Teachers of writing are a hardy, hardworking, and visionary bunch, impassioned and inspired by the needs of their students even while having to contend with unfavorable institutional realities. They are often at the forefront of educational change and expansion of educational access. They view education as doing more than it currently does, and they see the transformation of individuals, societies, and cultures through all the forms of development associated with advanced literacy. And they often have to enact these commitments from the margin of their institutions. Yet while our colleagues around the world are so much like us, their stories are just different enough to stop us from saying we have heard it all, and just different enough to help us see our own situation afresh. These are people you would really like to get to know.

# Works Cited

Donahue, Christiane. “‘Internationalization’ and Composition Studies: Reorienting the Discourse.” College Composition and Communication 61.2 (2009): 212–43. Print.

Horner, Bruce, Samantha NeCamp, and Christiane Donahue. “Toward a Multilingual Composition Scholarship: From English Only to a Translingual Norm.” College Composition and Communication 63.3 (2011): 269–300. Print.

Lu, Min-Zhan. “An Essay on the Work of Composition: Composing English against the Order of Fast Capitalism.” College Composition Communication 56.1 (2004): 16–50. Print.

Muchiri, Mary, Nshindi Mulamba, Greg Myers, and Deoscorous Ndoloi. “Importing Composition: Teaching and Researching Academic Writing beyond North America.” College Composition Communication 46.2 (1995): 175–98. Print.

Thaiss, Chris, Gerd Bräuer, Paula Carlino, Lisa Ganobcsik-Williams, and Aparna Sinha, eds. Writing Programs Worldwide: Profiles of Academic Writing in Many Places. Fort Collins: WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor P, 2012. Perspectives on Writing ser. Web.

# Internationalization, English L2 Writers, and the Writing Classroom: Implications for Teaching and Learning

Terry Myers Zawacki and Anna Sophia Habib George Mason University

When Kathleen Yancey invited us to contribute to this symposium, based on our research with international student writers, she asked us to consider what the increasing presence of these students in our writing classrooms implies for how we in writing studies do our work. While we, of course, accepted this invitation, we did so with some reservations about what meaningful observations we could make in the few thousand words available, especially in light of our international students’ enormously varied linguistic, cultural, and educational backgrounds. For our research over the past several years, we’ve been interested in the experiences of international English-second-language (L2)1 writers and the language-related concerns of the teachers for whom they write across the curriculum.2 So here, then, we’ll necessarily limit our remarks to these linguistically diverse students, and, to narrow our focus, we’ll consider the significant role language plays in how international L2 (or IL2) students process the writing lessons we teach, given that they are, at the same time, in the process of acquiring the linguistic and sociocultural knowledge necessary to produce the texts their US teachers expect. Our goal is to describe, albeit briefly, some of the academic writing concerns expressed by the IL2 students we interviewed in order to make visible the language and writing knowledge they’re negotiating as they “shuttle between languages” (Canagarajah). Their concerns suggest to us the need for more explicit attention to language in our teaching, not just as a problem for L2 or basic writers but as a rhetorical tool all students can use to move beyond the formulaic, overly generalized “rules” for academic writing in which they’ve been schooled over the years and across the secondary and postsecondary curriculum.

Ours is not a new suggestion, and it’s certainly one that’s been debated in writing studies since at least the 1960s, as Susan Peck MacDonald explains in her 2007 historical review of how, when, and why language came to be “erased” in our writing process pedagogies and why it’s time now to reexamine our role as teachers of language. We agree, and we think the increasing push to recruit international students, which is leading many US institutions to lower TOEFL or IELTS requirements for general admission, pushes us, in turn, to consider what new or different questions we in writing studies should be asking about where and how we can attend to students’ language development—cognitive and sociocultural, grammatical and rhetorical, linguistic (fluency and accuracy)—within the writing processes we’re teaching our students to employ.

But first a disclaimer of sorts to say that we do not have backgrounds in TESOL or second language writing; rather, our interest in effective pedagogies for L2 writers was initially motivated by our roles at the time as writing center and writing across the curriculum writing program administrators at one of the most culturally and linguistically diverse institutions in the country, where teachers and tutors looked to us for answers on how to help these students succeed, given the language and writing differences present in their papers. As our interest in this topic grew and our roles changed and expanded with the creation of our university’s Center for International Student Access,3 we began reading more deeply in the L2 writing scholarship to inform our research and practice, including research on the processes of language and genre learning (e.g., Schleppegrell; James; Leki; Swales; Canagarajah; Tardy; Johns) and the role of metalanguage and meta-awareness in the transfer and transformation of writing, rhetorical, and genre knowledge across (and within) linguistic, cultural, and disciplinary borders (e.g., Gentil; Brent; Larsen-Freeman; Donahue). We’d also been following arguments in the literature around translingualism (Horner et al.), the monolinguist and cultural assumptions embedded in the “invisible curriculum” of process pedagogy (e.g., Matsuda, “Myth”; Hyland), and the need to reconceptualize the composing processes of multilingual writers as a negotiation among and across languages, cultures, texts, and changing contexts for writing (Canagarajah). This scholarship, then, provides the background for our discussion even as we’ve chosen to foreground the voices of our IL2 students to illustrate why we’ve come to see language—its users, usage, styles, forms, and functions—as a central concern in our approaches to teaching writing process(es) for all students.

We begin with how the IL2 students we interviewed described the academic writing styles and structures, whether explicitly taught or intuited by the students, that their teachers expected in the schools where they’d been educated before coming to the United States and the contrasting expectations being conveyed to them by their US teachers in courses across the disciplines. In almost all cases, the students attributed these differing expectations to language and culture, rather than to the rhetorical and academic contexts in which they were writing.4 Many of the students, for example, spent considerable time describing the “beauty,” “richness,” and “complexity” of the school writing they’d done in their own languages that was so unlike the perceived straightforwardness of English. “In Arabic,” Malak said, for example, “it’s using the words to draw a picture; it’s not like using the wording in a simple meaning.” And Kanisha, a student from Sri Lanka, explained that he feels “sad” when he writes in English “because so much of the richness of language is lost” and, as he’s learned, “any beautiful language I use is wasted” on US readers. It’s unclear where the students we interviewed had acquired their perceptions of the appropriate style for writing in their first language (L1) since most said they had never really talked about writing as writing in their prior schooling; regardless, it was obvious that many felt a significant change in their writing identities when they shifted to English.5 Ayesha, from Pakistan, described that change in her question to us: “When I write in Urdu, my culture thing comes to me. How am I going to put that in English, you know?”

It’s possible that the students characterized their home languages as more “rich and beautiful” and as a deep part of their identities as writers because of their limited experience with academic writing in their L1 or because of their still-developing proficiency with writing in English, which sharply contrasted with their fluency and sense of themselves as “good writers” in their first languages. They may also have been repeating generalizations used to describe more formalized writing (literature?) in their home countries, just as they seemed to be echoing the general terms US teachers across disciplines typically use to describe the “good” academic writing they expect (Thaiss & Zawacki). Ayesha, for example, described good writing as “the three Cs”: “We must be clear, concise and complete.” Diana from Colombia explained: “We need to be concise, to be precise. To develop the ideas.” In these descriptions, we could also hear the tension many IL2 writers experience around how to make their language concise at the same time that they are trying to fully develop their ideas, to be “complete,” a tension any student may feel as he or she tries to figure out these seemingly contradictory teacher directives but made more difficult when the student is also trying to generate at the word and sentence level the correct and appropriate language for the task.

Similar to their reliance on generalized, culturally based descriptions of the stylistic preferences for writing in their L1 (“rich,” “beautiful,” “abstract”) and in English (“simple,” “direct”), most of the IL2 students we interviewed described the expected forms and structural conventions of academic writing in their L1 as more “complicated” and “implicit” than the direct, explicit approach that they’d been told is expected by US academic audiences. “American readers,” as many pointed out, expect an “obvious” thesis in the first paragraph, and transitions and paragraphs that are “efficient” and “easy to follow,” a structure they often found limiting and repetitive. Ignacio, for example, a third-year exchange student from Spain, recited the formula he’d learned, perhaps in his political science major here, for making an academic argument for US readers: “Tell me what you are going to tell me, tell me, then tell me what you told me. I found it pretty restricting at first. But now I am more at ease with it.” That Ignacio is feeling more “at ease” when he follows this formula indicates that he’s been successful in fitting his argument into the explicit “tell me” structure but not necessarily that he understands why such explicitness is valued, especially when it seems to contradict rhetorical values he’s learned from his past college schooling in Spain and France. Many of the students we interviewed, like Hanyan from China, for example, suspected that the reason explicitness is required is that American readers “want the essay to be easier [so] they don’t need to think about something because writers have to write everything.” For Nigerian student Karimatu, who was experiencing considerable difficulty with her academic writing in English, the purpose of the organizational “rules and regulations,” so unlike the “flowing” ideas in the Hausa writing she’d done, seemed to be to allow teachers to “figure out a bad writer right there and then.”

While students like Ignacio and Diana, who also told us she felt restricted by the highly structured writing she was learning to do in psychology (“I think that too much structure doesn’t allow students to think really. I feel like, Stop it. I want to do something else but I can’t”), have been succeeding as writers in their programs, they, like so many of our English L1 students, didn’t seem to understand how form and style work together to achieve rhetorical ends within a specific community of practice. So, even though Ignacio has learned to feel at ease with the “tell-me” structure and has tried “to adapt myself to the way Americans write,” he still feels he lacks “something to make it sound nicer, or to make it sound—I don’t know how to express it—more interesting or attracting.” Besides lacking the language to express what he thinks is needed to make his writing more attractive to his intended audience, he also lacks an understanding of how to achieve this goal. And Ayesha too, who told us that she was learning in her business writing class how “to kill the gap between the writer and the reader,” was short on specifics about how she could do that, although she, unlike Ignacio, seems to have been told that she could achieve that rhetorical goal by imagining a situation where she was writing to “your employees or giving a presentation” and “thinking at their level,” directions that assume she has the linguistic ability and the sociocultural and genre knowledge to do so.

And this leads us to consider the knowledge domains on which student writers need to call to analyze and successfully carry out a writing task, including knowledge of the subject matter, writing processes, rhetorical approaches, and genre conventions appropriate to the community of practice (Beaufort). This is a challenging undertaking for all students, but especially so for IL2 students who must also have acquired the sociocultural knowledge to understand and evaluate the task and the conceptual resources and linguistic ability to generate correct, accurate, and appropriate prose as they compose (Gentil; Tardy;

Ferris, Teaching 25–47). This latter point raises the question of how we writing teachers can facilitate that language-learning process. While helping students to develop fluency as writers has always been a goal of process pedagogy, our practices assume that all of our student writers can easily access the language needed to write fluently and with some degree of syntactic and lexical accuracy in order to generate meaningful drafts. And yet, as Ayesha lamented, “I do have ideas and I do want to put something down, but I am really short of words.”

Which brings us back to our role as teachers of language. As Paul Kei Matsuda shows in his review of the issues around teaching language in context, explicit grammar instruction has the potential, depending upon the individual student’s stage of development, to raise language awareness and facilitate language development, whether that instruction occurs through feedback on individual students’ papers, through lessons focused on “learnable rules . . informed by usage-based descriptive grammar,” which he calls “pedagogical grammar,” or through teaching genre as a “clustering of language resources” (“Let’s” 151–52). Moreover, as Diane Larsen-Freeman argues, teaching grammar in context—or “grammaring,” to use the term she coined to mean teaching grammar not as a “static system of rules” but as dynamic, contextualized choices writers make—affords the transfer of grammar knowledge (116–17), particularly when accompanied by metalinguistic commentary (Matsuda, “Let’s”) and self-monitoring strategies for reflecting on and evaluating language and writing choices (Gentil; Tardy). We still have much to learn, however, about how students, whether English L2 or L1, are transferring the language and writing lessons we’re teaching (or even whether they’re learning what we’re teaching) as they take up, adapt, translate, and transform, consciously or not, these lessons for other tasks, contexts (linguistic, cultural, social, academic), and rhetorical purposes (Donahue; James; Larsen-Freeman; DePalma and Ringer).

Considering, then, the complexity of the question we were invited to address about how internationalization may be changing what we in writing studies know and do, we want to suggest that to answer this question we need to cross fields (writing in the disciplines, TESOL/linguistics/applied linguistics, second language writing) and curricular/co-curricular borders (English language programs, including bilingual education and intensive-English programs) at our own institutions to collectively build on our knowledge about contextualized language and writing instruction and, further, to generate new questions about the languaging and writing processes through which students acquire academic writing competence. One such question relates to the scalability of language instruction; that is, given the diversity, linguistic and otherwise, of our students, how we can use what we know about the individualized nature of L2 learning and writing development to enact an inclusive languaging and writing process pedagogy for all students? When and how, for example, is explicit language instruction appropriate for the full class and not just in our feedback on an individual student’s writing? And yet another question relates to what we writing instructors need to know about pedagogical grammar and “grammaring” in order to provide explicit individual feedback or classroom lessons that will help students learn how “variations in language occur in tandem with variations in genre” (MacDonald 614).

Finally, we want to suggest that the questions IL2 students themselves ask about the way language works, grammatically and rhetorically (“What does however mean?”), can give us insight into some of the questions we’ve just posed. Their questions can also help us see how they are processing our writing instruction (“How will I use this rhetorical situation idea when I go home to Saudi to work?”) as they cross over from one language to another, whether linguistic, general academic, or local and field-specific. Pausing to listen to our IL2 students, in our teaching and our research, as they puzzle over how and whether the styles, forms, genres, and rhetorical concepts we’re teaching are translatable to other linguistic, social, cultural, and professional contexts they will be entering, compels us to acknowledge and adapt to their growing presence in our writing classrooms, which, by extension, moves us to rethink the language and writing needs of all of our students for the diverse contexts they will enter. But more than that, as our programs internationalize, the value these IL2 students bring goes beyond our ways of doing in the classroom to our ways of knowing—and questioning—the cognitive and social writing processes we teach when language and culture are added to the mix.

# Notes

1. For this discussion, we’ve chosen to use the designation $L 2$ to connect our work to the body of scholarship on second language writing studies. For a rationale for this designation, see Matsuda, “Teaching.”

2. In previous articles on this IRB-approved research (see Zawacki and Habib, “Negotiating”; Zawacki and Habib, “Will”; Zawacki et al.), we’ve reported on the experiences of twenty-six multilingual students with academic writing across the curriculum and the attitudes expressed by sixteen cross-disciplinary faculty about reading and evaluating the writing of these students. The students we interviewed had been in the United States between four months and ten years and spoke twenty different home languages. For this article, however, we’re drawing only on data from students classified as international at the time of their interviews (and whom we’ll call IL2 to differentiate them from resident L2 students); these students, as we learned, came with varying degrees of experience with general academic writing in their own languages and in English.

3. The Center for International Student Access (CISA) was created in 2011 in response to the university’s mission to internationalize. CISA widens the university’s admission policies by offering undergraduate and graduate pathway programs for students whose language proficiency scores do not meet the benchmarks for full admission to the university. In 2011, Anna stepped down from her work in the Writing Center to become English faculty with CISA. Her interest in teaching with this program comes from her own experiences as a multilingual writer/speaker who grew up as a refugee of the Lebanese civil war in Cyprus, where she attended a transplanted Lebanese school that followed the French Lycee curriculum. Terry is on the CISA Advisory Board and, since retiring, is also CISA affiliate faculty.

4. Their teachers may also be attributing the writing differences they notice to cultural ways of using language and organizing texts, as we know from the interviews we conducted with faculty across the disciplines for a second phase of our research (see Zawacki and Habib, “Negotiating”).

5. See chapters in the Cox, Jordan, Ortmeier-Hooper, and Schwartz collection Reinventing Identities in Second Language Writing for research on the ways L2 writers negotiate identity in academic settings.

# Works Cited

Beaufort, Anne. College Writing and Beyond: A New Framework for University Writing Instruction. Logan: Utah State UP, 2007. Print.   
Brent, Doug. “Transfer, Transformation, and Rhetorical Knowledge: Insights from Transfer Theory.” Journal of Business and Technical Communication 25.4 (2011): 396–420. Web. 26 Sept. 2013.   
Canagarajah, A. Suresh. “Toward a Writing Pedagogy of Shuttling between Languages: Learning from Multilingual Writers.” College English 68.6 (2006): 589–604. Print.   
Cox, Michelle, Jay Jordan, Christina Ortmeier-Hooper, and Gwen Gray Schwartz, eds. Reinventing Identities in Second Language Writing. Urbana: NCTE, 2010. Print.

DePalma, Michael-John, and Jeffry M. Ringer. “Toward a Theory of Adaptive Transfer: Expanding Disciplinary Discussions of ‘Transfer’ in SecondLanguage Writing and Composition Studies.” Journal of Second Language Writing 20.2 (201l): 134–47. Print.

Donahue, Christiane. “Transfer, Portability, Generalization: (How) Does Compo sition Expertise ‘Carry’?” Exploring Composition Studies: Sites, Issues, and Perspectives. Ed. Kelly Ritter and Paul Matsuda. Logan: Utah State UP, 2012. 145–66. Print.

Ferris, Dana R. Teaching College Writing to Diverse Student Populations. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2009. Print.

Gentil, Guillaume. “A Biliteracy Agenda for

Genre Research.” Journal of Second Lan guage Writing 20.1 (2011): 6–23. Print.

Horner, Bruce, Min-Zhan Lu, Jacqueline Jones Royster, and John Trimbur. “Language Difference in Writing: Toward a Translingual Approach.” College English 73.3 (2011): 299–317. Print.

Hyland, Ken. “Genre-Based Pedagogies: A Social Response to Process.” Journal of Second Language Writing 12.1 (2003): 17–29. Print.

James, Mark. “The Influence of Perceptions of Task Similarity/Difference on Learning Transfer in Second Language Writing.” Written Communication 25.1 (2008): 76–103. Print.

Johns, Ann M. (2008). “Genre Awareness for the Novice Academic Student: An Ongoing Quest.” Language Teaching 41.2 (2008): 237–52. Print.

Larsen-Freeman, Diane. “Transfer of Learning Transformed.” Language Learning 63 supp. 1 (2013): 107–29. Print.

Leki, Ilona. Undergraduates in a Second Language: Challenges and Complexities of Academic Literacy Development. New York: Routledge, 2007. Print.

MacDonald, Susan Peck. “The Erasure of Language.” College Composition and Communication 58.4 (2007): 585–625. Print.

Matsuda, Paul Kei. “Let’s Face It: Language Issues and the Writing Program Administrator.” WPA: Writing Program Administration 36.1 (2012): 141–63. Print.

. “The Myth of Linguistic Homogeneity in U.S. College Composition.” College English 68.6 (2006): 637–51. Print.

. “Teaching Composition in the Multilingual World: Second Language

Writing in Composition Studies.” Exploring Composition Studies: Sites, Issues, and Perspectives. Ed. Kelly Ritter and Paul Kei Matsuda. Logan: Utah State UP, 2012. 145–66. Print.

Schleppegrell, Mary. “Grammar, the Sentence, and Traditions of Linguistic Analysis.” Handbook of Research on Writing. Ed. Charles Bazerman, New York: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2008. 549–64. Print.

Swales, John. Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1990. Print.

Tardy, Christine. Building Genre Knowledge: Writing L2. West Lafayette: Parlor P, 2009. Print.

Thaiss, Chris, and Terry Myers Zawacki. Engaged Writers and Dynamic Disciplines: Research on the Academic Writing Life. Portsmouth: Heinemann, 2006. Print.

Zawacki, Terry Myers, and Anna Sophia Habib. “Negotiating ‘Errors’ in L2 Writing: Faculty Dispositions and Language Difference.” WAC and Second Language Writers: Research towards Linguistically and Culturally Inclusive Programs and Practices. Ed. Terry Myers Zawacki and Michelle Cox. Fort Collins: WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor P, 2014. Perspectives on Writing ser. Web.

Zawacki, Terry Myers, and Anna Sophia Habib. “‘Will Our Stories Help Teachers Understand?’ Multilingual Students Talk about Identity, Voice and Expectations across Academic Communities.” Cox, Jordan, Ortmeier-Hooper, Schwartz, 54–74. Print.

Zawacki, Terry Myers, Eiman Hajabbasi, Anna Sophia Habib, Alex Antram, and Alokparna Das. “Valuing Written Accents: International Voices in the U.S. Academy.” George Mason University, 2007. Web. 22 November 2013.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.