# A critical review of research and practice in data-driven learning (DDL) in the academic writing classroom

Meilin Cheni and John Flowerdewii,iii i Hong Kong Baptist University | ii Lancaster University iii Birkbeck, University of London

Since the late 1980s, there has been a growing interest in the direct application of corpora, or data-driven learning (DDL), in language education. This relatively novel teaching approach has been particularly applied in the teaching and learning of English for Academic Purposes (EAP)/academic writing, especially since the turn of the century. This paper synthesizes and evaluates the research progress in the field of EAP/academic writing since the year 2000 by critically reviewing 37 empirical studies focussing on applications of DDL in this context. Based on the critical review and a discussion of some contentious issues, a set of five recommendations for the way forward in DDL research and practice for EAP/academic writing is presented.

Keywords: academic writing, English for Academic Purposes (EAP), writing pedagogy, specialised corpora, language teaching

# 1. Introduction

Recent years have seen a rapid development in the application of corpus linguistic techniques to language teaching, a procedure referred to, after Johns (1990, 1991), as data-driven learning (DDL). Review articles on DDL by Chambers (2007), C. Yoon (2011), and Boulton (2012) have helped in developing a better understanding of the advantages and disadvantages of DDL as an approach to English language pedagogy. Furthermore, Boulton & Cobb (2017) and Cobb & Boulton (2015) have published two meta-analyses of empirical studies on DDL in English language classrooms, demonstrating that the approach can be at least as effective and efficient as other traditional teaching approaches.

A significant proportion of the reported applications of DDL are within the field of English for Academic Purposes (EAP)/academic writing and we feel that a dedicated review of DDL on this topic will be useful. We understand EAP/ academic writing as the teaching and learning of English as preparation or support for university level study, at undergraduate, diploma, masters, or PhD level. EAP/academic writing may also be taught at secondary or even primary school level (Johns & Snow 2006), but these levels are not considered here. EAP can be contrasted with English for General Purposes (EGP), which is concerned with the teaching and learning of everyday English communication skills. DDL in the context of the latter endeavour is not included in the survey.

Ädel (2010: 41) has claimed that “corpus-based courses on academic writing are still at an exploratory stage”. However, while there was in fact already a number of studies on DDL prior to Ädel’s (2010) comment, in the years since considerably more studies have been carried out investigating the value of the DDL approach in the teaching of academic writing. Coming later, these studies were not covered by any of the more broadly focussed three reviews of work in DDL mentioned above. Many of these were not included in the meta-analyses of Boulton & Cobb (2017) and Cobb & Boulton (2015) either, as they do not provide statistical measurements of learning outcomes, which were the focus of these two studies. Nonetheless, these newer studies provide valuable insights into the complex process of applying the DDL approach specifically in the field of EAP/ academic writing. Taken together, they provide a basis for taking stock and considering how the field may move forward. The publications reviewed in this article have all appeared since 2000 and they all give detailed accounts of students’ direct use of corpora in EAP writing classrooms and for the most part an evaluation of the approach. We take the year 2000 as a convenient cut-off point, given that earlier papers were relatively few and far between and were included in previous reviews. Much as we acknowledge the valuable contributions of pioneering studies carried out during the last decade of the 20th century on the role of DDL in EAP (e.g. Cobb 1997; Johns 1990, 1991; Stevens 1991; Tribble & Jones 1990; Turnbull & Burston 1998), these studies are not included in the present review, the main focus being here on more recent work. Furthermore, a number of studies since the turn of the century on the use of corpora in the writing classroom, but outside the field of EAP, have been excluded: see e.g. Kennedy & Miceli (2000, 2001, 2010) and Miceli & Kennedy (2002) on L2 creative writing; Fan & Xu (2002) and Hafner & Candlin (2007) on legal writing; Gabel (2001) on email writing; and Caviglia (2004), Chambers (2010, 2011), Chambers & O’Sullivan (2004), and O’Sullivan & Chambers (2006) on writing in languages other than English. Given these exclusions our review brings together 37 empirical studies of corpus application in the EAP/academic writing classroom since 2000 (see the Appendix for a full list).

# 2. Search criteria, procedures, methods of analysis, and structure of the review

To make the study more systematic, transparent and comprehensive, we applied a number of search criteria and procedures to identify the publications for inclusion in this review. The articles should focus on the use of corpus linguistics tools and techniques in the context of academic writing; studies on general English would not be included. The focus of the reported pedagogic interventions should be the teaching and learning of English, not other languages. The language of publication was restricted to English. Because they were interested in studies reporting on the effectiveness of the corpus approach, Boulton & Cobb (2017) and Cobb & Boulton (2015) included only publications which provided statistical measurements of learning outcomes. In contrast to these researchers, we also included more descriptive accounts of DDL interventions, as such studies may also provide valuable insights into the complex process of applying the DDL approach. In addition, we only included articles focussing on EAP/academic writing, whereas the studies by Boulton and Cobb included all types of DDL. Regarding the type of publication, international refereed journal articles and book chapters were the focus, as these are the most broadly accessible to both us as researchers and to our readers. We did not include MA or PhD dissertations, conference proceedings, or teacher newsletters, because they would have been only unevenly accessible and because to do so might have involved us making subjective decisions about what to include or exclude with regard to quality.

Regarding the research procedures, first of all, as this was a focussed review and as active researchers and practitioners in the field and regular attenders of the biannual Teaching and Language Corpora (TaLC) and other corpus linguistics conferences, we were already familiar with what proved to be a large number of the articles that were later included. As a starting point, we searched the table of contents of journals we knew to have published articles on DDL, e.g. Calico Journal, Computer Assisted Language Learning, English for Specific Purposes, International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, Journal of English for Academic Purposes, Journal of Second Language Writing, Language Learning & Technology, ReCALL, and System. We also perused edited collections on corpus linguistics and language learning using the City University of Hong Kong library search engine. Following on this initial trawl, searches were conducted by means of keyword searches of three databases – Google Scholar, Linguistics and Language Behavior Abstracts (LLBA), and the Educational Information Resource Center (ERIC). The keywords were various combinations of data-driven learning, DDL, academic writing, English for Academic Purposes, EAP, and corpus-based and corpora. Having identified a relevant title, the abstract and then the main body was read to determine whether it was relevant. More searching for further possible candidates was conducted by means of the reference lists of already selected publications. As a further procedure, journals which had published papers already selected were searched individually by hand for further articles on DDL in EAP/ academic writing contexts.

This search resulted in a corpus of 37 articles. To analyse the articles, we employed a combination of the “constant comparison” method associated with qualitative research, involving repeated reading, coding and comparison of the data (Corbin & Strauss 2008) and corpus techniques involving keyword analysis and key word in context (KWIC) concordances to help identify and analyse key themes. As a result of our analysis, we came up with a framework consisting of 12 categories, as represented in the Appendix, to provide a means of grouping, comparing and contrasting the 37 studies. This forms the basis of Section 3, the next section, an overview of the studies. As part of our analysis we identified four groups of studies which focussed on particular foci of teaching of DDL: learner self-correction of errors in EAP writing; academic writing in general; linguistic and rhetorical features of a particular section of research papers; and academic vocabulary. The papers included in each of these groups are compared and contrasted in Section 4. Our analysis also highlighted a number of recurrent contentious issues arising in a number of studies: decontextualisation of truncated concordance lines; time taken to do DDL; and learner motivation or learner needs. These issues are considered in Section 5. Section 6, the conclusion, synthesises the findings and makes a number of recommendations for the future of DDL.

# 3. Overview of the 37 studies

To present an overview of the 37 studies, we use the 12 categories listed in the Appendix. This gives us an idea of the countries where DDL research is being carried out, the size of the groups of participants, their L1s, their academic level, and their academic discipline; it furthermore provides information on the type and size of corpora employed, the focus of teaching, duration of training, number of texts produced by the students, whether or not a study included an evaluation of learning outcomes, and whether or not a focus on the use of corpora outside the classroom was included.

To begin with the countries where DDL research is being carried out, Table 1 shows the geographic spread of the 37 studies included in this review. Given its top international ranking in terms of research publication output in Linguistics (c.f. https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2018/nsb20181/report/sections/academicresearch-and-development/outputs-of-s-e-research-publications#publication

output-by-country), it is unsurprising that so many studies were carried out in the US. More interesting is the high number of papers published in Asia (also some of the US papers have (East) Asian authors). This may be due to the fact that research is increasingly being conducted through the medium of English in the countries of this region (Fenton-Smith et al. 2017; Gosden 1995; Tardy 2004). It is to be noted also that some of these authors have Western names. This is again unsurprising, as Asian countries have invested heavily in tertiary education and hired expatriate scholars. What is perhaps surprising is that so few papers have been published in the UK, and all of these five studies are by just one author (Maggie Charles). One possible explanation for this would be that many writing teachers and EAP practitioners in the UK who have regularly used corpora in teaching may not publish research papers on their corpus practice. Among the $5 6 0$ respondents of Tribble’s 2012 survey of DDL practitioners (Tribble 2015), for instance, English teachers from the UK were the second largest group (after the USA) of teachers to use DDL, so DDL is taking place in the UK, but not much research is being published on it from there. This, in turn, could possibly be explained by the fact that most EAP teachers in the UK do not have academic status and are not expected to publish. At the same time, it is worth noting that in the early days of DDL there were publications in the UK, most notably by Johns (1990, 1991).

Table 1. Geographic distribution of the 37 DDL studies   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Country! region</td><td></td><td>No. Studies</td></tr><tr><td>North America</td><td>14</td><td>USA: P. Chang 2012; Cortes 2007, 2014; Cot0s 2014; Feng 2014; Hegelheimer 2006; Kaur &amp; Hegelheimer 2005; Lee &amp; Swales 2006; Park &amp; Kinginger 2010; Poole 2016; H. Yoon 2o08; H. Yoon &amp; Hirvela 2004</td></tr><tr><td>Asia</td><td>12</td><td>Canada: Gaskell &amp; Cobb 2004; McGarrell 2015 China, Hong Kong and Taiwan: Crosthwaite 2017; Flowerdew 2015; Hsieh &amp; Liou 2008; Huang 2014, Liou et al. 2012, Sun 2007, Japan: Gilmore 2009; Quinn 2015; Tono et al. 2014, South Korea: J-Y. Chang 2014; H. Yo0n &amp; Jo 2014, Thailand:</td></tr><tr><td>(Continental)</td><td></td><td>Todd 2001 France: Boulton 2011, Italy: Bianchi &amp; Pazzaglia 2007; Cresswell 2007; Diani 2012,</td></tr><tr><td>Europe</td><td></td><td>Poland: Kaszubuski 201o, Sweden: Eriksson 2012</td></tr><tr><td>UK</td><td>5</td><td>Charles 2007, 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 shows the academic level of the participants in the various studies. This table shows that all of the research was carried out with university students, a majority $\scriptstyle ( n = 2 2 )$ ) being solely graduate students. This can be explained by the fact that, in comparison with teachers in primary and secondary schools, academic staff in universities are more likely to be expected to publish. Having said that, although we do not have exact numbers, our impression is that the great majority of the studies under review in this article was conducted by practising teachers and the research was conducted with intact groups of their students.

Table 2. The academic level of participants in the 37 studies   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Academic level of participants</td><td></td><td>No. Studies</td></tr><tr><td>MA onwards</td><td>22</td><td>Boulton 2011; Charles 2007, 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015; Cortes 2007, 2014; Cotos 2014; Crosthwaite 2017; J-Y. Chang 2014; P. Chang 2012; Eriksson 2012; Feng 2014; Flowerdew 2015; Hsieh &amp; Liou 2008; Lee &amp; Swales 2006; Liou et al. 2012; McGarrell 2015; Sun 2007; Todd 2001; H. Yo0n 2008</td></tr><tr><td>undergraduate</td><td>13</td><td>Bianchi &amp; Pazzaglia 2007; Cresswell 2007; Diani 2012; Gilmore 2009; Hegel- heimer 2006; Huang 2014; Kaszubuski 2010; Kaur &amp; Hegelheimer 2005; Park &amp; Kinginger 2010; Po0le 2016; Quinn 2015; Ton0 et al. 2014; H. Yo0n &amp; Jo 2014</td></tr><tr><td>undergraduate, MA &amp; PhD</td><td></td><td>1H. Yoon &amp; Hirvela 2004</td></tr><tr><td>not specified</td><td></td><td>1Gaskell &amp; Cobb 2004 *</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* All participants in Gaskell & Cobb (2004) had obtained a BA degree from China.

Regarding participants’ disciplinary backgrounds (see Table 3), of the 31 studies that specify learners’ majors, 18 involve learners from a variety of disciplines, five studies were conducted with language specialists or translation professionals, while each of the remaining eight publications studied learners from the same or similar discipline(s). Disciplinary background of the students is an important distinction because it affects the choice of corpora used. Single-discipline classes can make use of specialised corpora, while heterogeneous classes need to either use general (academic) corpora or alternatively individualise the learning, with different students using different corpora (e.g. Lee & Swales 2006; Charles 2015).

Table 3. The disciplinary background of participants   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Disciplines No. Studies</td></tr><tr><td>language specialists</td><td> Boulton 2011; Diani 2012; Hsieh &amp; Liou 2008; Huang 2014; McGarrell 2015</td></tr><tr><td>multiple disciplines</td><td>18 Charles 2007, 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015; P. Chang 2012; Cortes 2007, 2014; Cotos 2014; Crosthwaite 2017; Feng 2014; Gilmore 2009; H. Yo0n 2008; H. Yo0n &amp; Hirvela 2004; Kaszubuski 2010; Kaur &amp; Hegelheimer 2005; Flowerdew 2015; Lee &amp; Swales 2006;</td></tr><tr><td>Single or bi- disciplines</td><td>Sun 2007 8 Biochemistry and Biotechnology: Eriksson 2o12, Business: Park &amp; Kinginger 2010, Computer Science and Electronic Engineering: Liou et al. 2o12, Psychology: Bianchi &amp; Pazzaglia 2007, Science and Engineering: J-Y. Chang 2014; Todd 2001, Translation:</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 shows the foci of teaching in the 37 studies. The most frequently addressed issue in the research reviewed here has been learner self-correction of errors, accounting for almost a third $( n = 1 2 )$ of the studies. In eight studies, academic writing was taught comprehensively with no specific single focus. In five studies learners were taught rhetorical functions and their linguistic realisations (Charles 2007, 2011, 2012, 2015; Poole 2016), although note that four of these were by one author, while another four focused on a particular section of the research paper: introduction (P. Chang 2012), discussion (Flowerdew 2015), abstract (Hsieh & Liou 2008; Liou et al. 2012). Five more studies experimented with the application of corpora in vocabulary teaching and learning, while the remaining three focussed on other specific issues: transferability (Boulton 2011), learners’ longterm adoption of corpora after training (Charles 2014), and tracking the corpusaided academic writing process (Park & Kinginger 2010).

Table 4. Foci of teaching in the 37 studies   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Topic</td><td></td><td>No. Studies</td></tr><tr><td>Self-correction of. errors</td><td>12</td><td>J-Y. Chang 2014; Crosthwaite 2017; Feng 2014; Gaskell &amp; Cobb 2004; Gilmore 2009; Hegelheimer 2006; McGarrell 2015; Quinn 2015; Todd</td></tr><tr><td>Academic writing in</td><td>8</td><td>2001; Tono et al. 2014; H. Yo0n 2008; H. Yo0n &amp; Jo 2014 Bianchi &amp; Pazzaglia 2007; Cortes 2007, 2014; Diani 2012; Kaszubuski</td></tr><tr><td>Rhetorical functions general</td><td></td><td>2010; Lee &amp; Swales 2006; Sun 2007; H. Yo0n &amp; Hirvela 2004 Charles 2007, 2011, 2012, 2015; P00le 2016</td></tr><tr><td>Linguistic features of</td><td>5</td><td>4P. Chang 2012; Flowerdew 2015; Hsieh &amp; Liou 2008, Liou et al. 2012</td></tr><tr><td>a particular section of the research paper</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary for</td><td>5</td><td>Cotos 2014; Cresswell 2007; Eriksson 2012; Huang 2014; Kaur &amp; Hegel-</td></tr><tr><td>academic writing</td><td></td><td>heimer 2005</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>3Boulton 2011; Charles 2014; Park &amp; Kinginger 2010</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

One finding emerging from the investigation is that around two thirds $\left( n = 2 3 \right)$ of the studies were published between 2010 and 2017, while only 14 studies appeared during the longer period between 2000 and 2009. This is an encouraging sign of the growing attention being paid to corpus applications in academic writing in recent years, although the number still seems small when compared to studies in EGP classrooms; in Boulton & Cobb’s (2017) review, 42 studies were carried out in EGP classrooms compared to only 19 in academic writing classrooms.

Table 5 reports the number of corpora used in the studies. The table shows that nearly two thirds of the reported interventions $( n = 2 4 )$ ) employed more than one corpus. Multiple corpora may benefit learners in several ways. First, they may provide plentiful exposure. Many studies (Feng 2014, McGarrel 2015, H. Yoon &

Jo 2014), for example, make use of the free online concordance system in Compleat Lexical Tutor (Lextutor hereafter; Cobb n.d.), a system which enables users to search in many general corpora such as the British National Corpus (BNC) sampler version (http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/corpus/index.xml?ID $=$ products) and the Brown corpus (Francis & Kucera 1964). Second, multiple corpora enable learners to carry out contrastive analyses, which may help to highlight generic differences in academic writing across disciplines or gaps between novice and professional writing (e.g. Charles 2007, 2011; Cortes 2007; Cotos 2014; Hsieh & Liou 2008; Lee & Swales 2006). In contrast to those studies employing multiple corpora, those that focus on a specific section of the research paper usually make use of only one corpus (only one of these studies uses more than one corpus, Hsieh & Liou’s (2008) case study of an online writing system).

Table 5. Number of corpora used in the studies   

<html><body><table><tr><td>corpora used</td><td></td><td>No. Studies</td></tr><tr><td>One corpus</td><td>13</td><td>Bianchi &amp; Pazzaglia 2007; P. Chang 2012; Cresswell 2007; Diani 2012; Flowerdew 2015; Hegelheimer 2006, Liou et al. 2012, Park &amp; Kinginger 2010; Quinn 2015; Todd 2001; Tono et al. 2014; H. Yoon 2008; H. Yoon &amp; Hirvela 2004</td></tr><tr><td>2+</td><td></td><td>Boulton 2011; J-Y. Chang 2014; Charles 2007, 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015; Cortes 2007, 2014; Cotos 2014; Crosthwaite 2017; Eriksson 2012; Feng 2014; Gaskell &amp; Cobb 2004;</td></tr><tr><td>corpora</td><td></td><td>Gilmore 2009; Hsieh &amp; Liou 2008; Huang 2014; Kaszubuski 2010; Kaur &amp; Hegelheimer 2005; Lee &amp; Swales 2006; McGarrell 2015; Po0le 2016; Sun 2007; H. Yo0n &amp; Jo 2014</td></tr></table></body></html>

As shown in Table 6, among different types of corpora, specialised corpora are favoured by many DDL academic writing teachers $( n = 1 7 )$ ). Many such practitioners build in-house specialised corpora, which often include journal articles or PhD theses. These corpora are relatively easy to build, especially with freeware that can easily turn PDF into plain-text files and, because they are discipline-specific, are fine-tuned to cater for learners’ personal needs. General corpora are also frequently used $( n = 1 7 )$ ). Popular general corpora include the Collins COBUILD corpus, corpora on the Lextutor website (e.g. the BNC sampler, Brown), the BNC, and the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA; Davies 2008). It should be pointed out, however, that these “general” corpora include academic sub-corpora, which can be used as specialised corpora. Table 6 also shows that five studies include learner corpora. The need to use learner corpora in language classrooms has also been repeatedly emphasised by numerous researchers (e.g. Flowerdew 2001, 2008, 2015; Granger, 2009; Gilquin et al. 2007; Seidlhofer 2002). The use of learner corpora may raise learners’ awareness of common errors made by their peers (Hegelheimer 2006) and at the same time increase learners’ motivation (Cotos 2014).

Learner corpora used in the five studies were rather diverse, although they were all produced in-house (also described as ‘local corpora’; Cotos 2014) and all were quite small. Cotos (2014) does not specify the size of her corpus, but states that it was made up of student-produced research reports similar to the target writing genre; Eriksson (2012) uses a corpus made up of six research articles written by doctoral research students; Hegelheimer (2006) uses essays written by NNSs with errors marked up as his corpus; Kaszubuski (2010) does not report on the make-up of his corpus; while Lee & Swales (2006) had the students in their class each compile a corpus from their own writing consisting of term papers, dissertation drafts, and unedited journal drafts.

All of the studies using learner corpora also used an L1 reference, or monitor, corpus (see the Appendix), with the exception of Hegelheimer (2006). The learner corpus studies all focus on error correction of one type or another. It is worth noting that error correction may require the intervention of the teacher in highlighting the errors to be focussed upon, as learners may not know how to search appropriately. An outstanding issue in DDL research is thus how to enable learners to use learner corpora more autonomously. Learner corpora, when they are created in-house, tend to be rather small; this is not a great disadvantage, however, given that their purpose is to focus on the particular language problems of their users; indeed, a problem with very large corpora for DDL is that they may overwhelm the learner with too many examples.

Finally, Table 6 shows that six studies employed personal corpora. By a ‘personal corpus’ we mean a corpus made by an individual learner/writer for their personal use, most commonly a collection of research articles in the student’s discipline (e.g. Lee & Swales 2006). In principle, such corpora are the most useful, because they are by definition individualised. However, they require time to create, especially if they are to be “cleaned” of extraneous material, e.g. headers and footers – time which busy students, who are not dedicated language specialists, may not wish to sacrifice. As noted above, Lee & Swales (2006) had the students in their class each compile a personal corpus from their own writing. Such a corpus can be considered a form of learner corpus. We would argue that a learner corpus created from the individual learner’s writing is better than one sampled from a range of learners’ writing, as learners will want to focus on the problems they encounter, not on errors which they do not themselves find problematic.

The concordance tools employed in the studies reveal an interesting shift from commercial to free resources over time. As can be seen from Table 7, which allows a comparison of the two periods from 2000–2009 and the shorter period from 2010–2016, no offline free tools were used in the reviewed studies between 2000 and 2009; however, since 2012, AntConc (Anthony 2018), a freely downloadable tool, has been utilised in seven different studies. The popularity of AntConc was also found in Tribble’s (2015) international survey of English teachers’ concordance tool preferences (conducted in 2012), where, with Wordsmith Tools (Scott 2017), it was ranked equal second. COCA was ranked first, but Tribble’s survey procedure used Mark Davies’s mailing list, so results may well have been skewed. Furthermore, based on our own experience, COCA is not suitable for general classroom teaching because when too many computers from the same IP address use the website at the same time it results in halted/delayed searches. Frequent reasons given in response to an open-ended question in Tribble’s (2015: 52) survey regarding the popularity of a given concordance package for DDL were its userfriendliness and the fact that it is free. Table 7 also shows that from 2000 to 2009, only three studies made use of online free query systems (as opposed to free offline query tools), but the number has doubled since 2010. This partly reflects the encouraging trend of more and more resources being made openly accessible.

Table 6. Types of corpora used in the studies   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Type of corpus Specialised</td><td>No.Studies</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>corpus</td><td>17</td><td>in-house corpora: Bianchi &amp; Pazzaglia 2007; P. Chang 2012; Charles 2007, 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015; Cortes 2014; Cot0s 2014; Eriksson 2012; Hsieh &amp; Liou 2008; Liou et al. 2012; Park &amp; Kinginger 2010, MICUSP: Diani 2012, MICASE: Lee &amp; Swales 2006, PolyU CRA: Flowerdew 2015</td></tr><tr><td>General corpus</td><td>17</td><td>Collins COBUILD corpus: Boulton 2011; Gilmore 2009; Quinn 2015; H. Yo0n 2008; H. Yoon &amp; Hirvela 2004 Lextutor: Feng 2014; Gaskell &amp; Cobb 2004; H. Yo0n &amp; Jo 2014; Kaur &amp; Hegelheimer 2005; McGarrell 2015 BNC: Crosthwaite 2017; Gilmore 2009; Lee &amp; Swales 2006; Tono et al. 2014</td></tr><tr><td>Learner corpus</td><td>5</td><td>COCA: J-Y. Chang 2014; Feng 2014; McGarrell 2015 Cotos 2014; Eriksson 2012; Kaszubuski 2010; Hegelheimer 2006; Lee &amp; Swales 2006</td></tr><tr><td>Personal corpus</td><td></td><td>5Charles 2012, 2014, 2015; Cortes 2014; Lee &amp; Swales 2006; Sun 2007</td></tr></table></body></html>

The Appendix provides information on the duration of the training in each of the studies (where this is not reported in a given study, it is indicated by n.a.), showing variation from a single hour (McGarrell 2015) to 37.4 hours (Cortes 2007). Of course, the length of time is likely due to logistical constraints and the purpose of the study/training. However, the time needed for successful application of DDL should not be underestimated. Leńko-Szymańska (2014), for example, concluded that a semester-long course (22 hours) devoted solely to the use of corpora in English language teaching is still not enough, and similar observations are also made by Ebrahimi & Faghih (2017).

Table 7. Types of concordance tools used in the studies   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Type of tools</td><td>No. Studies</td></tr><tr><td>2000-2009</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Online in-house writing support systems</td><td>4 Cortes 2o07; Hegelheimer 2006; Hsieh &amp; Liou 2008; Sun 2007</td></tr><tr><td>Online free query systems (Lextutor, FAST Search)</td><td>3 Gaskell &amp; Cobb 2o04; Kaur &amp; Hegelheimer 2005; Todd 2001</td></tr><tr><td>Offline purchased tools (WordSmith Tools)</td><td>3 Bianchi &amp; Pazzaglia 2o07; Charles 2007; Cresswell 2007</td></tr><tr><td>Online purchased query systems (Collins COBUILD corpus)</td><td>2 H. Yoon 2o08; H. Yoon &amp; Hirvela 2004</td></tr><tr><td>Multiple tools</td><td>2 Lee &amp; Swales 2006; Gilmore 2009</td></tr><tr><td>2010-2016 Offline free tools (AntConc)</td><td>7 J-Y Chang 2014; Charles 2012, 2014, 2015; Cortes.</td></tr><tr><td>Online free query systems (COCA,</td><td>2014; Diani 2012; Eriksson 2012 6 Feng 2014; Huang 2014; McGarrell 2015; Park &amp;</td></tr><tr><td>Lextutor, Wmatrix, Intelitext, Google CSE)</td><td>Kinginger 2010; Tono et al. 2014; H. Yo0n &amp; Jo 2014</td></tr><tr><td>Online in-house writing support system Offline purchased tools (Concgram,</td><td>3 P. Chang 2012; Kaszubuski 2010, Liou et al. 2012 2 Charles 2011; Flowerdew 2015</td></tr><tr><td>WordSmith Tools) Online purchased query systems (Collins</td><td>2 Crosthwaite 2017; Quinn 2015</td></tr><tr><td>COBUILD corpus, Sketch Engine)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Multiple tools</td><td>1 Boulton 2011 2</td></tr><tr><td>No computer tools (paper-printed concordances)</td><td>Huang 2014; Po0le 2016</td></tr></table></body></html>

The Appendix also shows the number of texts produced during the reported intervention. Again, there is variation. Many studies do not include any actual writing, while others require a considerable amount: e.g. a research article (Cortes 2007, 2014); 12 short essays (H. Yoon & Jo 2014); 22 texts (J-Y. Chang 2014). This variation is likely to be due to the time available and the purpose of the study/training.

Finally, the Appendix reveals that research that depicts learners’ use of corpora outside the classroom is quite rare. The vast majority of existing studies focus on corpus consultation by learners during classroom teaching. Of the 36 studies, only 12 report that learners also consulted corpora outside the classroom as a requirement of the course. Three studies (Boulton 2011; Charles 2012, 2014) mention corpus use by learners on their own initiative after class. 22 studies, on the other hand, do not specify whether learners consulted corpora outside the classroom. Charles (2014) carefully analysed how her students continued or discontinued to use corpora after the training ended and proposed factors that affect learners’ learning behaviour. Park & Kinginger (2010) tracked how a Chinese ESL learner used corpora during her writing throughout one semester. The learners’ searching strategies were analysed using screen capture, interview and other techniques. Given that DDL is aimed at making learners autonomous in their use of corpus tools, more studies are required on learners’ use of corpus tools outside the classroom, a point we will return to later in this review.

# 4. Studies focussing on particular foci of teaching of DDL in the academic writing classroom

As mentioned in Section 2 and Section 3 (Table 4), four main foci of teaching were identified in the reviewed studies: (i) learner self-correction of errors in EAP writing, (ii) academic writing in general, (iii) rhetorical functions, (iv) linguistic and rhetorical features of a particular section of research papers of theses. Using these foci of teaching as an organising principle, this section considers how corpora have been employed in these studies and how or why different factors affect students’ learning responses and outcomes.

# 4.1 Studies focussing on learner self-correction of errors

There have been eleven studies focussing on learner self-correction of errors and corpora. Many of these studies $( n = 7 )$ were conducted in Asia (J-Y. Chang 2014; Crosthwaite 2017; Gilmore 2009; Quinn 2015; Todd 2001; Tono et al. 2014; H. Yoon & Jo 2014), while five other studies took place in North America (Feng 2014; Gaskell & Cobb 2004; Hegelheimer 2006; McGarrell 2015; H. Yoon 2008). Although carried out on two different continents, a majority of the studies $\scriptstyle ( n = 9 )$ mainly concerns learners from three Asian L1 backgrounds: Chinese (Crosthwaite 2017; Feng 2014; Gaskell & Cobb 2004; H. Yoon 2008); Japanese (Gilmore 2009; Quinn 2015; Tono et al. 2014); and Korean (J-Y. Chang 2014; H. Yoon 2008; H. Yoon & Jo 2014). The participants in Hegelheimer’s (2006) study were a mixed group of international students, from Korean, Chinese, Japanese and Indonesian L1 backgrounds, while those in McGarrell’s (2015) study mainly had Chinese and Arabic as their L1. Todd (2001) focuses on another Asian L1 background (25 Thai learners of English).

Most of these self-correction studies chose to use large general corpora or interfaces against which to match learner writing: e.g. COCA (Feng 2014;

McGarell 2015); Lextutor (McGarrell 2015; Feng 2014; Gaskell & Cobb 2004; McGarell 2015; H. Yoon & Jo 2014); Collins COBUILD (Quinn 2015; Gilmore 2009; H. Yoon 2008); and BNC (Crosthwaite 2017), and investigated learner writing outputs (often comparing pre- and post-training writing) to gauge learning outcomes. They did so from different perspectives. J-Y. Chang (2014), for instance, looked at how nine graduate students use general (COCA) and specialised (research articles and conference papers) corpora for improving their writing. Participants generally showed favourable attitudes towards both types of corpora; they found that while COCA is helpful in finding collocations, the specialised corpora are more suitable for their individual needs, as such corpora provide the English of their disciplinary fields. One of the drawbacks of COCA, according to J-Y. Chang’s (2014) learners, is that the interface is not easy to use. Students’ major concern regarding specialised corpora, on the other hand, was the reliability of the results they give, given that such corpora may contain papers written by both native speaker (NS) and non-native speaker (NNS) writers.

Instead of different corpora, Gaskell & Cobb (2004) and H. Yoon & Jo (2014) investigated the effectiveness of two different types of corpus consultation by learners, referred to, after Leech (1997), as ‘indirect’ and ‘direct’ approaches. For the former type of consultation, students in both studies were given ready-made (and edited) concordance lines for the target errors, while for the latter type of consultation they were required to carry out self-initiated searches to solve language problems in their writing. Both studies show that students tended to make more corrections when they did not have to go to the trouble of searching for answers by themselves (the indirect approach). However, Gaskell & Cobb (2004) observed that students became more active and corrected more errors by directly consulting the corpora as they gained more practice. H. Yoon & Jo (2014: 107) also found that their learners showed more interest in consulting a corpus directly, as they liked to be “language detectives”.

Apart from the type of corpus and the way in which the corpus is used, these self-correction studies also diverge regarding the treatment of errors. In four studies (J-Y. Chang 2014; Hegelheimer 2006; Quinn 2015; Tono et al. 2014), the teacher not only highlighted the location of errors, but also indicated types of error. In seven other studies (Crosthwaite 2017; Feng 2014; Gaskell & Cobb 2004; Gilmore 2009; Todd 2001; H. Yoon 2008; H. Yoon & Jo 2014), however, errors were only highlighted and not classified. Students in McGarrell’s (2015) study faced the toughest challenge, receiving little support from the teacher. They were required to edit their writing independently (identifying language errors, organisational inappropriateness, etc.) with the aid of corpora after only one hour of training in using concordancers. It is unknown which type of treatment is more effective, which points to the need of further investigation on this issue. Regardless of the type of treatment, learners in many studies find the combination of teacher intervention and the use of corpora against which they evaluate their own writing beneficial. In other words, having teachers identifying the mistakes and the students correcting them by themselves using corpora is a highly effective way to improve their writing (e.g. Crosthwaite 2017; Feng 2014; Quinn 2015). Learners in McGarrell’s (2015) study also indicated that the editing could be more effective if the teacher indicated where in the text it should be done. Of course, the drawback here is that being reliant on the teacher, learners do not become autonomous in their use of corpora.

Furthermore, helping learners identify errors does not make the learning process problem-free. After an error has been identified, students need to go through a complex cognitive process of hypothesising, designing the search, identifying patterns, and reaching a conclusion. There could be problems at any of the stages. Feng (2014) and H. Yoon & Jo (2014), for instance, found that learners’ prior knowledge could affect their concordancing strategies. In Feng’s (2014) study, three Chinese graduate students were required to correct four errors in their writing by consulting corpora and to keep a record of their search history. An interesting self-correction pattern emerged during the process. Learners’ prior knowledge seemed to affect their learning strategies. The students would first correct errors based on their intuition. When their prior knowledge was insufficient for the task, they would consult a dictionary, if they did not know the meaning of the word, or consult the corpora, if they knew the word. The influence of learners’ prior knowledge on their adoption of the corpus during error-correction was also found by H. Yoon & Jo (2014) with Korean learners.

Corpus facilitation of error correction can also be affected by intra-linguistic factors. Todd (2001), for instance, noticed that part of speech could affect Thai EFL learners’ ability to induce patterns and self-correct errors in their writing. While most of the time the students could successfully induce patterns out of concordance lines and make successful corrections, they experienced difficulty or failure when a word possessed more than one part of speech. Moreover, among different word classes, Todd (2001) found that errors involving adjectives were easier than verbs and in turn easier than nouns for Thai EFL learners. Tono et al. (2014) also reported that their Japanese undergraduate students performed better in correcting omission and addition errors than mis-formation errors using corpora; however, this may not be the case when the searched word has multiple parts of speech. Crosthwaite (2017), on the other hand, found that omission and addition errors were more difficult to resolve through using corpora for his Chinese postgraduate students than mis-formation errors. The intra-linguistic factors discussed here are all with learners from Asian language backgrounds, suggesting that such issues may be more of an issue for learners from languages typologically distant from English. They may not affect learners so much from Indo-European language backgrounds, languages which are typologically closer to English. Clearly there is a lot still to be learned regarding the cognitive processes and learning strategies learners use in error correction.

# 4.2 More globally-focussed studies

The second largest group of DDL studies treats academic writing more comprehensively $\left( n = 8 \right)$ . In contrast to studies reviewed in Section 4.1, in which learners use the corpus resource as an error-correction tool, the eight more globally focussed studies encourage learners to be “researchers” and explore corpora more freely. These studies often implement a combination of genre- and corpus-based approaches (Bianchi & Pazzaglia 2007; Cortes 2007, 2014; Diani 2012; Sun 2007), a model that has been repeatedly advocated by Flowerdew (2004, 2005, 2009) to mitigate the impact of what some critics have argued is the decontextualised nature of the bottom-up (corpus-based) approach. The integration of genre-based activities into EAP pedagogy means that, unlike error-correction studies, in which general corpora were often used, more specialised or personal corpora, often of journal articles, were adopted (Bianchi & Pazzaglia 2007; Cortes 2007, 2014; Diani 2012; Lee & Swales 2006).

As Charles (2007) points out, the convergence of genre- and corpus-based approaches helps scaffold the learning process by getting students to work with something more traditional and familiar to them and to move on to something more novel. Bianchi & Pazzaglia (2007), for instance, successfully guided 78 Italian EFL learners through the whole process of constructing, annotating, and consulting corpora over the period of 14 weeks. The researchers started the course by asking students to read research articles and analyse their structural and linguistic characteristics. Each student then downloaded a paper in their own field and annotated it manually, indicating generic moves and steps (Swales 1990). Corpus-based activities were later introduced with a focus on a particular section of the paper each time. Students completed different writing assignments with the aid of the corpus. The abstract-writing task at the end of the programme yielded encouraging results. The researchers found that initially students were overwhelmed by the massive amount of manual annotation; however, as the course proceeded, students, including those of lower proficiency, started to see the benefits of the approach. The students believed that corpus work was helpful in improving not only their general knowledge of English, but also their ability to understand a scientific text.

Cortes (2007, 2014) carried out two studies exploring the efficiency of the dual genre-corpus approach and moved a step further in the second study by comparing two types of treatment, one being corpus- and genre-based and the other only genre-based. Post-training evaluation showed that although the rating of the students’ final writing task did not reveal a significant difference between the two groups, those in the corpus-based group were very comfortable working with computerised corpora and found the integration of computer technology and traditional genre-based teaching empowering. Learners in the genre-based group, on the other hand, thought that analysing four paper-printed research articles was very limiting.

Other studies adopting the dual approach include those of Diani (2012), and Sun (2007), both of whom demonstrate how students benefit from analysing discourse moves in research paper samples and borrow the phraseological patterns identified in the samples for their own research writing. Cargill & O’Connor (2006: 210) consider these as “sentence templates” while J. Flowerdew & Wang (2017: 151) refer to the source texts as “textual mentors”; this is a powerful application of corpora.

Two other studies, although not focusing on the integration of genre- and corpus-based approaches, have made important contributions to the literature. The pioneering study by Lee & Swales (2006) explores how a corpus-based academic writing course could be staged by moving from freely accessible general corpora to self-compiled specialised corpora. PhD students in this study worked as researchers and presented insightful findings about linguistic features of research articles across disciplines in the final project of the course. H. Yoon & Hirvela (2004) investigated in detail how ESL learners perceive the corpus-based approach. While the majority of learners found corpora very helpful for writing, factors such as frustration with the technology, the amount of time required, and difficulty of interpreting results had an impact on the learning experience. The authors state that some of the complaints were likely caused by a lack of training.

As mentioned earlier, participants in studies surveyed in this section used corpora more as researchers. Students’ knowledge about academic writing conventions or their publication experiences seem to have a certain impact on the learning process. In his experiment with Polish undergraduate students, Kaszubuski (2010) identified three types of corpus users: adopters, minimalists and refusers; the first category refers to the most active corpus users and the third the most reluctant to adopt the new approach. He observed that students’ writing skills correlate with his classification system. In Sun’s (2007) study, graduate students with poorer knowledge about written academic conventions tended to refer to the information templates provided more frequently. The advanced PhD students of Lee & Swales (2006) demonstrated excellent research and computer skills. These students did not experience the frustration with formulating searches and interpreting results. Their research experience may have partly contributed to the smooth and fruitful learning experience.

Learners’ language proficiency, on the other hand, does not always show a linear correlation with learning outcome. Although advanced-level learners in their study performed best during the final writing task, Bianchi & Pazzaglia (2007) found no obvious correlation between learning outcome and proficiency. Advanced learners investigated by H. Yoon & Hirvela (2004) showed greater frustration with the new technology than intermediate learners, a finding which the authors mainly attributed to the limited training the advanced learners in their study received in class.

# 4.3 Studies focusing on particular sub-sections and rhetorical functions of research papers and theses

In addition to the studies reviewed in Section 4.2, seven more studies, while focussing on specific sections or rhetorical functions of research papers or theses, contribute to the literature regarding the integration of genre- and corpus-based approaches. Focusing on the discussion section of PhD theses, combining topdown and bottom-up approaches, Flowerdew (2015) demonstrated how she taught a group of PhD students from science backgrounds to structure and improve the discussion section of their theses. Studying the extracts of the discussion section from research papers, students became familiar with the generic structure of the section. They were then introduced to the Hong Kong PolyU Corpus of Research Articles (CRA) http://rcpce.engl.polyu.edu.hk/RACorpus/) and the concordancer ConcGram (Greaves 2009). The students had no problem transiting from the traditional genre-based approach to the DDL approach. Some even commented that printed examples were boring.

Hsieh & Liou (2008), on the other hand, tell a different story technology-wise. Adopting the dual approach, they developed an in-house online writing support system that enabled graduate students in a Taiwan university to carry out searches in a corpus of 100 move-annotated abstracts and to edit their writing. The abstract corpus consisted of texts by both NS and NNS writers and one session of the training was devoted to four non-native phenomena identified in the corpus. The learners practised writing and revising an abstract with the aid of the online system and the final version of their writing showed good command of the structure of abstracts. However, learners’ responses to the new writing support system were only moderately positive. Based on the learners’ feedback, the system was later improved by shortening the text explanations and adding more text-highlighting devices, adding internal links to allow learners to choose the examples they wished to see, and adding more web resources and instructions. As a result, performance was improved and the online abstract-writing unit seemed to have a positive effect on the students’ writing, helping them to become aware of the structure of abstracts, although there was still an issue with the ordering of the moves. Different responses from the students in both of the above studies may reflect the importance of having user-friendly interfaces in DDL classrooms.

The remaining five cases in this section aimed to improve learners’ rhetorical functions, still within the framework of genre- and corpus-based L2 writing pedagogy. Charles (2007, 2011, 2012, 2015) offered an academic writing course to graduate students at Oxford University using the genre-based L2 writing corpus pedagogy. The courses described in the first two studies by Charles (2007, 2011) were based on specialised corpora of successful PhD theses and focused on rhetorical functions such as defending one’s research against criticism, criticising others’ work, and making and countering arguments. The courses were all well received by the participants, although there were also complaints regarding technical problems, the time required for corpus work and the amount of training and practice required for learning the new skills, common problems mention in many studies in this review. In the two later studies, Charles (2012, 2015) further examined the corpus affordances of EAP writing pedagogy by helping students build their own specialised corpora in class. While students were consistently very positive about corpus use in EAP writing and appreciated the high relevance of self-compiled corpus to their own needs, negative comments were again repeatedly found regarding technical problems, the difficulty in and the time required for formulating searches, and interpreting results.

Such negative feedback, however, might still be present when the computer was “taken out of the equation” (Boulton 2010) and paper-printed concordance lines were used. Poole (2016) offered a 16-week genre- and corpus-based EAP writing course to international students in an American university, focusing on rhetorical functions. To better help students understand how rhetorical functions could be used, Poole (2016) took a contrastive approach by using texts on a controversial issue produced by two opposing groups. Paper-printed concordance lines were studied by the students, focusing on the linguistic realisations of different functions. A majority of the learners acknowledged during the post-course survey that the concordance activity was beneficial. However, still half of the students considered corpus work difficult, even though no technological drawbacks were involved. More work needs to be done in refining the teaching of rhetorical functions with DDL.

4.4 Studies focussing on the teaching of academic vocabulary

Vocabulary teaching is the most basic application of corpus linguistic techniques in DDL. Corpus techniques are most powerful in showing the lexico-grammatical patterns (collocation and colligation) into which a given vocabulary item is used. Huang (2014) demonstrates this potential in an experimental study with a group of 40 Chinese learners divided into an experimental and control group. Both groups were given a list of five abstract nouns, with the experimental group using paper-based concordances and the control group using dictionaries. Written posttests students showed greater improvement in collocational and (prepositional) colligational use for the experimental group.

DDL can also be very powerful in the teaching of lexical bundles. Eriksson (2012) demonstrates how a learner corpus can be used before and during the teaching of lexical bundles for academic writing. During his teaching preparation, together with a corpus of 25 research articles, he used a corpus of texts written by six doctoral students in biochemistry and biotechnology (five of whom attended the workshops he ran) for the selection of bundles. Later, during the two workshops (3 hours each), students searched for different types of bundles in both corpora, using AntConc to complete a series of tasks. Classroom observation and student notes showed that learners generally appreciated the use of corpora in learning. PhD students in Eriksson’s (2012) classroom found it motivating to work with tasks based on their own writing. This corroborates the motivational benefits of learner corpora emphasised by Aston (2002), Lee & Swales (2006), and Seidlhofer (2002).

A less frequent approach is the use of DDL for the teaching of cohesive devices. Like Eriksson (2012), working with a learner corpus, Cotos (2014) explored the teaching and learning of linking adverbials as a specific case of cohesion. In an experiment involving 31 graduate students, one group completed DDL tasks using a corpus of published research articles RAs and an in-house learner corpus, whereas the other group, doing similar activities, used only the native corpus. After three weeks’ (80 minutes per week) training, all students employed more varied adverbials in post-experiment writing and relied less on certain high-frequency adverbials from pre-experiment writing. The dual-corpora group found the local learner corpus particularly helpful because it related directly to their own writing.

Cresswell (2007) is another study on the function of linking adverbials (referred to here as connectors) showing the potential of the DDL approach to the teaching of these patterns. In this study, 126 Italian L1 undergraduate students, divided into experimental and control groups, studied connectors in academic writing. The evaluation of learner writing yielded a slightly positive effect of

DDL connective production. Classroom observations revealed that, although provided with corpus and concordance tools, around half of the students made use of the resources in a deductive way, i.e. checking dictionaries first and then looking for examples in the corpus. Learning style is, therefore, an important factor that teachers and researchers need to take into account in DDL. Despite working in an EAP context, Cresswell (2007) used a non-academic corpus, The Independent newspaper, although he suggested that it would be better to have students “using a corpus generically closer to their productive task, rather than a newspaper corpus” (Cresswell 2007: 248). The importance of appropriate corpus selection in EAP contexts is thus highlighted here.

# 5. Contentious issues

The survey of Section 4 has shown that factors such as types of corpora, the friendliness of query interfaces, learners’ prior linguistic knowledge, their knowledge of academic writing conventions, and the amount of teacher control, may impact on the learning experience or learners’ perception of the approach. This section continues the discussion by considering a number of contentious issues in DDL highlighted in the articles reviewed here and how they have been addressed in the studies under investigation. As with the other topics dealt with in this review, these issues were derived through our application of the combined constant comparison and corpus-assisted method of analysis referred to in Section 2.

One critique regarding corpus application in language classrooms concerns the decontextualisation of truncated concordance lines (Widdowson 2000; Swales 2002; Flowerdew 2009). Chinese learners in Huang’s (2014) experiment expressed similar concerns. However, as proposed by Charles (2007), this issue can be resolved through the use of the “File View” function of AntConc and WordSmith Tools or similar functions of other tools. Truncated concordance lines may no longer be a problem when the original texts are only a click away from learners. In both AntConc and WordSmith Tools, the “Concordance Plot” function can visualise the position of queried items in their original context. This function can be especially useful for showing students generic differences across sections of academic writing. The contextualisation problem can also be resolved through teacher intervention. Bianchi & Pazzaglia (2007) demonstrate how concordance lines produced by learners could be shared in class with an emphasis on the importance of co-text and context.

The time taken to do DDL is another issue that learners may raise (J-Y. Chang 2014; Charles 2011, 2012; Cotos 2014; Feng 2014; Huang 2014; McGarrell 2015; Quinn 2015). This might be inevitable, given the fact that the great majority of the participants in the research surveyed are introduced to this new approach for the very first time. Time is required for learners to become skilful at using the tools and interpreting results. As mentioned in Section 4.3, in DDL classrooms, students are expected to take on some of the responsibility and explore answers for themselves. This makes the learning process appear to be more challenging and take longer. However, teachers should still be concerned. A negative perception might prevent learners from transferring new skills to regular writing practices. For error-correction instruction, Quinn (2015) suggests that corpus work in conjunction with error codes given by the teacher could speed up the process, a procedure which has also been suggested by learners themselves (see Section 3.1). Reducing the intensity of DDL activities could be another way to avoid this problem. Instead of having intensive training over a short period of time, corpus practices could be spread over a longer time span. Flowerdew (2008) suggests that corpus sessions should be limited to between 10 and 20 minutes per lesson, as long sessions might lead to a loss of interest and concentration.

One factor that might offset the negativity regarding time investment is learner motivation or learner needs. Several studies have shown that learners who have immediate needs for writing support or have the immediate opportunity to transfer the skills learned to actual real world writing often have a more positive response towards the DDL approach. Hence, they may be more willing to invest time in learning the new skills. This might also explain why so many DDL interventions are focussed on academic writing, a type of writing for which there is usually a present or future need. On this issue, Charles (2014) found in her investigation into learners’ long-term application of corpus tools that PhD students used corpora more frequently than MA students, as the former have more pressing needs to write and publish research papers. In Cotos’s (2014: 217) study, learners who had access to both learner and native corpora had more positive views on the approach, as they could link the findings directly to their own writing, while those who only had access to native data found the tasks difficult because they “did not have opportunities for immediate application and practice”. Sun (2007) found that learners who were currently writing a research paper rated the corpus tool significantly higher than those who were not. Therefore, the timing of offering the DDL course could be of great importance.

# 6. Conclusion

This review of DDL studies has revealed a range of promising aspects of corpus consultation in the academic writing classroom. First, more studies have been carried out between 2010 and 2016, narrowing the gap between corpus-based academic writing research and the application of research findings. Second, more practitioners have been making use of specialised corpora, especially in-house or personal corpora. The scarcity of suitable corpora for DDL seems not to be as severe as before. Third, the use of multiple corpora in writing instruction is another encouraging sign, helping to better cater for learners’ different needs. Fourth, more concordance tools are now freely available, which may accelerate the spread of DDL in academic writing classrooms. Fifth, studies that combine genre- and corpus-based approaches in academic writing instruction have been increasing dramatically and have yielded generally positive outcomes. As Cobb & Boulton (2015) and Boulton & Cobb (2017) conclude in their comprehensive meta-analysis of DDL empirical research in language classrooms, DDL can be effective and efficient compared to other teaching approaches. Researchers may no longer need to dwell on the viability of corpus consultation in the EAP writing classroom, but rather explore in more depth how learners may successfully make use of corpus resources to facilitate academic writing.

In spite of the positive developments, and in spite of our attempt to organize and classify the studies included in this review, the field of DDL in EAP/academic writing has clearly not achieved anything near the sort of settled paradigm or explanatory framework associated with more mature fields in the sciences and social science. The field is still in its infancy and wide open for further research of different types. Based on our review, we suggest five points for future research and practice.

i. More descriptions of different approaches in different geographical and classroom contexts will be useful. Such accounts, of course, should meet minimal requirements in that they should be objective, include a clear statement of aims and objectives, a description of materials used (corpora, software, example tasks, etc.), student attitudes, student performance on learning tasks, student outcomes, and problems encountered. Practitioners can in this way learn from each other in the design and refinement of their DDL projects and the field can thereby move forward.

ii. More such studies need to be carried out describing how corpora and more traditional teaching approaches could be combined in overall writing instruction. While existing studies contribute greatly to the literature by means of experiments comparing the outcomes of an experimental group taught using corpus methods with a control group taught more traditionally, in real-world language teaching, corpora are likely to be used alongside other more traditional teaching media. Corpora are certainly not a replacement for dictionaries, grammar books or textbooks; they are better considered as a supplement. It would be beneficial to see how corpora and other resources can complement each other in L2 academic writing instruction, not as an either/or dichotomy. For example, studies which show how concordance lines may be used as a supplement to entries and exercises on grammar in coursebooks would be useful.

iii. Researchers and practitioners need to come up with ways of helping students to become more autonomous in their use of corpora. Most of the research and practice reported above involves teacher-led use of DDL. However, academic writers need to move beyond the classroom to work with corpora on their own and deal with the various texts they need to produce in the real world. Similar studies to those of Park & Kinginger (2010) and Charles (2014), which consider out-of-class use, are to be welcomed. Qualitative case studies of out-of-class corpus use highlighting good and less good practice based on observation and interviews have the potential to provide possible models for teachers to promote independent use among their students. Research into language learning outside the classroom, “in the wild”, in mainstream language education research has become popular in recent years (Nunan & Richards 2014) and its wider application in the field of DDL research is to be welcomed.

iv. An important aspect of autonomy and a key outstanding issue in DDL is how to show writers how to use corpus tools to identify problems in their writing without the aid of the teacher. This issue was referred to as the “Holy Grail” of DDL at a recent conference. Researchers and practitioners need to devise ways of helping learners with this problem. This issue might again be investigated by means of qualitative research methods. Observation, interviews, think-aloud protocols, and key-stroke analysis might be employed to identify how DDL users go about editing their work. What are the successful (and less successful) ways of searching and analysing corpus data?

v. More research into specialist training in DDL for EAP practitioners is needed. Our searches did not reveal any studies referring to teacher education courses in DDL for EAP/academic writing. We did cite two studies concerned with DDL teacher education (Leńko-Szymańska 2014; Ebrahimi & Faghih 2017), but these studies were for EGP teachers, not teachers of EAP. As mentioned earlier, better training of teachers in DDL will make it more likely that they will take it up. Teachers cannot be expected to adopt DDL without adequate preparation (Frankenberg-Garcia 2012). Furthermore, as noted in Section 3, the amount of training needed should not be underestimated. And it is not only the technical aspects of DDL that are needed. Training in discourse analysis of written academic text (including with corpus techniques) is equally important. Without a familiarity with such specialised language, teachers will be unable to highlight the key features of academic discourse on which their students should conduct their searches.

Significantly developing these five areas will give practitioners even greater confidence and be even more beneficial to learners. More generally, we can state that the relatively large number of studies reviewed in this article and the fact that the majority of them were published in the later part of the period under review indicates that there is a healthy and developing interest in the field of DDL in academic writing. In restricting our literature search to the most widely available sources (international journal articles and edited book chapters published in English), we should point out that there may be a lot of work, particularly of a practical nature, going on that we have not reviewed here. Nevertheless, based on what we have included in this review, we can be confident that the application of DDL in the academic writing context is entering a more mature stage. It is moving from being a niche interest of a small number of dedicated researchers and practitioners towards becoming a more mainstream mode of teaching practised by ever-increasing numbers of teachers and learners internationally. The prognosis for DDL in the academic writing classroom is therefore positive and we can look forward to further progress and adoption of the approach in the future.

# References

Ädel, A. (2010). Using corpora to teach academic writing: Challenges for the direct approach. In M. C. Campoy-Cubillo, B. Bellés-Fortuño & M. L. Gea-Valor (Eds.), Corpus-based Approaches to ELT (pp. 39–55). London: Continuum.   
Anthony, L. (2018). AntConc (Version 3.5.7) [Computer Software]. Tokyo: Waseda University. Available from http://www.laurenceanthony.net/software (last accessed August 2018).   
Aston, G. (2002). The learner as corpus designer. Language and Computers, 42(1), 9–25.   
Bianchi, F., & Pazzaglia, R. (2007). Student writing of research articles in a foreign language: metacognition and corpora. In R. Facchinetti (Ed.), Corpus Linguistics 25 Years on (pp. $2 5 9 - 2 8 7 ,$ ). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: Rodopi.   
Boulton, A. (2010). Data-driven learning: Taking the computer out of the equation. Language Learning, 60(3), 534–572. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467‑9922.2010.00566.x   
Boulton, A. (2011). Bringing corpora to the masses: Free and easy tools for language learning. In N. Kubler (Ed.), Corpora, Language, Teaching, and Resources: From Theory to Practice (pp. 69–95). Brussels: Peter Lang.   
Boulton, A. (2012). Corpus Consultation for ESP: A Review of Empirical Research. In A. Boulton, S. Carter-Thomas & E. Rowley-Jolivet (Eds.), Corpus-Informed Research and Learning in ESP: Issues and Applications (pp. 261–292). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/scl.52.11bou   
Boulton, A., & Cobb, T. (2017). Corpus use in language learning: A meta-analysis. Language Learning, 67(2), 348–393. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12224   
Cargill, M., & O’Connor, P. (2006). Developing Chinese scientists’ skills for publishing in English: Evaluating collaborating-colleague workshops based on genre analysis. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 5(3), 207–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2006.07.002   
Caviglia, F. (2004). Students’ diverse appreciation of text corpora as writing aids. In T. Caudery (Ed.), Proceedings of the Ninth Nordic Conference for English Studies (NAES 2004) (pp. 27–29). Aarhus: University of Aarhus.   
Chambers, A. (2007). Popularising corpus consultation by language learners and teachers. In E. Hidalgo, L. Quereda & J. Santana (Eds.), Corpora in the Foreign Language Classroom (pp. 3–16). Amsterdam/New York: Rodopi.   
Chambers, A. (2010). Combining text-based and corpus-based approaches in the learning and teaching of academic writing in French. In M. M. Jaén & M. C. Pérez (Eds.) Exploring New Paths in Language Pedagogy (pp. 145–156). London: Equinox Publishing.   
Chambers, A. (2011). Language learning as discourse analysis: Playing games in a corpus of French journalistic discourse. In N. Kübler (Ed.). Corpora, Language, Teaching, and Resources: From Theory to Practice (pp. 97–110). Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
Chambers, A. & O’Sullivan, Í. (2004). Corpus consultation and advanced learners’ writing skills in French. ReCALL, 16(1), 158–172. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344004001211   
Chang, J. -Y. (2014). The use of general and specialized corpora as reference sources for academic English writing: A case study. ReCALL, 26(2), 243–259. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344014000056   
Chang, P. (2012). Using a stance corpus to learn about effective authorial stance-taking: A textlinguistic approach. ReCALL, 24(2), 209–236. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344012000079   
Charles, M. (2007). Reconciling top-down and bottom-up approaches to graduate writing: Using a corpus to teach rhetorical functions. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6(4), 289–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2007.09.009   
Charles, M. (2011). Using hands-on concordancing to teach rhetorical functions: Evaluation and implications for EAP writing classes. In A. Frankenberg-Garcia, J. Flowerdew & G. Aston (Eds.), New Trends in Corpora and Language Learning (pp. 81–104). London/New York: Continuum.   
Charles, M. (2012). ‘Proper vocabulary and juicy collocations’: EAP students evaluate do-it-yourself corpus building. English for Specific Purposes, 31(2), 93–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2011.12.003   
Charles, M. (2014). Getting the corpus habit: EAP students’ long-term use of personal corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 35, 30–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2013.11.004   
Charles, M. (2015). Same task, different corpus: The role of personal corpora in EAP classes. In A. Leńko-Szymańska & A. Boulton (Eds.), Multiple Affordances of Language Corpora for Data-driven Learning (pp. 129–154). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/scl.69.07cha   
Cobb, T. (1997). Is there any measurable learning from hands-on concordancing? System, 25(3), 301–315. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0346‑251X(97)00024‑9   
Cobb, T. (n. d.). Concordancers [Computer software]. Available at http://www.lextutor.ca/conc/ (last accessed January 2018).   
Cobb, T., & Boulton, A. (2015). Classroom applications of corpus analysis. In D. Biber & R. Reppen (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of English Corpus Linguistics (pp. $4 7 8 \substack { - 4 9 7 }$ . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139764377.027   
Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of Qualitative Research. (3rd ed.). Los Angeles: Sage.   
Cortes, V. (2007). Exploring genre and corpora in the English for academic writing class. The ORTESOL Journal, 25, 8–14.   
Cortes, V. (2014). Genre analysis in the academic writing class: With or without corpora? Quaderns de Filologia-Estudis Lingüístics, 16, 65–80.   
Cotos, E. (2014). Enhancing writing pedagogy with learner corpus data. ReCALL, 26(2), 202–224.   
Cresswell, A. (2007). Getting to “know” connectors? Evaluating data-driven learning in a writing skills course. In E. Hidalgo, L. Quereda & J. Santana (Eds.), Corpora in the Foreign Language Classroom (pp. 267–288). Amsterdam/New York: Rodopi. https://doi.org/10.1163/9789401203906_018   
Crosthwaite, P. (2017). Retesting the limits of data-driven learning: Feedback and error correction. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 30(6) 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2017.1312462   
Davies, M. (2008). The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA): 560 million words, 1990-present. Retrieved from https://corpus.byu.edu/coca/ (last accessed August 2018).   
Diani, G. (2012). Text and corpus work, EAP writing and language learners. In R. Tang (Ed.), Academic Writing in a Second or Foreign Language (pp. 45–66). London: Continuum.   
Ebrahimi, A., & Faghih, E. (2017). Integrating corpus linguistics into online language teacher education programs. ReCALL, 29(1), 120–135–16. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344016000070   
Eriksson, A. (2012). Pedagogical perspectives on bundles: Teaching bundles to doctoral students of biochemistry. In J. Thomas & A. Boulton (Eds.), Input, Process and Products. Developments in Teaching and Language Corpora (pp. 195–211). Brno: Masaryk University Press.   
Fan, M., & Xu, X. (2002). An evaluation of an online bilingual corpus for the self-learning of legal English. System, 30(1), 47–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0346‑251X(01)00052‑5   
Feng, H. -H. (2014). A pilot study: The use of corpus concordancing for ESL learner self error-correction. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 25, 5–25.   
Fenton-Smith, B., Humphries, P., & Walkinshaw, I. (Eds.) (2017). EMI: Issues and Challenges in Asia-Pacific Higher Education. Cham: Springer.   
Flowerdew, J., & Wang, S. O. (2017). Teaching English for research writing purposes with a focus on genre, register, textual mentors, and language-reuse. In J. Flowerdew & T. Costley (Eds.), Discipline-specific Writing; Theory into Practice (pp. 144–161). London: Routledge.   
Flowerdew, L. (2001). The exploitation of small learner corpora in EAP materials design. In M. Ghadessy, A. Henry & R. Robert (Eds.), Small Corpus Studies and ELT: Theory and Practice (pp. 363–379). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/scl.5.21flo   
Flowerdew, J. (2004). The problem-solution pattern in apprentice vs. professional technical writing: An application of appraisal theory. In G. Aston, S. Bernardini & D. Stewart (Eds.), Corpora and Language Learners (pp. 125–35). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/scl.17.09flo   
Flowerdew, J. (2005). Integrating traditional and critical approaches to syllabus design: The ‘what’, the ‘how’ and the ‘why?’. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 4(2), 135–147. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2004.09.001   
Flowerdew, J. (2008). Corpus linguistics for academic literacies mediated through discussion activities. In D. Belcher & A. Hirvela (Eds.), The Oral-Literate Connection: Perspectives on L2 Speaking, Writing and Other Media Interactions (pp. 268–287). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.   
Flowerdew, J. (2009). Applying corpus linguistics to pedagogy: A critical evaluation. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics. 14(3) 393–417. https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.14.3.05flo   
Flowerdew, J. (2015). Using corpus-based research and online academic corpora to inform writing of the discussion section of a thesis. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 20, 58–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2015.06.001   
Francis, W. N., & Kucera, H. (1964). Computational Analysis of Present-day American English. Providence, R. I.: Brown University Press.   
Frankenberg-Garcia, A. (2012). Raising teachers’ awareness of corpora. Language Teaching, 45(4), 475–489. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444810000480   
Gabel, S. (2001). Over-indulgence and under-representation in interlanguage: Reflections on the utilization of concordancers in self-directed foreign language learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, $_ { 1 4 } ( 3 \substack { - 4 } )$ , 269–288. https://doi.org/10.1076/call.14.3.269.5792   
Gaskell, D., & Cobb, T. (2004). Can learners use concordance feedback for writing errors? System, 32(3), 301–319. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2004.04.001   
Gilmore, A. (2009). Using online corpora to develop students’ writing skills. ELT Journal, 63(4), 363–372. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccn056   
Gosden, H. (1995). Success in research article writing and revision: A social-constructionist perspective. English for Specific Purposes, 14(1), 37–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/0889‑4906(94)00022‑6   
Gilquin, G., Granger, S., & Paquot, M. (2007). Learner corpora: The missing link in EAP pedagogy. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6(4), 319–335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2007.09.007   
Greaves, C. (2009). ConcGram 1.0: A Phraseological Search Engine. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Granger, S. (2009). The contribution of learner corpora to second language acquisition and foreign language teaching: A critical evaluation. In K. Aijmer (Ed.), Corpora and Language Teaching (pp. 3–32). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/scl.33.04gra   
Hafner, C. A., & Candlin, C. N. (2007). Corpus tools as an affordance to learning in professional legal education. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6(4), 303–318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2007.09.005   
Hegelheimer, V. (2006). Helping ESL writers through a multimodal, corpus-based, online grammar resource. Calico Journal, 24(1), 5–32. https://doi.org/10.1558/cj.v24i1.5‑31   
Hsieh, W. M., & Liou, H. C. (2008). A case study of corpus-informed online academic writing for EFL graduate students. CALICO Journal, 26(1), 28–47.   
Huang, Z. (2014). The effects of paper-based DDL on the acquisition of lexico-grammatical patterns in L2 writing. ReCALL, 26(2), 163–183. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344014000020   
Johns, T. (1990). From printout to handout: Grammar and vocabulary teaching in the context of data-driven learning. English Language Research Journal, 4, 27–45.   
Johns, T. (1991). Should you be persuaded: Two samples of data-driven learning materials. English Language Research Journal, 4, 1–16.

Johns, A. M., & Snow, M. A. (2006). Academic English in secondary schools. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 5(4), 251–253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2006.08.001

Kaszubuski, P. (2010). IFAConc: A pedagogic tool for online concordancing with EFL/EAP learners. In A. Frankenberg-Garcia, J. Flowerdew & G. Aston (Eds.), New Trends in Corpora and Language Learning (pp. 81–104). London/New York: Continuum.   
Kaur, J., & Hegelheimer, V. (2005). ESL students use of concordance in the transfer of academic word knowledge: An exploratory study. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(4), 287–310. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588220500280412   
Kennedy, C., & Miceli, T. (2000). The CWIC project: Developing and using a corpus for intermediate Italian students. In B. Kettemann & G. Marko (Eds.), Teaching and Learning by Doing Corpus Analysis. Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Teaching and Language Corpora (pp. 81–104). Amsterdam/New York: Rodopi.   
Kennedy, C., & Miceli, T. (2001). An evaluation of intermediate students’ approaches to corpus investigation. Language Learning and Technology, 5(3), 77–90.   
Kennedy, C., & Miceli, T. (2010). Corpus-assisted creative writing: Introducing intermediate Italian learners to a corpus as a reference resource. Language Learning & Technology, 14(1), 28–44.   
Lee, D., & Swales, J. (2006). A corpus-based EAP course for NNS doctoral students: Moving from available specialized corpora to self-compiled corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 25, 56–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2005.02.010   
Leech, G. (1997). Teaching and language corpora: A convergence. In A. Wichmann, S. Fligelstone, T. McEnery & G. Knowles (Eds.), Teaching and Language Corpora (pp. 11–23). Harlow: Addison Wesley Longman.   
Leńko-Szymańska, A. (2014). Is this enough? A qualitative evaluation of the effectiveness of a teacher-training course on the use of corpora in language education. ReCALL, 26(2), 260–278. https://doi.org/10.1017/S095834401400010X   
Liou, H. C., Yang, P. C., & Chang, J. S. (2012). Language supports for journal abstract writing across disciplines. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 28(4), 322–335. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365‑2729.2011.00446.x   
McGarrell, H. M. (2015). Developing autonomy through awareness of textual features in academic texts. OLBI Working Papers, 7, 41–52. https://doi.org/10.18192/olbiwp.v7i0.1360   
Miceli, T., & Kennedy, C. (2002). An apprenticeship with the CWIC Corpus: A tool for learner writers in Italian. In C. Kennedy (Ed.), Proceedings of Workshop Innovations in Italian Teaching (pp. 83–94). Brisbane: Griffith University.   
Nunan, D., & Richards, J. C. (Eds.). (2014). Language Learning Beyond the Classroom. New York, NY: Routledge.   
O’Sullivan, Í., & Chambers, A. (2006). Learners’ writing skills in French: corpus consultation and learner evaluation. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15(1), 49–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2006.01.002   
Park, K., & Kinginger, C. (2010). Writing/thinking in real time: Digital video and corpus query analysis. Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 31–50.   
Poole, R. (2016). A corpus-aided approach for the teaching and learning of rhetoric in an undergraduate composition course for L2 writers. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 21, 99–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2015.12.003   
Quinn, C. (2015). Training L2 writers to reference corpora as a self-correction tool. ELT Journal, 69(2), 165–177. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccu062   
Scott, M. (2017). WordSmith Tools (Version 7) [Computer Software]. Stroud: Lexical Analysis Software.   
Seidlhofer, B. (2002). Pedagogy and local learner corpora: Working with learning-driven data. In S. Granger, J. Hung & S. Petch-Tyson (Eds.), Computer Learner Corpora, Second Language Acquisition and Foreign Language Teaching (pp. 213–234). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/lllt.6.14sei   
Stevens, V. (1991). Classroom concordancing: Vocabulary materials derived from relevant, authentic text. English for Specific Purposes, 10(1), 35–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/0889‑4906(91)90014‑N   
Sun, Y. C. (2007). Learner perceptions of a concordancing tool for academic writing. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(4), 323–343. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588220701745791   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. (2002). Integrated and fragmented worlds: EAP materials and corpus linguistics. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic Discourse (pp. 150–164). Harlow: Longman.   
Tardy, C. (2004). The role of English in scientific communication: Lingua franca or Tyrannosaurus rex? Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3(3), 247–269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2003.10.001   
Todd, R. W. (2001). Induction from self-selected concordances and self-correction. System, 29(1), 91–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0346‑251X(00)00047‑6   
Tono, Y., Satake, Y., & Miura, A. (2014). The effects of using corpora on revision tasks in L2 writing with coded error feedback. ReCALL, 26(2), 147–162. https://doi.org/10.1017/S095834401400007X   
Tribble, C., & Jones, G. (1990). Concordances in the Classroom: A Resource Book for Teachers. Harlow: Longman.   
Tribble, C. (2015). Teaching and language corpora: Perspectives from a personal journey. In A. Lenko-Szymanska & A. Boulton (Eds.), Multiple Affordances of Language Corpora for Data-Driven Learning (pp. 37–62). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/scl.69.03tri   
Turnbull, J., & Burston, J. (1998). Towards independent concordance work for students: Lessons from a case study. On-Call, 12(2), 10–21.   
Widdowson, H. G. (2000). On the limitations of linguistics applied. Applied Linguistics, 21(1), 3–25. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/21.1.3   
Yoon, C. (2011). Concordancing in L2 writing class: An overview of research and issues. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 10(3), 130–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2011.03.003   
Yoon, H. (2008). More than a linguistic reference: The influence of corpus technology on EAP writing. Language Learning & Technology, 12(2), 31–49.   
Yoon, H., & Hirvela, A. (2004). ESL student attitudes toward corpus use in L2 writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 13, 257–283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2004.06.002   
Yoon, H., & Jo, J. W. (2014). Direct and indirect access to corpora: An exploratory case study comparing students’ error correction and learning strategy use in L2 Writing. Language, Learning & Technology, 18(1), 96–117.

# Appendix

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2" colspan="3"></td><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">produced</td><td colspan="2">No of texts</td><td rowspan="2">Use of</td></tr><tr><td>by each S</td><td>Evaluation corpora</td></tr><tr><td>Author Country Population L1</td><td>Academic level</td><td>Tool Discipline Corpus type &amp; size type</td><td>Foci of teaching</td><td></td><td>Duration during of training training</td><td></td><td>of learning outside outcomesclass</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>Bianchi &amp; Pazza- glia</td><td>Italy</td><td>78</td><td>Italian</td><td> undergraduate Psychology</td><td></td><td>an in-house medium-sized specialised corpus</td><td>an offline purchased tool writing in (WS Tools)</td><td>academic general</td><td>30 hrs (2 hrs a number of per week)</td><td>short writing assignments</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes (required)</td></tr><tr><td>Boulton (2011)</td><td>France</td><td>n.a.</td><td>mixed, MA mainly French</td><td></td><td>English</td><td>big &amp; small general &amp; online free specialised</td><td>query systems &amp; offline purchased</td><td>other</td><td>n.a. (one semester)</td><td>a research paper</td><td>No</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>J-Y. Chang (2014)</td><td>South Korea</td><td>10</td><td></td><td>Korean MA&amp;PhD</td><td></td><td>Engineering alarge general corpus an offline free error + a large specialisedtool (AntConc) correction corpus</td><td></td><td>(editing)</td><td>22 weeks</td><td>22 texts</td><td>No</td><td>Yes (required)</td></tr><tr><td>P. Chang USA (2012)</td><td></td><td>7</td><td>Chinese PhD</td><td></td><td>Social sciences</td><td>a small specialised corpus</td><td>an online in-house query sections in system</td><td>particular academic writing</td><td>5 hrs</td><td>an introduction of 5 drafts</td><td>Yes</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Charles (2007)</td><td>UK</td><td>40</td><td>mixed</td><td>PhD</td><td>mixed</td><td>two small specialised an offline corpora</td><td>purchased tool functions (WS Tools)</td><td>stance) rhetorical</td><td>16 hrs (8 weeks)</td><td>Zero</td><td>No</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Charles (2011)</td><td>UK</td><td>80</td><td>mixed</td><td>MA, PhD &amp; Post-doc</td><td>mixed</td><td>two small specialised an offline corpora</td><td>purchased tool functions (WS Tools)</td><td>rhetorical</td><td>12 hrs (6 weeks)</td><td>Zero</td><td>No</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Charles UK (2012)</td><td></td><td>90</td><td>mixed</td><td>MA &amp; PhD</td><td>mixed</td><td>small personal corpora + two specialised corpora</td><td>an offline free tool (AntConc) functions</td><td> rhetorical</td><td>12 hrs (6 weeks)</td><td>Zero</td><td>No</td><td>Yes (on their own initiative)</td></tr><tr><td>Charles (2014)</td><td>UK</td><td>40</td><td>mixed</td><td>MA &amp; PhD</td><td>mixed</td><td>small personal corpora</td><td>an offline free tool (AntConc)</td><td> other</td><td>12 hrs (6 weeks)</td><td>Zero</td><td>No</td><td>Yes (on their own initiative)</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="8">No of texts. produced</td><td colspan="2">Use of</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Academic</td><td></td><td>Tool</td><td>Foci of</td><td>Duration</td><td>by each S during</td><td>Evaluation corporae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Author</td><td>Country Population L1</td><td>level</td><td>Discipline</td><td>Corpus type &amp; size type</td><td>teaching</td><td>of training training</td><td></td><td>of learning outside outcomes</td><td>class</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>Charles (2015)</td><td>UK</td><td>54</td><td>mixed</td><td>MA, PhD &amp; Post-doc</td><td>mixed</td><td>personal corpora + two specialised</td><td>free tool</td><td>an offline academic writing in</td><td>12 hrs(6 weeks)</td><td>Zero</td><td>No</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Cortes (2007)</td><td>USA</td><td>n.a.</td><td>mixed</td><td>MA</td><td>mixed</td><td>corpora 10 medium-sized specialised corpora</td><td>(AntConc) general an online in-house query.</td><td>academic writing in general</td><td>weeks)</td><td>37.5 hrs (14 a research) paper</td><td>No</td><td>Yes (required)</td></tr><tr><td>Cortes (2014)</td><td>USA</td><td>28</td><td>mixed</td><td>MA &amp; PhD</td><td>mixed</td><td>small personal corpora</td><td>system an offline academic free tool  writingin</td><td></td><td>14 weeks</td><td>a research</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes (required)</td></tr><tr><td>Cotos (2014)</td><td>USA</td><td>31</td><td>mixed</td><td>MA</td><td>mixed</td><td>small specialised corpora + a learner corpus</td><td>(AntConc) general query</td><td>an online academic in-house vocabulary.</td><td>4 hrs (3 weeks)</td><td>3+ texts</td><td>Yes</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Cresswell (2007)</td><td> Italy</td><td>126</td><td></td><td>Italian undergraduate Translation</td><td></td><td>a large specialised corpus</td><td>system offline purchased vocabulary software</td><td>academic</td><td>n.a. (an academic writing</td><td>a paper (of three drafts)</td><td>Yes</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>(2017) Crosthwaite Hong</td><td>Kong</td><td>32</td><td>Chinese</td><td>mainly MA onwards.</td><td> mixed</td><td>two large general corpora</td><td>(Concord) online purchased correction and free</td><td>error</td><td>course) 12.5 hrs (5 days)</td><td>Zero (but a 400-600-word text produced</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Diani</td><td> Italy</td><td>25</td><td></td><td>Italian undergraduate English</td><td></td><td>a small specialised novice corpus</td><td>an offline academic free tool (AntConc) (genre- &amp;</td><td>writing</td><td>20 hrs (10 weeks)</td><td>training) Zero</td><td>No</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Eriksson (2012)</td><td>Sweden</td><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>PhD</td><td>&amp;</td><td>Biochemistry a small specialised corpus &amp; a small</td><td>an offline academic free tool (AntConc)</td><td>corpus-based) vocabulary</td><td>6 hrs (2 sessions)</td><td>Zero</td><td></td><td>n.a.</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="6"></td><td colspan="2">No of texts produced by Use of</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Academic</td><td></td><td></td><td>each S</td><td></td><td>Evaluation corpora</td></tr><tr><td>Author</td><td>Country Population L1</td><td>level</td><td>Discipline Corpus type &amp; size Tool type</td><td>Foci of teaching</td><td>Duration of training training.</td><td>outcomes during</td><td>of learning outside. class</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>Feng(2014) USA</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>Chinese MA</td><td></td><td>mixed</td><td>multiple large general two online corpora</td><td>free query systems</td><td>error correction weeks)</td><td>5 hrs (5</td><td>2 essays</td><td> yes</td><td> n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>J.Flowerdew Hong (2015)</td><td>Kong</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>PhD</td><td>mixed</td><td>a large specialised corpus</td><td>offline purchased software</td><td>particular 5hrs sections in academic</td><td></td><td>writing of discussion section</td><td>No</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Gaskell &amp; Cobb (2004)</td><td>Canada</td><td>20</td><td>Chinese n.a.</td><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td> a large general corpus online free</td><td>(Concgram) query systems correction weeks)</td><td>error writing</td><td>45 hrs(15</td><td>10 writings</td><td>Yes</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Gilmore (2009)</td><td>Japan</td><td>45</td><td></td><td> Japanese undergraduate mixed</td><td></td><td>two large general corpora</td><td>online free query systems</td><td>error correction</td><td>1.5 hrs</td><td>a report of two Yes drafts</td><td></td><td>Yes (required)</td></tr><tr><td>Hegelheimer USA (2006)</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>mixed</td><td>undergraduate n.a.</td><td></td><td>a learner corpus</td><td>an online in-house writing support system</td><td>error correction weeks)</td><td>40 hrs (8</td><td>5 papers</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes (required)</td></tr><tr><td>Hsieh &amp; Liou (2008)</td><td>Taiwan</td><td>35</td><td>Chinese MA</td><td></td><td>Applied linguistics</td><td>two small specialised an online corpora</td><td>in-house writing support system</td><td>sections in academic writing</td><td>particular 6 sessions</td><td>an abstract of  Yes two drafts</td><td></td><td> n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Huang (2014)</td><td>China</td><td>40</td><td></td><td></td><td>Business Purposes</td><td>Chinese undergraduate English for two small specialised corpora</td><td>(paper-printed vocabularye concordances) none</td><td>academic</td><td>8o min.</td><td>3 essays</td><td>Yes</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Kaszubuski (2010)</td><td>Poland</td><td>27</td><td>Polish</td><td> undergraduate mixed</td><td></td><td>small general &amp; specialised corpora &amp; in-house a learner corpus</td><td>an online query system</td><td>academic writing in 4 weeks; general</td><td>ESAP group: Zero</td><td></td><td>No</td><td>n.a.</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="6">Author</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>No of texts produced</td><td>Use of</td></tr><tr><td>Country Population L1</td><td>Academic</td><td></td><td></td><td>by each s Evaluation corpora</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Foci of</td><td>Duration during</td><td></td><td>of learning outside</td></tr><tr><td>level Discipline Corpus type &amp; size Tool type</td><td></td><td>teaching of training training.</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>outcomes class</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>Kaur &amp; Hegelheimer (2005)</td><td>USA</td><td>18</td><td>mixed</td><td colspan="2">undergraduate mixed</td><td>a large general corpus an online free</td><td>query system (Lexical Tutor)</td><td>academic vocabulary</td><td>2 sessions</td><td> one essay</td><td>Yes</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Lee &amp; Swales (2006)</td><td>USA</td><td>4</td><td>Chinese PhD</td><td>mixed</td><td>corpora + small personal corpora (learner &amp; professional)</td><td>three large specialised an offline. purchased tool (ws Tools) +</td><td>general online free</td><td>academic writing in weeks)</td><td>=26 hrs (13 Zero</td><td>No</td><td></td><td>Yes (part of their training &amp; on their own initiative)</td></tr><tr><td>Liou, Yang &amp; J.S. Chang (2012)</td><td>Taiwan</td><td>60</td><td>Chinese MA &amp; PhD</td><td></td><td>Computer Science &amp; Electronic engineering</td><td>a specialised corpus</td><td>query systems an online in-house writing support system</td><td>particular 5o min. sections in academic writing</td><td></td><td>an abstract Yes</td><td></td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>McGarrell (2015)</td><td>Canada</td><td>10</td><td>English, MA Aribic &amp; Chinese</td><td>applied</td><td>linguistics corpora</td><td> multiple large general two online</td><td>free query systems</td><td>error 1 hr correction (editing)</td><td></td><td>an essay</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes (required)</td></tr><tr><td>Park &amp; Kinginger (2010)</td><td>USA</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>Chinese undergraduate Business</td><td>an online medium-sized</td><td>specialised corpus</td><td>an online free other query system (Google CSE)</td><td>one semester per week)</td><td>(2 75 min.</td><td>6 writings No</td><td></td><td>Yes (required)</td></tr><tr><td>Poole (2016) USA</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>Chinese, undergraduate n.a. Arabic, Korean</td><td></td><td>corpora</td><td>two small specialised none concordances)</td><td>(paper-printed functions weeks)</td><td>rhetorical 15 hrs (6</td><td> an essay</td><td>No</td><td>No (paper-printed concordances&amp;</td><td>keyword lists)</td></tr><tr><td>Quinn (2015)</td><td>Japan</td><td>58</td><td>Japanese undergraduate n.a.</td><td></td><td></td><td>a large general corpus an online</td><td>purchased query system (Collins)</td><td>error correction sessions)</td><td>two revisions</td><td>22.5 hrs(15 anessay&amp; No</td><td></td><td>Yes (required)</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sun (2007)</td><td>Taiwan</td><td>20</td><td>Chinese</td><td>MA &amp; PhD</td><td>mixed, mainly natural sciences</td><td>sentence templates</td><td>an online in-house support writing</td><td>academic n.a. writing in general</td><td></td><td>three sections of a research paper</td><td>No</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Todd (2001)</td><td>Thailand</td><td>25</td><td>Thai</td><td>MA</td><td>Science &amp; engineering</td><td>Internet</td><td>system an online free error</td><td>query system correction English</td><td>n.a. (an course)</td><td>a report</td><td>Yes</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>Tono, Satake &amp; Miura (2014)</td><td>Japan</td><td>93</td><td></td><td>Japanese undergraduate n.a.</td><td></td><td>a large general corpus an online free error</td><td></td><td>query system correction</td><td>= 45 min.</td><td>an essay</td><td>Yes</td><td>n.a.</td></tr><tr><td>H. Yoon USA (2008)</td><td></td><td>14</td><td>Korean or Chinese</td><td>MA &amp; PhD</td><td>mixed</td><td>a large general corpus an online</td><td>purchased search query system (Collins)</td><td>error correction weeks)</td><td>50 hrs (10</td><td>3+ texts</td><td>No</td><td>Yes (required)</td></tr><tr><td>H. Yoon USA &amp; Hirvela (2004)</td><td></td><td>22</td><td>mixed (mainly Chinese &amp; Korean)</td><td>undergraduate, mixed MA &amp;PhD</td><td></td><td>a large general corpus an online.</td><td>purchased search query general system (Collins)</td><td>writing in weeks)</td><td>academic 40hrs(10</td><td>n.a. (at least one writing)</td><td>No</td><td>Yes (part of their training &amp; on their own</td></tr><tr><td>H. Yoon South &amp; Jo (2014)</td><td>Korea</td><td>4</td><td>Korean</td><td>undergraduate n.a.</td><td></td><td>multiple large general an online free error corpora</td><td>(Lexical Tutor)</td><td>query system correction weeks)</td><td>15 hrs (10</td><td>12 short essaysYes</td><td></td><td>initiative) n.a.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Address for correspondence

Meilin Chen   
Language Centre   
Hong Kong Baptist University   
Kowloon Tong, Kowloon   
Hong Kong   
meilinchen8388@gmail.com

# Co-author information

John Flowerdew   
Department of Applied Linguistics and   
Communication   
Birkbeck, University of London   
johnflowerdew888@gmail.com

Copyright of International Journal of Corpus Linguistics is the property of John Benjamins Publishing Co. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.