Book review

# Engagement in Medical Research Discourse A Multisemiotic Approach to Dialogic Positioning, Daniel Lees Fryer. Routledge, New York (2022). 220 pp 9780367484682, $\$ 160$

Genre is defined as "a clas of communicative events, the members of which share some set of communicative purposes,.. recognized by the expert members of the parent discourse community (Swales, 1990, p. 58). Texts of pecific genres show generic features in terms of organization, purpose, and audience (Martin, 2001). Analyzing these generic conventions provides useful infor. mation on the communicative practices of the discourse community to which the genre belongs. Medical research articles, as a genre, encompassdifferent generic and discourse features as well a semiotic systems. However, the current body of knowledge lacks a solid and universal framework that delineates the commonly used moves and steps in writing such articles. The field has been mostly concerned with reporting medical discoveries regardlessof generic uniformity in writing articles. With a view to providing an un. derstanding of such rhetorical conventions, Daniel Lees Fryer investigates engagement in medical research articles in his book, Engagement in Medical Research Discourse A Multisemiotic Approach to Dialogic ositioning. As a part of appraisal theory, engagement is defined as how a \*text-or the voice represented by that text-refers to, responds to, and is influenced by prior and anticipated utterances' (p. 10). Drawing on concepts from dialogic theory, social semiotics, apraisal theory, and systemic functional theory, this timely monograph applies corpus ingustics and discourse analysis methods to investigate how resources from diffrent semiotic systems are used and integrated to generate meanings beyond semiotic part in medical research articles. It emphasies the importance of considering the contributions of different semiotic systems, as wel as their intersemioti potential in expressing engagement. The book is a valuable aset for research and practice in English for academic purpose (EAP), in general, and medical research articles, in particular, given its theoretical rigor.It can help educators and researchers in this field to get familiar with and employ proper rhetorical moves and structures in a unified way. The intended readership of ths invaluable volume includes but is not limited to EAP teachers, learners, materials developers, and researchers.

Structurall, the book comprises eight chapters. Chapter 1, Introduction: Engaging with Medical Research, lays the foundation for exploring engagement in medical research articles by discussing social relations and bonds in scientific communities. It also presents the aims and organization of the book. Chapter 2, "Voices in the Text: Models of Engagement and Alignment, conceptualizes the relationship between texts and those who produce or engage with them. It gives an overview of dialogism, social semiotics, and systemic functional theories to develop a conceptual framework for exploring engagement, with a view to providing a multi- and intersemiotic understanding of texts. Drawing on Martin and Rose's (2003) system of engagement, the author ends this chapter with how engagement is explicitly modeled through 'monoglossc' (i.e., single-voiced) and heteroglossic (i.e, other-voiced) utterances across verbal, visual, and mathematical semiotic systems. Chapter 3, Medical Research Discourse: An Overview", situates the study within the wider linguistic, multisemiotic, and discourse-analytic context by presenting an overview of studies on the medical research article genre. Findings of such studies on the verbal,visual, and mathematical discourse of medical research articles point to the medical research genre's predominantly positivist epistemology, \*relatively objective and value-free body of knowledge, and dialogically conractive, monogossic or authoritative discourse" (p. 26), where ther voices are incuded les. This i also reflected in the text type where knowledge i contextualized in modern medicine, namely the medical research article, with a highly formalized structure. The chapter ends with a description of The Medical Research Article Corpus (MRAC) on which the book is based.

Chapter 4, Verbal Engagement in Medical Research Articles", discusses the instantiation, realization, and interaction of different verbal engagement resources, and their distribution across diffrent phases of the medical research article. It also pinpoints that medical research artices are mostly heteroglossc" in their textual voices and entail a dialogic space, both expansive and contrctive, that allows other voices to appear. The most frequently emerged instances of engagement in this genre are found to be 'entertain' 'deny, and acknowledge', which align with the textual voice and the reader. Moments of disalignment are uncommon in choosing verbal resources because medical research articles are more consensus-seeking than other domains. Chapter 5, Mathematical Engagement in Medical Research Articles", and Chapter 6, "Visual Engagement in Medical Research Articles', do the same for mathematical and visual engagement as other types of engagement in medical research artices. The mathematical resources used in medical research articles show that thi genre is more heteroglossi' than monoglosi' and more additive' than 'subtractive in process Yet it is narrow in dialogic pace. The reason might be the various encoding systems of probability and certainty concepts, as compared with verbal semiotic systems. In Chapter 6, the author elaborates on the distribution of mathematical resources across the four stages of the medical research artice, namely Introduction, Methods, Results, and Discussion. After analyzing different mathematical clauses and statements of probability in such articles, Fryer clams that articles in this genre limitedly use mathematical engagement in the Introduction and Discusson stages, but considerably in the Methods and Results. The dialogic spaces, epistemologies, writer-reader relations, and knowlege structures are also contended to vary across sections in the medical reearch artices. The findings of these chapters (46) reveal that researchers in this academic genre employ verbal, visual, and mathematical engagement diffrently in research article sections, suggesting a lack of uniformity in obeying a common rhetorical model in writing their manuscripts..

The penultimate chapter, Intersemiotic Engagement in Medical Research Articles", explores engagement from an intersemiotic angle by examining how verbal, mathematical, and visual engagement resources work together to create complementary, divergent, and emergent engagement across and within the diffrent stages of a sample medical research article The analyses show that verbal, mathematical, and visual engagement resources mostly complement and amplify the overall dialogic efect. Yet, there are instances of divergent verbal, mathematical, and visual engagement resources that lead to dialogic tensions that perturb voice spaces in articles, such as combining monoglossc' graphs and tables with the mathematical expansion' construed by expressions and components like $p$ and $9 5 \%$ confidence interval. The author also adroitly shows the presence of emergent engagement where the overall dialogic effect is not the result of one single semiotic system, but emerges from a combination of verbal, mathematical, and visual semiotic systems. Chapter 8, "Engagement as Text, Engagement as System", compares engagement in the medical research article with engagement in other text types and disciplines. Here, the author concludes that \*despite the relative [monogloss] and dialogic contraction' of medical discourse suggested by comparative studies, medical research articles express remarkable dialogic diversity (p. 184). The chapter ends with a cal for a multisemiotic perspective and system of examining engagement in the wrtten texts of medical research articles.

Strangely enough, a description of the methodological aspects of the analyses is missing in the book. Except for Chapter 3, where a descriptio of the corpus used in the study is given, n explanation of dffern stages of data analys and ways to ensure the validit of interpretations (e., content validty) sems to have been neglected in the book Such sues may affect the methodological rigor and robustness f the analyses. Given the subjective nature of qualitative analyses like this interpreting trustworthiness by addressing the credibility, transferabilit, dendabilit, and confirmability of the anlys is important in such studies (asaji, 2020). Altough the analysis serves as a basis for comparative research on other genres and disciplines, a statement of suggestions for further research seems necessary. More importantly, the pedagogical uses of isclosing the generi features of medical reearch articles appear to be missing. However, the way such a line of knowledge can facilitate medical students' comprehension and production of medical texts is overlooked in this book. Furthermore, it would have een insightful, f the book had taken an intersemiotic perspective to investigate how different semiotic resources (e.g., verbal, mathematical, and visual), are deployed separately and collectively in the medical research articles, too.

That said, the book is commendable in its comprehensive coverage of different semiotic systems f engagement in medical research articles. Specifically, this resource is an invaluable contribution to the field, in that it extends the inguistic engagement system to mathematical and visual resurces. The ook's detailed analsis accompanied by examples from different article, as ellas its robust conceptual framework, makes this opportune volume avaluableresource and food for thought for EAP researchers in other genres and disciplines. The unique value of the bok i that it goes beyond a simple, lingustic, and monosemiotic analysi of texs and regards the medical reearch article as a multisemiotic instantiation of meaning Inthis sense, the volume is of both theoretical and practical value for readers. Overall the book is a promising aset for a wide readership, including AP teachers, learners, materials developers, and researchers, who can realize the generic features of the medical research artices, which may, i turn, help them compose academic papers effectively in medical sciences.

# References

ar .1.  .    i writing (pp. 311-338). Brepols.   
Martin, J. R., & David, R. (2003). Working with discourse: Meaning beyond the clause. Continuum.   
Nassaji, H. (2020). Good qualitative reearch. Language Teaching Research, 24(4), 427-431. https:/oi.org/10.1177/1362168820941288   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge University Press.