# Do consumer critics write differently from professional critics? A genre analysis of online film reviews

Ilona K.E. de Jong a , Christian Burgers b,n

a Theater Company Suburbia, Almere, The Netherlands b VU University Amsterdam, Department of Communication Science, De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands

# a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history:   
Received 23 August 2012   
Received in revised form   
25 February 2013   
Accepted 25 March 2013   
Available online 2 April 2013

Keywords: Genre analysis Consumer criticism Online reviews Professional criticism Word of mouth

# a b s t r a c t

Consumers often base their choices to purchase experience goods like movies on online reviews. These reviews can be written by professional critics or by other consumers. However, little is known on the issue how the texts written by these two groups of reviewers differ. To answer this question, we conducted a genre analysis of online film reviews by analyzing and comparing the moves and strategies in online film reviews written by professional and consumer critics. Both quantitative and qualitative analyses show that these two groups of texts differ: Consumer critics mainly evaluate the movies and mostly write from a personal perspective. In contrast, reviews written by professional critics describe the movie instead of evaluating it. These results show that online reviews written by professional and consumer critics differ in terms of content which may have important implications for discourse on the Internet.

$\circledcirc$ 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Many consumer choices are based on uncertainty, because the quality of products like films, restaurants and hotels is revealed only after the consumer has consumed and experienced the products (Shapiro and Varian, 1999). Thus, to reduce uncertainty, consumers often base their choices for these products on information available prior to purchase (Gemser et al., 2007). The Internet has made it easier for consumers to collect such information and consumers can base their product choices on such aspects like the product's price and availability or the way in which the product can be ordered. Yet, the most important determinant of online consumer behavior is the presence and content of online reviews in which other consumers discuss their product experiences (Fagerstrøm, 2011). Given the high impact of these reviews, one of the most crucial challenges for businesses and discourse analysts is understanding their dynamics.

Marketing scholars have demonstrated that various aspects of reviews can determine their effectiveness, one of which is the expertise of the reviewer (e.g., Vermeulen and Seegers, 2009; Willemsen et al., 2010; Willemsen et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2010). Some studies show that expert reviewers may have more impact on consumers than non-expert reviewers because the former are perceived as being more knowledgeable about the topic than the latter (Vermeulen and Seegers, 2009; Willemsen et al., 2010). Other studies show that experts may be less persuasive (Willemsen et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2010), because consumers expect experts to be less trustworthy than consumer reviewers (Willemsen et al., 2010).

Furthermore, language aspects of the reviews may also influence the way they are perceived (e.g., Schellekens et al., 2010; Schindler and Bickart, 2012) as reviews with descriptive rather than evaluative information (Schindler and Bickart, 2012) and abstract rather than concrete language (Schellekens et al., 2010) are seen as more helpful or persuasive. Yet, even though the type of reviewer (expert, consumer) and the language of the review are important predictors of the effectiveness of online reviews, little is known about the question of whether or how the language used in the review depends on the expertise of its author; language and expertise have—until now—been studied independently of each other. Furthermore, the establishment of expertise has been studied as an explicit cue given by the reviewer (Willemsen et al., 2011), which means that professionals explicitly indicate their expertise on a certain topic (e.g., an expert reviewer of digital cameras may say something like “As somebody who has been a professional photographer for over twenty years”). It may be that expertise may also be acknowledged implicitly, so that professional (expert) reviewers write differently from consumer (nonexpert) reviewers. In order to analyze how professional and consumer reviewers structure their reviews, we aim to answer the question if and how professional reviewers write differently from consumer reviewers.

# 2. Online criticism by professional and consumer critics

Online reviews are a type of word-of-mouth (WOM). Marketing research has shown the importance of WOM, especially in the case of WOM about movies: WOM written by both professional and consumer critics has been shown to impact movie revenues (for professional reviews, cf. Basuroy et al., 2003; Chen et al., 2012; Gemser et al., 2007; Terry et al., 2004, 2011; for consumer WOM, cf. Dellarocas et al., 2007; Liu, 2006; Moon et al., 2010).

Previous studies mainly focus on volume (number of reviews) and evaluative valence of WOM (Dellarocas et al., 2007; Liu, 2006; Moon et al., 2010). Following Hunston (2004: 157), evaluative valence is defined as “the indication that something is good or bad”. Most studies on evaluative valence in WOM consider the ratings that were given to a movie as indicators of valence, which implies that evaluation is seen as a scalar phenomenon (cf. Lemke, 1998; Martin and White, 2005). For instance, one such study shows that consumers tend to respond more favorably to American-made family entertainment featuring big movie stars, while professional critics tend to favor movies that are challenging, have abstract qualities of cinematic style, and move away from familiar settings (Holbrook, 1999). This study thus shows that professional critics hold different standards from the general public.

However, the conclusions presented in the previous paragraph are only based on ratings given by consumers and professional critics and are not based on the arguments used by both groups to (dis)like a movie. So, when Holbrook (1999) claims to disclose the differences and similarities between consumers and professional critics when it comes to movie taste, it may only scratch at the surface of the differences between both groups. In order to say that consumers and professionals write their reviews in different ways, it is important to take a closer look at the ways in which these two groups of critics actually write. In other words, even though volume and valence provide valuable insights into the general popularity of and general attitude towards a certain movie, it is still not clear how consumers and professionals actually discuss these movies. To answer this question, the discourse produced by both groups should be looked at into detail. One way to do this is by looking at the moves and strategies used by both groups (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990).

This study thus expands upon these previous studies that compared professional and consumer criticism by examining the content of both groups of reviews, instead of the volume, the valence or the general topic. We do so by using the method of corpus-based genre analysis (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990). The general goal of a corpus-based genre analysis is revealing the characteristic elements of the genre under investigation. While genre analysis has been used to study a variety of genres, corpusbased genre analysis has—to the best of our knowledge—not often been applied to review texts (but for an exception, see Taboada, 2011). With the use of genre analysis, the texts of consumer critics can be analyzed and compared to the texts of professional critics to see how these texts are similar or different in terms of genre structure. This analysis reveals which elements in a movie are being described and discussed by consumers and professionals in which ways.

# 3. Corpus-based genre analysis

An important goal of genre analysis is to provide a better understanding of the textual conventions of the genre under discussion (Bhatia, 1993; Hyland, 2009; Swales, 1990). If textual conventions are known to a genre's users, this knowledge may help users to improve or understand these genre texts (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990; Upton and Cohen, 2009). Genre analysis has been shown to be useful for a variety of genres including judicial genres (Bhatia, 1993, 2004; Hafner, 2010; Propen and Schuster, 2010), scientific genres (Hyland, 2009; Swales, 1990), educational genres (Chapmann, 1999; Freedman et al., 1994), and business genres (cf. de Groot et al, 2006; Rutherford, 2005; Zhu, 2000).

A second goal of genre analysis is to test texts that claim to be a part of a genre on text conventions (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990). If a text adheres to most conventions associated with a specific genre, the text can be said to belong to that genre. Such a comparison between different groups of texts with the use of genre analysis has been applied in the field of intercultural communication to investigate if texts from a similar genre originating from different cultures are similar or different in terms of genre structure (cf. de Groot et al., 2006).

In genre analysis, several aspects of a genre can be studied, but the essence of a genre lies within its communicative goal (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990). One of the claims of genre analysis is that every text of the same genre has a similar communicative goal (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990), which is reflected in other aspects of a genre text such as content, medium or style. In this paper, we examine two genres that, on face value, resemble each other closely: professional and consumer criticism about movies. After all, the authors of both texts types review the same evaluation object (films) and are free to discuss the same or different elements of these films in their reviews.

Genre analysis states that authors can use different rhetorical functions and lower-level functions to accomplish the communicative goal of the text, the so-called ‘moves’ and ‘strategies’ (Swales, 1981, 1990)1 . A move is an element of a text that is used for a certain function (Swales, 1981), e.g., describing the movie. A strategy is the way by which this move is realized, e.g., by summarizing (a part of) the plot. Thus, an analysis of the different moves and strategies in the criticism genre can reveal the different conventions used by professional and consumer critics.

# 4. Research questions

We analyze and compare the moves and strategies from the genre of online film reviews of texts written by professional critics to those written by consumer critics. Our two sub-questions are:

RQ1. How does the use of moves differ between film reviews written by professional critics and consumer critics? RQ2. How does the use of strategies differ between film reviews written by professional critics and consumer critics?

# 5. Pilot study

In order to make a discourse analysis as reliable as possible, it is important to first make all the rules that coders need to follow explicit in a codebook (Krippendorff, 2004). Thus, our first task in the pilot phase was creating and pilot testing a codebook. We did so in the following way: First, a draft of the codebook was created using earlier research and different journalistic handbooks. Previous research describes two main stages found in typical movie reviews: description and evaluation (Taboada, 2011). In this previous research, the descriptive stage can be divided into several other stages, such as subject, plot, characters and background (Taboada, 2011). The evaluative stage is separate from the description stage and not further specified in previous literature (Taboada, 2011). This present paper takes up on this earlier study and expands and further specifies stages of film reviews.

For the first version of our codebook, we combined the stages found in Taboada (2011) with elements found in the instructions of different handbooks on how to write film reviews (Boggs and Petrie, 2004; Bordwell and Thompson, 2004; Corrigan, 2001; Donkers and Willems, 2002; Gocsik and Barsam, 2007). For example, these handbooks mention that reviews often give practical information about the movie such as the movie's runtime. They also state that reviews often try to encourage or discourage readers from seeing the movie. Finally, the handbooks also mention more specific filmic elements reviewers can use to describe or evaluate the movie or to place the movie in a context. Reviewers can for example describe cinematographic elements or evaluate the sound effects.

These different elements and stages were subsequently classified into moves and strategies by the first author of the paper. This first draft of the codebook was then tested in a pilot study of eight film reviews. Since no detailed codebook for the analysis of movies and strategies in film reviews existed, we thought it especially important to first pilot test the codebook on a small sample of film reviews and adjust the codebook according to the findings. The pilot study showed that elements were missing from the codebook2 . Several strategies were added, such as comparing the movie to a movie from the same genre or to a different medium. Additionally, the strategies of one of the moves were split into two groups. With these results of the pilot study, a final version of the codebook was created. Appendices A and B give overviews of the different moves and strategies as well as the specific sources on which the move or strategy was based. The Digital Appendix gives a full overview of the codebook together with examples for all moves and strategies.

# 6. Main study

# 6.1. Codebook

The codebook consists of different steps. In order to make observations comparable, we first established speech acts (Searle, 1969) as our unit of analysis (Krippendorff, 2004). By writing a sentence with a specific goal, a speaker performs a speech act. In film reviews, a critic can for example use a sentence to recommend the reader to see the movie. In this sentence, the critic performs an act of persuasion. Within a move, more than one strategy can be used. A strategy can be a whole sentence, but it can also be part of a sentence.

Next, coders decide which move and strategies are used in the speech act under discussion. In a film review, five different moves can be used which each contain different strategies. The first three moves are descriptive moves and are used to describe parts of the movie or the movie as a whole. Appendix A gives an overview of these descriptive moves and corresponding strategies. The descriptive moves are: (1) ‘giving practical information about the movie’, (2) ‘describing the movie’ and (3) ‘placing the movie in context’. The final two moves are evaluative moves. These moves are: (4) ‘giving criticism’ and (5) ‘recommending the movie to the reader’. Appendix B shows an overview of the evaluative moves and corresponding strategies. For reader convenience, examples from every move are discussed below.

The first move, (1) ‘giving practical information’, can be achieved by strategies such as giving information on the number of cinemas that show the movie or by elements about the movie itself such as the movies runtime, its director or the name of the principle actors and actresses. The second move, (2) ‘describing the movie’, can be realized by describing the story of the movie or elements from the movie such as specific characters. The third move, (3) ‘placing the movie in context’, establishes a link between the evaluation object (the movie) and the context in which it was created. This move can be split into two categories of strategies. The first group consists of the parts of the movie that are being compared, for example the subject of the movie. The second group of strategies consists of the comparison material, for example another specific movie.

The three moves described above are descriptive moves. The two other moves in film reviews are evaluative moves. The fourth move, (4) ‘giving criticism’, is used by the critic to give his or her positive or negative evaluation about the movie. A critic can for example do this by giving his or her view on the movie as a whole or on the different film techniques. In this move, we thus see giving criticism as giving an evaluation in terms of Hunston (2004): indicating whether the movie was good or bad. The final move, (5) ‘recommending the movie’, is used to persuade the reader and consists of two groups of strategies. The first strategy is recommending or discommending the reader to see the movie. The second group of strategies consists of arguments to back up the critic's advice, for example arguments about previous films from the same filmmakers. The complete codebook as well as individual examples of each move and each strategy can be found in the Digital Appendix.

# 6.2. Corpus

The first author coded a corpus of 72 online film reviews, 36 of which were written by professional critics (who get paid for writing their reviews) and 36 were written by consumer critics (who do not get paid for writing their reviews). The professional film reviews were taken from the websites of De Volkskrant3 and Telegraaf, two Dutch national newspapers. The reviews written by consumer critics were collected from two websites which dealt exclusively with film reviews written by consumer critics: Filmkeuze.nl and Moviescan.be. For every consumer with Internet access, it is possible to publish a film review on these websites. To make sure that the consumers who publish on these websites were not professional critics, at least five critics of each website were checked for connections with professional criticism. Both websites met these criteria as the specific critics were not professionals.

Empirical evidence suggests that different movie genres are evaluated in different ways by both professional and consumer reviewers (Holbrook, 1999). To deal with this aspect, we were evenly selected 9 movies from two different film genres (action films and romantic comedies). These genres were chosen because there is no risk of films overlapping within these genres. Labels provided by the Internet Movie Database (www.imdb.com) and Boxofficemojo.com were used to determine whether a movie belonged to one of these genres. The specific movies were then randomly chosen based on the largest turnover in the Netherlands in the year 2009 (Boxofficemojo.com, 2009). In alphabetic order, the action movies included in the analysis were (1) 2012, (2) Avatar, (3) Fast $\mathcal { E }$ Furious, (4) Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince, (5) Public Enemies, (6) Terminator Salvation, (7) Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen, (8) Watchmen and (9) X-Men Origins: Wolverine. The romantic comedies were (1) (500) Days of Summer, (2) Couples Retreat, (3) He's Just Not That Into You, (4) I Love You, Man, (5) Julie $\mathcal { E }$ Julia, (6) The Rebound, (7) The Ugly Truth, (8) Whatever Works and (9) Yes, Man. For each of these 18 mainstream movies, four reviews were selected (one from every website). This resulted in a corpus of 72 film reviews.

# 6.3. Reliability

Reliability of the identification of moves and strategies was tested in an intercoder reliability analysis. We randomly selected around $2 0 \%$ of the data, following recommendations by Wimmer and Dominick (2003: 157). This means that 16 reviews were included in this analysis. These reviews were evenly distributed across the professional and consumer reviews. A second coder then independently analyzed these 16 reviews and the two analyses were compared to analyze reliability of the codebook. The analysis shows that the choice between the different types of moves, descriptive or evaluative moves, was almost perfectly reliable (κtype of move $_ { \mathrm { i } } = . 8 8$ , Landis and Koch, 1977: 165). The choice between the five different moves can also be made almost perfectly reliable $\left( \kappa _ { \mathrm { m o v e s } } = . 8 2 \right)$ . For every move, the choice between the strategies have been tested. These choices are substantially reliable (κmean strategies $_ { ! = . 6 4 }$ ). The analysis shows that the codebook is reliable and that coders generally make the same choices in analyzing a film review with this codebook.

# 7. Results

We used both quantitative and qualitative analyses to answer our research questions. We see these analyses as complementary: the quantitative results show how often certain moves and strategies are used by the two groups of critics, the qualitative results show in which ways these moves and strategies are described in the text and whether the two groups of critics use different writing styles to do so. First, we discuss our quantitative results.

# 7.1. Quantitative results

# 7.1.1. Descriptive and evaluative moves

Before looking at specific moves and strategies, quantitative results for the two types of moves (descriptive or evaluative) are discussed. First, we conducted a control analysis to see whether the different reviews were of equal length. A 2 (type of review: professional vs. consumer) $\times 2$ (genre of the film: action vs. romantic comedy) between-subjects ANOVA with the total number of words of the review as a dependent variable showed a difference in length between professional and consumer reviews $( F ( 1 , 6 8 ) = 1 1 . 8 3$ , $p < . 0 1$ , ${ \eta _ { p } } ^ { 2 } \mathrm { = } . 1 5 \mathrm { ) }$ . Professional reviews $\scriptstyle { M = 2 9 6 . 9 }$ words, $S D { = } 1 9 0 . 8 $ ) contained fewer words than consumer reviews $M = 4 4 5 . 1$ words, $S D = 1 9 5 . 4 \AA$ ). Furthermore, the length of reviews of action movies $M { = } 4 3 9 . 5$ words, $S D { = } 2 1 4 . 2$ ) was higher than that of reviews of romantic comedies $\cdot M { = } 3 0 2 . 5$ words, $S D { = } 1 7 4 . 2$ , $F ( 1 , 6 8 ) { = } 1 0 . 1 3$ , $p < . 0 1$ , ${ \eta _ { p } } ^ { 2 } \mathrm { = } . 1 3 \rangle$ . The interaction between the type of review and the genre of the movie was non-significant $( F < 1 )$ .

Because the type of reviews differed in length, we decided to control for this difference by calculating the percentage of evaluative moves as compared to the total number of moves (i.e., evaluative $^ +$ descriptive moves) in the review and used this new variable as the dependent variable of our subsequent analysis. We conducted a $2 \times 2$ between-subjects ANOVA with type of review (professional vs. consumer) and movie genre (action vs. romantic comedy) as independent variables and the percentage of evaluative moves as a dependent variable. This analysis showed a difference in the relative use of evaluative moves between professional and consumer criticism $( F ( 1 , 6 8 ) = 2 4 . 8 8$ , $p < . 0 0 1$ , ${ \eta _ { p } } ^ { 2 } \mathrm { = } . 2 7 ;$ , which indicated that consumer critics $\mathrm { \Delta } M = . 5 0$ , $S D { = } . 1 5 )$ use relatively more evaluative moves than professional critics $M = . 3 4$ , $S D { = } . 1 5$ ). Furthermore, the relative use of evaluative moves also differed between reviews from the two film genres $( F ( 1 , \ 6 8 ) = 1 3 . 4 3$ , $p < . 0 0 1$ , ${ \eta _ { p } } ^ { 2 } \mathrm { = } \mathrm { . } 1 7 \rangle$ : reviews of action movies $( M = . 4 8 , \ S D = . 1 7 )$ contain relatively more evaluative moves than reviews of romantic comedies $M = . 3 6$ $S D { = } . 1 5$ ). No interaction effect between the type of reviews and the use of evaluative moves was found $( F < 1 )$ .

# 7.1.2. Analysis of specific moves

For the analysis of the specific moves and strategies, we used Chi-square tests4 . A Chi Square test showed a significant association between the different moves and the types of reviews $\scriptstyle ( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 4 ) =$ 16.67, $p < . 0 1$ , Cramer's $V { = } . 1 9$ )5 .

Tables 1 and 2 show that the moves (1) ‘giving practical information about the movie’, (4) ‘giving criticism’ and (5) ‘recommending the movie to the reader’ differ from the expected values. The adjusted standardized residuals show that move (1) ‘giving practical information about the movie’ was used more by professional critics $( 6 2 . 5 \% )$ than by consumer critics $( 3 7 . 5 \% )$ . Consumers used the moves (4) ‘giving criticism’ and (5) ‘recommending the movie to the reader’ more $( 5 5 . 6 \%$ and $6 8 . 2 \%$ , respectively) than professional critics did $( 4 4 . 4 \%$ and $3 1 . 8 \%$ , respectively). This showed that consumer critics used more evaluative moves than professional critics. The other moves, (2) ‘describing the movie’ and (3) ‘placing the movie in context’, did not differ from the expected values.

# 7.1.3. Analysis of strategies

The strategies of two of the five moves were also used differently in professional film reviews and consumer film reviews. The strategies of the other three moves did not show a significant connection with the type of review according to the Chi Square test. These were the strategies that belong to moves (2) ‘describing the movie’ $\chi ^ { 2 } ( 2 ) = 1 . 3 6$ , $p { = } . 5 4$ , exact method), (4) ‘giving criticism’ $\scriptstyle ( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 4 ) = 5 . 4 1$ , $p { = } . 2 5 ,$ ), (5) ‘recommending the movie to the reader’ group 1 ‘recommending or discommending the movie’ $\scriptstyle ( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 ) = . 0 1$ , $p { = } . 9 7 )$ and group 2 ‘argument for recommending or discommending’ $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 4 ) = 1 . 5 7 , p = . 8 3$ , exact method). A Chi Square test did show a significant connection between the strategies from the moves (3) ‘placing the movie in context’ and (1) ‘giving practical information’ and the type of film review (i.e., professional or consumer criticism).

A Chi Square test showed a medium association between the type of review and the strategies of move (1) ‘giving practical information’ $\chi ^ { 2 } ( 4 ) = 2 0 . 1 2$ , $p < . 0 0 1$ , Cramer's $V = . 2 9$ ). The adjusted standardized residuals in Table 1 show that information about the movie theater was mainly used in professional reviews $( 1 0 0 \% )$ and in none of the consumer reviews in the corpus. The strategy ‘information about the critic’ was used more than the expected values in consumer criticism $( 6 0 . 9 \% )$ and less in professional criticism $( 3 9 . 1 \% )$ .

Table 1 Frequency of the use of the specific descriptive moves and the corresponding strategies in reviews per kind of review (professional reviews and consumer reviews) (Percentages between brackets).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Moves and strategies</td><td>Professional reviews</td><td>Consumer reviews</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>(Move 1) Giving practical</td><td>60a (63.3%)</td><td>36b (36.7%)</td><td>96</td></tr><tr><td>information Information about:</td><td>124 (49.8%)</td><td>125 (50.2%)</td><td>249</td></tr><tr><td>Movie theater</td><td>16a (100%)</td><td>0b (0%)</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td>Film itself</td><td>36 (50.0%)</td><td>36 (50.0%)</td><td>72</td></tr><tr><td>Review</td><td>36 (50.0%)</td><td>36 (50.0%)</td><td>72</td></tr><tr><td>Critic</td><td>34b (39.1%)</td><td>53a (60.9%)</td><td>87</td></tr><tr><td>(Move 2) Describing the movie</td><td>71 (60.2%)</td><td>47 (39.8%)</td><td>118</td></tr><tr><td>Describing:</td><td>88 (59.5%)</td><td>60 (40.5%)</td><td>148</td></tr><tr><td> Story</td><td>65 (60.2%)</td><td>43 (39.8%)</td><td>108</td></tr><tr><td>Characters</td><td>17 (53.1%)</td><td>15 (46.9%)</td><td>32</td></tr><tr><td>Filmic elements</td><td>6 (75.0%)</td><td>2 (25.0%)</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>(Move 3) Placing the movie in</td><td>36 (61.1%)</td><td>23 (38.9%)</td><td>59</td></tr><tr><td>context Part of the movie:</td><td>45 (56.3%)</td><td>35 (43.7%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Film as a whole</td><td>21 (58.3%)</td><td>15 (41.7%)</td><td>80 36</td></tr><tr><td>Subject</td><td>10 (76.9%)</td><td>3 (23.1%)</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td>Actors</td><td>6 (54.5%)</td><td>5 (45.5%)</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>Director and film studio.</td><td>8 (40.0%)</td><td>12 (60.0%)</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>Comparison material:</td><td>45 (56.3%)</td><td>35 (43.7%)</td><td>80</td></tr><tr><td>Specific movie</td><td>7b (26.9%)</td><td>19a (73.1%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Film genre</td><td>.7 (58.3%)</td><td></td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td>Culture</td><td>20a (71.4%)</td><td>5 (41.7%) 8b (28.6%)</td><td>12 28</td></tr><tr><td>Medium</td><td>11 (78.6%)</td><td>3 (21.4%)</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

a or $^ { \mathrm { b } } =$ The frequency was a bigger or b smaller than expected based on the rowand column-totals (i.e. adjusted standardized residuals $< - 1 . 9 6$ or $> 1 . 9 6$ ). One move can consist of more than one strategy.

Move (3) ‘placing the movie in context’ consists of two groups of strategies. The first group of strategies consists of the part of the movie that is being compared while the second group consists of the comparison material. The Chi Square test showed that the first group of strategies has no significant association to the type of review $\mathcal { O } ^ { 2 } ( 3 ) = 4 . 4 8$ , $p { = } . 2 1$ ). However, the second group of strategies did have a strong significant association to the type of review $\mathcal { O } ^ { 2 } ( 3 ) = 1 4 . 5 6$ , $p < . 0 1$ , Cramer's $V { = } . 4 3$ ). Table 1 shows that the strategy ‘compare to a different specific movie’ was used more in consumer criticism $( 7 3 . 1 \% )$ and less in professional criticism $( 2 6 . 9 \% )$ than the expected values showed. The strategy ‘compare with (own national or other) culture’ was used more in professional criticism $( 7 1 . 4 \% )$ and less in consumer criticism $( 2 8 . 6 \% )$ than the expected values showed. The other strategies showed no significant association to the type of review.

# 7.2. Qualitative results

# 7.2.1. Descriptive and evaluative moves

The quantitative results showed that professional critics used more descriptive moves and less evaluative moves than consumer critics did. A qualitative analysis can subsequently show how these moves and strategies are used differently by both groups of critics. A good example of a professional review with many descriptions is a review from Volkskrant.nl about Public Enemies (Beekman, 2009a), an action movie based on real historical characters such as the American gangster John Dillinger. In this review, the professional critic uses eight paragraphs from a total of thirteen to describe the movie in multiple ways. First, the critic from Volkskrant.nl discusses the life of Dillinger in detail. Then, the Dillinger character is compared to main characters from other movies made by director Michael Mann. Furthermore, the critic describes the ways in which the actors prepared for their roles. In contrast, a critic on Filmkeuze.nl just used one paragraph to describe the plot of Public Enemies (Verheyen, 2009). The three other paragraphs in this consumer review were used to evaluate the movie.

While consumer critics use more lines to evaluate a movie, professional critics are very succinct in their evaluations. In a Volkskrant.nl review of romantic comedy I Love You, Man, the critic only evaluates the movie in two sentences: “Besides a lot of silly humor, this brings very witty dialogues, which are delivered by Paul Rudd and Jason Segel, previously seen together in Forgetting Sarah Marshall. Both actors are at their best here” (Toma, 2009a) 6 . For descriptions, it is the other way around: in texts written by consumer critics, the movie is only briefly described, mostly by references to the plot. In professional film criticism, the movie is often described extensively and in multiple ways, as we have seen.

# 7.2.2. Analysis of specific moves

The specific moves (4) ‘giving criticism’ and (5) ‘recommending the movie to the reader’ are also used differently by consumer and professional critics. One such difference was found in the critic's point of view. In none of the professional reviews was an evaluation written from the first-person perspective, while in the consumer reviews this form was used multiple times. For example, one consumer critic of Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince wrote: “It surprised me, but it [the movie] was at least as effective as the emotions I felt when reading the book” (Schouten, 2009). Consumer critics also addressed the readers directly when recommending a movie, using move (5) ‘recommending the movie to the reader’. On Avatar, a consumer critic stated: “Go to a movie theater with the biggest 3D-screen and the best sound system and watch the wonderful future of film” (Bruyneel, 2009a). In contrast, professional critics did not address the reader directly but rather discussed groups of film viewers whom they felt probable to (dis) like the movie under discussion. For instance, one of the professional critics wrote: “[Avatar is] not a movie for cynics” (Toma, 2009b). This implies that professional critics use a more detached writing style to address their readers than consumer critics do.

Reviews written by consumer and professional critics also give practical information about the movie in different ways, which can be explained by the design of the two types of websites. On professional review websites, information about the movie is displayed inside the review, which makes this information part of the review. On consumer review websites, information about the movie is displayed in a separate frame from the review, which places this information outside of the review.

# 7.2.3. Analysis of strategies

When looking closer at the different strategies of move (1) ‘giving practical information’, we find differences in the strategies ‘information about the movie theater’ and ‘information about the critic’. The professional critics often mentioned the number of movie theaters where a movie was shown, while consumer critics never gave such information. The two consumer review websites did show more information about the critic of the review than the professional review websites. Besides the names of the critics, their ages and sometimes even their email addresses were mentioned. These websites thus offer more space for critic profiles than the professional websites ${ \tt d o } ^ { 7 }$ .

Table 2 The frequency of the use of the specific evaluative moves and the corresponding strategies in reviews per kind of review (professional reviews and consumer reviews) (Percentages between brackets).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Moves and strategies</td><td> Professional reviews</td><td>Consumer reviews</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>(Move 4) Giving criticism</td><td>80b (44.4%)</td><td>100a (55.6%)</td><td>180</td></tr><tr><td>View about:</td><td>161 (44.4%)</td><td>202 (55.6%)</td><td>363</td></tr><tr><td>Film as a whole</td><td>33 (35.5%)</td><td>60 (64.5%)</td><td>93</td></tr><tr><td>Filmmakers</td><td>39 (43.3%)</td><td>51 (56.7%)</td><td>90</td></tr><tr><td>Filmic elements</td><td>41 (47.7%)</td><td>45 (52.3%)</td><td>86</td></tr><tr><td>Story</td><td>33 (49.3%)</td><td>34 (50.7%)</td><td>67</td></tr><tr><td>Characters</td><td>15 (55.6%)</td><td>12 (44.4%)</td><td>27</td></tr><tr><td>(Move 5) Recommending the movie to the reader</td><td>7b (31.8%)</td><td>15a (68.2%)</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>Recommend:</td><td>11 (28.2%)</td><td>28 (71.8%)</td><td>39</td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td>7 (28.0%)</td><td>18 (72.0%)</td><td>25</td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>4 (28.6%)</td><td>10 (71.4%)</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>Argument:</td><td>11 (28.2%)</td><td>28 (71.8%)</td><td>39</td></tr><tr><td>Film as a whole</td><td>3 (20.0%)</td><td>12 (80.0%)</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td>Filmmakers</td><td>1 (20.0%)</td><td>4 (80.0%)</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Filmic elements</td><td>4 (36.4%)</td><td>7 (63.6%)</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td> Story</td><td>2 (33.3%)</td><td>4 (66.7%)</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Characters</td><td>1 (50.0%)</td><td>1 (50.0%)</td><td>2</td></tr></table></body></html>

a or $^ \mathrm { b } =$ The frequency was a bigger or b smaller than expected based on the row- and column-totals (i.e. adjusted standardized residuals $< - 1 . 9 6$ or $> 1 . 9 6$ ). One move can consist of more than one strategy.

Our results for the strategies of move (3) ‘placing the movie in context’ show that consumer critics mainly compared movies to other movies. The movies they used as comparison material were mostly made by the same film makers as the movie under discussion. Consumer critics used other movies mainly to discuss the career of the film makers, like one of the consumer reviewers did in a review on Whatever Works on Moviescan.be: “Woody Allen returned to his beloved New York after four city trips on the old continent—Match Point (2005); Scoop (2006); Cassandra's Dream (2007) and Vicky Cristina Barcelona (2008)” (Bruyneel, 2009b).

In contrast, professional critics hardly discuss film makers' careers, but compared the movies to history and actuality. Referring to the latest entertainment news, a professional critic introduced the movie X-Men Origins in the following way: “Who kept up with the latest entertainment news couldn't have missed the new blockbuster” (Beekman, 2009b). Other movies were being compared to historical events. For example, a professional critic connected Public Enemies to the rise of the FBI in 1920s America: “Michael Mann connects the rise and fall of Dillinger to the rise of the FBI” (Beekman, 2009a). Consumer critics rarely compared movies to history or the news.

# 8. Conclusion and discussion

Using a corpus-based genre analysis, this study compared movie reviews written by professional critics to those written by consumer critics. We created a codebook to analyze and compare 72 film reviews. As a first research question, we asked how the use of moves differed between film reviews written by professional and consumer critics.

Results show that professional film criticism differed from consumer film criticism on a number of points. First of all, the type of moves differed between the two groups of critics. Consumers used relatively more evaluative moves than professional critics. This difference was also seen when focusing on the two specific evaluative moves, (4) ‘giving criticism’ and (5) ‘recommending the movie to the reader’. Professional critics wanted to inform their readers about the movie, while consumer critics mostly gave an opinion about the movie. Consumer critics thus use more explicit evaluative language (Hunston, 2004; Martin and White, 2005), while professional critics try to maintain an impression of neutrality.

Our qualitative analysis also showed differences in the use of moves between the two groups of critics. One of these was the use of the first-person perspective. The first-person perspective was used by consumer critics to directly give their own view on the movie, while professional critics always try to give their opinion in a more objective way by using the third-person perspective. While consumer critics address their readers directly, professional critics more often describe the group of viewers who would go see the movie. Based on the assumptions of genre analysis (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990), subtle differences can be observed when comparing professional and consumer reviews.

Our second research question asked how the use of strategies differed between film reviews written by professional and consumer critics. Our analysis again showed differences between texts written by professional and consumer critics. For instance, the strategies of the first move (1) ‘giving practical information’ were used differently by both groups of critics. Professional critics gave more information about the number of movie theaters in which a movie was shown. In consumer reviews, more personal information was given about the reviewers themselves.

When looking at move (3) ‘placing the movie in context’, another difference was found. Professional critics placed the movies in a broader context than consumer critics did. After all, professional critics elaborated more on the history of and the news about the movie, while consumers mostly placed the movie into context based on the career of the film makers. Thus, professional critics give a broad, more objective, context of the movie, while consumer critics stay on the surface with their analysis of a movie.

Because of the differences in usage of text characteristics (moves and strategies), the texts written by the two groups of critics can be seen as different. This implies that texts written by professional critics and the texts written by consumer critics belong to different text genres. These results are underscored by marketing research that has compared the influence of both professional and consumer reviews on sales performance (cf. Chen and Xie, 2008; Zhang et al., 2010). These studies conclude that both professional and consumer reviews have effects on sales performance, but that different types of consumers are influenced in different ways by these genres. So, previous studies on the impact of WOM concluded that professional and consumer reviews are complementary in their influence on box office revenues (Dellarocas et al., 2007; Liu, 2006).

These previous studies from the domain of marketing mainly focused on volume and the general valence of the criticism. We built on these studies by investigating how the actual texts written by professional and consumer reviews differ. Our analyses show that professional and consumer critics structure their reviews differently in subtle but important ways. As we have shown, professional critics write in a more neutral way and offer more context on a movie, while consumer critics give a more personal view on a movie. These results thus show the importance of discourse analysis for the field of marketing, as the difference between professional and consumer critics may not only reside in explicit cues of expertise (cf. Willemsen et al., 2011), but can also be manifested in more subtle ways like the use of different types of moves and strategies. As previous studies have shown that professional and consumer reviews are perceived by consumers in different ways (cf. Chen and Xie, 2008; Zhang et al., 2010) and this may have a big impact on revenues, it could be worthwhile for the models used in these studies to also operationalize the concept of expert reviewers in more subtle ways. As such, our study also invites replications in which scholars may want to investigate of similar differences in reviewing styles can be found when consumers and professionals review other film genres (e.g., horror movies, foreign language films) or even other products (e.g., CDs, restaurants, hotels).

Finally, our study extended the method of genre analysis to include online reviews of movies. We developed a codebook that is based on both top-down analysis as we based ourselves on existing books that describe how to write a review and on bottomup analysis as we conducted a pre-test to detect if the codebook could be extended by other moves or strategies that were not mentioned in the literature. Our reliability analysis shows that this new codebook is reliable. So, by extending the method of genre analysis to the genre of online reviews, we offer an addition to genre analysis itself. While other genres have been studied extensively with genre analysis (cf. Bhatia, 2004; de Groot et al., 2006; Hyland, 2009; Rutherford, 2005; Zhu, 2000, among others), the analysis of the review genre is relatively new to genre analysis (but for an exception, cf. Taboada, 2011), and therefore an expansion of genre analysis.

Some caveats may be noted about our study. First, in order to provide additional information on the ways in which consumer and professional critics write, our study may be supplemented with other forms of discourse analysis like coherence (cf. Sanders et al, 2012) or argumentation analysis (cf. Schellens and de Jong, 2004). These forms of discourse analysis are complementary; together, these methods can provide a broad overview on a specific text genre, such as the online review genre.

The choice of the movies included in the corpus should also be reflected upon. The film reviews in our corpus are all based on movies that were released in the Netherlands in 2009. Shifts in time or cultural differences may cause differences in the reviews. To investigate whether this is indeed the case, historical or cross-cultural comparisons of online reviews are a useful addition to our study.

This study provides empirical evidence on the differences in content of online film reviews written by professional and consumer critics. We designed a reliable codebook which we subsequently applied to a corpus of online film reviews to conduct a genre analysis of the texts of these two groups of critics. Our study not only shows that online film reviews written by consumer and professional critics are different from one another, but also how these reviews differ. Professional critics write neutrally and offer more context about the movie, while consumer critics write with a more personal view on the movie.

# Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Saskia van Gils for her valuable assistance with the intercoder reliability coding.

# Appendix A. Overview of the specific descriptive moves and the corresponding strategies

See Table A1.

# Appendix B. Overview of the specific evaluative moves and the corresponding strategies

See Table B1.

Table A1   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Descriptive move (Communicative goal)</td><td>Strategies</td><td>Source</td></tr><tr><td>(1) Giving practical information about the movie (Providing information about the movie)</td><td>- Information about the movie theater - Information about the movie itself - Information about the review Information about the critic of the review</td><td>Boggs, Donkers Boggs, Donkers Pilot study Boggs, Donkers</td></tr><tr><td>(2) Describing the movie (Informing the reader about the movie)</td><td>- Describing the story - Describing the characters - Describing filmic elements</td><td>Boggs, Corrigan, Taboada Corrigan, Donkers, Taboada Bordwell</td></tr><tr><td>(3) Placing the movie in context (Making the movie easily understandable to the reader by linking the object (movie) with the context in which it was created)</td><td>Part of the movie: - Based on the movie as a whole - Based on the subject - Based on the actors - Based on the director and film studio AND:Comparison material:</td><td>Donkers Donkers Donkers Donkers Donkers Taboada</td></tr></table></body></html>

Appendix B1   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Evaluative move (Communicative goal)</td><td>Strategies</td><td>Source</td></tr><tr><td>(4) Giving criticism (Forming an attitude and giving a view about the movie)</td><td>- About the movie as a whole - About the filmmakers - About filmic elements - About the story - About the characters</td><td>Boggs, Corrigan, Taboada Corrigan, Taboada Bordwell, Taboada Boggs, Corrigan, Taboada Pilot study</td></tr><tr><td>(5) Recommending the movie to the reader (Recommend or discommend the movie to the reader and persuade the reader)</td><td>Recommend (group 1): - Indicate that the reader must see the movie</td><td>Boggs, Corrigan Boggs, Corrigan</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>- Indicate that the reader should not see the movie  Boggs, Corrigan</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>BECAUsE OF:Arguments (group 2):</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Pilot study</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Argument as to the movie as a whole</td><td> Pilot study</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>- Argument as to the filmmakers</td><td>Pilot study</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>- Argument as to filmic elements</td><td> Pilot study</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>- Argument as to the story</td><td>Pilot study</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Pilot study</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>- Argument as to the characters</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# Appendix C. Supporting information

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dcm.2013.03.001.

# References

Basuroy, S., Chatterjee, S., Ravi, S.A., 2003. How critical are critical reviews? The box office effects of film critics, star power and budgets. Journal of Marketing 67, 103–117.   
Beekman, B., 2009a. De val van een vogelvrije volksheld: recensie Biopic over de jaren '30 gangster John Dillinger [The fall of an outlawed folk hero: review biopic of the 1930s gangster John Dillinger]. Volkskrant.nl/Cinema.nl 30 July 2009, Source 〈http://www.volkskrant.nl/wca_digi/film_detail/460/592620/Pub lic-Enemies.html〉 (last accessed October 2011).   
Beekman, B., 2009b. Wolverine stelt teleur [Wolverine disappoints]. Volkskrant.nl/ Cinema.nl 29 April 2009, Source 〈http://www.volkskrant.nl/wca_digi/film_de tail/460/592560/X-Men-Origins-Wolverine.html〉 (last accessed October 2011).   
Bhatia, V., 1993. Analysing Genre: Language use in Professional Settings. Longman, London.   
Bhatia, V., 2004. Worlds of Written Discourse: A Genre-Based View. Continuum, London.   
Boggs, J.M., Petrie, D.W., 2004. The Art of Watching Films. McGraw-Hill, New York.   
Bordwell, D., Thompson, K., 2004. Film Art: An Introduction. McGraw-Hill, New York.   
Boxofficemojo.com, 2009. Netherlands Yearly Box Office 2009. Source $\langle \mathrm { h t t p } { : } / \vert$ boxofficemojo.com/intl/netherlands/yearly/?yr=2009&p=htm〉 (last accessed October 2011).   
Bruyneel, K., 2009a. Avatar. Moviescan.be, Source 〈http://www.moviescan.be/Films/ Recensies/Avatar_(2009).html〉 (last accessed October 2011).   
Bruyneel, K., 2009b. Whatever Works. Moviescan.be, Source 〈http://www.moviescan.be/ Films/Recensies/Whatever_Works_(2009).html〉 (last accessed October 2011).   
Chapmann, M.L., 1999. Situated, social, active: rewriting genre in the elementary classroom. Written Communication 16 (4), 469–490.   
Chen, Y., Liu, Y., Zhang, J., 2012. When do Third-Party product reviews affect firm value and what can firms do? The case of media critics and professional movie reviews. Journal of Marketing 76, 116–134.   
Chen, Y., Xie, J., 2008. Online consumer review: word of mouth as a new element of marketing communication mix. Management Science 54 (3), 477–491.   
Corrigan, T., 2001. A Short Guide to Writing about Film. Longman, New York.   
de Groot, E.B., Korzilius, H., Nickerson, C., Gerritsen, M., 2006. A corpus analysis of text themes and photographic themes in managerial forewords of DutchEnglish and British annual general reports. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication 49 (3), 217–235.   
Dellarocas, C., Zhang, X., Awad, N.F., 2007. Exploring the value of online product reviews in forecasting sales: the case of motion pictures. Journal of Interactive Marketing 21 (4), 23–45.   
Donkers, H., Willems, J., 2002. Journalistiek schrijven voor krant en vakblad [Journalistic writing for newspapers and magazines]. Bussum, Coutinho.   
Fagerstrøm, A., 2011. The motivating effect of antecedent stimuli on the web shop: a conjoint analysis of the impact of antecedent stimuli at the point of online purchase. Journal of Organizational Behavior Management 30 (2), 199–220.   
Field, A., 2009. Discovering Statistics using SPSS, 3rd edition Sage, London.   
Freedman, A., Adam, C., Smart, G., 1994. Wearing suits to class: simulating genres and simulations as genre. Written Communication 11 (2), 193–226.   
Gemser, G., Van Oostrum, M., Leenders, M.A.A.M., 2007. The impact of film reviews on the box office performance of art house versus mainstream motion pictures. Journal of Cultural Economics 31, 43–63.   
Gocsik, K., Barsam, R., 2007. Writing about Movies. W.W. Norton & Company, New York.   
Hafner, C.A., 2010. A multi-perspective genre analysis of the barrister's opinion: writing context, generic structure and textualization. Written Communication 27 (4), 410–441.   
Holbrook, M.B., 1999. Popular appeal versus expert judgments of motion pictures. Journal of Consumer Research 26 (2), 144–155.   
Hunston, S., 2004. Counting the uncountable: problems of identifying evaluation in a text and in a corpus. In: Partington, A., Morley, J., Haarman, L. (Eds.), Corpora and Discourse. Peter Lang, Bern, pp. 157–188.   
Hyland, K., 2009. Academic DiscourseContinuum, London.   
Krippendorff, K., 2004. Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology, 2nd edition Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.   
Landis, J.R., Koch, G.G., 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics 33 (1), 159–174.   
Lemke, J., 1998. Resources for attitudinal meanings: evaluative orientations in text semantics. Functions of Language 5 (1), 33–58.   
Liu, Y., 2006. Word of mouth for movies: its dynamics and impact on box office revenue. Journal of Marketing 70, 74–89.   
Martin, J., White, P., 2005. The Language of Evaluation: Appraisal in English. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke.   
Moon, S., Bergey, P.K., Iacobucci, D., 2010. Dynamic effects among movie ratings, movie revenues, and viewer satisfaction. Journal of Marketing 74, 108–121.   
Naylor, R.W., Lamberton, C.P., West, P.M., 2012. Beyond the “like” button: The impact of mere virtual presence on brand evaluations and purchase intentions in social media settings. Journal of Marketing 76, 105–120.   
Propen, A.D., Schuster, M.L., 2010. Understanding genre through the lens of advocacy: the rhetorical work of the victim impact statement. Written Communication 27 (1), 3–35.   
Rutherford, B.A., 2005. Genre analysis of corporate annual report narratives: a corpus linguistics-based approach. Journal of Business Communication 42 (4), 349–378.   
Sanders, J., Sanders, T., Sweetser, E., 2012. Responsible subjects and discourse causality. How mental spaces and perspective help identifying subjectivity in Dutch backward causal connectives. Journal of Pragmatics 44, 191–213.   
Schellekens, G., Verlegh, P., Smidts, A., 2010. Language abstraction in word of mouth. Journal of Consumer Research 37, 207–223.   
Schellens, P.J., de Jong, M, 2004. Argumentation schemes in persuasive brochures. Argumentation 18 (3), 295–323.   
Schindler, R.M., Bickart, B., 2012. Perceived helpfulness of online consumer reviews: the role of message content and style. Journal of Consumer Behaviour 11 (3), 234–243.   
Schouten, P., 2009. Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Filmkeuze.nl 22 July, Source 〈http://www.filmkeuze.nl/cgi-bin/pm/frec-6b53f5.html〉 (last accessed October 2011).   
Searle, J.R., 1969. Speech Acts: An Essay in Philosophy of Language. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.   
Shapiro, C., Varian, H.R., 1999. Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.   
Swales, J.M., 1981. Aspects in Article Introduction. Aston ESP Research Report No. 1, Language Studies Unit, University of Aston in Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.   
Swales, J.M., 1990. Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.   
Taboada, M., 2011. Stages in an online review genre. Text & Talk 31 (2), 247–269.   
Terry, N., Butler, M., De’Armond, D.A, 2004. Critical acclaim and the box office performance of new film releases. Academy of Marketing Studies Journal 8 (1), 61–73.   
Terry, N., King, R., Patterson, R., 2011. Vampires, slashers, or zombies: opening weekend's favorite box office monster. Journal of Business and Economics Research 9 (2), 95–105.   
Toma, K., 2009a. I Love You, Man. Volkskrant.nl/Cinema.nl 28 May, Source 〈http:// cinema.nl/films/4869643/i-love-you-man〉 (last accessed January 2011).   
Toma, K., 2009b. Triomf voor de techniek: Avatar van James Cameron [Triumph for technology: Avatar by James Cameron]. Volkskrant.nl/Cinema.nl 17 December, source 〈http://www.volkskrant.nl/vk/nl/2676/Cultuur/article/detail/372261/2009/ 12/17/Avatar-Triomf-voor-de-techniek.dhtml〉 (last accessed October 2011).   
Upton, T., Cohen, M.A., 2009. An approach to corpus-based discourse analysis: the move analysis as example. Discourse Studies 11 (5), 585–605.   
Verheyen, G., 2009. Public Enemies. Filmkeuze.nl 1 August, Source 〈http://www. filmkeuze.nl/cgi-bin/loader?/cgi-bin/pm/crit-6a7270.html〉 (last accessed January 2011).   
Vermeulen, I.E., Seegers, D., 2009. Tried and tested: the impact of online hotel reviews on consumer consideration. Tourism Management 30, 123–127.   
Volkskrant, 2011. Volkskrant stopt met Cinema.nl, meer films op eigen site [Volkskrant leaves Cinema.nl, more films on its own website]. Volkskrant. nl 8 June, Source 〈http://www.volkskrant.nl/vk/nl/3376/film/article/detail/ 2443050/2011/06/08/Volkskrant-stopt-met-Cinema-nl-meer-film-op-eigensite.dhtml〉 (last accessed October 2011).   
Willemsen, L., Neijens, P.C., Bronner, F., 2010. Perceived expertise vs. perceived trustworthiness: the suppressed effect of source type on review attitude. In: Okazaki, S. (Ed.), Advances in Advertising Research, vol. 2. Gabler Verlag, Wiesbaden, pp. 424–436.   
Willemsen, L., Neijens, P.C., Bronner, F., de Ridder, J.A., 2011. “Highly recommended!” The content characteristics and perceived usefulness of online consumer reviews. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 17, 19–38.   
Wimmer, R.D., Dominick, J.R., 2003. Mass Media Research: An Introduction, 7th edn. Wadsworth, Thomson.   
Zhang, Z., Ye, Q., Law, R., Li, Y., 2010. The impact of e-word-of-mouth on the online popularity of restaurants: a comparison of consumer reviews and editor reviews. International Journal of Hospitality Management 29, 694–700.   
Zhu, Y., 2000. Rhetorical moves in Chinese sales genres: 1949 to the present. Journal of Business Communication 37 (2), 156–172.