# Writing at the graduate level: What tasks do professors actually require?

Amy Cooper-, Dawn Bikowski

Ohio University Linguistics Department, Gordy Hall, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA

# Abstract

This paper presents a case study of writing tasks in graduate courses at a large, American university. The study investigates writing tasks across the curriculum and draws implications for curriculum design in English for Academic Purposes (EAP). Using actual course syllabi for task analysis, the researchers analyzed 200 course syllabi from 20 academic departments covering a wide range of disciplines. Findings indicate that library research papers and project reports are the most commonly assigned tasks across the curriculum. This study also found that professors in the social sciences, arts, and humanities assign a wider variety of writing assignments and more writing assignments in general than do professors in the sciences, math, and engineering. Finally, while many courses in the sciences, math, and engineering require no writing assignments at all, each of these departments does have at least some courses requiring extended writing.

$©$ 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Writing; Tasks; Academic; Graduate; University; EAP

# 1. Introduction

As international students embark on graduate study in American universities, they need to be prepared for the academic writing tasks that their particular departments will require of them. This preparation is precisely the work of professionals in the field of English for Academic Purposes (EAP). However, the question of exactly which writing tasks are required of graduate level students remains unanswered, and as such, EAP professionals are left to rely largely on guesswork of what their students need.

The present study aimed to fill this gap in the research by investigating the writing requirements of 200 graduate courses across 20 academic departments at a large, American university. To avoid the unreliability of survey methodology, the researchers analyzed actual course syllabi and conducted follow-up interviews as necessary to clarify the nature of specific writing assignments.

# 2. Study aims and justification

The objectives of this research were to discover what writing tasks are required in the coursework of graduate students at the university under study, how the assignment of these tasks varies across academic departments, and how frequently (or infrequently) these particular tasks are required. The results of this study are important for three reasons. First, they fill a gap in the current body of literature in the area of academic writing tasks. An exhaustive search yielded no studies on graduate writing assignments (or syllabi listing them) that sufficiently cover the academic departments in which international students at the present university study. Second, the results of this study inform curriculum design and instructional practices in graduate writing classes intended to prepare international students for the coursework they will face in their specific departments. In particular, they inform the graduate writing program for international students at the university under study. Finally, the results of this study add to the findings on academic writing tasks that have emerged in previous studies.

# 3. Literature review

From a theoretical point of view, the study of writing tasks has been part of a larger debate over whether EAP instructors should aim to prepare students for their disciplinespecific needs or not. The root of this debate, according to Ferris (2001), comes from two articles by Horowitz (1986a, 1986b) on writing tasks across the disciplines. In these articles, Horowitz made an argument for looking specifically at the writing tasks students are expected to do in American universities so that EAP instruction can focus realistically on what students will be expected to do. Shortly after these articles appeared, Spack (1988), in a very widely-cited article, argued that Horowitz’s contention of focusing on the specific disciplinary needs of EAP students is not practical. She maintained that the disciplinary needs of EAP students are simply too diverse to be practically taught in EAP courses, and moreover, EAP instructors are generally not qualified to teach such discipline-specific tasks. Since Spack’s initial argument, some researchers have continued to argue that EAP teachers cannot hope to teach in a discipline-specific way. Freedman (1993), for example, argued that trying to teach discipline-specific genres (or tasks) can even be dangerous because EAP instructors may very well have misinformation about genres outside their own field of expertise.

Horowitz’s (1986a, 1986b) belief in the usefulness of understanding the tasks graduate students engage in has persisted, however. Reid (2001) argued that advanced EAP writing courses ‘‘should be thoughtfully designed to integrate immediate student needs with the hierarchy of institutional values, disciplinary goals, and professorial expectations’’ (p. 144). Ferris and Hedgecock (2007) note, ‘‘Teachers of ESL play a crucial role in bringing their learners into such discourses, given their responsibility for preparing their students to meet the demands and challenges of academic institutions’’ (p. 49).

In their 2002 article, Johns and Swales combined Horowitz’s (1986a, 1986b) appreciation for understanding writing tasks confronting EAP students with Spack’s (1988) concerns of the impracticality of teaching these students discipline-specific conventions:

Finally, Spack (1988) is right, of course. We cannot prepare students for all eventualities in academic classrooms or in other situations (such as proposal defenses), nor do we understand other disciplines or other pedagogical practices well enough to give our students templates for success. What we can do, across the board, is raise students’ awareness, give them a variety of experiences and exposures, encourage their analyses and critique of texts and contexts, and motivate them to see the university, like all institutions, as human and constructed, rigid, fluid, hegemonous and negotiable—all at the same time. (p. 26)

According to Johns and Swales, then, an awareness of and exposure to a variety of writing tasks is useful for non-native English-speaking students. For graduate students, this understanding is only possible if we in fact know what types of writing tasks are assigned in graduate courses. In sum, despite the difficulties of preparing EAP students for the genres and/or tasks in their specific disciplines, their specific disciplinary needs cannot be ignored when designing curriculum.

Given this general consensus, the question of what exactly is required in the academic disciplines of EAP students once again becomes relevant. Because the present study is concerned particularly with academic writing tasks, the following is a review of studies that have previously been done in this area.

Most of the studies to date on academic writing tasks have used survey methodology (Bridgeman & Carlson, 1984; Casanave & Hubbard, 1992; Jenkins, Jordan, & Weiland, 1993; Johns, 1981; Kroll, 1979; Leki & Carson, 1994; Ostler, 1980). Though these studies certainly provide valuable information, respondents’ perceptions of what they do may be quite different from what they actually do. Perhaps even more problematic is the fact that surveys tend to force a set of preconceived categories onto their respondents. Many writing tasks may be overlooked when this approach is used.

Horowitz (1986a, 1986b) led the way in collecting actual writing assignments for task analysis. Specifically, he collected copies of essay examinations and writing assignment handouts from faculty at a medium-sized American university. In addition to the essay examinations, he collected a total of 54 writing assignment handouts from 29 courses in 17 academic departments. He then let categories of writing tasks emerge from this data. In addition to essay tests, he identified seven categories of writing tasks (in decreasing order of frequency): synthesis of multiple sources, connection of theory and data, report on a specified participatory experience, summary, research project, case study, and annotated bibliography. The task synthesis of multiple sources was described as the traditional library research paper in that it requires the synthesis of multiple bibliographic sources. A writing assignment in which students are given data that someone else has collected that they then have to relate to a theory under study was deemed connection of theory and data. A report on a specified participatory experience was described as akin to a lab report though it could have also included a report on an observational experience. A research project was defined as a report on original research done by the student, a case study was an examination of a particular case situation, a summary represented a simple condensation of information, and an annotated bibliography was a collection of bibliographic sources with descriptions.

While this study marked the path for future research of this type, it focused primarily on undergraduate coursework. In fact, only one course out of the 29 examined was at the graduate level. Thus, this study reveals little about the writing demands of postbaccalaureate study, which may be highly discipline specific. In addition, it is not clear whether the writing assignments analyzed were representative of the total writing demands of those courses. This is because the faculty members who contributed their assignments did not necessarily send complete sets.

To investigate writing demands at the graduate level, Canseco and Byrd (1989) collected 55 course syllabi from a graduate business program at a southeastern American university. While syllabi may not allow as detailed a look at writing assignments, this method of data collection proved advantageous in that it provided a comprehensive view of what different classes do and do not require in terms of writing. The findings of this study revealed that the following seven types of writing assignments were required in this particular graduate program (listed in descending order of frequency): examinations, problems and assignments, projects, papers, case studies, reports, and miscellaneous. The number of examinations far exceeded the quantity of any other type of writing assignment in this program. While this study offers a window into the writing required of graduate business students, this study did not provide information on graduate writing across disciplines. It also fell short in providing specific definitions of the above tasks. Hence, it is difficult to understand how these tasks are differentiated and to compare them with prior studies. For example, it is not clear how a project is different from a paper or a report.

To address the gap left by these earlier studies, the Educational Testing Service (ETS) commissioned a large-scale study that investigated both undergraduate and graduate writing at eight North American universities (Hale et al., 1996). As in the study by Horowitz (1986b), the ETS researchers collected sets of actual writing assignments for the analysis and let categories of writing tasks emerge from this data. They performed the latter by identifying key elements of difference between tasks and then using these to identify categories that were inclusive of most tasks encountered. Once their organizational scheme was in place, the researchers classified a total of 188 sets of writing assignments (one set per class) for multiple attributes, including locus, length, genre (equivalent to task in this study), cognitive demands, rhetorical task, and pattern of exposition. The results were then used to do a major comparison between the social sciences and sciences/technology.

The findings of this study revealed the presence of nine types of writing tasks at the graduate level: essays, library research papers, short tasks (less than half a page), reports on experiments/observations with interpretation, summaries, case studies, plans/proposals, documented computer programs, and book reviews. While these roughly correspond to the categories that Horowitz (1986b) found, there are a few differences worth noting. In particular, Hale et al. (1996) did not find the task termed connection of theory and data at the graduate level but did find some additional categories: short tasks, plans/proposals, and documented computer programs. Though not found at the graduate level, this study also identified a category called unstructured writing.

Across disciplines and levels (graduate and undergraduate), essays and short tasks were the most common assignments. Library research papers and reports on experiments/ observations were also common across the board while other tasks were only found sparingly. Comparing departments, library research papers proved to be significantly more common in graduate science/technology courses than in the graduate social sciences. The study also found that in-class short tasks and short essays (1 page or less) were significantly more common in the graduate science/technology courses. In the graduate social sciences, longer essays tended to be more common though this difference was not statistically significant. Because the sample sizes of other tasks were too small, the authors did not attempt to make further comparisons.

While this study was impressive in its breadth, it lacked depth, particularly in its investigation of graduate writing tasks. Of the 188 assignment sets, only 67 represented graduate courses. Further, only five graduate disciplines were examined and only two, psychology and business, represented the social sciences group. It is questionable how representative these two disciplines are of the social sciences as a whole, and it is certain that they do not represent writing in humanities, from which no data was collected.

Another shortcoming of this study is that writing assignments were only collected from classes in which at least some writing was required. Thus, as the authors themselves acknowledge, the results cannot be used to draw inferences about the overall frequency of writing tasks. A specific illustration of this weakness concerns the results of the library research paper category. This task was found to be significantly more common in the graduate science/technology group than in the social sciences group. However, these results may be misleading because, even if library research papers made up a bigger percentage of the assignments in this group, these results do not necessarily mean that more library research papers overall were assigned in these courses than in those in the social sciences. Rather, these results signify that a larger proportion of those writing tasks that were assigned in the sciences and technology group, however few or many, were library research papers.

Despite its limitations, the Hale et al. (1996) study is an important one because it provided a broad base for more research into graduate writing tasks. It was also consistent with Horowitz’s (1986b) findings that library research papers (which Horowitz termed synthesis of multiple sources) and reports on experiments/observations (which corresponds to Horowitz’s reports on participatory/observational experiences) are among the most common academic writing tasks.

The present study builds specifically on the above studies by investigating graduate writing demands across a breadth of academic departments using a case study approach and placing the results of the study in the context of the recent scholarship on genre-based teaching. That is, this study reports on writing tasks in graduate departments at one particular university. Rather than using sets of writing assignments, the researchers chose to follow the data collection methodology of Canseco and Byrd (1989) by collecting course syllabi. This technique was chosen over collecting individual writing assignments for two reasons. First, syllabi typically list all graded writing tasks and thus provide a comprehensive view of the tasks that are assigned. It was critical to obtain this complete picture of total writing requirements in order to investigate task frequency across departments. Second, requesting syllabi as opposed to individual writing assignments encouraged participation in the study as it was inherently easier for faculty members to send one document, a syllabus, than an entire set of documents that explain separate writing assignments. It should be noted that this source of data collection is not without limitations. As Canseco and Byrd (1989) noted, most syllabi only offer limited information about the form and content of writing assignments. In fact, sometimes syllabi alone do not provide enough detailed information to accurately classify task types. Because of this limitation, the present study also used follow-up interviews to help categorize ambiguous assignments.

# 4. Research questions

The first research question addressed in this project was, ‘‘What types of writing tasks are assigned to graduate students in their courses at the university under study?’’ Based on the works of Horowitz (1986b) and Hale et al. (1996), it was hypothesized that library research papers, reports on participatory/observational experiences, short tasks, and essay tests would be the most commonly assigned tasks. It was also hypothesized that some graduate departments would require additional tasks such as article/book reviews, case studies, summaries, proposals, and unstructured writing assignments.

The second question was, ‘‘How does the assignment of writing tasks vary across departments?’’ The researchers hypothesized that there would be notable variation in the types and frequency of writing tasks assigned in different areas of study and especially in a comparison between the social sciences/humanities/arts $\mathrm { ( S S / H / A ) }$ group and those in sciences/math/ engineering $\mathbf { ( S / M / E ) }$ . In particular, it was expected that the $\mathrm { S S / H / A }$ group would assign more of all tasks except for reports on experiments/projects, of which the lab report is the prototypical example. The researchers anticipated that the majority of these tasks would occur in the $\mathbf { S } / \mathbf { M } / \mathbf { E }$ group and that this group would assign a very limited number of other types of writing tasks.

The third question was, ‘‘How often do graduate departments require no writing at all?’’ The researchers had two hypotheses in response to this question. First, they expected that several of the courses represented in this study would not require any writing assignments, and these courses would be primarily in technical fields such as engineering. However, the researchers expected that at least some writing would be required in coursework of every department (though not in all courses). They also anticipated that most, if not all, departments would require a major writing project outside of the regular coursework such as a thesis or dissertation.

# 5. Methodology

# 5.1. Site

This research took place at a large public university located in the American Midwest. The total student enrollment is nearly 20,000, with approximately 3,000 students being in graduate programs. The university offers over 300 academic programs through 10 colleges, including 61 master’s degree programs and 48 doctoral programs. As of 2004, nearly 1,000 international students were enrolled with the vast majority of these studying at the graduate level (Office of Institutional Research, 2005). This particular site was chosen partially because of its high proportion of international graduate students. The most popular areas of study for these students, according to the most recent university data available, are shown in Table 1.

# 5.2. Data collection

To test the hypotheses mentioned earlier, the researchers collected course syllabi from the above departments. As the goal was to inform EAP curriculum design especially at the university under study, these specific departments were targeted because they most represent the academic interests of international graduate students across the two major discipline groups at this university. In fact, over $80 \%$ of the international students at this university are found in these departments.

Table 1 Most popular areas of study for international graduate students at the university under study   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sciences/math/engineering departments (S/M/E)</td><td>Social sciences/humanities/arts departments (SS/H/A)</td></tr><tr><td>Electrical engineering (73)a</td><td>International studies (72)</td></tr><tr><td>Physics (56)</td><td>Educational studies (63)</td></tr><tr><td>Chemistry (36)</td><td>Telecommunications (35)</td></tr><tr><td>Mathematics (33)</td><td>Economics (29)</td></tr><tr><td>Chemical engineering (33)</td><td>Communication studies (27)</td></tr><tr><td>Biology (32)</td><td>Linguistics (24)</td></tr><tr><td>Mechanical engineering (28)</td><td>Business management (18)</td></tr><tr><td>Industrial engineering (17)</td><td>Film (17)</td></tr><tr><td>Hearing/Speech science (13)</td><td>Journalism (16)</td></tr><tr><td>Civil engineering (7)e</td><td>Communications systems management (12)</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Number of students shown in parentheses.

Syllabi were first solicited directly from faculty members via an email request. While 77 syllabi were received through this method, the researchers were concerned that professors who do not require writing would have little interest in this study and may have been less likely to respond. To reduce this bias, the researchers additionally collected 100 syllabi publicly available on the Internet as well as 23 donated by international students themselves. These additional means of collection also helped the researchers obtain a relatively even spread of syllabi across departments, with no less than seven and no more than 13 syllabi coming from any one department and courses. To ensure that courses from a wide range of professors were collected, the researchers collected syllabi from a minimum of three different professors in each department. The distribution of courses and professors is shown in Table 2. In order to make sure that the findings would reflect current writing demands, only syllabi from the past 5 years were accepted. In all, 200 syllabi were collected, approximately three-fourths of which came from master’s degree courses and one-fourth of which came from those at the doctoral level.

# 5.3. Pilot study

A pilot study was first conducted with a random, stratified sample of 30 syllabi in order for the researchers to develop the initial organizational scheme. Each researcher reviewed the syllabi independently and recorded all writing assignments encountered. In being consistent with the Hale et al. (1996) study, any task that required two or more consecutive sentences was considered to be a writing assignment. Once both researchers had a chance to review the sample syllabi, they then convened to decide which categories best covered the writing tasks encountered. The classification system used by the researchers was derived from those of Horowitz (1986b) and Hale et al. (1996). Below are the categories, along with definitions, that were chosen for the initial analysis:

Library research paper: A paper that incorporates and synthesizes information from multiple bibliographic sources.

Table 2 Number of courses and professors represented per department   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Department</td><td>Number of courses</td><td>Number of professors</td></tr><tr><td>Linguistics</td><td>13</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>International studies</td><td>11</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Educational studies</td><td>13</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Economics</td><td>11</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Film</td><td>11</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Telecommunications</td><td>7</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Communication studies</td><td>9</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Communications systems management</td><td>7</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Journalism</td><td>10</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Management</td><td>11</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Math</td><td>11</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Biology</td><td>12</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Chemistry</td><td>8</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Physics/astronomy</td><td>8</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Mechanical engineering</td><td>13</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Chemical engineering</td><td>8</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Computer science/electrical engineering</td><td>12</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Industrial and manufacturing systems engineering</td><td>8</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Civil engineering</td><td>8</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Hearing and speech science.</td><td>9</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Totals</td><td>200</td><td>127</td></tr></table></body></html>

Article/Book review: A summary and reaction to/opinion of an article or book. Because film critiques involve essentially the same components, they were also included in this category.

Report on an experiment/project: A description of an experiment, usually following a prescribed format dictated by the professor. Lab reports and reports describing group projects are typical examples.

Proposal/plan: A piece of writing that explains how a future problem or project will be approached.

Case study: A piece of writing describing and analyzing a particular case situation. Examples include action research reports and investigations of special business scenarios.

Journal article: A formal article reporting original research that could be submitted to an academic journal. Rather than a format dictated by the professor, the writer must use the conventional form of academic journals in the relevant discipline.

Essay: A composition that calls for exposition of a thesis and is composed of several paragraphs including an introduction, a body, and a conclusion. It is different from a library research paper in that the synthesis of bibliographic sources is not required.

Unstructured writing: The type of writing done in journals, electronic discussion boards, blogs, etc. that does not require the formal structure of other tasks listed here. Paragraphing is not necessarily required nor is clear support for one’s ideas.

Annotated bibliography: An annotated bibliography consists of lists of references with accompanying description of the information that these sources offer.

Summary/abstract: This task is similar to a review but calls only for condensing information. No critique is required.   
Short task: This is an assignment less than half a page. Examples include answers to homework questions and problem sets.   
Essay test: An in-class, timed essay in which the writer must synthesize information learned in the course.

Once the actual study was underway, the researchers chose to add a miscellaneous category and to drop the categories of essay test and short task. This decision to drop essay tests from the categories was made because the syllabi used in this study frequently did not indicate whether exams required essay writing or not. Likewise, the syllabi did not provide adequate information on short tasks, if they were listed at all, to accurately classify them.

# 6. Analysis

With the initial categories in place, the researchers began to code all of the syllabi. Specifically, each syllabus was labeled with the name of the academic department from which it came, the year that the course was offered, the means of collection (internet, professor, or student) and the types of writing assignments included. When the nature of a particular writing assignment was unclear, the researchers first convened to discuss their perceptions, and if it remained ambiguous, an email was sent to the professor asking for more detail about the assignment. In all, six emails were sent and five professors responded. In one case where a professor did not respond, the researchers relied on inference to categorize the assignment as best as possible. In no cases did the researchers disagree on the final categorization of an assignment.

Once every syllabus had been coded, the data was recorded on a spreadsheet. This allowed the researchers to easily calculate the number of classes in each department that require specified tasks. This information was then used to calculate the total occurrence of each task across the curriculum. Following this, the researchers conducted a major comparison between those tasks assigned in the two major discipline groups: $\mathrm { S S / H / A }$ and $\mathbf { S } / \mathbf { M } / \mathrm { E }$ . The Chi-square test was used to determine statistical significance in this comparison. Finally, the researchers tallied both the number of courses and departments in each major discipline group that assigned no writing at all while also checking which of these departments require theses, dissertations, or the equivalent.

# 7. Results

In response to research question one, eleven categories of tasks were identified. These were (in descending order of frequency) library research papers, reports on experiments/ projects, article/book reviews, plans/proposals, summaries, case studies, unstructured writing, journal articles, essays, annotated bibliographies, and miscellaneous. As mentioned earlier, short tasks and essay tests were not found, perhaps due to the limitation of using syllabi for data collection. Overall, these are very similar to the findings of ETS (Hale et al., 1996) and Horowitz (1986b). The main difference in categories is that the present study did not find documented computer programs and short tasks. Also, essays were not found to be as common across academic departments as in prior studies.

Table 3 Percentage of courses assigning specified writing tasks   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Task</td><td>Percentage of classes with specified task (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Library research paper</td><td>38</td></tr><tr><td>Article/book review</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>Report on an experiment/project</td><td>18</td></tr><tr><td>Plan/proposal</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>Case study</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>Summary/abstract</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>Essay</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td> Journal article</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Unstructured writing</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Annotated bibliographye</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Miscellaneous</td><td>Less than 2</td></tr></table></body></html>

The most commonly assigned writing task by far was the library research paper with $3 8 \%$ of all courses requiring this task at least once. The next most common assignments were the report on an experiment/project and the article/book review, which were expected in 20 and $1 8 \%$ of the surveyed classes, respectively. Plans/proposals and case studies were found in $12 \%$ of the classes and summaries/abstracts occurred in $1 1 \%$ . Only a small number of other tasks were encountered. Unstructured writing occurred in $8 \%$ of the classes, essays and journal articles in $7 \%$ , and annotated bibliographies in $4 \%$ . Three courses, or less than $2 \%$ , had assignments that fit into a miscellaneous category with specific assignments being newspaper/magazine articles in two journalism classes, curriculum vitae in a communications class, and a screenplay in a film class. These results are summarized in Table 3.

The second research question concerned variation in the frequency of occurrence of these assignments across the curriculum. As anticipated, statistically significant differences were found between the two major discipline groups in all but the category of report on an experiment/observation and the miscellaneous category. More specifically, all tasks except reports on experiments/projects and miscellaneous tasks occurred significantly more frequently in the $\mathrm { S S / H / A }$ group (see Table 4 for individual Chi-square results). The largest difference was found in the assignment of library research papers. While both discipline groups assigned this task, they were far more common in the social sciences, humanities, and arts. Article/book reviews were also quite common in this group. Overall, the results show that more of almost all types of writing tasks were assigned in the $\mathrm { S S / H / A }$ group. One exception to this was the category of report on an experiment/project, with this task proving to occur at about the same frequency in both discipline groups. This task was assigned in approximately $20 \%$ of the courses in both groups. The researchers had anticipated this task would be assigned mainly in the science, math, and engineering departments. The category of miscellaneous tasks was also not statistically significantly different, but only a total of three assignments fit into this category, with all three being in the $\mathrm { S S / H / A }$ group. The results for research question two are summarized in Table 4.

In response to the third research question, both hypotheses were confirmed. The first hypothesis was that many of the classes in the $\mathbf { S } / \mathbf { M } / \mathbf { E }$ group would assign no writing at all. This was certainly the case given that over half of the classes $( 5 3 \% )$ in this group did not assign any writing (see Table 5). The majority of these classes, as anticipated, were in the engineering departments. On the other hand, only $12 \%$ of classes in the $\mathrm { S S / H / A }$ group did not assign writing. While this says nothing about the length and difficulty of writing assignments, it does suggest that writing assignments in general are not required as often in the science, math, and engineering fields, at least at the graduate level. The second hypothesis was that at least some classes in every department would require writing. This was also the case, as there appeared to be no departments in which students could completely avoid writing. Additionally, the researchers confirmed that most of the departments under study require the completion of a thesis, dissertation, or equivalent major project to be completed outside of regular coursework.

Table 4 Number and percentage of classes assigning specified writing tasks   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Task</td><td colspan="2">Social sciences/humanities/. arts (SS/H/A)</td><td colspan="2">Sciences/math/engineering (S/M/E)</td><td>Chi-square value</td></tr><tr><td>N = 103</td><td>%</td><td>N = 97</td><td>%</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Library research paper</td><td>55</td><td>53</td><td>19</td><td>20</td><td>24.50*</td></tr><tr><td>Article/Book review.</td><td>30</td><td>29</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>19.89*</td></tr><tr><td>Report on an experiment/project</td><td>21</td><td>20</td><td>18</td><td>19</td><td>0.11</td></tr><tr><td>Plan/Proposal</td><td>21</td><td>20</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>14.34*</td></tr><tr><td>Case study</td><td>18</td><td>17</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>7.45*</td></tr><tr><td>Summary/Abstract</td><td>17</td><td>17</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>6.57*</td></tr><tr><td>Essay</td><td>13</td><td>13</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>10.31*</td></tr><tr><td>Journal article</td><td>11</td><td>11</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>4.42*</td></tr><tr><td>Unstructured writing</td><td>13</td><td>13</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>8.03*</td></tr><tr><td>Annotated bibliography</td><td>7</td><td>7</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>4.32*</td></tr><tr><td>Miscellaneous</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2.87</td></tr></table></body></html>

\*Difference between $\mathrm { S S / H / A }$ and $\mathbf { S } / \mathbf { M } / \mathbf { E }$ frequencies significant at the 0.05 level.

Table 5 Percentage of classes in each discipline group that assigned no writing   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Social sciences/humanities/arts (SS/H/A)</td><td>Sciences/math/engineering (S/M/E)</td></tr><tr><td>Classes without writing assignments</td><td>12%</td><td>53%</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 8. Discussion

# 8.1. Comparison with prior studies

The above results suggest that most international graduate students at the university under study can expect to write library research papers and reports on experiments/ projects regardless of their particular fields. These findings are consistent with those of Hale et al. (1996) and Horowitz (1986b) in that their studies also found these to be among the most common writing tasks. However, unlike the research of Hale et al. (1996), the present study did not find essays and short tasks to occur frequently. This may be explained by the fact that examinations, which may often be in essay format, were not included in this study due to the limitation inherent in using syllabi. Likewise, the present study did not find the category of short tasks. This may be explained in two ways. First, the researchers did not find this category necessary because the assignments they found fit better into other, more defined categories. Second, short tasks may not have been included on the course syllabi that were used for this study.

There were two tasks that appeared in prior studies that did not emerge at all in the present data. Horowitz (1986b) identified the task connection of theory and data, but this task did not emerge at all in the present study. Likewise, Hale et al. (1996) did not find this type of task. There are two possible explanations for this discrepancy. For one, it may be that this is an assignment that is given primarily to undergraduate students. As an alternative explanation, this same task may have simply been categorized differently in both the ETS study (Hale et al., 1996) and the present one. That is, assignments that require the connection of theory to data may have included other essential components such as synthesis of bibliographic sources or summarization; this may have led the latter studies to categorize these assignments differently than Horowitz. The other category of task that did not appear at all in the present study is what Hale et al. termed documented computer program. While the researchers identified several computer programming assignments in the syllabi, there was no evidence that these required enough writing to fit the definition of writing assignments adopted for this study. Again, this discrepancy could be due to the limitation of using syllabi for data collection.

A further difference with the ETS study (Hale et al., 1996) is that the present study revealed unstructured writing tasks and journal articles as two additional tasks required of graduate level students. Most of the unstructured assignments in this study consisted of submitting entries to electronic discussion boards. Because these are a relatively new form of instructional technology, these assignments might not have been as common 10 years ago. The lack of journal articles, defined here as formal research articles that could be submitted to an academic journal, in the Hale et al. (1996) study is surprising. The explanation for this may be that these tasks were simply classified under another category. In the present study, however, the researchers found journal articles to be a distinct task.

As for differences across the two major discipline groups, the findings indicate that departments in the $\mathrm { S S / H / A }$ group assign a wider array of tasks. In addition to library research papers and project reports, students in these fields could expect to write article/ book reviews, case studies, plans/proposals, essays, journal articles, unstructured writing, and annotated bibliographies in their classes. Those in the $\mathbf { S } / \mathbf { M } / \mathbf { E }$ fields, however, mostly write library research papers and project reports. In fact, less than $5 \%$ of classes in this group assigned any other type of task.

As expected, there were several graduate courses that required no writing at all, and these were largely in engineering classes. However, at least some writing assignments were found in each department represented in this study. In addition, graduate students in the departments under study generally must write a thesis, professional research paper, and/or a dissertation in order to complete their programs. Thus, it can be claimed that all graduate students, regardless of field, need academic writing skills for success in their departments.

# 8.2. Pedagogical implications

One might conclude from the above findings that graduate writing classes should be divided into separate sections for students from different discipline groups. This is certainly one answer for accommodating the diverse disciplinary needs of international graduate students. If an EAP program were to make this decision, the results of this study could be used to develop task-based syllabi. A graduate writing course for students in the science, math, and engineering departments could focus on library research papers and project reports. However, focusing on course-specific tasks only will not necessarily prepare these students for writing their thesis or dissertation. A graduate writing class for those in the social sciences, humanities, and arts could practice a broader range of tasks. The results of this study indicate that article/book reviews are especially prevalent assignments for this group of students. Plans/proposals, case studies, and summaries might also be included in writing courses for these students.

However, one difficulty of dividing students into these separate sections is that some departments do not fit neatly into these two discipline categories. As an illustration, a student studying geography takes both science and social science classes. In this case, the EAP program or the individual student would have to make a decision as to which section would be more appropriate for these students’ needs. A further complication in offering specialized sections is the need for qualified professionals to teach such discipline-specific EAP courses (Spack, 1988).

In addition to offering separate sections, then, another approach may be to focus on those tasks that are most common across disciplines at the graduate level. Given that library research papers and project reports were found to be the most common assignments across departments in the present study and that these results are consistent with prior studies, EAP professionals should consider using these tasks as the primary assignments in writing courses intended for beginning graduate students. Instructors would be wise to emphasize to their students that these are not the only tasks they may face in their disciplines but that many of the skills for these tasks, such as summarizing and citing sources, are transferable to the other types of tasks the students may encounter in their academic departments, such as article/book reviews and theses/dissertations.

# 8.3. Limitations

The present study is, of course, not without limitations. First and foremost, this study assumes that instructors actually follow their course syllabi. As Canseco and Byrd (1989) note, a syllabus is generally viewed as a contract between the teacher and students, so there is a strong expectation that teachers will follow them. Yet, it is undeniable that instructors do sometimes stray from their syllabi and thus, the frequencies of writing tasks encountered in particular departments should be thought of as estimates.

A further limitation involves the difficulty in classifying writing assignments into neat, mutually exclusive categories. Though the researchers made a strong effort not to have overlapping categories, they did find some writing tasks, particularly journal articles and plans/proposals, often contained other categories of tasks within themselves. For example, the writing categorized as academic journal articles or research proposals usually contain literature reviews and thus could be said to include a library research paper within the larger task. Yet, for the purposes of categorizing each task only once, the researchers deferred to the larger category (e.g., journal article) when an assignment included sub-tasks.

A final limitation is that the present study focuses only on graduate coursework and not on thesis/dissertation writing. It should be noted that universities outside of the American system may not require coursework at all at the graduate level and may only require the writing of a thesis or dissertation. For instructors in such systems, the present study is not relevant because it focuses solely on graduate coursework, which in American universities, is typically a prerequisite to beginning work on one’s thesis or dissertation.

# 9. Conclusion

This study examined graduate writing tasks across the curriculum at one university with the aim of discovering the types and frequencies of writing tasks that are assigned to graduate students. The study built on prior studies of academic writing tasks by taking a case study approach. That is, the present study examined writing assignments of courses at one particular university. To do this, the researchers collected data on 200 current courses through syllabi analysis and follow-up interviews. Because the ultimate goal of the study was to inform curriculum design in EAP, the specific courses targeted were representative of the 20 departments in which international students most enroll.

The findings of this study suggest that library research papers and project reports are the most common writing tasks across the graduate curriculum at the university under study. While these are the two principal types of writing done in the sciences, math, and engineering departments, a broader spectrum of tasks were encountered in the social sciences, humanities, and arts. In addition to library research papers and project reports, these departments assigned reviews, plans/proposals, case studies, and summaries/ abstracts with relative frequency. While these additional tasks differ in terms of final products, they may require many of the same skills as library research papers and project reports. Thus, a syllabus concentrating on the most common tasks may well serve the diverse needs of EAP students. The findings also indicate that while several classes do not require any writing, every department includes courses that do. As most of the departments in this study require the completion of a thesis, dissertation, or the equivalent, the ability to do academic writing is essential to international graduate students regardless of how technical their fields may be.

Future research could add to these findings by examining the particular forms that these writing tasks take in different departments. For example, it would be interesting to know how similar the expected formats and rhetorical styles of library research papers and project reports are across the curriculum. It would also be very informative for the EAP profession to know which tasks are the most troublesome for international students. If reports on projects/experiments, for example, are very easy for these students, then EAP classes might choose not to spend class time on these. Further, it would be interesting to know more about essay examinations at the graduate level. If these are common and graduate students find them challenging, then EAP classes may want to include these in their graduate writing programs.

Finally, some research has begun on thesis/dissertation writing and this is important research to continue. While this paper focuses particularly on the prerequisite coursework for graduate students in programs that require it (most American institutions and some abroad), it is well known that graduate students generally have to complete a major writing assignment such as thesis or dissertation before graduating. Therefore, continued research on these tasks will complement studies such as the present one which focuses on coursework.

In sum, obtaining this detailed information about graduate writing tasks in the coursework phase will ultimately lead to better-informed graduate writing instruction in EAP programs. Knowing more about the writing tasks assigned to international graduate students helps EAP professionals follow the advice of Johns and Swales (2002), Reid (2001), and Ferris and Hedgecock (2007). As a result, international students will be better prepared to meet the writing demands of their particular graduate departments and subject-area faculty will be able to concentrate more on teaching their particular disciplines instead of spending their time on providing detailed writing instruction.

# References

Bridgeman, B., & Carlson, S. B. (1984). Survey of academic writing tasks. Written Communication, 1, 247–280.   
Canseco, G., & Byrd, P. (1989). Writing required in graduate courses in business administration. TESOL Quarterly, 23, 305–316.   
Casanave, C. P., & Hubbard, P. (1992). The writing assignments and writing problems of doctoral students: Faculty perceptions, pedagogical issues, and needed research. English for Specific Purposes, 11, 33–49.   
Ferris, D. (2001). Teaching writing for academic purposes. In J. Flowerdew, & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for academic purposes (pp. 298–314). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Ferris, D. R., & Hedgecock, J. S. (2007). Teaching ESL composition: Purpose, process, and practice (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Freedman, A. (1993). Show and tell? The role of explicit teaching in learning of new genres. Research in the Teaching of English, 27, 222–251.   
Hale, G., Taylor, C., Bridgeman, B., Carson, J., Kroll, B., & Kantor, R. (1996). A study of writing tasks assigned in academic degree programs. Educational Testing Service Research Report 54. Princeton: Educational Testing Service.   
Horowitz, D. M. (1986a). Essay examination prompts and the teaching of academic writing. English for Specific Purposes, 5, 107–120.   
Horowitz, D. M. (1986b). What professors actually require: Academic tasks for the ESL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 20, 445–460.   
Jenkins, S., Jordan, M. K. J., & Weiland, P. O. (1993). The role of writing in graduate engineering education: A survey of faculty beliefs and practices. English for Specific Purposes, 12, 51–67.   
Johns, A. M. (1981). Necessary English: A faculty survey. TESOL Quarterly, 15, 51–57.   
Johns, A., & Swales, J. M. (2002). Literacy and disciplinary practices: Opening and closing perspectives. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1, 13–28.   
Kroll, B. (1979). A survey of writing needs of foreign and American college freshman. ELT Journal, 33, 219–226.   
Leki, I., & Carson, J. G. (1994). Students’ perceptions of EAP writing instruction and writing needs across the disciplines. TESOL Quarterly, 28, 81–101.   
Office of Institutional Research. (2005). International student enrollment. Ohio University. Retrieved on February 1, 2006, from http://www.ohiou.edu/instres/student/international/Internatl7YrGrad.html   
Ostler, S. (1980). A survey of academic needs for advanced ESL. TESOL Quarterly, 14, 489–502.   
Reid, J. (2001). Advanced EAP writing and curriculum design. What do we need to know? In T. Silva, & P. K. Matsuda (Eds.), On second language writing (pp. 143–160). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Spack, R. (1988). Initiating students into the academic discourse community: How far should we go? TESOL Quarterly, 22, 29–51.

Amy Cooper currently teaches academic ESL for the Maryland English Institute at the University of Maryland. She is a recent graduate of the M.A. program in Linguistics at Ohio University. While studying, she worked as an academic ESL Instructor and took a special interest in graduate level writing. She has taught ESL in varying contexts for the past 10 years.

Dawn Bikowski is the Director of the ESL Writing Program in the Linguistics Department at Ohio University. Her teaching interests include teaching advanced writing at the graduate level, using technology in instruction, and teacher training. She is currently a doctoral candidate in Educational Studies.