# Speech production in Vietnamese-English bilingual speakers living in a 3-generation home

Adam J. Hogan, Todd A. Gibson & Vivian Luong

To cite this article: Adam J. Hogan, Todd A. Gibson & Vivian Luong (2024) Speech production in Vietnamese-English bilingual speakers living in a 3-generation home, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:10, 1375-1389, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2024.2355533

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2024.2355533

# Speech production in Vietnamese-English bilingual speakers living in a 3-generation home

Adam J. Hogan $\textcircled{1}$ , Todd A. Gibson $\textcircled{1}$ and Vivian Luong $\textcircled{1}$

Department of Communication Sciences & Disorders, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA

# ABSTRACT

Without data on speech accuracy of Vietnamese-English speakers, speechlanguage pathologists (SLPs) are unable to assess accurately this population for speech sound disorders. This study explored the heretofore uninvestigated speech accuracy and use of VietnameseEnglish bilingual individuals residing in the USA. Participants included six individuals from a 3-generation household (two US-born children and four Vietnam-born adults). Each participant completed a language history questionnaire and single-word articulation tests in Vietnamese and English. Percentage Consonants Correct – Revised and Percentage Consonant Clusters Correct were compared across participants and generations. Phoneme errors were analysed to identify adult influence on child productions. Heritage language use and speech accuracy generally showed an inverse relationship with length of stay, but the children’s productions were nearly without error in both languages. Only the mother exerted apparent influence on the children’s speech development, though only in Vietnamese. The children’s English productions were unaffected by any adult’s productions. Clinicians working with children from this background should consider not only familial influence on speech sound accuracy but should anticipate high levels of speech accuracy in both English and Vietnamese. When working with adults, SLPs should be aware that deviant speech productions might be due to typical Vietnamese-English speech development.

ARTICLE HISTORY Received 6 February 2023 Accepted 10 May 2024

# KEYWORDS

Vietnamese; bilingual; articulation

# Introduction

Bilingualism is on the rise in the USA. Twenty-two percent of the US population speaks a non-English language at home. Among these individuals, $3 8 \%$ rated their own English-speaking abilities as less than ‘very well’ (Dietrich and Hernandez 2022). It is important to understand this population since children from this cohort receive educational and ancillary health services, and bilingualism is a variable that is important to take into account (McCray and García 2002). For example, bilingual children are more likely to be under- and over-referred for special services in schools (Murphy and Johnson 2022).

Vietnamese-English bilingual speakers essentially have been overlooked by bilingualism researchers who have focused on Spanish-English bilingualism instead, likely because the majority of bilingualism in the USA is realised by the Spanish-English pairing (e.g. Fabiano-Smith and Goldstein 2010; Gildersleeve-Neumann et al. 2008; Goldstein, Fabiano, and Washington 2005). This oversight is unfortunate given that Vietnamese has become the fourth most-spoken language in the USA (Batalova and McHugh 2010; Park, Zong, and Batalova 2018; Ruiz Soto, Hooker, and Batalova 2015), and the Vietnamese-speaking population continues to grow (Park, Zong, and Batalova 2018).

Despite the growing number of Vietnamese-English bilingual individuals in the USA, little is known about their speech development. Hwa-Froelich, Hodson, and Edwards (2002) noted the need for further studies addressing typical phonological development for Vietnamese-English bilinguals to facilitate better assessment and intervention. Without data on speech accuracy of Vietnamese-English speakers, speech-language pathologists (SLPs) are not able to assess this population for speech sound disorders (SSDs). Given the strong correlation between SSD and other communication disorders, information about Vietnamese-English speech development might contribute to diagnoses of additional impairments. For example, as many as $7 7 \%$ of children with SSD are estimated to have expressive and/or receptive language disorder (Shriberg, Tomblin, and McSweeny 1999). Furthermore, as many as $2 3 . 5 \%$ of children with SSD are estimated to have poor literacy skills (Eadie et al. 2015). Although McLeod and colleagues (2021) have investigated VietnameseEnglish speech accuracy in Australia, vanishingly few such studies have been performed in the USA. The few studies investigating Vietnamese-English bilingual speech accuracy in the USA (Benson 1988; Osburne 1996; Sato 1984) have been case studies focused on English consonant clusters. To our knowledge, no study has analysed consonant accuracy beyond consonant clusters in Vietnamese-English bilingual speakers in the USA. The purpose of the current study is to acquire data on speech development of Vietnamese-English bilingual speakers to aid SLPs in the assessment of SSDs in this population.

Thirteen percent of Vietnamese speakers in Louisiana reported living in multigenerational households (households that include at least three generations, e.g. grandparents, their children, and grandchildren; Ruggles et al. 2022). Nationally, $34 \%$ of Vietnamese speakers live in multigenerational households (Budiman 2021). It is unclear why fewer Vietnamese-speaking families in Louisiana reported living in multigenerational households. Prior research findings suggest a positive correlation between the likelihood of children becoming proficient bilinguals and the presence of bilingual nonparental adults residing in the same home with the children and their parents (Alba et al. 2002). Several studies have found that grandparents living in the home likely have an outsized influence in promoting heritage language proficiency (Ishizawa 2004; Sandel, Chao, and Liang 2006; Tan Jun Hao and $\mathsf { N g } \ 2 0 1 0 )$ . In the current study, grandparents lived in the same household as their children and grandchildren.

# Vietnamese and English phonologies

Since participants in the current study spoke the southern dialect of Vietnamese, only the southern dialect will be discussed here. The southern dialect is the dialect spoken by an estimated half of the Vietnamese population in Vietnam (Binh 1993) and is spoken most commonly by Vietnamese Americans (Tang 2007). To our knowledge, estimates are not available that detail the exact number of speakers of each dialect of Vietnamese in the United States. Despite differences in phonemes and tones between the many different dialects of Vietnamese, Hwa-Froelich, Hodson, and Edwards (2002) noted their mutual intelligibility. SLPs should be aware of the dialect spoken by their Vietnamese-speaking clients due to cross-dialectal differences in speech sounds and tones. Vietnamese phonology differs from that of US English in several ways. It features five contrastive lexical tones (Pham and McLeod 2016) while English does not use tone for contrastive purposes. For example, Vietnamese vowel tone changes in the production [ma] can change the word’s meaning from ‘scold’ /mâ/ to ‘mom’ /má/ to ‘horse’ /mà/. English speakers, however, change the tone to indicate purpose (e.g. a word’s tone might rise to indicate a question [Yours?] or fall to indicate a response [Mine]), but such changes do not shift the meaning of the words involved. Vietnamese has been described as a monosyllabic language, though some disyllabic words exist (Hwa-Froelich, Hodson, and Edwards 2002). Thompson (1965) noted that Vietnamese speakers rarely produce monosyllabic words in isolation, often insisting on a two-syllable utterance. Consonant clusters, uncommon in

Vietnamese, are limited to an initial consonant (Jasso and Potratz 2020), usually a stop or a fricative, plus an approximant (Pham and McLeod 2016). However, some have argued that they may not occur at all (Cheng 1991). These clusters may be reduced to singletons (consonants not immediately abutted by another consonant) depending upon syllable type (e.g. ‘stop’ becomes ‘top’; Pham and McLeod 2016). Phonemes unique to Vietnamese and therefore potentially difficult to acquire for a child learning both English and Vietnamese include $/ 6 , \mathrm { d } , \mathrm { s } , \mathrm { t } , \mathrm { r } , \mathrm { n } , \mathrm { c } , \mathrm { y } , \mathrm { x } /$ (Pham and McLeod 2016). Speakers of the southern dialect of Vietnamese may have difficulty producing the English phonemes $/ \Theta , \Theta , \Theta , \Theta , \Theta , \Theta , \Theta ,$ t͡ ʃ, $\widehat { \mathsf { d } } _ { 3 } /$ in all word positions given their non-occurrence in Vietnamese (Center for Applied Linguistics 1976; Cheng 1991; Hwa-Froelich, Hodson, and Edwards 2002; Jasso and Potratz 2020). Acceptable final consonants in the southern dialect of Vietnamese include voiceless stops, nasals, and approximants (Cheng 1991; Pham and McLeod 2016). A speaker of the southern dialect of Vietnamese is expected to have difficulty producing English words containing word-final fricatives, affricates, and voiced stops. Common phonological processes (rule-based errors such as deleting every first consonant in a word) for Vietnamese-English bilinguals while speaking English include final consonant deletion, devoicing, and cluster reduction, especially in word-final position (Jasso and Potratz 2020; Pham and McLeod 2016).

# Vietnamese-English bilingual speakers

To our knowledge, only one study has addressed Vietnamese-English bilingual consonant accuracy in both languages, and this focused on Australian English. McLeod et al. (2021) investigated the articulation (i.e. speech production) of a multigenerational Vietnamese-Australian English family to identify the extent to which the speech input from adults in the home explained the children’s speech production. This study involved two children, their mother with whom they resided, and their grandparents who visited for one to two months each year. Each child (aged 5;6 and 3;10) acquired Vietnamese as their first language and heard English in school and in after-school childcare. They were reported to be competent in both languages. Their performance on Vietnamese and English articulation tests were within one standard deviation from the mean. Only the mother and grandfather completed the English articulation test. They had the most difficulty producing English fricatives, affricates, and voiced stops. All adults participated in the Vietnamese testing. Though achieving above $9 6 \%$ accuracy, none of the adults’ Vietnamese consonant accuracy reached $100 \%$ .

McLeod and colleagues (2021) then compared the Vietnamese articulation of the two children to that of the adults in their home to determine the influence of the speech input. A contrastive analysis of the children’s Vietnamese productions revealed that they spoke most like their mother. The authors concluded that the speech input the children received from their home environment was an important factor in explaining the children’s error patterns in Vietnamese. A contrastive analysis of the children’s English revealed minimal influence from adults. Instead, most of the children’s English productions mirrored those of their age-matched monolingual peers.

# Theoretical background

Some researchers have argued that children of immigrants who are exposed to native ambient language examples will have no noticeable articulation differences compared to their monolingual peers in most situations (Chambers 2002; Chambers 2005; Snow 1987). Chambers (2002; 2005) argued that these children have an innate accent-filter that prevents them from perceiving their immigrant parents’ nonnative speech patterns while speaking the ambient language. This results in the children producing the ambient language without an accent. Chambers called this innate accent-filter the ‘Ethan Experience’ after a child who was not aware of his immigrant parents’ accents and spoke without a noticeable nonnative accent. Chambers (2005) cited Ethan’s lack of a nonnative accent as evidence that nonnative speech does not influence native-born children’s speech if the children additionally are exposed to native productions.

On the other hand, the emergence approach to speech acquisition (Davis and Bedore 2013) posits that speech sound development depends upon intrinsic cognitive and linguistic abilities, social interaction, and ambient phonology of the language learner. According to this approach, a child acquires phonological knowledge through interactions with others. Individual differences in neural-cognitive, perceptual, and interaction abilities result in varied speech production. In models like the emergence approach, there is no innate accent-filter that prevents children from perceiving familial accents. Instead, familial accent is one of a host of variables that influences children’s speech output. If the familial accent differs from the community’s ambient accent, one might anticipate that the child’s speech also might differ from the ambient accent.

Consistent with the emergence approach is the Revised Speech Learning Model (SLM-r; Flege and Bohn 2021). This model posits that differences between monolingual and bilingual speech is the result of input factors. Flege and Bohn (2021) argued that bilingual children generally receive less input in their second language than do their monolingual peers. Additionally, the input bilingual children receive in their L2 is more likely to be foreign-accented than is the input received by monolingual children. Because L1 and L2 share a common phonetic space, sounds from each language interact. For example, L2 sounds might fail to form a new phonetic category, instead merging with existing L1 sound categories. On the other hand, some L2 sounds create new phonetic categories despite being close to L1 sounds in the shared phonetic space. Flege and Bohn (2021) argued that the interaction between L1 and L2 sounds experienced by bilingual speakers is inevitable and bidirectional. This interaction can result in an increase in nonnative-like productions of L1 and L2 speech sounds among adults and children alike.

# Research questions

This study examines the speech patterns of a multigenerational Vietnamese-English bilingual family in the USA to answer the following questions:

1. What is the daily usage of Vietnamese and English for members of a multigenerational Vietnamese-English bilingual household?   
2. How does Vietnamese and English speech accuracy differ between generations for members of a multigenerational Vietnamese-English bilingual household?   
3. What (if any) patterns of speech production are similar between generations for members of a multigenerational Vietnamese-English bilingual household?

Given that our first question is descriptive in nature, no predictions can be made about daily language usage based on the theories here discussed. Regarding our second question, the innate accent-filter predicts that the children should produce English speech sounds without a detectable accent regardless of the input they receive from the adults in their home. The innate accent-filter model does not make predictions about the children’s productions of their first language or about adult productions in either language. The emergence approach and the SLM-r predict that individuals most frequently receiving native-language speech models should produce L2 speech sounds most accurately regardless of the generation in which they find themselves. Unique among the models, the emergence approach highlights the importance of social interaction as a predictor of L2 speech sound accuracy. The emergence approach model predicts that individuals interacting most frequently with English-speaking peers should produce L2 speech sounds most accurately. Regarding our third question, the innate accent-filter predicts that the only similarities between the speech of adults and children in a multilingual home should be those English speech sounds that the adults produce identically to monolingual English productions. The emergence approach predicts similarities between the speech of adults and children due to social interactions. The SLM-r predicts that interactions between L1 and L2 speech sounds should be occur regardless of a speaker’s generation. Because the individuals in this study share similar L1 and L2 phonetic subsystems, the SLM-r predicts that there should be commonality among the errors produced.

# Methods

The Louisiana State University Institutional Review Board approved this research (IRBAM-22-0132). Prior to data collection, adult participants signed consent forms for themselves and their children, and the children additionally signed assent forms.

# Participants

Participants included two children, their parents, and their grandparents living in a community in the Southeastern USA (see Table 1 for demographic and language use details). All adult participants emigrated from Vietnam as adults, and the children were born in the USA. Self-rating of Vietnamese and English proficiency showed that the children evaluated themselves as being stronger in English than in Vietnamese, while the adults evaluated themselves as being stronger in Vietnamese than in English. All participants spoke the southern Vietnamese dialect. All participants were exposed only to Vietnamese in their earliest years, independent of their country of birth. The older child, C2, was later to be exposed to English than was the younger child, C1. Some participants reported using English and Vietnamese throughout the day, while the father and both children reported using Vietnamese in one setting and English in another.

# Questionnaire

Participants responded to a questionnaire that captured not only demographic information (age, sex, age of acquisition, and years of education) but information about daily language-use. Participants reported which language they were speaking on an hour-by-hour basis assuming an average day. This resulted in a percent Vietnamese and percent English usage score. Participants also provided self-ratings of their Vietnamese and English proficiency using a 5-point Likert scale $1 = { \mathsf { N o t } }$ at all; $5 =$ Very well).

# Articulation tests

To analyse Vietnamese and English consonant productions, we administered the Vietnamese Articulation Test – Version II (VAT-2; Cameron and Watt 2006) and the Sounds in Words subtest of the

Table 1. Demographic and language background   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="4">Demographics</td><td colspan="4"> Language profile</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">Vietnamese</td><td colspan="2">English</td></tr><tr><td> Participant</td><td>Age</td><td>AOE</td><td>Ed (yrs)</td><td>Self-rated ability</td><td>Daily usea</td><td> Self-rated ability</td><td> Daily use a</td></tr><tr><td>GF.</td><td>79</td><td>21-24</td><td>10</td><td>5</td><td>100.00</td><td>2</td><td>66.67</td></tr><tr><td>GM</td><td>74</td><td>30+</td><td>10</td><td>5</td><td>100.00</td><td>1</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>F</td><td>49</td><td>12-15</td><td>12</td><td>5</td><td>26.67</td><td>4</td><td>73.33</td></tr><tr><td>M</td><td>40</td><td>27-30</td><td>12</td><td>5</td><td>100.00</td><td>2</td><td>58.33</td></tr><tr><td>C1</td><td>9</td><td>3-6</td><td>5</td><td>3</td><td>35.71</td><td>5</td><td>78.57</td></tr><tr><td>C2</td><td>16</td><td>6-9</td><td>11</td><td>3</td><td>7.14</td><td>5</td><td>100.00</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: GF $=$ Grandfather; ${ \sf G M } =$ Grandmother; $\mathsf { F } =$ Father; $\mathsf { M } =$ Mother; $\mathsf C 1 =$ Younger child; ${ \textsf { C } } 2 =$ Older child; $\tt A O E =$ Age of exposure to English in three-year increments; $\mathsf { E d } =$ Years of formal education; Self-rated ability is on a scale from 1 (Not at all) to 5 (Very well). Daily use is displayed as percentage. a Totals do not add to $1 0 0 \%$ . Some participants reported use of both Vietnamese and English during a single time interval.

Goldman Fristoe Test of Articulation – Third Edition (GFTA-3; Goldman and Fristoe 2015). The VAT-2, which does not provide a numeric score, is an informal articulation screener for Vietnamese consonants in all relevant word positions of single words. Most Vietnamese phonemes appeared twice per allowed word position, but medial /f/ and final /k/ appeared only once. Participants were not penalized for the use of dialectal variants (e.g. /w/ for /kw/ is nonstandard but used by the dialect of the participants). The GFTA-3 is a standardised speech assessment normed on monolingual English speakers. It tests consonants in the initial, medial, and final positions of words, and includes consonant clusters. Both tools feature single, colour pictures on each page to facilitate target phoneme elicitation. Both the VAT-2 and GFTA-3 were used for elicitation purposes only.

Based on the productions drawn from the VAT-2 and GFTA-3, we identified consonant accuracy at the word level by calculating Percentage Consonants Correct – Revised (PCC-R; Shriberg et al. 1997) for each participant in each language. PCC-R considers speech sound distortions as correct. Shriberg et al. (1997) recommended the use of this revised measure when testing populations of diverse ages. Since its development, PCC-R has been widely considered a valid measure for bilingual consonant accuracy studies (e.g. Fabiano-Smith 2019; Fabiano-Smith and Hoffman 2018; Goldstein and Bunta 2012; Goldstein, Fabiano, and Washington 2005; Montanari, Mayr, and Subrahmanyam 2018). In addition to accepting speech sound distortions as correct, PCC-R allows for the acceptance of phonetic differences as correct such as the production of an unaspirated [k] in target words where aspiration is customary but does not result in a contrastive difference. Total PCC-R and singleton PCC-R by phoneme class for each language were calculated. Phonemes were classified according to their voicing, manner, place, and word position. All phonemes produced with acceptable southern Vietnamese dialectal variations were scored as correct (e.g. /w/ for /kw/ consonant cluster is acceptable in the southern Vietnamese dialect). Percentage Consonant Clusters Correct (PClC) was calculated only in English due to the lack of dialect-obligatory clusters in the elicited Vietnamese words on the VAT-2. Consonant clusters were scored as a unit and considered correct if all consonants in the cluster were produced correctly. The consonants in these clusters were not scored separately and did not contribute to singleton PCC-R. English total PCC-R included singleton and consonant cluster accuracy. Consonants in consonant clusters were not scored separately when calculating total PCC-R (e.g. we considered /st/ accurate if a participant produced /st/ and inaccurate if a participant produced one or all phonemes in the cluster incorrectly).

# Procedures

Each participant sat opposite the tester in a quiet area in the participants’ home. All sessions were digitally audio recorded using a TASCAM DR-05X Linear PCM recorder placed on the table near the participant. The tester followed the administration techniques detailed in the GFTA-3 Examiner’s Manual for both the GFTA-3 and VAT-2 administration. First, the tester showed each stimulus and asked ‘What is this?’ or the Vietnamese equivalent (‘Cái này là gì?’), as per participant preference. If participants did not produce the target word, the tester utilised delayed imitation (e.g. ‘This is a ball. We can bounce it. What is this?’). During English testing, the third author spoke the prompt in Vietnamese if a participant did not comprehend English sufficiently. Both tests were administered on the same day. Audio files were transferred to a PC for transcription.

# Transcriptions

Before transcribing the Vietnamese utterances, the third author and a fellow undergraduate student who are both Vietnamese-English bilinguals calibrated their transcriptions using a practice recording not included in the current study. They each independently transcribed utterances collected during two recorded VAT-2 administrations involving two Vietnamese adults (not included in this study) who spoke the southern Vietnamese dialect. Agreement for this calibration reached $9 3 . 6 \%$ which is considered acceptable for broad transcription (Shriberg and Lof 1991). The third author and the same undergraduate student then transcribed $100 \%$ of the Vietnamese utterances produced by the participants in this current study. This exceeds the customary percent of transcriptions checked for interrater reliability (e.g. Margetson et al. 2022; McLeod et al. 2021). Agreement for the transcription of participants’ Vietnamese responses was $9 6 . 4 \%$ . These raters reviewed any disagreements to reach a consensus. When a consensus could not be reached, the first author resolved these disagreements.

The first and third authors broadly transcribed the English utterances for each participant. The raters coded any acceptable allophonic variant of the target phoneme as correct. Interrater agreement for each participant’s English productions was above $8 5 \% ,$ ranging from $8 9 . 3 \%$ to $1 0 0 \% ,$ which is considered acceptable for broad transcription (Shriberg and Lof 1991). Overall interrater agreement reached an average of $9 4 . 9 6 \%$ . As with Vietnamese, the percentage of utterances selected for interrater reliability exceeded what is customary. The first and third authors discussed any disagreements and came to a consensus.

# Analyses

We generated descriptive statistics for the total PCC-R and singleton PCC-R in Vietnamese and English as well as English PClC for each participant to analyse individual and generational differences in Vietnamese and English. We then compared each adult and child’s Vietnamese PCC-R to identify any shared error patterns. The words ‘buýt’ in Vietnamese and ‘quack’ in English were not included in the analysis because of difficulty eliciting those items.

# Results

Vietnamese PCC-R, English singleton PCC-R, English total PCC-R, and English PClC for each generation follow. Due to the lack of consonant clusters elicited by the VAT-2, singleton and total PCCR were identical for Vietnamese and will therefore be referred to as Vietnamese PCC-R.

# Vietnamese articulation

A descriptive analysis revealed high accuracy on Vietnamese phonemes for each generation (see Table 2). No participant produced more than two errors. The overall trend suggested a slight decrease in Vietnamese consonant accuracy with each successive generation.

# Vietnamese PCC-R by class

A review of Vietnamese PCC-R by phoneme class (voicing, manner, place, and word position) revealed that all errors occurred with Vietnamese voiceless phonemes in word-initial position (see Table 3). The father and grandfather produced no errors. Error analysis revealed near-identical error patterns among the children and their mother. The grandmother produced one error (substitution of $/ { \mathsf { p } } /$ for /f/ in one of two opportunities) and the mother produced two errors (substitution of $\widehat { \varkappa } | \widehat { \sf t } |$ for /ʈ/ in two of two opportunities). The older child, C2, produced the same type and number of errors as her mother. The younger child, C1, produced one error on the same phoneme as his sister and mother (see Table 4).

Table 2. Vietnamese PCC-R by generation.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Generation</td><td>PCC-R</td></tr><tr><td>G1</td><td>99.07</td></tr><tr><td>G2</td><td>98.15</td></tr><tr><td>G3</td><td>97.22</td></tr><tr><td> Mean (SD)</td><td>98.15 (.76)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: ${ \sf G } 1 =$ Grandparents; ${ \sf G } 2 =$ Parents; ${ \sf G } 3 =$ Children.

Table 3. Vietnamese PCC-R by phoneme class.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">Tokens</td><td colspan="3">Generation</td></tr><tr><td>G1</td><td>G2</td><td>G3</td></tr><tr><td>Condition Voicing</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Voiced</td><td>34</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Voiceless</td><td>20</td><td>97.50</td><td>95.00</td><td>92.50</td></tr><tr><td>Manner</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Plosive</td><td>17.</td><td>100.00</td><td>94.12</td><td>91.18</td></tr><tr><td>Nasal</td><td>14</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td> Fricative</td><td>15</td><td>96.67</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Approximant</td><td>6</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Lateral</td><td>2</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Place</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Bilabial</td><td>:</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td> Labiodental</td><td>5</td><td>90.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td> Alveolar</td><td>19</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td> Retroflex</td><td>2</td><td>100.00</td><td>50.00</td><td>25.00</td></tr><tr><td> Palatal</td><td>6</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Velar</td><td>12</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Glottal</td><td>2</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Word Position</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Initial</td><td>43</td><td>98.84</td><td>97.67</td><td>96.51</td></tr><tr><td> Medial</td><td>1</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Final</td><td>10</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: Tokens represent the number of opportunities to produce a particular phoneme class.

Table 4. Vietnamese phoneme substitutions.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">Substitutions</td></tr><tr><td>Speakera</td><td>phong tam</td><td>trung</td><td>trang</td></tr><tr><td>GM</td><td>p/f</td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>M.</td><td></td><td>tJ/t</td><td>21 </td></tr><tr><td>C1</td><td></td><td>Wt</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C2</td><td></td><td></td><td>2</td></tr></table></body></html>

$^ { \mathtt { a } } G F$ and F did not produce any errors.

# English articulation

English accuracy improved as English usage increased (see Table 5). Overall, participants had similar difficulties with English singletons $( M = 7 4 . 8 6 \% ;$ range: $5 5 . 7 4 \% - 1 0 0 \% )$ and consonant clusters $( M =$ $7 4 . 5 1 \% $ range: $3 5 . 2 9 \% - 1 0 0 \% )$ , resulting in a mean total PCC-R of $7 4 . 8 2 \%$ (range: $5 3 . 2 4 \% - 1 0 0 \% )$ . Though accuracy increased with each successive generation, different patterns of accuracy occurred between generations. The first generation (G1) performed relatively better on English singletons than on consonant clusters; the opposite was true for the second generation (G2). The third generation (G3) only produced one error between the two participants – C1 devoiced word-final $/ { \mathsf { g } } /$ i n ‘pig.’

# English PCC-R by class

To examine English patterns by phoneme class (voicing, manner, place, and word position), we conducted a descriptive analysis of the data (see Table 6). English voiced, approximant, interdental, and word-final consonants had the lowest accuracy among their respective classes. Participants had the most success with English voiceless, plosive, glottal and labiovelar, and word-initial consonants among their respective classes. The children performed better than did all adults in all categories. G2 performed better than did G1 in most phoneme classes. G1 performed better than did G2 on English nasal, approximant, postalveolar, and palatal consonants, and performed equally to G2 on English lateral, labiovelar, and glottal consonants.

Table 5. English PCC-R, PClC, and total PCC-R by generation.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Generation</td><td> PCC-R Singletons</td><td>PCIC</td><td>Total PCC-R</td></tr><tr><td>G1</td><td>58.20</td><td>44.12</td><td>56.47</td></tr><tr><td>G2</td><td>66.80</td><td>79.41</td><td>68.35</td></tr><tr><td>G3</td><td>99.59</td><td>100.00</td><td>99.64</td></tr><tr><td>Mean (SD)</td><td>74.86 (17.83)</td><td>74.51 (23.07)</td><td>74.82 (18.28)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6. English singleton PCC-R by phoneme class.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">Tokens</td><td colspan="3">Generation</td></tr><tr><td>G1</td><td>G2</td><td>G3</td></tr><tr><td>Condition Voicing</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Voiced</td><td>75</td><td>50.67</td><td>59.33</td><td>99.33</td></tr><tr><td>Voiceless</td><td>47</td><td>70.21</td><td>78.72</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Manner</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Plosive</td><td>36</td><td>73.61</td><td>86.11</td><td>98.61</td></tr><tr><td>Nasal</td><td>17</td><td>79.41</td><td>76.47</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Fricative</td><td>35</td><td>45.71</td><td>61.43</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Affricate</td><td>8</td><td>56.25</td><td>75.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Approximant</td><td>17</td><td>38.24</td><td>35.29</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Lateral</td><td>9</td><td>44.44</td><td>44.44</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Place</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Bilabial</td><td>16</td><td>87.50</td><td>87.50</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Labiodental</td><td>12</td><td>41.67</td><td>70.83</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Interdental</td><td>4</td><td>0.00</td><td>12.50</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Alveolar</td><td>54</td><td>51.85</td><td>56.48</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td> Palatal</td><td>2</td><td>75.00</td><td>50.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td> Palato-Alveolar</td><td>8</td><td>56.25</td><td>75.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Postalveolar</td><td>4</td><td>75.00</td><td>62.50</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Velar</td><td>18</td><td>61.11</td><td>80.56</td><td>97.22</td></tr><tr><td>Glottal</td><td>2</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td> Labiovelar</td><td>2</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Word Position</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Initial</td><td>42</td><td>79.76</td><td>86.90</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td> Medial</td><td>30</td><td>65.00</td><td>81.67</td><td>100.00</td></tr><tr><td>Final</td><td>50</td><td>36.00</td><td>41.00</td><td>99.00</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: Tokens represent the number of opportunities to produce a particular phoneme class.

Table 7. Vietnamese and English consonant accuracy by adult sex.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">Vietnamese PCC-R</td><td colspan="3">English</td></tr><tr><td>PCC-R Singletons</td><td>PCIC</td><td>Total PCC-R</td></tr><tr><td>Male</td><td>100 (0).</td><td>65.57 (4.92)</td><td>73.53 (20.59)</td><td>66.56 (6.84)</td></tr><tr><td>Female</td><td>97.22 (.93)</td><td>59.43 (3.69)</td><td>50.00 (14.71)</td><td>58.27 (5.34)</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Differences by sex

Although not a part of our planned analysis, we noted that there appeared to be differences between the sexes in consonant accuracy in both languages. Adult males demonstrated higher consonant accuracy than did females, both within and across adult generations (see Table 7).

# Discussion

Results from this investigation are consistent with the emergence approach to speech acquisition and the SLM-r. Although the children spoke English without a detectable accent unlike their parents and grandparents, they spoke Vietnamese most like their mother despite her Vietnamese productions differing from the three other adults in their home. Rather than developing speech with what Chambers (2002) called an innate accent filter that prevents learners from perceiving familial accents, participants in this study were influenced by the ambient phonology in which they found themselves. Additionally, as predicted by the SLM-r, the children and adults who reported most frequently receiving native-like input produced English speech sounds with the greatest accuracy.

The SLM-r predicts bidirectional interactions between L1 and L2 phonetic subsystems. Evidence of an L1 influence on L2 productions was apparent in many of the English speech sounds produced by each adult. For example, the restricted nature of word-final consonants in Vietnamese appeared to influence the productions of many English consonants in word-final position for the adults in this study. This resulted in English consonants in word-final position being produced with the lowest accuracy of all word positions. The adults omitted many word-final approximants and produced many word-final voiced stops as voiceless stops. Evidence of an L2 influence on L1 productions was less common. An analysis of errors on Vietnamese consonants revealed that the mother consistently substituted the English affricate /t͡ʃ/ for the Vietnamese retroflex stop /ʈ/. No other adult participant produced this consonant similarly. This suggests an L2 influence on L1 in the mother’s speech. This is especially apparent given that the mother produced the English affricate /t͡ʃ/ correctly in all word positions for the English stimuli.

# Vietnamese and English usage

Participants generally used less Vietnamese and more English with each successive generation. The father’s high rate of English usage corresponds with his job in an English-speaking setting. The children’s English use at school and with peers as well as the mix of Vietnamese and English at home is consistent with prior research. Consistent with the emergence approach and the SLM- $^ { \cdot \sf r , }$ this demonstrates that input impacts outcomes in speech accuracy. However, there was a surprising result that runs counter to what typically has been found in the literature. The older child used Vietnamese less often than did her younger sibling. This is unusual because prior research has found the opposite pattern. That is, firstborn bilingual children typically use their heritage language more often than do their later-born siblings (e.g. Fishman 1991; Shin 2002; Silvén et al. 2014). Firstborn children often serve as interpreters or cultural brokers for their parents, resulting in greater heritage language usage (Dorner, Orellana, and Li-Grining 2007; Tse and McQuillan 1996). When the role of cultural broker is filled by the older sibling, younger siblings tend to focus on the ambient language. Since the current investigation is a case study, it is difficult to determine if this unexpected result is related to this household, related to Vietnamese, or related to multigenerational Vietnamese households. Future research should determine if patterns of language use among VietnameseEnglish bilinguals differ from that of other bilingual cultural groups.

It is a possibility that this immigrant group might differ from other immigrant groups in terms of heritage language usage. We arrive at this possibility following a conversation with a member of this community who informed one of the authors of the following case: the parents in a family of Vietnamese immigrants to the USA directed their US-born children to focus on learning English more than Vietnamese. This resulted in impoverished Vietnamese ability by the time the children were teenagers. Newly immigrated Vietnamese individuals (members of the same family) observed the weak Vietnamese abilities of their nieces and nephews who had focused on learning English more than Vietnamese. To avoid the same Vietnamese language outcomes for their children, they directed their own US-born children to focus on Vietnamese. Such a pattern might not happen only across pods within the same extended family but within the same pod. For example, when children of immigrants are separated in age by several years (e.g. one child is born 10 years after the other), parents might change their language usage decisions for the younger child based on the heritage language outcomes of the older child. Future researchers should consider these patterns of language usage.

Given that patterns of language usage might differ for Vietnamese-English bilinguals based on birth order and given that there is a well-established positive relationship between language usage and speech accuracy (e.g. Flege, Munro, and MacKay 1995; 1997; Piske et al. 2002), the Vietnamese speech accuracy of Vietnamese-English bilinguals might be impacted by birth order. We are not aware of any studies investigating birth order effects on bilingual speech production. Future research should consider the role of birth order in Vietnamese-English bilingual speech development.

# Differences across generations

# Vietnamese

Vietnamese accuracy decreased with successive generations, but adult errors were rare. All participants produced Vietnamese consonants with at least $9 7 \%$ accuracy. The children’s high rate of Vietnamese consonant accuracy might be supported by the presence of Vietnamese-speaking nonparental adults in the home (i.e. grandparents; Alba et al. 2002). The grandfather and father produced Vietnamese consonants with $100 \%$ accuracy. This contrasts with McLeod et al. (2021) who found that Vietnamese-Australian English bilinguals made speech accuracy errors well into adulthood.

# English

Among the three generations, G1 had the most difficulty with English consonant accuracy. Consistent with the emergence approach and the SLM-r, each successive generation became increasingly accurate with English consonants and consonant clusters. Consistent with the innate accent-filter, the children produced English speech sounds differently from the adults in their home. Both G1 and G2 exhibited cross-linguistic influence of Vietnamese on English productions, but G3 did not. The least accurate consonants by phoneme class included English voiced, interdental, approximant, and word-final consonants. G1 and G2 frequently reduced English consonant clusters to singletons. This is expected given the phonological constraints of Vietnamese. Interestingly, G2 had more difficulty producing English singletons than consonant clusters $( 6 6 . 7 \%$ and $7 9 . 4 1 \%$ , respectively). This difference was driven by the father producing consonant clusters with $9 4 . 1 2 \%$ accuracy compared to singletons with $7 0 . 4 9 \%$ accuracy. The father reported speaking English more than did any other adult in the home. It may be that the father became aware of his Vietnamese-influenced pattern of consonant cluster reduction and addressed this phonological process on his own. His earlier age of English acquisition compared to other adults also may have influenced his production of English consonant clusters.

# Similarities across generations

Both adult generations exhibited few errors in Vietnamese and many errors in English. The children exhibited few errors in Vietnamese and only one error in English. Both children produced the Vietnamese retroflex stop /ʈ/ as the English /t͡ʃ/. Although these Vietnamese productions were not dialectally acceptable variations, they mirrored their mother’s productions of the same target phoneme. Thus, in the context of the children’s communicative environment, this would not be considered an error even though all other adults in the household produced /ʈ/ $100 \%$ of the time. Consistent with the emergence approach and inconsistent with the innate accent-filter, the older child showed signs of influence from other communicative partners within her home. Fifty percent of the time, the older child produced /ʈ/ as a retroflex stop as did her other adult family members. This finding highlights the fact that family members can have differential impacts on other family members’ speech production.

Although the home environment appears to have influenced the children’s Vietnamese phoneme production, the mismatch between the adults’ low English consonant accuracy and the children’s almost perfect English consonant accuracy suggests that the home environment had little or no influence on the children’s English phoneme production. Consistent with the emergence approach, characteristics of the children’s communicative environment at an English-only school coupled with social motivation and individual maturation likely produced English articulation typical of monolingual peers within only a few years of English usage. In previous studies, five-year-old bilingual children were no different from their monolingual peers on PCC (Fabiano-Smith and Hoffman 2018; Goldstein, Fabiano, and Washington 2005). The findings of the current study involving older children suggest that speech sound accuracy continues to match monolingual norms into later childhood and adolescence.

# Differences across the sexes

We did not predict sex-based differences in the consonant accuracy of the adult participants. Adult males produced all classes of Vietnamese phonemes with $100 \%$ accuracy. Each female produced one Vietnamese phoneme in error. Adult males performed better in English than did adult females on most individual measures and overall. Although studies investigating sex effects on bilingual speech production have shown mixed findings (e.g. Flege, Munro, and MacKay 1995), the primary focus of such studies has been on accent which was not the focus of the current study. We are unaware of research that has shown sex-based consonant accuracy differences among adult participants. The adult males in the current study produced Vietnamese and English singletons as well as English consonant clusters with greater accuracy than did adult females. This pattern held across each adult generational dyad such that the grandfather had greater phoneme accuracy for each language than did the grandmother, and the father had greater phoneme accuracy for each language than did the mother.

One possible explanation for greater phoneme accuracy among adult males compared to adult females in the current study could be related to English usage differences. Males spoke more English than did females. The additional English practice might have led to greater English phonemic accuracy. This is consistent with Flege, Munro, and MacKay (1995) who showed that more frequent use of L2 and less frequent use of L1 resulted in a more native-like L2 accent. In addition to having a lower percentage of daily English usage, the adult females in this household may have a lower level of acculturation than do the adult males. Nguyen and Cheung (2009) found that Vietnamese-American teenagers rated their mothers as being less acculturated than their fathers. Regardless of the reason, the adult females in the current study spoke English less often than did the adult males, thereby potentially limiting their ability to improve their English phoneme accuracy. This is especially true for the grandmother who reported no daily use of English. Her English PCC-R and PClC were the lowest of all participants.

# Limitations and future directions

English and Vietnamese testing occurred within single sessions, which may have activated the bilingual language mode, resulting in possible interference from the participants’ non-target language (Grosjean 1998; Grosjean and Li 2013). Future studies should control for this possibility.

Additionally, the speech tests elicited a small number of tokens for each phoneme – in some cases only one or two. Typically, SLPs require at least two accurate productions of a phoneme before it is counted as part of an individual’s phonemic inventory (Dinnsen et al. 1990; Fabiano-Smith 2019; Stoel-Gammon 1987). Future studies should include speech samples to elicit a sufficient number of phonemes (Fabiano-Smith 2019).

The current investigation focused only on consonants. Since Vietnamese vowels and tones may reveal within- and between-generation differences that Vietnamese PCC-R did not, future research should analyse these features.

# Summary/Conclusion

Vietnamese-English bilingual speakers residing in a multigenerational household in the USA speak each of their languages with varying degrees of daily usage. Children in this household use

English more often and Vietnamese less often than do their adult family members. Vietnamese consonant accuracy decreases with each generation, while English consonant and consonant cluster accuracy increases with each generation. The children produce English consonants like their monolingual peers and Vietnamese like their mother. Generation- and sex-based accuracy patterns observed among the adults in this multigenerational home suggest that children may receive differing models in both Vietnamese and English. SLPs working with children from diverse linguistic backgrounds should take the possibility of this variation into account when assessing speech sound accuracy to determine whether errors require intervention.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

# Data availability statement

Data files are available on the Open Science Framework at https://osf.io/qbjxe/?=ad7f3b1a0d2c48ec94c91e587fc7ef06.

# Notes on contributors

Adam J. Hogan is a Communication Sciences and Disorders Ph.D. student at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge. His research interests include bilingual phonetics and phonology across the lifespan as well as second language acquisition.

Todd A. Gibson is a professor of Communication Sciences and Disorders at Louisiana State University at Baton Rouge.   
His research focuses on the influence of language exposure and experience on bilingual language acquisition.

Vivian Luong is a Communication Sciences and Disorders undergraduate senior at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge. Her recent focus of research is on Vietnamese-English phonology.

# ORCID

Adam J. Hogan $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5896-9143   
Todd A. Gibson $\circledcirc$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8618-2962   
Vivian Luong $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3512-3695

# References

Alba, R., J. Logan, A. Lutz, and B. Stults. 2002. “Only English by the Third Generation? Loss and Preservation of the Mother Tongue among the Grandchildren of Contemporary Immigrants.” Demography 39 (3): 467–484. https://doi.org/10. 1353/dem.2002.0023.   
Batalova, J., and M. McHugh. 2010. Top Languages Spoken by English Language Learners Nationally and by State. Migration Policy Institute. https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/publications/FactSheet%20ELL3% 20-%20FINAL.pdf.   
Benson, B. 1988. “Universal Preference for the Open Syllable as an Independent Process in Interlanguage Phonology.” Language Learning 38 (2): 221–235. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1988.tb00410.x.   
Binh, T. V. 1993. “Vietnamese.” In Community Languages in the Netherlands, edited by G. Extra and L. Verhoeven, 301– 318. London: CRC Press. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003077428.   
Budiman, A. 2021. Vietnamese in the U.S. Fact Sheet. P. R. Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/fact-sheet/ asian-americans-vietnamese-in-the-u-s-fact-sheet/.   
Cameron, N., and C. Watt. 2006. Vietnamese Articulation Test—Version II. https://slhs.sdsu.edu/wp-content/uploads/ 2018/11/VietnameseArticulationTest-II-pictures.pdf.   
Center for Applied Linguistics. 1976. Teaching English Pronunciation to Vietnamese. http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ ED125304.pdf.   
Chambers, J. K. 2002. “Dynamics of Dialect Convergence.” Journal of Sociolinguistics 6 (1): 117–130. https://doi.org/10. 1111/1467-9481.00180.   
Chambers, J. K. 2005. “Sociolinguistics and the Language Faculty.” Canadian Journal of Linguistics/Revue Canadienne de Linguistique 50 (1−4): 215–239. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0008413100003716.   
Cheng, L. 1991. Assessing Asian Language Performance: Guidelines for Evaluating Limited-English Proficient Students. 2nd ed. Oceanside, CA: Academic Communication Associates.   
Davis, B. L., and L. M. Bedore. 2013. An Emergence Approach to Speech Acquisition: Doing and Knowing. New York, NY: Psychology Press. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203375303.   
Dietrich, S., and E. Hernandez. 2022. Language Use in the USA: 2019. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau. https://www. census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2022/acs/acs-50.pdf.   
Dinnsen, D. A., S. B. Chin, M. Elbert, and T. W. Powell. 1990. “Some Constraints on Functionally Disordered Phonologies.” Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 33 (1): 28–37. https://doi.org/10.1044/jshr.3301.28.   
Dorner, L. M., M. F. Orellana, and C. P. Li-Grining. 2007. “‘I Helped my mom,’ and it Helped me: Translating the Skills of Language Brokers Into Improved Standardised Test Scores.” American Journal of Education 113 (3): 451–478. https:// doi.org/10.1086/512740.   
Eadie, P., A. Morgan, O. C. Ukoumunne, K. Ttofari Eecen, M. Wake, and S. Reilly. 2015. “Speech Sound Disorder at 4 Years: Prevalence, Comorbidities, and Predictors in a Community Cohort of Children.” Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology 57 (6): 578–584. https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.12635.   
Fabiano-Smith, L. 2019. “Standardized Tests and the Diagnosis of Speech Sound Disorders.” Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups 4 (1): 58–66. https://doi.org/10.1044/2018_PERS-SIG1-2018-0018.   
Fabiano-Smith, L., and B. A. Goldstein. 2010. “Phonological Acquisition in Bilingual Spanish-English Speaking Children.” Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 53 (1): 160–178. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2009/07- 0064).   
Fabiano-Smith, L., and K. Hoffman. 2018. “Diagnostic Accuracy of Traditional Measures of Phonological Ability for Bilingual Preschoolers and Kindergarteners.” Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools 49 (1): 121–134. https://doi.org/10.1044/2017_LSHSS-17-0043.   
Fishman, J. A. 1991. Reversing Language Shift: Theoretical and Empirical Foundations of Assistance to Threatened Languages. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.   
Flege, J. E., and O.-S. Bohn. 2021. “The Revised Speech Learning Model (SLM-r).” In Second Language Speech Learning: Theoretical and Empirical Progress, edited by R. Wayland, 3–83. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. https://doi. org/10.1017/9781108886901.002.   
Flege, J. E., E. M. Frieda, and T. Nozawa. 1997. “Amount of Native-Language (L1) Use Affects the Pronunciation of an L2.” Journal of Phonetics 25 (2): 169–186. https://doi.org/10.1006/jpho.1996.0040.   
Flege, J. E., M. J. Munro, and I. R. A. MacKay. 1995. “Factors Affecting Strength of Perceived Foreign Accent in a Second Language.” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 97 (5): 3125–3134. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.413041.   
Gildersleeve-Neumann, C. E., E. S. Kester, B. L. Davis, and E. D. Pena. 2008. “English Speech Sound Development in Preschool-Aged Children from Bilingual English-Spanish Environments.” Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools 39 (3): 314–328. https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461(2008/030).   
Goldman, R., and M. Fristoe. 2015. Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation–Third Edition. Pearson.   
Goldstein, B. A., and F. Bunta. 2012. “Positive and Negative Transfer in the Phonological Systems of Bilingual Speakers.” International Journal of Bilingualism 16 (4): 388–401. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006911425817.   
Goldstein, B. A., L. Fabiano, and P. S. Washington. 2005. “Phonological Skills in Predominantly English-Speaking, Predominantly Spanish-Speaking, and Spanish-English Bilingual Children.” Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools 36 (3): 201–218. https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461(2005/021).   
Grosjean, F. 1998. “Studying Bilinguals: Methodological and Conceptual Issues.” Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 1 (2): 131–149. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672899800025X.   
Grosjean, F., and P. Li. 2013. The Psycholinguistics of Bilingualism. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. https://www.wiley. com/en-us/The+Psycholinguistics+of+Bilingualism-p-9781444332797.   
Hwa-Froelich, D. A., B. W. Hodson, and H. T. Edwards. 2002. Characteristics of Vietnamese Phonology. https://doi.org/10. 1044/1058-0360(2002/031).   
Ishizawa, H. 2004. “Minority Language Use among Grandchildren in Multigenerational Households.” Sociological Perspectives 47 (4): 465–483. https://doi.org/10.1525/sop.2004.47.4.465.   
Jasso, J., and J. R. Potratz. 2020. “Assessing Speech Sound Disorders in School-Age Children from Diverse Language Backgrounds: A Tutorial with Three Case Studies.” Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups 5 (3): 714–725. https://doi.org/10.1044/2020_PERSP-19-00151.   
Margetson, K., S. McLeod, S. Verdon, and V. H. Tran. 2022. “Transcribing Multilingual Children’s and Adults’ Speech.” Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699206.2022.2051073.   
McCray, A. D., and S. B. García. 2002. “The Stories we Must Tell: Developing a Research Agenda for Multicultural and Bilingual Special Education.” International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education 15 (6): 599–612. https://doi. org/10.1080/0951839022000014330.   
McLeod, S., K. Margetson, C. Wang, V. H. Tran, S. Verdon, K. White, and B. Phạm. 2021. “Speech Acquisition Within a 3- Generation Vietnamese-English Family: The Influence of Maturation and Ambient Phonology.” Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics 36 (4–5): 470–493. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699206.2020.1862915.   
Montanari, S., R. Mayr, and K. Subrahmanyam. 2018. “Bilingual Speech Sound Development During the Preschool Years: The Role of Language Proficiency and Cross-Linguistic Relatedness.” Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 61 (10): 2467–2486. https://doi.org/10.1044/2018_JSLHR-S-17-0393.   
Murphy, M., and A. Johnson. 2022. “Dual Identification? The Effects of English Learner (EL) Status on Subsequent Special Education (SPED) Placement in an Equity-Focused District.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis. https://doi. org/10.3102/01623737221121786.   
Nguyen, P. V., and M. Cheung. 2009. “Parenting Styles as Perceived by Vietnamese American Adolescents.” Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal 26 (6): 505–518. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10560-009-0182-0.   
Osburne, A. G. 1996. “Final Cluster Reduction in English L2 Speech: A Case Study of a Vietnamese Speaker.” Applied Linguistics 17 (2): 164–181. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/17.2.164.   
Park, M., J. Zong, and J. Batalova. 2018. Growing Superdiversity among Young US Dual Language Learners and its Implications. Migration Policy Institute. https://cdn.givingcompass.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/23103431/ SuperDiversityAmongDLLs_FINAL.pdf.   
Pham, B., and S. McLeod. 2016. “Consonants, Vowels and Tones Across Vietnamese Dialects.” International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology 18 (2): 122–134. https://doi.org/10.3109/17549507.2015.1101162.   
Piske, T., J. E. Flege, I. R. MacKay, and D. Meador. 2002. “The Production of English Vowels by Fluent Early and Late ItalianEnglish Bilinguals.” Phonetica 59 (1): 49–71. https://doi.org/10.1159/000056205.   
Ruggles, S., S. Flood, R. Goeken, M. Schouweiler, and M. Sobek. 2022. IPUMS USA: Version 12.0 (12.0) [Data set]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V12.0.   
Ruiz Soto, A. G., S. Hooker, and J. Batalova. 2015. Top Languages Spoken by English Language Learners Nationally and by State. Migration Policy Institute. https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/publications/ELLFact%20SheetNo4.pdf.   
Sandel, T. L., W.-Y. Chao, and C.-H. Liang. 2006. “Language Shift and Language Accommodation Across Family Generations in Taiwan.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 27 (2): 126–147. https://doi.org/10. 1080/01434630608668544.   
Sato, C. J. 1984. “Phonological Processes in Second Language Acquisition: Another Look at Interlanguage Syllable Structure.” Language Learning 34 (4): 43–58. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1984.tb00351.x.   
Shin, S. J. 2002. “Birth Order and the Language Experience of Bilingual Children.” TESOL Quarterly 36 (1): 103–113. https://doi.org/10.2307/3588366.   
Shriberg, L. D., D. Austin, B. A. Lewis, J. L. McSweeny, and D. L. Wilson. 1997. “The Percentage of Consonants Correct (PCC) Metric: Extensions and Reliability Data.” Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 40 (4): 708–722. https://doi.org/10.1044/jslhr.4004.708.   
Shriberg, L. D., and G. L. Lof. 1991. “Reliability Studies in Broad and Narrow Phonetic Transcription.” Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics 5 (3): 225–279. https://doi.org/10.3109/02699209108986113.   
Shriberg, L. D., J. B. Tomblin, and J. L. McSweeny. 1999. “Prevalence of Speech Delay in 6-Year-old Children and Comorbidity with Language Impairment.” Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 42 (6): 1461–1481. https://doi.org/10.1044/jslhr.4206.1461.   
Silvén, M., M. Voeten, A. Kouvo, and M. Lundén. 2014. “Speech Perception and Vocabulary Growth: A Longitudinal Study of Finnish-Russian Bilinguals and Finnish Monolinguals from Infancy to Three Years.” International Journal of Behavioral Development 38 (4): 323–332. https://doi.org/10.1177/0165025414533748.   
Snow, C. 1987. “Relevance of the Notion of a Critical Period to Language Acquisition.” In Sensitive Periods in Development, edited by M. H. Bornstein, 201–228. Hilldale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Stoel-Gammon, C. 1987. “Phonological Skills of 2-Year-Olds.” Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools 18 (4): 323–329. https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461.1804.323.   
Tang, G. 2007. “Cross-linguistic Analysis of Vietnamese and English with Implications for Vietnamese Language Acquisition and Maintenance in the United States.” Journal of Southeast Asian American Education and Advancement 2 (1). https://doi.org/10.7771/2153-8999.1085.   
Tan Jun Hao, S., and B. C. Ng. 2010. “Three Generations Under One Roof: A Study of the Influence of the Presence of Grandparents on Language Shift, Identity and Attitudes.” Travaux Neuchâtelois de Linguistique 52: 69–92. https:// doi.org/10.26034/tranel.2010.2845.   
Thompson, L. C. 1965. A Vietnamese Grammar. Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press.   
Tse, L., and J. McQuillan. 1996. Culture, Language, and Literacy: The Effects of Child Brokering on Language Minority Education (ED394357). ERIC. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED394357.pdf.