Book review

Crossing Borders, Writing Texts, Being Evaluated: Cultural and Disciplinary Norms in Academic Writing, Anne Golden, Lars Anders Kulbrandstad, Lawrence Jun Zhang (Eds.). Multilingual Matters (2022). $\mathbf { x v } + \mathbf { 1 6 6 }$ pp. US\$39.95, UK29.95, ISBN: 978-1-788-92858-8

The ability to write academically is widely recognized as crucial prerequisite for academic sces and professional development. While previous studies have explored various sues related to academic writing, such as general difficulties in writing academicall, the complexities of academic writing, and academic writing for publication purposes (Flowerdew & Habibie, 2022; Manchon & Matsuda, 2016; Wette, 2021), much remains unexplored about academic writers' writing experiences across diffrent cultural and disciplinary contexts. In particular, it is a demanding enterprise for them to develop academic writing proficiency in a second/additional language (Hyland, 2019). Crossng Borders, Writing Texts, Being Evaluate: Cultural and Disciplinary Norms in Academic Writing is therefore a timely and welcome attempt to address this pressing need, establishing a comprehensive picture of the journey undertaken by L2 writers within a new academic community..

Structurally, the volume consists of eight chapters examining the lingustic, cultural, and social issues that L2 learners need to address when writing academically and ofering potential support to scaffold them. Drawing upon both theoretical discussions and empirical evidence, the edition is of great value for researchers and practitioners who are interested in teaching, evaluating, and researching L2 academic writing.

The volume begins with a chapter by Golden and Kulbrandstad where they emphasize that writing norms vary with cultures and disciplines, and review the borders that need to be crossed by L2 writers. This chapter provides an extensive discussion of the chal. lenges they face, including discourse conventions in different disciplines, ideological differences across cultures, and the bias and reluctance of examiners towards non-standard varieties of English. With this discussion, this opening chapter lays a solid foundation for the following investigations into L2 learners border crosing in academic writig and the actions they can take to smooth their academic writing journey.

Building on this foundation, the subsequent chapters delve into the specific obstacles fced by L2 learners. Chapter 2 is dedicated to the influence of rater variability on L2 students' academic writing performance. Golden and Kulbrandstad investigate how experienced raters asses uncorrected and corrected Norwegian writing samples produced by Vietnamese and Spanish test-takers. The study reveals that although the Vietnamese writers make fewer erors in texts than their panish peers, they receive lower scores. Thi i because the Vietnamese-speaking learners focus on linguistic accuracy, while the raters prioritize other text features (e.g., content, organization, coherence) over accuracy. These findings shed light on a potential cultural bias in writing evaluation, and highlight the challenges that learners face in acquiring cultural and writing conventions in L2.

Aside from the issue of rater variation, L2 learnersalso navigate challenges in developing their language ability and discourse competence in the academic genre, which are addressed in Chapters 3, 4, and 7. In Chapter 3, Rosmawati focuses on the difficulties related to language structures in academic writing. Employing text exploring and linguistic profil building, she examines L2 learners syntactic structures and finds that language structures pose barriers to those without Anglophone backgrounds. The chapter en. courages L2 learners to utilize complex nominal structures to met the linguistic demands of English academic writing. Chapter 4 examines L2 learners challenges germane to content, genre, and language when they write academic texts in science. Underpinned by Systematic Functional Linguistics (SFL), the empirical tudy reported in this chapter analyzes the genre and register of written texts produced by two L2 learners. The analysis demonstrates that it is taxing for L2 learners to produce texts that adhere to disciplinespecific requirements and school expectations. To scaffold L2 learners, the authors propose to use a genre-based writing approach to cultivate their genre awareness and enhance their academic literacy.

To produce standard academic writing, L2 learners also need to traverse discourse borders when stepping into a new discourse community. This ssue is discussed in Chapter 7, comparing the use of persuasion in argumentative writing between Chinese and British undergraduate students. Through a contrastive interlanguage analysis, Dong showcases the similarities and differences between the two groups of students employment of persuasion. Not only does the chapter confirm the argument that the use of persuasion is influenced by ideologies underpinned by cultures, but it also generates valuable implications for L2 writing teachers. In particular, the discussion recommends that they incorporate the instruction of persuasive devices used by native speakers into their classroom pedagogy, which would benefit L2 students' academic writing..

Additionall, L2 leaners should be able to meet the challenges of improving their academic literacy and agency; thee isues are the focus of Chapters 5 and 6. In th former chapter, the contributor loks at how PhD candidates develop their writing in a new language environment, showing that due to their L2 proficiency and cultural norms, L2 doctoral students' academic literacy is far from the demands imposed by Western conventions. Recommendations are roposed in Chapter 5 to engage L2 learners with scholarly practices to construct their academic identity and develop their academic ability. This chapter will be particularly useful for PhD supervisors, as the suggestions willoffer ways to help their 2 doctoral candidates adapt themselves to a new academic community and cros cultural borders smoothly. Meanwhile, Chapter 6 centers on immigrant students' agency in L2 Finnish, exploring their beliefs and lived experiences. Through a dialogical approach and nexus analysis, the author argues that agency is developed through dialogue with others as wellas the environment. Furthermore, the chapter suggests beneficial practices such as summary writing and learning journals to promote L2 academic writers' agency. It contributes to the existing literature by examining L2 students' agency in developing their academic writing in Finland, an under-researched context.

The edition concludes with Chapter 8 by Zhang, where he call on practitioners, researchers, and administrators to take the initiatie to tacklethe difficulties faced by L2 students arig from different cultural norms and academic expectations. The chapter synthesizes and reviews L2 learners challenges, emphasizing the need for a collaborative effort by teachers, supervisors, and researchers to enable L2 students to become successful border-crossers. This chapter refutes the prevailing notion of L2 learners as inherently disadvantaged when writing academically in an additional language. According to Zhang, L2 learners as bilingual or multilingual users have a number of advantages over native speakers, and have more reources at their disposal t is therefore essential for L2 academic writers to leverage these resources to enhance their writing skills and boost the confidence to overcome feelings of inferiority. This chapter inspires a reevaluation of the positions where L2 learners are situated when writing academicall, and ffers support to enable them to thrive in their academic writing endeavors.

To summarize this volume bridges the gap between research and practice, affording pedagogical approaches and recommenda tions to address language barriers, gnre-spcific challenges, and culural uances or practtionrs espcially for novice teachers and supervisors. Nurturing 2 academic writers can be grueling, but this book equips practitioners with specific and nuanced suggestions, as outlined in Chapters 4 and 5 for example, to help L2 learners address the challenges they encounter in their border-crossing adventures, thereby empowering them to survive in the English academic environment. Thus, this volume is an invaluable and practical reference for L2 teachers and supervisors..

Additionally, the edition benefit researchers in the field of academic writing. For one thing, the contributors suggest a range of directions for future studies, opening interesting avenues for researchers. For another, it describes various theoretical frameworks (e. g, complex dynamic systems theory and SFL) and approaches to data analysis (e.g., nexus analysis and contrastive interlanguage analysis). Researchers can conduct studies from different theoretical perspectives and employ different methods to processtheir data, contributing to the production of novel and compelling findings.

Also, the book should be applauded from the readers perspective, with credit for the reader-friendinessof this edition. Across the whole volume the authors pay attention to accessility and comprehensility. The welldesigned tables and figures, plain language, and in-depth explanations of key words enable readers to understand the ideas without any complication. This increases the book's readability and makes it easily accessible..

Two areas could be improved, though. First the current volume predominantly focuses on L2 learners from Asia, which may inadvertently constrain the voices and experiences of L2 students from outside Asia (e.g., Africa and Latin America).Considering that L2 learners' native writing and cultural traditions may influence their perceived dificulties in new contexts, it would have been valuable to include perspectives from a more diverse range of L2 learners. Second, as most chapters are qualitatively-oriented, there is a lack of quantitative or mixed methods studies. Consequently, the generalization of research findings isrestricted and they should be interpreted cautiously. The inclusion of quantitative and mixed methods inquiries would have increased the validity of the book.

Despite these shortcomings, this penetrating resource deserves commendation for yielding insightful and thought-provoking perspectives on the hurdles that L2 learners confront in academic writing, learning to write academicall, and academic writing assesment It i an enlightening book that offers important insights for L2 academic writers, teachers, superviors, and reearchers. Thus, we highly recommend this beneficial scholarly work to the readers of Journal of English for Academic Purposes.

# Acknowledgement

This work was supported by the Social Science Fund of Hubei Province, China (Grant number: 22zD068).

# References

Flowerdew, J., & Habibie, P. (2022). Introducing English for research publication purposes. Routledge Hyland, K. (2019). Second language writing. Cambridge University Press.   
Manchon, R., & Matsuda, P. (2016). Handbook of second and foreign language writing. De Gruyter. Wette, R. (2021). Writing using sources for academic purposes. Routledge.

Book review

development, intercultural communication, and computer-assisted language learning.

he Wa   s  st  e t        wg teacher education, teacher development, and classroom assessment..