# Analyzing the relation between the sense of citizenship and global citizenship in the context of students of higher education institution

Erol Koçoğlu\* and Bahadır Kaya

Department of Social Studies Education, Faculty of Education, Inonu University, Malatya, Turkey.

Accepted 25 August, 2020

# ABSTRACT

The purpose of the present study was to determine the relation between the sense of citizenship of Higher Education students and their opinions on global citizenship. In line with this purpose, the study was planned and conducted in the correlational design in screening model of quantitative research types. The sampling of the study consisted of 300 students, who were studying at a public university in a socioeconomically moderate city in Eastern Turkey, who were selected from undergraduate and associate students by using the “Criteria Sampling Method”, constituted the sampling of the study. A data collection tool consisting of three parts was used in the study. The first part was the Personal Information Form, which was used to determine the personal characteristics of the students of the higher education institution participating in the study, the second part was the “Sense of Citizenship Scale”, and the third part was the “Student’s Opinions Questionnaire Form on Global Citizenship”. The data of the study were analyzed with descriptive and inferential statistical methods. As a result of the study, it was determined that the higher education students had high levels of opinions on citizenship and global citizenship. The study also concluded that there was a moderate level relation between the sense of citizenship and global citizenship. It is recommended that additional trainings is provided to both Higher Education teachers and students to further raise the awareness of citizenship and global citizenship of the latter.

Keywords: Citizenship, sense of citizenship, global citizenship.

\*Corresponding author. E-mail: erolakademi@gmail.com.

# INTRODUCTION

The sense of citizenship means belonging to an independent state in political terms. In this context, people who constitute the nation, which is one of the elements that make up the state, are called “citizens” (Yilmaz, 2007: 106). Based on the general use the term “citizenship”, either refers to the status of membership to a nation-state recognized by international laws or to a national congregation represented by this nation-state (İçduygu, 2009).

Countries shape the citizenship concept by associating it with certain foundations. While the United States of America and France adopt a citizenship concept based on territory, Israel and Germany adopt the ethno-cultural citizenship concept based on ethnical blood ties (Dag, 2012). Turkey has a citizenship concept based on territory. However, this concept has been directed towards beyond-nation understanding after the adaptation to the European Union process, and moved away from nationalistic policies (Dag, 2012; Morva, 2015). It is possible to speculate that the citizenship concept of individuals has been transformed during this process.

Osler and Starkey (2006) argued that the citizenship concept was not limited to staying within the limits of a country. In other words, the citizenship concept reached a global context. With the globalized citizenship concept, the probability of an individual being affected by an event happening in any part of the world has increased (Bozkurt, 2013). In this respect, argues difficulty in understanding the targeted democracy by the nationstates, which moved away from being a homogenous community, and the fact that certain problems are not being solved only at national levels (i.e. environmental problems, poverty, health, etc.), and that human rights gained a global dimension, brought the discussion of citizenship at an international level. It also caused that global citizenship was discussed in all fields (Kartal, 2010).

The emergence of global citizenship and it becoming a common concept were the starting point of the present study. Consequently, the purpose of the present study was to determine the opinions of Higher Education students on the relation between sense of citizenship and global citizenship. It was also aimed to determine whether the opinions of the students differed at significant levels depending on gender, age, type of graduated high school, class of education, Higher Education institution were they studied mother’s educational status and father’s educational status. In the context of the purposes of the study, answers to the following questions were sought:

1. What is the level of the opinions of the Higher Education students on sense of citizenship and global citizenship?

2. Do the opinions of the Higher Education students on sense of citizenship and global citizenship vary depending on gender, age, type of graduated high school, class of education, Higher Education institution were they studied, mother’s educational status and father’s educational status?

3. Is there a significant relation between the opinions on sense of citizenship and global citizenship of Higher Education students?

# METHOD

# Model of the study

The relational screening model was used in the study. Studies in which the relational screening model is used provide opinions on the correlation between the variables in a group and on the probability of cause-effect relations between the variables (Fraenkel et al., 2012). Therefore, in this study, it was used to examine the relations between the sense of citizenship of Higher Education students and their opinions on global citizenship were examined in the study. The relational screening model was preferred in the study on the grounds of determining whether there were any relations between the variables, and if any, whether these relations were strong or weak, and whether a variable increased or decreased while the other increased or decreased (Gürbüz and Şahin, 2017).

# Universe and sampling

The universe of the present study consisted of the undergraduate and associate students studying at a public university in a socio-economically moderate city in Eastern Turkey. The sampling consisted of 300 Higher Education students from the universe, selected by using the “Criteria Sampling Method”. The fact that the students were in the final year of the Higher Education provided by the institution where they were studying was used as a criterion in the study.

# Data collection tools

In this study, three data collection tools were used. The Personal Information Form was used to determine the personal characteristics of the students participating in the study. The “Sense of Citizenship Scale”, developed by İçen et al. (2017), and the “Student’s Opinions Questionnaire Form on Global Citizenship”, developed by Çolak (2015) were used to determine the students’ opinions”.

# Sense of citizenship scale

The kurtosis and skewness values, which are one of the ways to determine whether scale data from two sub dimensions, called Sense of Adopting Differences and Belonging (Gürbüz and $\mathsf { S }$ ahin, 2017) were examined and show a distribution close to normal and/or normal distribution. The kurtosis coefficient values of the scale were found to vary between “.123 and . $6 4 4 ^ { \dprime }$ , and the skewness coefficients were between “.080 and . $5 6 3 "$ . When the values of the coefficients of kurtosis and skewness were in the $\pm 1 . 5$ range, it was deemed to show the normal distribution of points in the “Sense of Citizenship Scale” (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2013). The Cronbach Alpha reliability coefficients that were calculated as a result of the reliability study of the scale were found to be “. $8 4 ^ { \mathfrak { n } }$ in the Adopting Differences dimension, and “. $8 3 "$ in the Sense of Belonging dimension. In addition, the reliability of the general scores of the scale that was used in the study was calculated as “.81”. The scale was considered “highly reliable” when Cronbach’s Alpha values were “.80 to $1 . 0 0 ^ { \prime \prime }$ (Kalayci, 2017).

# Student opinions questionnaire on global citizenship

The kurtosis and skewness values were examined to determine whether the data collected with the OGAF on

Global Citizenship were distributed normally. The kurtosis values were found to vary between “.094 and .1294”, and the skewness coefficients were between “.011 and . $5 6 3 "$ . Since the values of the coefficient of kurtosis and skewness were between $\pm 1 . 5$ , it was deemed that the scores of OGAF on Global Citizenship showed normal distribution (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2013). The Cronbach alpha reliability coefficients of the “Student’s Opinions Questionnaire Form on Global Citizenship” were found to be “.81” in the sub dimension of Other People and Cultures, “. $8 1 ^ { \mathfrak { s } }$ in the sub dimension of the World’s State and Problems, “.87” in the sub dimension of the World as a System, “. $8 4 "$ in the sub dimension of Participation, “. $8 6 "$ in the dimension of Local and/or Global Belonging, and “. $8 8 ^ { \prime \prime }$ in the sub dimension of Characteristics of Global Citizenship. In addition, the reliability of the general scores of the questionnaire was calculated as “. $8 6 "$ . The highly trusted status of the scale was accepted because Cronbach’s Alpha values were in the range of “.80 to $1 . 0 0 ^ { \dprime }$ (Kalayci, 2017).

# Data analysis

The data of the study were processed into the SPSS 25 package program, and were then analyzed through this program. In the analyses, mean values, standard deviation, “Independent Samples t-Test”, “One-Way Variance Analysis (ANOVA)”, and “Pearson Correlation” coefficient calculations were made. The “LSD” test was preferred to determine which groups caused the significant differences between the variables that were found significant as a result of ANOVA. The Pearson Correlation Coefficient was used when calculating the relationship between the participants’ opinions (Simon and Freund, 1997). If the Pearson Correlation Coefficient was greater than “. $7 0 ^ { \dag }$ , it was considered “high level relation”; if it was in the range of “.30 to . $7 0 ^ { \dprime }$ , “moderate relationship”; “low level relation”, if it was $" 0 "$ , “no relationship”, and if it was “1”, it was considered as perfect relation (Roscoe, 1975).

# FINDINGS

# Sense of citizenship

The results of the analyses made to determine the level of the opinions of Higher Education students on sense of citizenship are given in Table 1.

When the mean values of the students were examined on the basis of dimensions, it was understood that their opinions were in the form of “I agree” in “Adopting Differences ( ${ \overline { { \mathrm { X } } } } = 3 . 9 3 { \mathrm { ) } } ^ { \prime { \mathrm { } } }$ and “Sense of Belonging ( ${ \overline { { \mathrm { X } } } } =$ 4.00)” sub-dimensions. In addition, the general mean values of the opinions of the students participating in the study about the sense of citizenship was in the form of “I agree ( $\overline { { \mathrm { X } } } = ~ 3 . 9 6 ) ^ { " }$ , which is given in Table 1. It is possible to speculate in line with the findings that the sense of citizenship of these Higher Education students is at a high level. It may be argued that students achieved the goals of citizenship education in the transition from basic education to secondary education and then to Higher Education, and that the acquired national identity was adopted by students through education.

Table 1. Findings on the level of opinions on sense of citizenship.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sub dimensions</td><td>x</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>Adopting differences</td><td>3.93</td><td>.911</td></tr><tr><td>Sense of belonging</td><td>4.00</td><td>.685</td></tr><tr><td>General</td><td>3.96</td><td>.645</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 shows evidence that the opinions of the Higher Education students who participated in the study did not differ significantly by gender $( \mathsf { p } > . 0 5 )$ . Based on this finding, it can be argued that the opinions of these Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship were similar in terms of gender. In the study, the fact that the opinions of the students of Higher Education did not differ significantly in terms of gender can be explained with the fact that male and female students were educated with similar teaching programs, which caused similar feelings of citizenship.

When the findings given in Table 3 were analyzed, it was determined that the opinions of Higher Education students who participated in the study did not differ significantly by class $( \mathsf { p } > . 0 5 )$ . According to the findings obtained from the study, the opinions of Higher Education students can be interpreted as similar in terms of sense of citizenship. It can also be argued that the participation of final year students of Higher Education was important in this result.

When the findings given in Table 4 were analyzed, it was determined that the opinions of Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship based on the type of high school they graduated from did not differ at significant levels $( \mathsf { p } > . 0 5 )$ . According to this finding, it may be argued that the opinions of Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship were similar in terms of the type of high school graduated.

The opinions of the Higher Education students who participated in the study by age given in Table 5 were found to differ at significant levels in the sub-dimension of “Adopting Differences” $( \mathsf { p } \ = \ . 0 4$ ; $\mathsf { p } < . 0 5 )$ . According to this finding, students’ opinions on the sense of citizenship were not similar in terms of age in the “Embracing Differences” dimension. The significant difference in the sub-dimension of “Adopting Differences” was found to be among students who were aged 21 and under, and those between the ages of 24 and 25. It was also found that there were significant differences between students who were aged 26 and older and students in the 24-25 age

Table 2. Analysis of opinions on sense of citizenship by gender.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sub dimensions</td><td>Gender</td><td>n</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>t</td><td>P</td></tr><tr><td>Adopting differences</td><td>Female Male</td><td>215 85</td><td>4.00 3.74</td><td>.794 1.140</td><td>1.927</td><td>.02</td></tr><tr><td>Sense of belonging</td><td>Memale</td><td>215</td><td>4.03</td><td>.639</td><td>.915</td><td>.36</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Female</td><td>215</td><td>4.01</td><td>.582</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>General</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Male</td><td>85</td><td>3.84</td><td>.772</td><td>1.879</td><td>.06</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3. Analysis of opinions on sense of citizenship by class.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sub dimensions</td><td>Education class</td><td>n</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>t</td><td>P</td></tr><tr><td>Adopting differences</td><td>2ndclass 4&quot;class</td><td>140 160</td><td>3.89 3.95</td><td>.965 .863</td><td>-.558</td><td>.57</td></tr><tr><td>Sense of belonging</td><td>2ndclass</td><td>140</td><td>3.99</td><td>.692</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>4&quot;class</td><td>160</td><td>4.01</td><td>.682</td><td>-.216</td><td>.82</td></tr><tr><td>General</td><td>2ndclass</td><td>140</td><td>3.94</td><td>.659</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>4&quot;class</td><td>160</td><td>3.98</td><td>.635</td><td>-.509</td><td>.61</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4. Analysis of opinions on sense of citizenship by type of high school graduated.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sub Dimensions</td><td>High school typee</td><td>n</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>t</td><td>P</td></tr><tr><td>Adopting differences</td><td>Vocational high school Anatolian high school</td><td>118 182</td><td>3.86 3.97</td><td>.939 .893</td><td>-.952</td><td>.34</td></tr><tr><td>Sense of belonging</td><td>Vocational high school Anatolian high school</td><td>118 182</td><td>4.00 4.00</td><td>.689 .685</td><td>.063</td><td>.95</td></tr><tr><td>General</td><td>Vocational high school Anatolian high school</td><td>118 182</td><td>3.93 3.98</td><td>.650 .643</td><td>-.638</td><td>.52</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5. Analysis of opinions on sense of citizenship by age.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Age</td><td rowspan="2">N</td><td colspan="2">Adopting differences</td><td colspan="2">Sense of belonging</td><td colspan="2">General</td></tr><tr><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>Ss</td></tr><tr><td>1. 21 years and under</td><td>66</td><td>4.10</td><td>.845</td><td>4.11</td><td>.689</td><td>4.11</td><td>.656</td></tr><tr><td>2. Ages 22-23</td><td>140</td><td>3.87</td><td>.911</td><td>3.95</td><td>.682</td><td>3.91</td><td>.628</td></tr><tr><td>3. Ages 24-25</td><td>56</td><td>3.71</td><td>1.043</td><td>3.93</td><td>.681</td><td>3.82</td><td>.701</td></tr><tr><td>4. Age 26 and older</td><td>38</td><td>4.14</td><td>.732</td><td>4.06</td><td>.696</td><td>4.10</td><td>.546</td></tr><tr><td>F</td><td></td><td>2.739</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">.04</td><td colspan="2">1.107</td><td colspan="2">2.900</td></tr><tr><td>p</td><td colspan="3">1&gt;3; 4&gt;3</td><td colspan="2">.34</td><td colspan="2">.03 1&gt;2; 1&gt;3; 4&gt;3</td></tr></table></body></html>

range.

When the findings given in Table 5 were analyzed, it was determined that the opinions of the Higher Education students, who participated in the study did not differ significantly by age in the “Sense of Belonging” dimension $( \mathsf { p } = . 3 4 ; \mathsf { p } \mathrm { > } . 0 5 )$ . According to this finding, the opinions of Higher Education students regarding the sense of citizenship were close to each other in terms of age in the “Sense of Belonging” dimension.

When the findings in Table 5 were analyzed, it was determined that the opinions of the Higher Education students who participated in the study differed significantly by age in terms of general average of the scale $( { \mathsf { p } } = . 0 3 ; { \mathsf { p } } < . 0 5 )$ . According to this finding, it can be argued that the opinions of the students on citizenship were not similar in terms of age. It was determined that the significant differences in the sense of citizenship were between students who were aged 21 and under and those between the ages of 22 and 23; students who were aged 21 and under and those between the ages of 24 and 25; students who were aged 26 and over and those between the ages of 24 and 25. Based on the findings obtained in terms of age in the study, the opinions of the Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship can be interpreted as not similar to one another.

When the findings given in Table 6 were analyzed, it was determined that the opinions of Higher Education students who participated in the study did not differ significantly according to the mother’s educational status $\left( \mathsf { p } > . 0 5 \right)$ . According to this finding, it can be argued that the opinions of the Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship were close to one another in terms of the mother’s educational status. The reason for this may be that the mothers of the majority of the students who participated in the study were similar (Literate/Primary School).

When the findings given in Table 7 were analyzed, it was determined that the opinions the of Higher Education students who participated in the study did not differ significantly according to the father’s educational status $\left( \mathsf { p } > . 0 5 \right)$ . According to this finding, it can be argued that the opinions of these Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship were similar in terms of father’s educational status.

Table 6. Analysis of opinions on sense of citizenship by mother’s educational status.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Education status</td><td rowspan="2">n</td><td colspan="2">Adopting differencese</td><td colspan="2"> Sense of belonginge</td><td colspan="2">General</td></tr><tr><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>1. Literate /Primary school</td><td>165</td><td>4.00</td><td>.896</td><td>3.96</td><td>.709</td><td>3.98</td><td>.659</td></tr><tr><td>2. Middle school</td><td>63</td><td>3.77</td><td>1.024</td><td>4.05</td><td>.641</td><td>3.91</td><td>.682</td></tr><tr><td>3. High school</td><td>52</td><td>3.92</td><td>.905</td><td>4.03</td><td>.671</td><td>3.97</td><td>.615</td></tr><tr><td>4. Undergraduate</td><td>20</td><td>3.83</td><td>.609</td><td>4.04</td><td>.694</td><td>3.93</td><td>.498</td></tr><tr><td>F</td><td></td><td>1.089</td><td></td><td>.344</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>p</td><td></td><td colspan="2">.35</td><td colspan="2">.79</td><td colspan="2">.205 .89</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7. Analysis of opinions on sense of citizenship by father’s educational status.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Education status</td><td rowspan="2">n</td><td colspan="2">Adopting differences</td><td colspan="2">Sense of belonging</td><td colspan="2">General</td></tr><tr><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>1.Literate/primary school</td><td>64</td><td>4.01</td><td>.910</td><td>3.90</td><td>.725</td><td>3.96</td><td>.688</td></tr><tr><td>2. Middle school</td><td>61</td><td>3.92</td><td>1.001</td><td>3.91</td><td>.655</td><td>3.91</td><td>.698</td></tr><tr><td>3. High school</td><td>112</td><td>3.83</td><td>.897</td><td>4.05</td><td>.711</td><td>3.94</td><td>.650</td></tr><tr><td>4. Associate degree</td><td>19</td><td>3.86</td><td>1.000</td><td>4.22</td><td>.676</td><td>4.04</td><td>.499</td></tr><tr><td>5. Undergraduate</td><td>44</td><td>4.07</td><td>.777</td><td>4.04</td><td>.589</td><td>4.05</td><td>.558</td></tr><tr><td>F</td><td></td><td>.762</td><td></td><td>1.262</td><td></td><td>.402</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>p</td><td colspan="3">.55</td><td colspan="2">.28</td><td colspan="2">.80</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Findings on global citizenship

The results of the analysis made to determine the level of opinions of Higher Education institution students on global citizenship are given in Table 8.

When the opinions of the Higher Education students who participated in the study were examined in general, it was determined that they were in the form of “I agree” ( ${ \overline { { \mathrm { X } } } } =$ 3.97)” in the “Other People and Cultures”; “I Agree” in the “State and Problems of the World” ( $\overline { { \mathrm { ~ X ~ } } } = ~ 3 . 8 2 ) "$ , “I agree” in “World as a System” $\overline { { \mathrm { X } } } = 3 . 8 5 ) ^ { " }$ ; “I agree” in “Participation” sub dimension ( $\overline { { \mathrm { X } } } = ~ 3 . 9 7 ) ^ { \mathrm { , } }$ ; “I agree” in “Local and/or Global Belonging” sub dimension ( ${ \overline { { \mathrm { X } } } } =$ 3.88); and “I absolutely agree” in “Characteristics of Global Citizenship” sub dimension $\begin{array} { r l } { \overline { { \mathrm { X } } } = } & { { } 4 . 2 8 ) ^ { \mathrm { , } } } \end{array}$ . In addition, the general average of the opinions of the Higher Education students who participated in the study was found to be in the form of “I agree” ( $\overline { { \mathrm { X } } } = 3 . 9 2 ) ^ { " }$ . It can be argued based on the findings obtained in the study that the opinions of these Higher Education students on global citizenship were at a high level. It can be argued that the high levels of the opinions of the students on global citizenship may be due to the fact that they think that developments at the national level are not independent of the developments at global level, adopting or assimilating global citizenship characteristics.

Table 8. Findings on the level of opinions on global citizenship.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sub dimensions</td><td>x</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>1. Other people and cultures.</td><td>3.97</td><td>.661</td></tr><tr><td>2. The state and problems of the world</td><td>3.82</td><td>.658</td></tr><tr><td>3. The world as a system.</td><td>3.85</td><td>.623</td></tr><tr><td>4. Participation</td><td>3.97</td><td>.711</td></tr><tr><td>5. Local and/or global belonging.</td><td>3.88</td><td>.608</td></tr><tr><td>6. Characteristics of global citizenship</td><td>4.28</td><td>.752</td></tr><tr><td>General</td><td>3.92</td><td>.558</td></tr></table></body></html>

As seen in Table 9, it was determined that the opinions of the Higher Education students who participated in the study did not differ significantly by gender $( \mathsf { p } \ > \ . 0 5 )$ . Based on this finding, it can be argued that the general opinions of the students of the higher education institution about global citizenship are similar in terms of gender.

Based on the findings given in Table 10, it was determined that the opinions of the Higher Education students participating in the study did not differ significantly according to the class studied variable $( { \mathsf { p } } >$ .05). According to this finding, it can be argued that the general opinions of these Higher Education students about the sense of global citizenship were similar in terms of the class they studied. According to the findings obtained in this sense, general opinions of these Higher Education students about global citizenship can be interpreted to be similar in terms of the class they studied. It can be argued that this finding was the result of participation of senior students at undergraduate and associate level to the study.

Table 11 shows evidence that the opinions of the Higher Education students participating in the study did not differ significantly according to the type of high school they graduated from $( \mathsf { p } > . 0 5 )$ . According to this finding, it can be argued that the opinions of these Higher Education students about the sense of global citizenship were similar in terms of the type of high school they graduated from.

Table 12 shows that the opinions of the Higher Education students participating in the study did not differ significantly by age $( \mathsf { p } > . 0 5 )$ . According to this finding, it can be argued that the general opinions of these Higher Education about the sense of global citizenship were similar in terms of age. According to the findings obtained in the study in terms of age, it can be commented that the opinions of these Higher Education students about global citizenship were similar.

Table 13 reveals that the opinions of the Higher Education students participating in the study did not differ significantly according to the status of mother’s educational status $( \mathsf { p } > . 0 5 )$ . According to this finding, it can be argued that the general opinions of these Higher Education students about the sense of global citizenship were similar in terms of the mother’s educational status. The reason for this may be that the mothers of the majority of the students who participated in the study had similar levels of education (Literate/Primary School).

Table 14 shows that the opinions of the Higher Education students participating in the study did not differ significantly according to the father’s educational status $( \mathsf { p } > . 0 5 )$ . Consequently, it can be argued that the general opinions of these Higher Education students about the sense of global citizenship were similar in terms of the educational status of the father.

# Relation between sense of citizenship and global citizenship

The results of the analysis made to determine the relations between the sense of citizenship of Higher Education students and their opinions on global citizenship are given in Table 15.

When the data on the relations between global citizenship and sense of citizenship in Table 15 were examined, the following findings were reached:

- The relations were positive and low $( \Gamma ~ = ~ . 2 8 6 )$ in“ Adopting Differences” and “Other People and Cultures”;

Table 9. Analysis of the opinions of students on global citizenship by gender.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sub Dimensions</td><td>Gender</td><td>n</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>t</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td>1. Other people and cultures</td><td>Female Male</td><td>215 85</td><td>4.05 3.76</td><td>.546 .858</td><td>.403</td><td>.68</td></tr><tr><td>2. The state and problems of the world</td><td>Female Male</td><td>215 85</td><td>3.90 3.63</td><td>.564 .825</td><td>2.039</td><td>.07</td></tr><tr><td>3. The world as a system.</td><td>Female Male</td><td>215 85</td><td>3.88 3.76</td><td>.547 .781</td><td>1.056</td><td>.39</td></tr><tr><td>4. Participation</td><td>Female Male</td><td>215 85</td><td>3.99 3.92</td><td>.620 .904</td><td>1.158</td><td>.29</td></tr><tr><td>5. Local and/or global belonginge</td><td>Female Male</td><td>215 85</td><td>3.92 3.79</td><td>.523 .778</td><td>.986</td><td>.32</td></tr><tr><td>6. Characteristics of global citizenshipe</td><td>Female Male</td><td>215 85</td><td>4.35 4.11</td><td>.649 .947</td><td>.889</td><td>.24</td></tr><tr><td>General</td><td>Female Male</td><td>215 85</td><td>3.98</td><td>.457</td><td>1.346</td><td>.18</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 10. Analysis of the opinions of students on global citizenship by class studied.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sub Dimensions</td><td>Education class</td><td>n</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>t</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td>1. Other people and cultures</td><td>2nd class 4th class</td><td>140 160</td><td>3.93 4.00</td><td>.712 .614</td><td>-.340</td><td>.76</td></tr><tr><td>2. The state and problems of the world</td><td>2nd class 4th class</td><td>140 160</td><td>3.81 3.83</td><td>.612 .697</td><td>.415</td><td>.68</td></tr><tr><td>3. The world as a system</td><td>2d class 4t class</td><td>140 160</td><td>3.85 3.85</td><td>.619 .629</td><td>-.189</td><td>.85</td></tr><tr><td>4. Participation</td><td>2nd class 4&quot; class</td><td>140</td><td>3.97</td><td>.711</td><td>-.382</td><td>.70</td></tr><tr><td>5. Local and/or global belonging</td><td>2nd class</td><td>160</td><td>3.97</td><td>.714</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>4t class</td><td>140</td><td>3.88</td><td>.586</td><td>1.056</td><td>.29</td></tr><tr><td>6. Characteristics of global citizenship</td><td>2nd class 4th class</td><td>140 160</td><td>4.29 4.28</td><td>.772 .736</td><td>1.346</td><td>.18</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>140</td><td>3.91</td><td>.540</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>General</td><td>4th class 2nd class</td><td>160</td><td>3.93</td><td>.575</td><td>.403</td><td>.68</td></tr></table></body></html>

moderate $( \mathsf { r } = . 3 3 1 )$ in “State of the World and Problems” dimension; moderate $\left( \mathsf { r } = \mathsf { \Omega } . 3 3 8 \right)$ in “World as a System” dimension; low $\left( \mathsf { r } = . 2 3 5 \right)$ in “Participation” dimension; low $\left( \mathsf { r } = . 2 3 3 \right)$ in “Local and/or Global Belonging” dimension; low $( \mathsf { r } = \mathsf { \_ { 2 2 5 } } )$ in “Characteristics of Global Citizenship” dimension; and moderate $( \mathsf { r } = . 3 3 9 )$ in “Global Citizenship

Table 11. Analysis of the opinions of students on global citizenship by type of high school.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sub Dimensions</td><td>High school type</td><td> n</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>t</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td>1. Other people and cultures.</td><td>Vocational high school.</td><td>118</td><td>3.91</td><td>.733</td><td>-.702</td><td>.48</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Anatolian high school</td><td>182</td><td>4.01</td><td>.609</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. The state and problems of the world</td><td>Vocational high school</td><td>118</td><td>3.84</td><td>.621</td><td>-1.228</td><td>.22</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Anatolian high school</td><td>182</td><td>3.81</td><td>.682</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. The world as a system.</td><td>Vocational high school</td><td>118</td><td>3.92</td><td>.582</td><td>-.136</td><td>.89</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Anatolian high school</td><td>182</td><td>3.80</td><td>.646</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4. Participation</td><td>Vocational high school</td><td>118</td><td>3.98</td><td>.718</td><td>1.039</td><td>.30</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Anatolian high school</td><td>182</td><td>3.96</td><td>.709</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5. Local and/or global belonging.</td><td>Ancational high schoo</td><td>12</td><td>3.88</td><td>.564</td><td>-.386</td><td>.70</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6. Characteristics of global citizenship.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Aocationa high schoo</td><td>118</td><td>4.360</td><td>.849</td><td>-.338</td><td>.73</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>General</td><td>Ancational hih schoo</td><td>18</td><td>3.92</td><td>.550</td><td>1.019</td><td>.42</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 12. Analysis of students’ opinions on global citizenship by age.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Age</td><td rowspan="2">n</td><td colspan="2">1</td><td colspan="2">2</td><td colspan="2">3</td><td colspan="2">4</td></tr><tr><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>1. 21 years and under</td><td>66</td><td>4.11</td><td>.586</td><td>3.87</td><td>.507</td><td>3.99</td><td>.475</td><td>4.03</td><td>.634</td></tr><tr><td> 2. Ages 22-23</td><td>140</td><td>3.95</td><td>.574</td><td>3.84</td><td>.645</td><td>3.82</td><td>.614</td><td>3.98</td><td>.658</td></tr><tr><td>3. Ages 24-25</td><td>56</td><td>3.83</td><td>.836</td><td>3.62</td><td>.849</td><td>3.71</td><td>.799</td><td>3.87</td><td>.880</td></tr><tr><td> 4. Age 26 and older</td><td>38</td><td>3.96</td><td>.767</td><td>3.95</td><td>.572</td><td>3.94</td><td>.545</td><td>3.96</td><td>.765</td></tr><tr><td>F</td><td></td><td>.085</td><td></td><td>.736</td><td></td><td>1.010</td><td></td><td>.123</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>p</td><td></td><td>.91</td><td></td><td>.48</td><td></td><td>.36</td><td></td><td>.88</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Age</td><td rowspan="2">n</td><td colspan="2">5</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>x</td><td></td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>6 s</td><td>x</td><td> General</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. 21 years and under</td><td>66</td><td>3.96</td><td>.458</td><td></td><td>4.52</td><td>.482</td><td>4.02</td><td></td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>2. Ages 22-23</td><td>140</td><td>3.87</td><td></td><td>.576</td><td>4.25</td><td>.764</td><td>3.91</td><td></td><td>.395 .527</td></tr><tr><td>3. Ages 24-25</td><td>56</td><td>3.80</td><td></td><td>.808</td><td>4.06</td><td>.964</td><td>3.77</td><td></td><td>.763</td></tr><tr><td>4. Age 26 and older</td><td>38</td><td>3.92</td><td></td><td>.617</td><td>4.33</td><td>.634</td><td>3.98</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>.050</td><td></td><td>.307</td><td></td><td></td><td>.409</td><td>.524</td></tr><tr><td>F p</td><td></td><td colspan="2">.95</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: The sub-dimensions of the scale are numbered from one to six.

General” dimension.

- The relations were positive and moderate $( \mathsf { r } = . 3 3 2 )$ in “Sense of Belonging” and “Other People and Cultures” dimension; low $\begin{array} { r l r } { ( \ r _ { \ r } ) } & { { } = } & { . 2 9 1 ) } \end{array}$ in “World’s State and Problems”; low $( \mathsf { r } ~ = ~ . 2 7 4 )$ in “World as a System”

dimension; low $( \mathsf { r } = . 1 2 0 )$ in “Participation” dimension; low $( \mathsf { r } = . 2 4 7 )$ in “Local and/or Global Belonging” dimension; moderate $\begin{array} { r } { \mathrm { ~ \scriptsize ~ ( ~ r ~ } = \mathrm { ~ \scriptsize ~ . ~ } 3 1 1 \cdot } \end{array}$ ) in “Characteristics of Global Citizenship”; and moderate $\mathrm { ~  ~ { ~ ( ~ r ~ } ~ } = \mathrm { ~ \ } . 3 2 8 )$ in “Global Citizenship General” dimensions.

Table13. Analysis of the opinions of students on global citizenship by mother’s educational status.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Education status</td><td rowspan="2">n</td><td colspan="2">1</td><td colspan="2">2</td><td colspan="2">3</td><td colspan="2">4</td></tr><tr><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>1. Literate/Primary school</td><td>165</td><td>3.93</td><td>.680</td><td>3.82</td><td>.711</td><td>3.83</td><td>.641</td><td>3.93</td><td>.746</td></tr><tr><td>2. Middle school</td><td>63</td><td>3.85</td><td>.689</td><td>3.77</td><td>.593</td><td>3.90</td><td>.592</td><td>4.03</td><td>.689</td></tr><tr><td>3. High school</td><td>52</td><td>4.19</td><td>.562</td><td>3.91</td><td>.600</td><td>3.90</td><td>.620</td><td>4.08</td><td>.669</td></tr><tr><td> 4. Undergraduate</td><td>20</td><td>4.04</td><td>.548</td><td>3.76</td><td>.552</td><td>372</td><td>.592</td><td>3.82</td><td>.568</td></tr><tr><td>F</td><td></td><td colspan="2">1.079</td><td colspan="2">1.539</td><td colspan="2">.873</td><td colspan="2">.164</td></tr><tr><td>p</td><td></td><td colspan="2">.18</td><td colspan="2">.19</td><td colspan="2">.48</td><td colspan="2">.95</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Education status</td><td rowspan="2">n</td><td colspan="2">5</td><td colspan="2">6</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">General</td></tr><tr><td>1. Literate/Primary school</td><td></td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td></td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td></td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>165</td><td>3.86 3.82</td><td>.642 .557</td><td></td><td>4.24 4.30</td><td>.830 .694</td><td></td><td>3.90</td><td>.596</td></tr><tr><td>2. Middle school 3. High school</td><td>63 52</td><td>3.97</td><td>.606</td><td></td><td>4.41</td><td>.618</td><td></td><td>3.88 4.03</td><td>.512</td></tr><tr><td> 4. Undergraduate</td><td>20</td><td>4.04</td><td>.442</td><td></td><td>4.31</td><td>.523</td><td></td><td></td><td>.521</td></tr><tr><td>F</td><td></td><td></td><td>.429</td><td></td><td>1.009</td><td></td><td></td><td>3.91</td><td>.460</td></tr><tr><td>P</td><td colspan="3">.78</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">.539</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table14. Analysis of the opinions of students on global citizenship by father’s educational status.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Education status</td><td rowspan="2">n</td><td colspan="2">1</td><td colspan="2">2</td><td colspan="2">3</td><td colspan="2">4</td></tr><tr><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>1. Literate/Primary school</td><td>64</td><td>3.85</td><td>.729</td><td>3.82</td><td>.755</td><td>3.78</td><td>.729</td><td>3.82</td><td>.773</td></tr><tr><td>2. Middle school</td><td>61</td><td>4.16</td><td>.434</td><td>3.90</td><td>.485</td><td>4.08</td><td>.483</td><td>4.13</td><td>.523</td></tr><tr><td>3. High school</td><td>112</td><td>3.91</td><td>.738</td><td>3.79</td><td>.683</td><td>3.78</td><td>.607</td><td>4.03</td><td>.703</td></tr><tr><td>4. Associate degree</td><td>19</td><td>3.86</td><td>.721</td><td>3.74</td><td>.816</td><td>3.95</td><td>.575</td><td>3.86</td><td>.969</td></tr><tr><td>5. Undergraduate</td><td>44</td><td>4.06</td><td>.526</td><td>3.81</td><td>.590</td><td>3.75</td><td>.626</td><td>3.85</td><td>.703</td></tr><tr><td>F</td><td></td><td>1.661</td><td></td><td></td><td>.940</td><td>2.472</td><td></td><td></td><td>1.422</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2" colspan="2">p</td><td colspan="2">.16</td><td colspan="2">.44</td><td colspan="2">.27</td><td colspan="2">.68</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>5</td><td></td><td></td><td>6</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Education status</td><td rowspan="2">n</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">General</td></tr><tr><td>x 3.82</td><td></td><td>s</td><td>x</td><td>s</td><td></td><td>x</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>1.Literate /Primary school</td><td>64</td><td>3.95</td><td>.698 .514</td><td></td><td>4.11</td><td>.879</td><td></td><td>3.85</td><td>.648</td></tr><tr><td>2. Middle school.</td><td>61</td><td>3.92</td><td></td><td></td><td>4.43 4.30</td><td>.468</td><td></td><td>4.05</td><td>.359</td></tr><tr><td>3. High school 4. Associate degree</td><td>112 19</td><td>3.75</td><td>.581 .803</td><td></td><td>4.17</td><td>.802 .932</td><td></td><td>3.90 3.85</td><td>.580</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>44</td><td>3.85</td><td>.566</td><td></td><td>4.36</td><td>.617</td><td></td><td>3.91</td><td>.720 .499</td></tr><tr><td>5. Undergraduate</td><td></td><td colspan="2"></td><td></td><td colspan="2"></td><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>F p</td><td></td><td colspan="2">1.180 .80</td><td></td><td colspan="2">1.217 .65</td><td></td><td colspan="2">.472 .38</td></tr></table></body></html>

- The relations were positive and moderate $~ ( \mathsf { r } = . 3 7 8 )$ in “Sense of Citizenship General” and “Other People and Cultures” dimensions; moderate $\left( \mathsf { r } = . 3 8 8 \right)$ in “State of the World and Problems” dimension; moderate $( \mathsf { r } = . 3 8 4 )$ in “World as a System” dimension; low $\mathrm { ~ ( r ~ \ = ~ \ } \mathrm { \ . } 2 2 9 )$ in “Participation” dimension; low $( \mathsf { r } = \mathsf { \Omega } . 2 9 6 )$ in “Local and/or Global Belonging” dimension; moderate $( \mathsf { r } ~ = ~ . 3 2 4 )$ in “Characteristics of Global Citizenship” dimension; and moderate $( \mathsf { r } ~ = ~ . 4 1 4 )$ in “Global Citizenship General” dimension.

It was determined that there was a meaningful relation between the sense of citizenship and the opinions on global citizenship of these Higher Education students, which shows that global citizenship is not independent of a national sense of citizenship.

Table 15. Analysis on the relation between sense of citizenship and global citizenship.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sub Dimensions</td><td></td><td>Adopting differences</td><td>Sense of belonging</td><td>Sense of citizenship general.</td></tr><tr><td>Other people and cultures</td><td>r</td><td>.286**</td><td>.332**</td><td>.378**</td></tr><tr><td>The state and problems of the world</td><td>r</td><td>.331**</td><td>.291**</td><td>.388**</td></tr><tr><td>The world as a system</td><td>r</td><td>.338**</td><td>.274**</td><td>.384**</td></tr><tr><td> Participation</td><td>r</td><td>.235**</td><td>.120*</td><td>.229**</td></tr><tr><td> Local and/or global belonging</td><td>r</td><td>.233**</td><td>.247**</td><td>.296**</td></tr><tr><td>Characteristics of global citizenship</td><td>r</td><td>.225**</td><td>.311**</td><td>.324**</td></tr><tr><td>Global citizenship general</td><td>r</td><td>.339**</td><td>.328**</td><td>.414**</td></tr></table></body></html>

\*. Correlation is significant at the .01 level. \*\*. Correlation is significant at the .05 level.

# CONCLUSION, DISCUSSION AND SUGGESTIONS

In the study, it was determined that the intensity of the frequencies of the responses of students about the Sense of Citizenship scale was at the “I Agree” level in all items. When examined in terms of dimensions, it was determined that the students had high participation in “Adopting Differences” as “I can be friends with someone of different ethnicities other than myself.” It can be argued that the increase in the number of refugees coming especially from Syria since 2011 to Turkey was important.

The activities to integrate of refugees into the education system of Turkey have enabled students to encounter individuals of different nationalities and different ethnicities. When considered in this context, the following positive opinions on the sense of citizenship of Higher Education students can be considered normal; “I can live with people of different ethnicities other than myself”, “I can live with people of different faiths other than myself”, “I can be friends with someone from different ethnicity”, “I can be friends with someone of different faiths”, and “It does not bother me to receive education with students from different faiths and ethnicities”. It can be argued that it is natural that positive opinions are high in these items.

When examined in terms of dimensions, it was determined that the students agreed at higher levels in “I am honored to be a citizen of the Republic of Turkey” in “Sense of Belonging” dimension. In the formation of this situation, it can be interpreted as the continuation of national feelings among students was effective in the formation of this situation. In addition, it can be argued that the aim “As a citizen of the Republic of Turkey, who loves his/her homeland and nation, who knows and uses his/her rights, fulfills his/her responsibilities, and who has national consciousness, to be raised as a citizen with national consciousness” (Ministry of National Education of the Republic of Turkey, 2018), which is among the basic aims of the Turkish National Education System, was realized among the students of these Higher Education. It can also be understood that the basic aims of the national education were adopted by the students in the following statements of the students; “My opinions about people who do not live like me are positive”, “I think I have equal rights with other people as a free person in this country”, “I feel safe in the environment I live and in this country”, and “I have no faith in democracy and our problems can be solved by democratic means”.

Heater (2004) argued that citizens should have abstract and scientific thinking skills, and know the role of citizenship in the framework of relationship with the state, which is an abstract concept, to have a sense of commitment, be aware of his/her rights and responsibilities. When considered in this context, the Higher Education students who participated in the study can be interpreted as being devoted to their state because they have high sense of citizenship above the moderate level, and are aware of their rights and responsibilities.

It was found in the study that the opinions of Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship differed significantly in terms of gender in “Embracing Differences” dimension. This difference was expressed as “significant difference in favor of women” because the mean score of sense of citizenship of female students was significantly higher than men. In the study, it was also found that the opinions of Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship differed at significant levels in terms of the “Sense of Belonging” sub-dimension, and in the overall scale of the sense of citizenship. This conclusion can be interpreted as that the opinions of the students were similar in terms of gender in the dimensions.

When the answers given by students about the sense of citizenship were examined by gender, it was concluded that the feelings of women on citizenship in all aspects and scales were higher than men. The number of female students participating in the study can be cited as the reason for this.

It was found in the study that the opinions of Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship did not differ at significant levels according to the class in which they studied. This result can be interpreted as the opinions of the students were similar in terms of the class in which they studied. When the answers given by students about the sense of citizenship were examined according to the class they studied at, it was concluded that the citizenship feelings of fourth graders were higher than second year students in all aspects and scale. The fact that the number of fourth-graders who participated in the study was greater than the second grade students can be cited as the reason for this outcome. Also, the reason for this situation may be the excessive education period in undergraduate level and the students who participated at the undergraduate level were the students of the faculty of education. It can be argued that the pedagogical and field knowledge trainings of the students of the education faculty were effective in the high degree of citizenship scores.

It may be considered as a striking result that higher education institutions, which have an autonomous and scientific structure and a different structure compared to other educational institutions, can be considered as the reason for the outcome of the study in terms of the sense of citizenship of students not being different during higher education. In addition, the sense of citizenship of students not being different in terms of the class in which they studied can be interpreted as that the learning process is far from configuring such a difference. In addition, since the study was not conducted in the longitudinal fashion, students in the first and fourth classes being different individuals can be considered among the reasons why the expected difference did not occur.

In the study, it was found that the opinions of Higher Education students about sense of citizenship did not differ at significant levels according to age. This result can be considered that the opinions of the students were similar in terms of age. It can be argued that the age groups of students being close to each other were effective in the absence of significant differences. When the answers of students about the sense of citizenship by age were examined, it was concluded that the sense of citizenship of the students who were 26 years of age and older were higher than the students who were younger than them in all dimensions and in the overall scale. The reason for this may be considered as the life experience of 26 years and older students who participated in the study had more life experiences compared to other students.

It was determined in the study that the opinions of Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship did not differ at significant levels depending on the type of high school they graduated from. This result can be interpreted as the opinions of the students were similar in terms of the type of high school graduated. When the answers of the students about the sense of citizenship according to the type of graduated high school were examined, it was concluded that the sense of citizenship of Anatolian high school graduates were higher in all dimensions and in the scale in general than the students who graduated from Vocational High School. It can be argued that the reason for this may be that the majority of Anatolian High School students who participated in the study were studying at undergraduate level in education faculties.

In the study, it was also found that the opinions of Higher Education students about the sense of citizenship did not differ at significant levels depending on the educational status of their parents. It can be argued that the opinions of the students were similar in terms of the educational status of parents. When the answers of the students about the sense of citizenship according to the educational status of their parents were examined, it was concluded that the responses of students in all dimensions and in overall scale were very close to each other.

It was concluded in the study that the perceptions of the Higher Education students on global citizenship were high. It was determined that the students had a high participation in the sub dimension of “World as a System” in the item of “People from different languages, religions and races cannot be found strange”. It can be argued that student exchange programs with foreign universities were effective in this situation, and the increase in the number of refugees coming to Turkey, especially from Syria, as of 2011, which was the case in the results of the sense of citizenship. Because the likelihood of encountering people from different languages, religions and races being increased in Turkey, which is home to around 4 million Syrian refugees, may have been important in this result. This result also shows that the main aim of global citizenship education to improve the idea of identifying with world societies by clarifying their attitudes towards other nations ensured that students understood the commitment between nations around the world was realized in the scope of the study.

The high levels of the opinions of the students of the Higher Education institution who participated in the study on global citizenship can be interpreted as spread of global citizenship spirit according to Falk (1994). Globalization, which is the basis of global citizenship, creates intense human mobility and communication. An intensive people “flow” is realized among societies for purposes like education, work, trade, tourism and living. To avoid possible communication conflicts caused by this movement, “respect for cultures” and “intercultural communication” have taken their place among the new values and abilities that educational institutions are trying to make students acquire. In our present day, education has to provide people with a socialization ready for global relations. Nowadays, societies move away from the ethnocentric culture of the past centuries; and scientists have gone one step further from this, and expressed multilingual and multicultural education (Oktay, 2001). In this context, it can be argued that the results of the study were parallel to the understandings brought by globalization.

It was also found in the study that the opinions of Higher Education students on global citizenship did not differ at significant levels according to gender. This result can be interpreted that the opinions of the students on global citizenship were similar in terms of gender. In the study, it was found that female Higher Education students had higher sense of global citizenship compared to men. It can be argued that this result may be because of women being more sensitive to global issues than men. Different from the results of the present study, Kaya and Kaya (2012) found in their study that male students who participated in their study thought that globalization had positive effects than female students. In other words, the perspectives of male students on global citizenship can be said to be more than female students. Ferreira (2011), on the other hand, concluded that there were significant differences in attitudes towards global social issues and awareness in favor of female students (female students had higher awareness). This result shows that female students are more interested in learning global social issues. As a result, it was found that the results of some previous studies in the literature overlapped with our findings in terms of gender while some other contradicted our results.

It was also found in the study that the opinions of the students of the Higher Education about global citizenship did not differ at significant levels in all aspects of the scale and in general terms according to the class in which they studied. This result can be expressed that global citizenship opinions of students were similar in terms of the class in which they studied.

Global citizenship is defined as individuals who are aware of their responsibilities, who respect diversity, pay attention to responsibilities, and who are reactive to social inequality as a citizen of a wide world. In addition, global citizens are people who take all kinds of initiatives and responsibility for a fairer and sustainable world (Oxfam, 2006). When evaluated in this context, the result of the study can be interpreted as that the perceptions of global citizenship, which were found to be high for in terms of the class of Higher Education institution students, were supported by the literature.

When it is considered that student opinions on global citizenship included a different aspect between the autonomous and scientific structure of Higher Education institutions and other educational institutions, the fact that the sense of students on global citizenship did not differ in Higher Education can be interpreted as a striking result in terms of sense of citizenship. In the study, the opinions of the students of the Higher Education institution about global citizenship did not differ in terms of the class where the studied. This may be interpreted as that university education is far from configuring such a difference. In addition, since the study was not conducted in a longitudinal design, the fact that students in the first and fourth grades were different individuals can be shown among the reasons why there were no expected differences in global citizenship as well as in the sense of citizenship.

In the study, it was found that the opinions of the students of the Higher Education about global citizenship did not differ at significant levels in general and in all aspects of the scale in terms of the type of high school they graduated from. This result can be expressed that the global citizenship opinions of students were similar in terms of the type of high school graduated. It was also concluded in terms of averages that the responses of Higher Education students were very close to each other.

In the study, it was determined that the opinions of the students of the Higher Education institution about global citizenship did not differ at significant levels depending on the educational status of their parents, which can be stated as similar to the global citizenship opinions of the students according to the educational status of their parents. In terms of averages, it was concluded that the global citizenship levels of the Higher Education students whose parents graduated from secondary school were higher than those whose parents graduated from other educational levels.

İçen and Akpınar (2012) conducted a study and reported that the importance of human and human values should be emphasized, children should be empathized by allowing awareness about problems in the near and far environment during the global citizenship education, and the problems of the world should be discussed.

In the study conducted by Hendershot and Sperandio (2009), it was reported that a foreign education activity that was not long and which included experiences related to other places and cultures would make a remarkable contribution to the development of global citizen identities of students. In this context, it may be argued that the presence of studies that enable relations with abroad like Erasmus in Turkey contributed to the high level of opinions of the students studying in Higher Education about global citizenship.

When the study data on the correlation between global citizenship and sense of citizenship were examined, it was concluded that there were positive and low relations between “Adopting Differences” of the sense of citizenship scale and “Other People and Cultures”, “Participation”, “Local and/or Global Belonging” and “Characteristics of Global Citizenship” dimensions of global citizenship; and there was a positive and moderate relation between “State of the World and Problems”, “World as a System”, and “Global Citizenship General” dimensions.

When the study the data on the relation between global citizenship and sense of citizenship were examined, it was concluded that there were positive and low relations between “Sense of Belonging” dimension of the sense of citizenship scale and “State of the World and Problems”

and “World as a System”, “Participation” and “Local and/or Global Belonging” dimensions of the global citizenship scale, and there were positive and moderate relations between the “Other People and Cultures”, “Characteristics of Global Citizenship” and “Global Citizenship General” dimensions.

When the correlations between global citizenship and sense of citizenship were examined, it was concluded that there were positive and moderate relations between the general scores of citizenship and the dimensions of global citizenship in “Participation” and “Local and/or Global Belonging”, and that there were positive and moderate relations between “Other People and Cultures”, “State of the World and Problems”, “World as a System”, “Characteristics of Global Citizenship” and “Global Citizenship General” dimensions. As a result, it is possible to argue that as the sense of citizenship of Higher Education students increased, there was also a moderate increase in the perceptions of global citizenship.

The following recommendations are made based on the results of the study:

- Subjects can be included in the curricula of higher education institutions for the development of sense of citizenship and global citizenship.   
- Additional trainings can be given to both higher education instructors and students to further raise students’ sense of citizenship and global citizenship awareness.   
- Higher education institution students can be sent abroad with various programs to interact with people in different countries for the development of sense of citizenship and especially the global citizenship.   
- Applicable studies can be conducted on the acquisition of sense of citizenship and global citizenship for higher education institution students.   
- Investigations can be made on what kind of trainings should be given to acquire the sense of citizenship and global citizenship starting from pre-school educational institutions.   
- Detailed studies can be conducted by consulting school administrators, parents and teachers to determine the opinions on sense of citizenship and global citizenship. - More comprehensive studies can be conducted by including qualitative methods in the study by using quantitative methods.

# REFERENCES

Bozkurt, M. (2013). Sınıf öğretmenlerinin sosyal bilgiler dersi bağlamında küresel eğitime ilişkin görüşleri. Yayımlanmamış Yüksek Lisans Tezi, Anadolu Üniversitesi Eğitim Bilimleri Enstitüsü, Eskişehir. Çolak, K. (2015). Sosyal bilgiler ile vatandaşlık ve demokrasi eğitimi derslerinde küresel vatandaşlık eğitimi. Yayımlanmamış Doktora Tezi, Marmara Üniversitesi Eğitim Bilimleri Enstitüsü, İstanbul.

Dag, D. (2012). Vatandaşlığın niteliksel dönüşümü ve vatandaşlık eğitimi üzerine bir betimleme çalışması. Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilgiler Dergisi, 12(1): 105-118.   
Falk, R. (1994). The making of global citizenship. In V. B. Steenbergen (Ed.), The condition of citizenship (pp. 127-139). London: Sage.   
Ferreira, R. (2011). Development Of An Instrument To Measure High School Students’ Global Awareness And Attitudes: Looking Through The Lens Of Social Sciences, Ph.D. Thesis, Florida International University.   
Fraenkel, J. R., Wallen, N. E., and Hyun, H. H. (2012). How to Design and Evaluate Research in Education. New York: McGraw-Hill.   
Gürbüz, S., and Şahin, F. (2017). Sosyal bilimlerde araştırma yöntemleri. Ankara: Seçkin Yayıncılık.   
Heater, D. (2004). A history of education for citizenship. London: Routledge.   
Hendershot, K., and Sperandio, J. (2009). Study abroad and development of global citizen identity and cosmopolitan ideals in undergraduates. Current Issues In Comparative Education, 12(1): 45- 55.   
İçduygu, A. (2009). Türkiye’de uluslararası göç ve vatandaşlık tartışması: Birey düzeyinde analiz. İçduygu, A. ve Keyman, F. (Ed.), Küreselleşme, Avrupalılaşma ve Türkiye’de vatandaşlık içinde (s.227- 255). İstanbul: İstanbul Bilgi Üniversitesi Yayınları.   
İçen, M., and Akpınar, E. (2012). Küresel vatandaşlık eğitiminin uluslararası sorunların çözümündeki rolü. Erzincan Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, 5(2): 277-290.   
İçen, M., Öztürk, C., and Yılmaz, A. (2017). Vatandaşlık duygusu ölçeği güvenirlik ve geçerlik çalışması. International Journal of Field Education, 3(2): 26-36.   
Kalaycı, Ş. (2017). SPSS uygulamalı çok değişkenli istatistik teknikleri. Ankara: Dinamik Akademi Yayınları.   
Kartal, F. (Ed). (2010). Yurttaşlık tartışmaları: Yeni yaklaşımlar. Ankara: Todaie Yayınları.   
Kaya, B., and Kaya, A. (2012). Teknoloji çağında öğretmen adaylarının küresel vatandaşlık algıları. Sakarya University Journal of Education, 2(3): 81-95.   
Morva, O. (2015). Özneler arası bir iletişim süreci olarak kültürel vatandaşlık. Hacettepe Üniversitesi İletişim Fakültesi Kültürel Çalışmalar Dergisi, 1(2): 133-152.   
Oktay, A. (2001). 21. yüzyılda yeni eğilimler ve eğitim, 21. yüzyılda eğitim ve Türk eğitim sistemi. İstanbul: Sedar Yayıncılık.   
Osler, A., and Starkey, H. (2006). Education for democratic citizenship: A review of research, policy and practice. Research Papers in Education, 21(4): 433-466.   
OXFAM (2006). Education for global citizenship a guide for schools, http://www.oxfam.org.uk/\~/media/Files/Education/Global% 20Citizenship/education_for_global_citizenship_a_guide_for_schools .ashx, 13.04.2020.   
Republic of Turkey Ministry of National Education (2018). Matematik Dersi 1-8 Sınıf Öğretim Programı, ttkb.meb.gov.tr/program.aspx, 10.03.2020.   
Roscoe, J. T. (1975). Fundamental research statitics for the behavioral sciences. Second Edition. New York: Holt Rinehart and Winston.   
Simon, G. A., and Freund, J. F. (1997). Modern elemantary statistics. Ninth Edition. Prentice-Hall International.   
Tabachnick, B. G., and Fidell, L.S. (2013). Using multivariate statistics. $6 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ edition. ABD: Pearson Education.   
Yılmaz, D. (2007). Üniversiteler için vatandaşlık bilgisi. Konya: Çizgi Kitapev.

Citation: Koçoğlu, E., and Kaya, B. (2020). Analyzing the relation between the sense of citizenship and global citizenship in the context of students of higher education institution. African Educational Research Journal, 8(3): 627-639.