# Facilitating undergraduate novice L2 writers’ pathways toward criticality enactment in genre-based literature review writing instruction

Vera A. Dugartsyrenova

National Research University Higher School of Economics, School of Foreign Languages, 47/7 Bolshaya Ordynka Street, Moscow, Russia 115184

# a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history: Available online 12 March 2024

# Keywords:

Genre learning   
Literature reviews   
Undergraduate novice L2 academic writers   
Academic research proposals   
Assessing writing   
Learners’ perspectives

# a b s t r a c t

Using a critical approach in source-based writing remains a primary challenge for many learners, especially undergraduate-level L2 writers. However, studies examining the use of explicit pedagogical approaches to address this challenge in literature review writing instruction to undergraduate L2 writers are still limited. To bridge this gap, based on a measurement of students’ $( N = 4 6$ ) writing performance on two literature review writing tasks, this study investigated the effectiveness of using an explicit unit-based approach to promote novice L2 academic writers’ criticality in source use in an undergraduate course on research proposal writing. It also explored participants’ $N = 5 5$ ) perceptions of their genre learning experiences using data from individual written reflections and a survey. Textual analysis suggests that the approach facilitated participants’ acquisition and successful sequencing of taught criticality enacting discoursal strategies. Learners’ self-reports reveal that many appreciated the approach for enhancing their awareness of genre features and of ways to enact criticality. These findings reinforce the potential of explicit pedagogical approaches to promote learners’ source use skills in literature review assignments and contribute to research into how undergraduate novice L2 academic writers respond to genre-based instruction.

$\circledcirc$ 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Extensive literature has emerged over the last few decades documenting pedagogical initiatives to teach academic genres (e.g., research articles, research proposals, Master’s and doctoral theses) in the academic writing classroom. Some of this research has focused on interventions targeting the preparation of literature reviews (LRs)da strategically important yet a demanding genre to teach (Swales and Lindemann, 2002) given the various cognitive, rhetorical, and linguistic challenges that L2 students at and well beyond the undergraduate level of study face in acquiring this genre (Bitchener and Banda, 2007; Cisco, 2014; Dovey, 2010; Kwan, 2008).

Some major challenges with writing LRs and related source-based assignments (e.g., research papers, book reviews, argument essays) have been linked to effective source use. Research has documented that both L1 and L2 writers may have limited understanding of the expectations regarding source use in writing from sources (Shi, 2012; Wette, 2017, 2018). Some may lack the skills needed to choose sources critically (Parkinson, 2013), attribute them appropriately (Gao et al., 2021), and integrate them coherently in argument construction (Wingate, 2012). A particular concern, especially with respect to undergraduate writers, has been raised in connection to learners’ ill-preparedness to exhibit criticality in writing from sources. Considering the diversity of approaches to defining criticality and related constructs (e.g., critical analysis, critical thinking, evaluation, and stance) (Hunston and Thompson, 2000; Lancaster, 2016; Woodward-Kron, 2002), with respect to LR writing, in this study, criticality is understood as the writer’s ability to juxtapose sources (i.e., synthesize ideas, concepts, findings from sources and draw appropriate connections among them in developing an argument) and exercise evaluative judgment toward them (i.e., assess and exhibit own stance on the relevance, value, and limitations of sources in addressing the current research inquiry). As suggested in the literature on undergraduate learners’ criticality in writing from sources, they readily describe rather than evaluate their sources (Dugartsyrenova, 2016) and struggle with taking a clear stance toward the evidence (Lee et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2022).

While research on L2 learners’ source use in source-based assignments is growing, not much of it has reported interventions seeking to enhance undergraduate-level novice L2 academic writers’ criticality in source use in genre-based LR writing instruction, especially with regard to less explored research genres such as literature reviews to academic research proposals. Based on writing data from two LR writing tasks and participants’ self-reports, the current study attempts to fill this gap by investigating the effectiveness of using an explicit unit-based pedagogical approach to facilitate Russian undergraduate novice L2 academic writers’ pathways toward criticality enactment in the context of LR writing instruction. A LR “unit”, also referred to as a “thematic unit” in the literature on LR writing (Bitchener and Turner, 2011; Kwan, 2006), is understood in this study as a smaller part (e.g., subsection) within a LR section which deals with a specific aspect of a topic (theme).

# 2. Undergraduate writers’ challenges with source use and genre-based LR writing instruction

Research into L1 and L2 undergraduate writers’ source use (Kwon et al., 2018; Shi, 2012; Wette, 2017, 2018; Wingate, 2012) has reported various concerns regarding students’ ill-preparedness to engage with sources critically and integrate them effectively in their writing. In particular, it has been found that undergraduate L2 writers often find it difficult to position themselves toward cited material (Lee et al., 2018), may provide lists of summaries of sources rather than their syntheses (Dugartsyrenova, 2016) or may use limited linguistic resources for citation purposes (Kwon et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018). Some may also make language choices (e.g., use of pronouns like “you”) which reflect conversational rather than academic norms (Parkinson, 2013). These challenges are especially pertinent in multicultural classrooms with L2 learners from nonAnglophone settings, who, apart from language-related concerns, may be unaccustomed to Anglophone modes of thinking (Dovey, 2010) and source use conventions due to differences in scholarly writing traditions (Liu et al., 2016).

The reported concerns often stem from a lack of prior instructional focus/support which could better prepare learners such as undergraduate-level writers for the challenges inherent in source-based writing. The guidelines on critical engagement with sources are often very general and say little to the students apart from the fact that the latter need to engage with sources “critically”. As Wingate (2012) argues in a study on undergraduate L1 students’ difficulties with argumentative essay writing, in some contexts, students are only offered two-page writing guidelines and tutor feedback as support, which results in their uncertainty about how to engage in argument construction and academic debate in source-based writing assignments. Similarly, using perceptions data from undergraduate students assigned to write a literature review in a political science course, Cisco (2014) reports participants’ perceived lack of confidence and clear understanding regarding what kind of content to select from sources and how to structure it, and laments the lack of LR-related teaching materials catering to these needs.

Addressing the above concerns with respect to LR writing instruction implies that more attention needs to be paid to explicitly introducing learners, especially undergraduate writers, to expectations regarding source use and ways to enact criticality. Arguably, this can be achieved in the context of genre instruction following ESP genre-based approaches (Hyland, 2007; Swales, 1990; Tardy, 2009), which prioritize a “top-down” approach to introducing learners to generic genre features thereby helping them internalize these features. These approaches have largely relied on the use of representative, corpusbased genre exemplars and scaffolded genre awareness-building activities (Dugartsyrenova, 2020; Dugartsyrenova and Sardegna, 2022; Cheng, 2021; Huang, 2014) to sensitize learners to the subtle interplay between writers’ rhetorical purposes and reader expectations, text organization, and linguistic realizations.

With respect to the LR genre, some empirical studies (Bitchener and Turner, 2011; Swales and Lindemann, 2002) have provided valuable insights into the potential of explicit genre-based approaches to enhance the acquisition of LR skills (e.g., in rhetorical organization, language use, and citation) through guidelines and templates. For example, using Kwan’s (2006) move framework for writing doctoral thesis LRs, Bitchener and Turner (2011) found that an explicit instruction on skills related to writing a LR thematic unit (e.g., introducing a theme, establishing the niche, sequencing information, and paraphrasing information) helped L1 doctoral students acquire and retain these skills as shown by their writing performance on three similar tasks (a LR thematic unit) before, immediately after instruction, and two months later. However, this study examined learners’ writing of only part of a thesis LR produced within $3 0 ~ \mathrm { { m i n } }$ .

While insightful, the existing genre-based literature on teaching LR writing remains largely limited to graduate and postgraduate EAP contexts and advanced writing tasks related to research article and thesis writing. There is a clear need for more empirical investigations into the effectiveness of using explicit genre-based approaches to promote undergraduate novice L2 academic writers’ criticality in source use in LR writing, with a focus on text construction at the microleveldthe level of a LR unit related to a theme. Just like in the case of paragraphs in academic essay writing instruction, these basic units of discourse may prove a useful starting point to model the kind of strategies that experienced writers use to introduce, comment on, and take a stance toward sources and to prompt learners’ use of these strategies in their own writing. As Swales and Lindemann (2002) point out, it is the intricacies of teaching students text development at this microlevel that are often neglected in LR writing instruction.

To bridge these gaps, this study examined the effectiveness of using a structured unit-level approach to LR writing instruction which aimed to facilitate L2 novice academic writers’ criticality enactment at the level of a LR unit as a starting point before they transitioned to extended LR drafts in an undergraduate-level course on research proposal writing. A corpus of research proposals in students’ target fields was compiled to identify the kind of domain-specific criticality enacting discursive strategies employed by student writers within LR units and incorporate these into teaching. The study drew on learners’ writing data from two LR writing tasksdan initial LR unit on a theme and a complete LR draftdand their self-reports regarding their perceptions of genre learning experiences. The study was guided by two research questions:

1. To what extent did the approach encourage students to adopt a critical approach in their LR writing? 2. What were participants’ perceptions of their genre learning experiences and the effectiveness of the approach in facilitating their source use?

# 3. The study

# 3.1. Participants and context

Participants were 78 Year 4 undergraduate economics and international relations majors (all first language speakers of Russian) at a large research university in Russia taking an elective three-module academic writing course on research proposal writing. As shown by a background survey administered at the beginning of the course, most of these students $( 7 0 \% )$ had little to no prior experience with writing research proposals or articles in English, although they had taken courses on writing academic essays and business texts. As the goal of the course was to help students prepare and defend an international academic proposal for their BA thesesda high-stakes graduation requirement,d given their limited knowledge of how to write research papers in English, they all took the course hoping that it would help them meet this graduation requirement.

Sixty-eight of the course participants gave informed consent to participate in the study. Of these, 46 students completed both writing tasks used in the study to measure evidence of using a critical approach in their writing. Based on the results of a diagnostic oral and written language assessment at the beginning of the year, their English language proficiency levels ranged from B2 (13), $^ { \mathsf { B 2 + } }$ (17) to C1 (16) according to the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (Council of Europe, 2001).

To assess learners’ needs prior to the design of the course, an exploratory study (Dugartsyrenova, 2016) was conducted which examined a small sample of research proposals $N = 2 0 $ ) produced by previous cohorts of students with no prior exposure to research writing in English. It was found that these students had low awareness of the research proposal as a genre and the expectations regarding the kind of content to include and how to sequence it effectively. The analysis of the literature review part in the proposals revealed that many of the authors viewed a review of sources as a task to provide summaries of sources without offering much critical evaluation of their merits or limitations and establishing clear linkages between them. Their texts often lacked the argumentation that is necessary to create a research space and used non-academic sources (e.g., media sources) as supporting evidence. Notably, some texts were word-for-word translations of texts produced in students’ L1.

To address these learners’ needs, in developing the course, an explicit genre-based approach, with its systematic focus on teaching formal genre features (Hyland, 2007; Tardy, 2009), was deemed most suitable in the given context. Course content was structured around the skills related to writing four major sections of a research proposal: Introduction, Literature Review, Methods, and Expected Outcomes. A variety of course materials were developed by the researcher to facilitate students’ genre learning in and outside the classroom. These included a course textbook (Dugartsyrenova, 2017), additional paper-based inand out-of-class worksheets, and an online academic writing tutor (described in Dugartsyrenova, 2020) which offered genre input and a range of automatically scored follow-up activities.

The eight-week module on writing research proposal literature reviewsdthe focus of the present studydwas taught after students completed a module on research proposal Introductions (Module 1). During that module, students were introduced to the genre of research proposals, the concept of moves/steps, and the contextual/rhetorical/linguistic conventions for writing the Introduction section. They also revisited the concepts of plagiarism and patchwriting and practiced paraphrasing, summarizing, and quoting information from text extracts using APA style citations. By the end of Module 1, students produced an Introduction draft for their project and received teacher feedback.

The LR module’s sessions introduced students to key genre considerations specific to research proposal LRs. Weekly input and activities were organized to facilitate students’ progress from analyzing genre exemplars and their formal features to producing own textsdseveral LR drafts of varying length. To encourage target learners to move beyond merely “reporting”

information from studies through summaries (as was the case with many students’ research proposals described in Dugartsyrenova, 2016), much attention was paid to raising learners’ awareness of how to write from sources critically as they first developed a LR unit on a theme and then expanded it into a longer and then a complete LR version.

# 3.2. The unit-based approach to teaching LR writing

# 3.2.1. Developing the literature review unit pattern

In order to identify how target genre texts are structured at the level of LR units and what discursive strategies enable authors to exhibit criticality (as understood in the present study), we drew on a small corpus $( N = 2 0 )$ ) of high-graded undergraduate-level international academic proposals that we could find in students’ target fields (economics – 5; business – 6; political science – 5; and international relations – 4). The literature review sections in these samples were divided into units (from one to a few paragraphs) which dealt with a particular theme. Each unit was then examined for steps taken by the authors as they introduced theme-related sources, reported evidence (e.g., findings, methods, perspectives), and enacted criticality toward the evidence.

Based on the analysis, a range of “unit-level” LR steps were identified. It was found that some steps constitute largely descriptive writing as they report information from sources without offering much critical evaluation (hereafter named “basic” LR steps). A different type of steps enable authors to exhibit criticality by engaging in academic debate (via showing similar and competing perspectives), commenting on sources (e.g., via providing own interpretations and explanations regarding reported findings/methods/perspectives), and establishing a stance toward the sources (e.g., via highlighting their contributions or limitations with respect to the current research inquiry), ultimately helping authors bring their argument toward niche establishment and occupying. The latter type were named “critical writing” (CW) LR steps. The steps of both types were organized into a pattern (hereafter named the “literature review unit pattern”) (Table 1) to be used as a scaffolding tool which illustrated ways of introducing and discussing sources critically at the level of a LR unit as a microfocus. The steps which appeared in the corpus less frequently were marked as “optional”.

Table 1 The literature review unit pattern.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Basic steps</td></tr><tr><td>Introducing a theme (often as a topic sentence)</td></tr><tr><td>Reporting (summarizing) findings/methods/perspectives from studies as a group</td></tr><tr><td>Reporting (summarizing) findings/methods/perspectives from individual studies</td></tr><tr><td>Critical writing steps (exhibit the author&#x27;s critical approach in reviewing sources)</td></tr><tr><td>Commenting on findings/methods/perspectives (supporting evidence) from studies by:</td></tr><tr><td>highlighting the overall contribution of studies as a group</td></tr><tr><td>highlighting contributions of individual studies</td></tr><tr><td>highlighting limitations of studies as a group</td></tr><tr><td>highlighting limitations of individual studies interpreting findings/methods/perspectives from studies as a group (drawing conclusions)</td></tr><tr><td>interpreting findings/methods/perspectives from individual studies</td></tr><tr><td>explaining findings/methods/perspectives from studies as a group</td></tr><tr><td>explaining findings/methods/perspectives from individual studies</td></tr><tr><td>Drawing connections among sources by:</td></tr><tr><td>comparing findings/methods/perspectives</td></tr><tr><td>contrasting findings/methods/perspectives</td></tr><tr><td>Establishing the nichea by:</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>stating what remains unaddressed (conclusive gap)</td></tr><tr><td>question raising (optional)</td></tr><tr><td>justifying the need for further research (optional)</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Most often in the final paragraph of a literature review or the final LR unit.

Following their realizations in the corpus, interpreting and explaining findings/methods/perspectives and highlighting contributions and limitations steps (which all relate to “commenting” on sources) were isolated as distinct steps to facilitate more nuanced use of these steps by the undergraduate writers. To illustrate the distinctions, “interpreting” implies a generalization of the author’s own understanding of what the evidence (e.g., findings, methods, perspectives) may mean in relation to the current research focus (much like drawing conclusions), while “explaining” findings/methods/perspectives focuses exclusively on suggesting explanations for selected evidence in developing an argument. At the same time, highlighting contributions/limitations steps imply evaluating and establishing a stance toward the evidence by articulating its contributions to theory and/or practice in the area and particular limitations motivating the need for further investigations. Appendix A demonstrates the use of these steps in the student proposal corpus (key points are underlined). The extracts in the appendix were drawn from two proposals in the MICUSP (2009) corpus of the University of Michigan and a student’s proposal from the Honors College of the University of Southern Mississippi (USM).

Following the ESP genre-based approach, text exemplars of varying length were selected from the proposal corpus to illustrate contextual, rhetorical, and linguistic realizations of LR steps via input and activities and compile lists of frequently used language chunks for realizing distinct steps. As the proposal corpus was limited in size, these exemplars were supplemented with extracts from a larger corpus of research articles in students’ target and other social fields (education, language learning, marketing, and psychology) (80 papers in total).

# 3.2.2. Procedure

Students were introduced to the LR unit pattern at Week 2 during a discussion on the links between critical reading and writing and key critical reading/writing skills involved in LR writing (e.g., critical evaluation and purposeful selection of sources, identifying appropriate evidence to support a claim). Prior to that, at Week 1, students had been exposed to the purposes and functions of research proposal LRs, the kind of sources and supporting evidence used in argument construction, various approaches to organizing LRs (e.g., chronologically, around themes, concepts or frameworks), and the generic moves in research proposal LRs (providing a critical review of sources, establishing the niche, and occupying the niche by presenting the current study). Several genre exemplars illustrating how an overall argument is developed at the macrolevel through LR moves were presented to and discussed with students. Follow-up activities on analyzing the move structure of LRs in new LR exemplars were offered as home assignment. In addition, in preparation for LR writing tasks, students were asked to start selecting sources on their topic following suggested source evaluation criteria, reading these closely, and grouping them.

As the pattern (Table 1) was introduced, it was explained to the students that a series of logically linked LR units make up the body of the LR section and help drive authors’ argument toward niche establishment and occupying, as they move from one such unit to the next. Each unit provides the space for authors to introduce and critically discuss a group of theme-related sources through a strategic arrangement of basic and CW steps and can span from one to a few paragraphs. To encourage students to enact criticality in writing from sources, their attention was drawn to the CW steps, which students were prompted to use in their writing. It was highlighted that while the basic steps (e.g., reporting findings/methods/perspectives) in the pattern tend to occur in most LR units, not all of the CW steps may feature in all LR units. Moreover, depending on writers’ rhetorical purposes, some steps can be used repeatedly and can be sequenced in a variety of ways (except the “introducing a theme” step, which typically serves as a topic sentence). It was also explained that some steps (e.g., comparing and/or contrasting findings/methods/perspectives) may overlap with other steps within the same sentence (e.g., reporting and explaining or interpreting findings/methods/perspectives from studies as a group/individual studies). Because students often feel tempted to report findings/methods/perspectives from studies as a group without detailing those of individual studies, it was also pointed out and illustrated through genre exemplars that in constructing their argument authors may often use information not only from groups of studies but also from individual studies as evidence.

Furthermore, to address language use and coherence considerations, students were introduced to the features and nuances of using neutral (to report information) and evaluative language (to comment on information and establish own stance), such as attitude markers, contrast and comparison structures, hedges, and boosters. Attention was also given to cohesive devices (e.g., link words and conjunctions of various types, synonyms, repetitions of keywords and phrases, pronoun references) and content linkages that help authors establish topical and organizational connections within a single LR unit and across LR units.

To illustrate the use of LR steps, several LR extracts were offered in class, with tasks asking students to identify which of the steps were present in the extracts and which were not. As a follow-up, based on a variety of genre texts, students practiced identifying the overall purpose of a text and the intended audience, evaluating the effectiveness of different kinds of evidence in developing an argument, and discussing ways in which the authors presented competing perspectives on an issue and established their stance. Week 2 home assignment exposed students to language chunks for realizing distinct LR steps (through so-called “language focus” tabs) and related cohesive devices (e.g., link words of emphasis, comparison and contrast). Based on new genre texts, it also offered further self-graded practice with identifying LR steps via the online tutor. For example, one type of activities asked students to match sentences to distinct steps, while the second type asked them to reconstruct a text from scrambled excerpts based on a given plan of steps. Appendix B illustrates an online “language focus” tab and the two types of activities.

At Weeks 3 and 4, students revisited issues related to source use (e.g., legitimate and illegitimate uses of source texts, APA citation) and were given practice with paraphrasing, summarizing, quoting, and synthesizing information from sources in and outside the class. As a home task, students were asked to develop a rough outline of their proposal LR identifying and sequencing the major themes for their argument development, which they then peer reviewed and discussed at Week 4.

Starting at Week 4, to afford students practice with writing from sources using the LR unit pattern, they were asked to produce three LR drafts of varying length (Table 2). Detailed instructions and checklists were developed to guide students’ work on each draft, including a LR outline that illustrated the overall structure of LRs incorporating LR units.

Table 2 Assigned literature review drafts.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Drafts</td><td>Recommended length (in words)</td><td>Minimal number of required sources</td><td>Due for submissione</td></tr><tr><td>LR unit</td><td>300+</td><td>5</td><td>Week 5</td></tr><tr><td>Extended LR draft</td><td> 600+</td><td>8</td><td>Week 7</td></tr><tr><td>Complete LR draft</td><td> 800-1,000+</td><td>10</td><td>Three weeks after the end of the module</td></tr></table></body></html>

Based on previous studies into undergraduate academic writers’ challenges with source use (Kwon et al., 2018; Wette, 2017, 2018; Wingate, 2012), especially in LR writing (Cisco, 2014; Dugartsyrenova, 2016), the three writing tasks were offered in the sequence described to ease these novice writers’ transition from writing a single LR unit synthesizing a manageable number of sources to more complex, multi-paragraph forms of writing (e.g., the complete LR draft) incorporating more themes and a larger number of sources. While the first task, being quite short and offering initial practice with integrating sources using CW steps, did not explicitly require that students conclude their LR units with niche establishment and occupying, the two subsequent tasks prompted students to develop several LR units (with progressively more commentary and detail) that logically lead to niche establishment and occupying. To ensure that students show appropriate logical connections between their sources and own study, checklists for these longer drafts asked them to attend to overall coherence both within and across paragraphs as they developed their argument.

Individual teacher feedback which included comments on students’ use of CW steps (or lack thereof) and recommendations on the issues to address was provided on each draft, after which students were asked to revise their work before they submitted their next draft. They also had their first two drafts reviewed by a peer in class. While the first draft (LR unit) was not graded, the other two drafts were graded by the instructor on a scale from 0 to 100.

# 3.3. Data collection and analysis

To examine the effectiveness of the unit-level approach in facilitating learners’ criticality in source use (Research Question 1), students’ $( N = 4 6$ ) performance on two writing tasksda LR unit on a theme and a complete LR sectiondwas analyzed using an assessment framework (Appendix C). The LR units, being quite short in length ( $^ { 3 0 0 + }$ words) and only a fragment of the future LR section, were examined to gauge the initial evidence of a critical approach in students’ writing halfway through the module (Week 5). The complete LR drafts $_ { 8 0 0 - 1 , 0 0 0 + }$ words) were analyzed to gain a more holistic perspective on students’ performance with regard to criticality in source use at the level of the whole text. Prior to the analysis, each student was assigned a number (e.g., S#). Scores on each assessment criterion were compared across each student’s writing performance on the two tasks.

To control for potential issues with plagiarism and patchwriting in students’ texts, their submissions on both writing tasks were checked for plagiarism using the university’s plagiarism detection platform (with $2 0 \%$ of plagiarism set as an allowed percentage limit). Submissions in which occurrences of plagiarism/patchwriting did not meet the limit (except for appropriately used direct quotes) were excluded from the analysis. Furthermore, only contextually and linguistically appropriate realizations of LR steps were considered in the analysis (i.e., they clearly aligned with the communicative purpose of the step and employed effective lexico-grammatical realizations, including step-specific chunks). Appendix D provides examples of these realizations by participants.

Two researchers familiar with the coding scheme first independently reviewed ten pairs of LR units and complete LR drafts of the same students and then compared their scores on both tasks across each student. If disagreement occurred, the coding scheme was reassessed until complete agreement in measuring writing performance on both tasks was reached. They then assessed the rest of the data independently. The overall interrater reliability for the scores on the six criteria on both writing tasks was found to be high (introduction of a theme $r = 0 . 9 4$ and $r = 0 . 9 5$ , respectively; reporting of findings $r = 0 . 9 2$ and $r = 0 . 9 4$ ; source selection $r = 0 . 9 5$ and $r = 0 . 9 3$ ; evidence of criticality $r = 0 . 9 2$ and $r = 0 . 9 0$ ; sequencing of information $r = 0 . 9 4$ and $r = 0 . 9 6$ ; and referencing of sources $r = 0 . 9 6$ and $r = 0 . 9 1$ ) indicating consistency in the way that writing performance was measured.

To develop a holistic understanding of participants’ perceptions of their learning experiences (Research Question 2), two data sources were used: individual written reflections and an anonymous online survey. Participants completed the individual written reflections $( N = 4 9 )$ ) on overall learning experiences and potential gains during the final class. One week after the end of the module, participants were also invited to complete an anonymous survey with Likert-scale and open-ended questions which further tapped into their perceptions of the usefulness of the module’s topics/activities for developing specific LR writing skills $1 =$ least useful; $5 =$ most useful), any affordances of taking the module, and any challenges that they may have experienced. Fifty-five study volunteers returned the survey.

Participants’ responses to the Likert-scale items were analyzed using descriptive statistics. Their responses to the openended questions and individual reflections were analyzed by two researchers based on the general inductive approach to coding qualitative data (Thomas, 2006). Comments were selected to illustrate salient findings.

# 4. Results

# .1. Assessment of students’ writing performance on the LR unit task

Analysis of students’ LR units $N = 4 6$ ; average number of words $= 3 7 4$ ) yielded the following results. At this initial stage of writing, the majority of participants made an effort to exhibit criticality toward their sources as they alternated between reporting findings/methods/perspectives from sources $9 8 \%$ preferred to report findings/methods/perspectives from individual sources, while $2 5 \%$ reported those from sources as a group) and discussing these critically. In doing so, all students integrated at least five sources related to a theme, as prompted by the task instructions. The average number of sources used per group was 6.9, with the mean score on the appropriacy of participants’ source selection and referencing being quite high (2.93 and 2.67 out of 3, respectively).

As Table 3 shows, the four CW steps used by at least half of the participants were interpreting findings from individual studies $65 \%$ , with the total number of realizations of this step equaling 55), followed by comparing findings $( 5 9 \% )$ , highlighting limitations of findings from studies as a group $( 5 7 \% )$ , and contrasting findings $( 5 0 \% )$ . The average rate of use of these steps ranged from 1.2 to 1.8. Notably, some steps (interpreting findings from individual studies/studies as a group and highlighting contributions of individual studies) were realized three to four times by $7 - 2 0 \%$ of the participants.

Table 3 Participants’ use of LR steps $N = 4 6$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Basic stepse</td><td>N(%)a</td><td>Nb</td><td>Nc</td><td>Nd</td></tr><tr><td>Reporting findings/methods/perspectives from individual studies</td><td>45 (98)</td><td>145</td><td>3.2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Introducing a theme</td><td>35 (76)</td><td>53</td><td>1.5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Reporting findings/methods/perspectives from studies (group).</td><td>25 (54)</td><td>32</td><td>1.3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Critical writing steps Interpreting findings/methods/perspectives from individual studies</td><td>30 (65)</td><td>55</td><td>1.8</td><td>9 (20)</td></tr><tr><td>Comparing findings/methods/perspectives across studies</td><td>27 (59)</td><td>39</td><td>1.4</td><td>1 (2)</td></tr><tr><td>Highlighting limitations of studies (group)</td><td>26 (57)</td><td>32</td><td>12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Contrasting findings/methods/perspectives across studies.</td><td>23 (50)</td><td>27.</td><td>12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Highlighting limitations of individual studies</td><td>20 (43)</td><td>29</td><td>1.5</td><td>2 (4)</td></tr><tr><td> Interpreting findings/methods/perspectives from studies (group).</td><td>17 (37)</td><td>27</td><td>1.6</td><td>3 (2)</td></tr><tr><td>Highlighting contributions of individual studies</td><td>13 (28)</td><td>21</td><td>1.6</td><td>3 (7)</td></tr><tr><td>Stating what remains unaddressed (gap)</td><td>11 (24)</td><td>14</td><td>1.3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Justifying the need for further research</td><td>8 (17)</td><td>:</td><td>1.0</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Explaining findings/methods/perspectives from individual studies</td><td>3 (7)</td><td>:</td><td>2.7</td><td>1 (2)</td></tr><tr><td>Highlighting the overall contribution of studies (group)</td><td>3(7)</td><td>6</td><td>2.0</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Explaining findings/methods/perspectives from studies (group)</td><td>2(4)</td><td>2</td><td>1.0</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Additional stepse</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Showing topic importance</td><td>31 (67)</td><td>31</td><td>1.0</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Stating the study&#x27;s purpose Providing background information</td><td>8 (17)</td><td>9</td><td>1.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Clarifying definitions</td><td>7 (15) 6 (13)</td><td>1 7</td><td>1.0 1.2</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

a Number and percentage of participants who used this step at least once. b Total number of realizations of this step per whole group. c Rate of use of this step per whole group. d Number and percentage of participants who used this step at least three times.

Overall, as Table 4 demonstrates, 39 participants $( 8 5 \% )$ successfully used from three to seven of the taught CW steps at least once, while 12 participants $( 2 6 \% )$ used the largest number of CW steps (6–7). Some steps (e.g., introducing a theme and reporting findings from studies as a group, comparing and contrasting findings, interpreting findings from studies as a group/ individual studies, and highlighting their limitations) were often combined within one sentence. In synthesizing information using the CW steps, most students successfully employed appropriate step-specific chunks, attitude markers, comparison and contrast structures, and hedges (e.g., “It should be no surprise that .”, “the main contribution of the paper is .”, “the only study that provides some answers to . is”, “explanations of such insensitivity are controversial”, “similarly to”, “in contrast”, “might be identified as”).

Table 4 Number of CW steps used per group $( N = 4 6 )$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td>N of CW steps used</td><td>N of students</td><td>Participants (S#)</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>S3</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>S2, S8</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>4</td><td> S13, S20, S27, S42</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>9</td><td>S6, S11, S16, S17, S21, S24, S28, S38, S46</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>13</td><td>S5, S7, S9, S14, S15, S18, S19, S22, S26, S37, S40, S43, S44</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>S4, S12, S23, S29, S39</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>9</td><td>S1, S10, S25, S31, S32, S34, S35, S36, S41</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>3</td><td>S30, S33, S45</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>46</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

An extract from S24’s LR unit (Appendix E) illustrates her use of several CW steps in discussing the role of the silver supply system of Yunnan (one of the Ming Empire border provinces) in the economic and socio-political development of the province in the XIV–XV centuries. Annotations for both basic and CW steps are provided in brackets.

Notably, it was found that in synthesizing their sources using basic and CW steps, most students were able to make clear topical and organizational connections within and across LR unit paragraphs using appropriate content linkages and cohesive devices, such as synonyms, repetitions of keywords, pronoun references, and, most often, link words of various types (“in particular”, “furthermore”, “likewise”, “however”, “therefore”). The mean score on the sequencing of information criterion was quite high (2.63 out of 3). Appendix F provides an example of a complete LR unit from S12 demonstrating her successful and coherent use of basic and CW steps. As can be seen, while some steps may overlap within one sentence, others (e.g., explaining findings) may span several sentences (e.g., 8–11).

At the same time, it was found (Table 3) that six students (S2, S8, S13, S27, S20, S42) used a minimal number of CW steps (1–2), while one student (S3) did not use any of these steps, as she only provided lists of summaries of findings from individual studies. The following example from S2’s LR unit illustrates her integration of five sources on the development of French colonial policy in North Africa. While the student makes an attempt to highlight the contribution of some of the sources (sentence 4) and establish a stance toward them using stancetaking language (e.g., “helpful”, “not only . but also .”, “more importantly”, “another significant aspect of French-North African relationships” in sentences 4–7), this piece fails to provide proper elaboration on the sources (beyond their summaries) and show clear contextual and logical connections between them.

Example 1: An Unsuccessful Attempt at Engaging With Sources Critically (S2)

1 Some studies examine relationships between France and North African countries in the XX century. $^ 2 \mathrm { I n }$ his study, Ferry (2011) outlines three arguments in favor of colonial politics of France in the North African region. 3 Chikrizova and Soshnikova (2018) also admit a significant influence of France in formation of states boundaries in the African region in the beginning of XX century. 4 This study is helpful as it describes extensively national interests of France in the North African and the Middle East region. 5 Also, Coller (2013) focuses not only on social and economic aspects of French colonization of North African states but also considers religion as a crucial point of further development of the dependent territories. 6 More importantly, the interaction of France with distinct countries is examined by Errashidi (2014). 7 Finally, in their research, Albanskiy and Khrabskova (2016) study another significant aspect of French-North African relationships in the end of XX century and the beginning of XXI century.

Also, while some participants succeeded in highlighting limitations $( 4 3 \% )$ and contributions $( 3 0 \% )$ of their sources with respect to the study’s research focus, two students’ (S8, S21) limitation statements were somewhat vague requiring elaboration, as can be seen in this example from S8 (the limitation statement is underlined):

Example 2: A Vague Limitation Statement (S8)

Hanstad (2008) more or less clearly indicates the blurring of the WADA’s functionality and its real tasks. However, this research presents little empirical evidence.

# 4.2. Assessment of students’ writing performance on complete LR drafts

Analysis of complete LR drafts $N = 4 6$ ; average length $= 8 6 8$ words; average number of LR themes per piece $^ { \textmd { ‰} }$ ) as the most extended form of LR writing presented valuable opportunities to assess students’ engagement with multiple sources (at least 10) as they developed their argument concluding their piece with niche establishment and occupying. Findings indicated several areas of improvement in participants’ move toward criticality as compared to their performance on the LR unit task.

First, in developing their argument, all students integrated at least 10 sources (the average number of sources used per group being 12.3) and made an effort to employ from three to ten of the taught CW steps (Table 5). In fact, at least half now used no fewer than seven CW steps as compared to four on the LR unit task indicating an increase in the range of CW steps used. The average number of sources (Table 6) demonstrates the gains (from one to five) in the number of successfully used CW steps exhibited by many participants $(7 2 \% )$ , including the six students (S2, S8, S13, S20, S27, S42) who had previously used the lowest number of CW steps (1–2) and one student (S3) who did not use any of the CW steps (now used five steps).

Table 5 Number of CW steps used per group $( N = 4 6$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td>N of CW steps used</td><td>N of students</td><td>Participants (S#)</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>S16, S20</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>6</td><td>S3, S11, S14, S28, S42, S46</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>11</td><td>S5, S8, S9, S12, S23, S24, S25, S29, S35, S40, S44</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>17</td><td>S2, S4, S7, S10, S13, S17, S18, S19, S21, S27, S30, S31, S34, S37, S38, S39, S43</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>8</td><td>S6, S15, S22, S26, S32, S33, S36, S45</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>2</td><td>S1 S41</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>46</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 Gains in the use of CW steps $( N = 4 6$ ).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Gains</td><td>N of students</td><td>Participants (S#)</td></tr><tr><td>+1</td><td>12</td><td>S4, S9, S11, S19, S20, S28, S32, S36, S39, S40, S44, S46</td></tr><tr><td>+2</td><td>8</td><td>S1, S5, S7, S18, S37, S24, S42, S43</td></tr><tr><td>+3</td><td>6</td><td>S15, S17, S21, S22, S26, S38</td></tr><tr><td>+4</td><td>5</td><td>S6, S8, S13, S27, S41</td></tr><tr><td>+5</td><td>2</td><td>S2, S3</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>33</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

In particular, as Table 7 shows, the most frequently used CW steps included interpreting findings from individual studies $( 7 8 \% )$ and groups of studies $( 5 2 \% )$ ; highlighting limitations of studies as groups $( 7 0 \% )$ and individual studies $( 6 1 \% )$ ; stating what remains unaddressed $( 6 7 \% )$ ; and comparing $( 6 3 \% )$ and contrasting findings across studies $( 6 1 \% )$ . Some of these steps (e.g., interpreting findings from individual studies/studies as a group, highlighting limitations from studies as a group, and comparing and contrasting findings) were realized from three to eight times by $1 7 - 2 0 \%$ of participants. Notably, the average rate of use of the seven steps per whole group ranged from 1.4 (stating the gap) to 2.3 (interpreting findings from studies as a group) indicating a more frequent use of these steps in complete LR drafts in comparison to that in LR units.

Table 7 Participants’ use of LR steps $N = 4 6$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Basic steps</td><td>N (%)a</td><td>Nb</td><td>Nc</td><td>Nd</td></tr><tr><td>Reporting findings/methods/perspectives from individual studies</td><td>46 (100)</td><td>374</td><td>8.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Introducing a theme</td><td>45 (98)</td><td>104</td><td>2.3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Reporting findings/methods/perspectives from studies (group)</td><td>36 (78)</td><td>77</td><td>2.1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Critical writing stepsd</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Interpreting findings/methods/perspectives from individual studies Highlighting limitations of studies (group)</td><td>36 (78)</td><td>65</td><td>1.8</td><td>8 (17)</td></tr><tr><td>Stating what remains unaddressed (gap)</td><td>32 (70)</td><td>61</td><td>1.9</td><td>9 (20)</td></tr><tr><td>Comparing findings/methods/perspectives across studies</td><td>30 (67)</td><td>41</td><td>1.4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Contrasting findings/methods/perspectives across studies</td><td>29 (63)</td><td>59 53</td><td>2.0</td><td>9 (20)</td></tr><tr><td>Highlighting limitations of individual studies</td><td>28 (61)</td><td>51</td><td>1.9</td><td>8 (17)</td></tr><tr><td>Interpreting findings/methods/perspectives from studies (group)</td><td>28 (61) 24 (52)</td><td>55</td><td>1.8</td><td>3 (7)</td></tr><tr><td>Highlighting contributions of individual studies</td><td>17 (37)</td><td>29</td><td>2.3</td><td>8 (17)</td></tr><tr><td>Justifying the need for further research</td><td>14 (30)</td><td>16</td><td>1.7</td><td>5 (11)</td></tr><tr><td>Explaining findings/methods/perspectives from individual studies</td><td>10 (22)</td><td>17</td><td>11 1.7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Explaining findings/methods/perspectives from studies (group)</td><td>9 (20)</td><td>12</td><td>1.3</td><td>2 (4)</td></tr><tr><td>Highlighting the overall contribution of studies (group)</td><td>3 (?)</td><td>4</td><td>1.3</td><td>1 (2)</td></tr><tr><td>Question raising</td><td>1 (2)</td><td>1</td><td>1.0</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

a Number and percentage of participants who used this step at least once. b Total number of realizations of this step per whole group. c Average rate of use of this step per whole group. d Number and percentage of participants who used this step at least three times.

Furthermore, while, quite expectedly, complete LR drafts integrated a larger number of sources by all participants (at least 10) as compared to LR units, an important finding was that they exhibited participants’ move toward offering more elaboration on their sources (both earlier cited and newly added ones) as they developed their argument. This was evidenced in some students’ use of a wider range of CW steps when discussing these sources and more elaboration on the sources they could have previously presented briefly. For example, many students now extended their limitations and gap claims to provide a stronger motivation for their study, including those (S8, S21) who had not elaborated on their limitations claims in their LR units. This example from S8 shows her elaboration on the earlier limitation statement regarding one of her sources (new details are underlined):

Example 3: An Extended Limitation Statement (S8)

Hanstad (2008) more or less clearly indicates the blurring of the WADA’s functionality and its real tasks. However, considering the fragmentation of functions between the IOC and WADA, this research presents little empirical evidence regarding actual examples of WADA’s functions and activities during major sporting events in the XXI century.

Another extract from S2’s complete LR draft (Appendix G) illustrates several changes in the way she integrated her sources on the development of French colonial policy in North Africa as compared to the way she presented them in her LR unit (discussed earlier). Newly added details are underlined. Annotations for basic and CW steps are provided in brackets. As can be seen, the student now uses a wider range of CW steps, provides more elaboration on the sources, and makes clearer the connections between them.

Furthermore, a notable finding with respect to overall text organization and development in complete LR drafts was that, overall, most students were able to achieve coherence by sequencing the information effectively within and across paragraphs using appropriate content linkages and cohesive devices. The mean score on this aspect was 2.72 out of 3dslightly higher than on the LR unit task. Specifically, students’ drafts began with an introductory paragraph which in most cases claimed the importance of the topic $( 7 6 \% )$ , followed by a series of body paragraphs (3–6) which introduced and discussed 2–3 themes and subthemes within them. Importantly, in developing their argument, most students structured their pieces logically bringing them to a meaningful conclusion. To illustrate, many established the niche by stating a conclusive gap (67%) and/or justifying the need for further research $( 3 0 \% )$ or question raising $( 2 \% )$ (Table 7) and announced the present study. Yet, a few students’ drafts evidenced issues with paragraph division $( 1 1 \% )$ , such as one-sentence paragraphs or multiple short paragraphs each focusing on one study, and use of erroneous or repetitive link words $( 2 2 \% )$ .

Finally, complete LR drafts demonstrated most students’ improvement in their referencing skills using APA, especially as regards in-text referencingdthe kind of skills that many seem to have mastered by the time they submitted their complete LR drafts. The accuracy of referencing sources was found to be quite high (2.48 out of 3).

# 4.3. Learners’ perceptions

Analysis of participants’ responses to the survey and individual reflections (completed at the end of the LR module but before students submitted their complete LR drafts) afforded insights into students’ perceptions of their genre learning experiences and the effectiveness of the proposed approach in facilitating their source use. As suggested by both the quantitative data and open-ended responses to the survey, as novice academic L2 writers, many participants were highly positive about the usefulness of the approach in enhancing various aspects of their genre awareness and in sensitizing them to the importance of and ways of enacting criticality in writing from sources. The majority rated highly the topics and activities concerning the rhetorical organization of research proposal LRs $\mathrm { ^ { \prime } M _ { r a n g e } } = 4 . 4 5 5 { - 4 . 2 5 5 } \mathrm { ^ { \prime } }$ ) and concepts related to critical reading/writing and source use $( \mathrm { M } _ { \mathrm { r a n g e } } = 4 . 4 9 1 - 3 . 9 4 6 )$ (Table 8).

Table 8 Perceptions of the module’s topics/activities.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Topics/activities (N = 55)</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>I. Rhetorical organization</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. The overall move structure of the LR section</td><td>4.455</td><td>0.633</td></tr><tr><td>2. LR unit structure</td><td>4.255</td><td>0.673</td></tr><tr><td>II. Critical reading/writing and source use.</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. Referencing sources using APA</td><td>4.491</td><td>0.690</td></tr><tr><td>4. The concept of critical writing</td><td>4.145</td><td>0.951</td></tr><tr><td>5. Summarizing information from sources.</td><td>4.055</td><td>0.848</td></tr><tr><td>6. The concept of critical reading</td><td>4.036</td><td>0.942</td></tr><tr><td>7. Quoting information from sources.</td><td>3.964</td><td>0.902</td></tr><tr><td>8. Paraphrasing information from sources.</td><td>3.946</td><td>0.891</td></tr></table></body></html>

As revealed by students’ open-ended responses to the survey, more than half $( 5 6 \% )$ valued how the explicit genre approach promoted their understanding of the rhetorical organization of LRs (macrolevel) and the structure of LR units (microlevel). They felt that they benefited from the “structured approach to writing LR” (S13) by learning how to “[share] information from the sources in the most comprehensible and logical way, following a certain pattern” (S26) and “how to write units with clear logic that serves your goal” (S6). As S32 observed referring to her previous (autonomous) LR writing endeavors, “When I tried to get to know these concepts myself without any guidance, I found it very challenging”, while S27 shared, “I now understand how this section should be organized, as before I took the course my perceptions were blurred”.

Importantly, more than half $( 5 2 \% )$ appreciated the insights gained as regards enacting criticality in writing from sources. As S51 pointed out, “It was very useful to learn . not to retell the author’s thoughts, but to indicate how his/her research contributed to my work”, while S24 remarked, “without this module I would probably pay much less attention to comparing/ contrasting/criticising resources”. Echoing these perceptions, S48 stressed her renewed understanding that “highlighting limitations of previous studies and justifying your own study through the gap [serves] the overall aim of the section”. Notably, some of these students $( 3 6 \% )$ especially valued an increased awareness of the importance of being critical in LR writing, while three students confessed that the whole experience of writing critically was novel and revealing to them. For example, as S32 stated, “Actually, it was my first in-depth experience writing about scientific literature, so the whole process of analyzing papers and re-writing Information was quite new”. A similar sentiment was shared by S21:

I applied perhaps for the first time critical reading skills and evaluative language. It looks easy on paper to be critical, not just restate what work is about, but when it comes to writing . It is a completely different story. I am happy I now know how many things fall into this process making it sensible.

As suggested by individual reflections, for an overwhelming majority of students $( 8 0 \% )$ , instructor’s feedback on LR drafts was a major factor contributing to their positive perceptions of learning gains as they moved from writing the initial LR unit to more extended drafts. Most stressed that the feedback was “clear and understandable” (S4), “very ample and detailed, which has made it easier to revise the already written pieces” (S1), and appreciated how it directed their attention to problem areas in their writing, which they found rewarding. For example, as S5 wrote, “The feedback . helped me improve the argumentation and logic in my LR”, while S25 noted that “it helped a lot to improve the LR unit”.

Despite most students’ positive perceptions of their genre learning experiences, the main challenge regarding LR writing endeavors reported by 22 participants $( 4 0 \% )$ in the survey was related to the use of specific CW steps such as highlighting limitations. As some students explained, they found it difficult to criticize other scholars’ findings/perspectives, as they did not feel competent enough to engage in this kind of evaluation skillfully given limited prior experiences with expressing evaluative stances even in their L1. As S50 commented on this, “It was difficult to write criticism and personal assessment, since we have little experience in writing such works”. Other students noted that the limitations in previous research were often not obvious to them or that they found it a challenge to “criticize some papers. but at the same time to be unbiased” (S23). Also, as regards niche establishment, one student voiced the difficulty of “finding the limitations general for all to help justifying your study” (S46).

# 5. Discussion and conclusion

The study’s findings point to the effectiveness of using the proposed approach to facilitate undergraduate novice L2 academic writers’ criticality enactment in LR genre instruction targeting less explored genres such as undergraduate-level research proposals. Importantly, they contribute to the ongoing debate on the value of explicit genre instruction (Bitchener and Turner, 2011; Cheng, 2021; Dugartsyrenova and Sardegna, 2022; Huang, 2014; Hyland, 2007; Tardy et al., 2023) by adding textual and learner-based evidence that such approaches help scaffold novice L2 writers’ successful initiation into and sustained use of criticality enacting strategies in LR writing (as shown by their writing performance on two LR tasks) and are appreciated by learners.

As revealed by the textual analysis, the approach seems to have motivated students to enact criticality in writing, albeit to different degrees, by appropriating and sequencing appropriately the taught CW steps starting with the LR unit task as a microfocus. Furthermore, a comparison of participants’ writing performance on a LR unit (initial LR task) and a complete LR draft indicated gains in their writing performance. These gains were evidenced by a considerable increase in the range and frequency of use of the CW steps by a larger number of participants (with half of them using at least seven of the CW steps in their complete LR drafts as compared to four on the LR paragraph task); more elaboration in the discussion of sources; effective sequencing of basic and CW steps with respect to distinct themes and the overall argument; and successful attribution/referencing of sources. Notably, it was also found that quite a few participants $( 6 1 - 7 0 \% )$ eventually did integrate effectively CW steps that exhibit stance taking (e.g., highlighting limitations in sources as a group and individual sources) in their complete LR drafts, including many of those who complained about difficulties with critiquing sources. Overall, these findings suggest that when the fuzzy concept of engaging with sources “critically” is broken down into identifiable discursive strategies for criticality enactment (such as the CW steps), illustrated via multiple genre exemplars at the macrolevel and the level of LR units as a starting point, and consolidated through focused writing practice, undergraduate novice L2 writers like those in the present study recognize their value and, arguably, feel more confident to apply these strategies in their own writing. Moreover, with teacher support, students’ use of such strategies improves as they move from less demanding writing tasks such as the LR unit task to more complex ones, which implies long-term value of the approach.

Evidence from learners themselves reveals that many appreciated the structured, “top-down” instructional approach (involving the use of the LR unit template, the structured task design setting clear expectations, and detailed guidelines, including checklists), which may explain their readiness to appropriate the taught CW steps in their writing. At the same time, insights regarding some students’ perceived shifts in their earlier views on source use point to these novice writers’ limited prior awareness of the need to engage with sources critically and little understanding of the ways to exhibit criticality in source use. These findings reaffirm earlier concerns (Cisco, 2014; Wette, 2018; Wingate, 2012) about the lack of prior systematic instruction on critical engagement with sources in a variety of undergraduate contexts and with respect to various source-based assignments. The findings also add learner and text-based empirical evidence that when offered explicit instruction and scaffolding to facilitate their initiation into criticality enactment in LR writing and help them overcome their “uncertainties” (Wette, 2018) regarding “critical” source use, these learners recognize the value of such instructional approaches and can successfully apply them to their writing practices. While the present study explored source use in undergraduate-level research proposals (a less represented genre), considering the growing need for EAP/ESP instructors to introduce learners to a range of well and less explored genres (e.g., undergraduate-level policy proposals described in Lancaster, 2016) and the diverse challenges with writing from sources experienced by L1/L2 writers well beyond the undergraduate level (Bitchener and Banda, 2007; Dovey, 2010; Kwan, 2008; Sun et al., 2022), the proposed approach may be pertinent to a wide array of pedagogical settings at all levels of instruction.

Based on the findings, this study offers several important implications for EAP/ESP researchers and practitioners looking to use similar approaches to promote criticality enactment in the context of genre-based LR instruction. First, given the complexity of reading/writing processes involved in LR writing (Bitchener and Banda, 2007; Dovey, 2010; Kwan, 2008), sequencing writing tasks (e.g., from the initial short draft such as a LR unit to longer drafts integrating more themes and sources) may arguably afford students time and practice for a gradual buildup of skills necessary for them to learn to identify relevant sources, select appropriate evidence (which they can critically evaluate rather than simply report on), identify connections between sources, and ultimately develop an extended argument (over several LR units) that will logically lead into niche establishment and occupying. Less demanding LR tasks involving a manageable number of sources (e.g., five, like in the LR unit) as a starting point may alleviate the cognitive load associated with the highly sophisticated processes of reading, selecting, and organizing information from multiple sources, especially in undergraduate-level LR instruction. Such tasks may also offer valuable learning/teaching opportunities to identify problem areas with source use (e.g., lack of criticality) at an early stage. For example, students can be encouraged to elaborate on vague propositions when using particular steps (e.g., highlighting limitations), as was done via the instructor’s feedback on S8’s LR unit, which eventually helped her clarify her point in the complete LR draft. Further (and ongoing) pedagogical support (e.g., focused teacher feedback motivating revisions, classroom discussions) is imperative to draw students’ attention to nuances in source use and prompt qualitative improvements in the way they integrate sources (e.g., with regard to linguistic/contextual appropriacy of used LR steps in a given context and adequate elaboration in commenting on sources) as they move toward more extended forms of LR writing. Importantly, to address coherence issues, when students are likely to incorporate CW steps without showing proper connections between ideas (as what happened in some students’ writing in the current study), this kind of support should sensitize students to the quality of linking their ideas in the context of a distinct LR unit, across all LR units, and with respect to the overall argument.

Furthermore, with regard to genre materials, to ensure that students’ realizations of LR steps are contextually and linguistically appropriate, and sequenced logically, activities drawing their attention to the rhetorical organization and linguistic features of LR steps in selected text exemplars should be used. For example, students can be asked to break down such an exemplar or part of it (e.g., a LR unit) into LR steps and comment on: (a) the extent to which a particular step effectively communicates a message, such as highlighting a limitation; (b) lexico-grammatical realizations of these steps (e.g., the choice/use of step-specific chunks, tense use, hedging, subject-verb agreement); and (c) the logical sequencing of these steps within the given context. Practice with identifying and correcting unsuccessful examples of LR step realizations produced by fellow students (e.g., involving inaccurate choices/uses of lexical and/or grammatical items, link words, hedging) can also be helpful in alerting students to the way such realizations can hinder understanding of the message and lessen the intended effect on the reader. This practice can be extended and enhanced beyond the classroom with online tools offering self-graded genre activities like those in Appendix B. Moreover, to further promote their developing genre awareness, students can be encouraged to independently explore and “discover” genre features in their own selections of LR texts (preferably published in high-impact journals) aligned with their projects’ research focus. Discussions can then be held facilitating students’ reflections on their analyses and allowing for collaborative sharing of observations about any features that they found to be noteworthy (e.g., those going beyond conventional genre practices and expectations).

Finally, it should be acknowledged that learners’ success in critical engagement with sources and their overall genre competence development will likely depend on the kind of research expertise and degree of immersion into disciplinary writing practices that extend beyond their efforts in the academic writing classroom. As suggested by Tardy’s (2009) insights into graduate writers’ pathways to genre knowledge development, one should not underestimate the importance of learners’ real world experiences with and research expertise on subject-matter topics, and ongoing analytic and writing practices for professional and research purposes outside the writing classroom as contributing to their genre knowledge. Arguably, such experiences or lack thereof may be key to students’ response to instructional approaches like the one in the present study and may explain why some students (as was the case with many participants) are initially better prepared to make maximum use of prompts, such as the LR unit pattern, than others (e.g., participants who used few to none of the CW steps in their LR units, including S2). In fact, all students in this study had research methods tutorials (in which they discussed their projects with a faculty member in their disciplines) running in parallel to the academic writing course, and could consult academic supervisors assigned to them, which may have facilitated their LR writing endeavors.

In this regard, while the writing classroom alone may not help all learners evolve as successful academic writers without a continuous exposure to socio-rhetorical conventions and authentic writing practices within their disciplinary contexts (especially within short timeframes), it can offer them a space for (a) developing a nuanced understanding of how genre texts are constructed in light of the complex interplay between rhetorical purposes, disciplinary expectations, and linguistic realizations and how criticality in writing from sources is achieved; and (b) gaining concrete writing experiences, even if simplified for ease of learning, under the instructor’s guidance. On another note, to better gauge the extent to which writing instruction can help learners cope with the demands associated with acquiring a certain genre (in a short and long-term perspective), writing instructors should consider the timing of the course and the opportunities/resources available in a particular context (e.g., mentoring services, research methods courses, interactions with subject matter experts) for learners to develop research expertise and disciplinary-specific knowledge and, ultimately, become more confident in establishing their stance toward this knowledge in their various pursuits both in and outside the writing classroom.

Several limitations to this study should be noted. First, the study employed a small corpus of student proposals in students’ target disciplines to identify salient domain-specific criticality enacting strategies for teaching in a particular context, which may have reduced the potential range of these strategies. To inform their instruction, future researchers and practitioners might want to investigate how criticality is realized in target forms of source-based writing using self-compiled learner and/ or expert corpora of genre texts. Second, the analysis of students’ writing focused on instances of their successful use of taught CW steps (i.e., contextually and linguistically appropriate realizations of these steps). Examining these students’ unsuccessful attempts at source-based writing presents another worthwhile research avenue. Finally, the study used a relatively small and homogeneous sample of undergraduate novice L2 academic writers $N = 4 6$ ) residing in a non-English speaking environment, most of whom were highly motivated to succeed so as to meet a high-stakes graduation requirement. It would be interesting to explore the value of pedagogical initiatives aimed at criticality enactment involving larger populations of students with more diverse academic, cultural, and linguistic backgrounds and differing academic goals.

# Funding

There was no funding for this study.

# Declarations of interest

None.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Vera A. Dugartsyrenova: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Investigation, Conceptualization.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2024.02.003.

# References

Bitchener, J., & Banda, M. (2007). Postgraduate students’ understanding of the functions of thesis sub-genres: the case of the literature review. New Zealand Studies in Applied Linguistics, 13(2), 89–102.   
Bitchener, J., & Turner, E. (2011). Assessing the effectiveness of one approach to the teaching of thematic unit construction of literature reviews. Assessing Writing, 16, 123–136. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2011.02.002   
Cisco, J. (2014). Teaching the literature review: a practical approach for college instructors. Teaching Learning Inquiry, 2(2), 41–57.   
Cheng, A. (2021). The place of language in the theoretical tenets, textbooks, and classroom practices in the ESP genre-based approach to teaching writing. English for Specific Purposes, 64, 26–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2021.07.001   
Council of Europe. (2001). Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assessment (CEFR). Strasbourg: Council of Europe. http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/Cadre1_en.asp.   
Dovey, T. (2010). Facilitating writing from sources: a focus on both process and product. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9, 45–60. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jeap.2009.11.005   
Dugartsyrenova, V. A. (2016). Trudnosti obucheniya inoyazychnomu akademicheskomu pismu [Issues and challenges in teaching academic writing to Russian EFL learners]. Vysshee Obrazovaniye v Rossii, 6, 106–113.   
Dugartsyrenova, V. A. (2017). A student’s guide to writing research proposals in the social sciences: Rukovodstvo po napisaniyu proektov nauchnogo issledovaniya na angliyskom yazyke (dlya sotsialnykh disciplin). URSS.   
Dugartsyrenova, V. A. (2020). Supporting genre instruction with an online academic writing tutor: Insights from novice L2 writers. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 44, 100830. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2019.100830.   
Dugartsyrenova, V. A., & Sardegna, V. G. (2022). Enhancing genre instruction on research proposal introductions with an online academic writing tutor. Journal of Second Language Writing, 58, 100908. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2022.100908.   
Gao, J., Picoral, A., Staples, S., & Macdonald, L. (2021). Citation practices of L2 writers in first-year writing courses: form, rhetorical function, and connection with pedagogical materials. Applied Corpus Linguistics., 1, 100005. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acorp.2021.100005   
Huang, J. C. (2014). Learning to write for publication in English through genre-based pedagogy: a case in Taiwan. System, 45, 175–186. http://dx.doi.org/10. 1016/j.system.2014.05.010   
Hunston, S., & Thompson, G. (2000). Evaluation in Text: Authorial Stance and the Construction of Discourse. Oxford University Press.   
Hyland, K. (2007). Genre pedagogy: language, literacy and L2 writing instruction. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16, 148–164. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ j.jslw.2007.07.005   
Kwan, B. (2006). The schematic structure of literature reviews in doctoral theses of applied linguistics. English for Specific Purposes, 25, 30–55. http://dx.doi. org/10.1016/j.esp.2005.06.001   
Kwan, B. (2008). The nexus of reading, writing and researching in the doctoral undertaking of humanities and social sciences: implications for literature reviewing. English for Specific Purposes, 27, 42–56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2007.05.002   
Kwon, M. H., Staples, S., & Partridge, R. S. (2018). Source work in the first-year L2 writing classroom: undergraduate L2 writers’ use of reporting verbs. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 34, 86–96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.04.001   
Lancaster, Z. (2016). Expressing stance in undergraduate writing: discipline-specific and general qualities. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 23, 16–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.05.006   
Lee, J. J., Hitchcock, C., & Casal, J. E. (2018). Citation practices of L2 university students in first-year writing: form, function, and stance. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 33, 1–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.01.001   
Liu, G.-Z., Lin, L. V., Kou, X., & Wang, H.-Y. (2016). Best practices in L2 English source use pedagogy: a thematic review and synthesis of empirical studies. Educational Research Review, 19, 36–57. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2016.06.002   
Michigan Corpus of Upper-level Student Papers. (2009). Ann Arbor, MI: The Regents of the University of Michigan.   
Parkinson, J. (2013). Adopting academic values: student use of that-complement clauses in academic writing. System, 41, 428–442. http://dx.doi.org/10. 1016/j.system.2013.03.002   
Shi, L. (2012). Rewriting and paraphrasing source texts in second language writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 21, 134–148. http://dx.doi.org/10. 1016/j.jslw.2012.03.003   
Sun, Q., Kuzborska, I., & Soden, B. (2022). Learning to construct authorial voice through citations: a longitudinal case study of L2 postgraduate novice writers. System, 106, 102765. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2022.102765   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J., & Lindemann, S. (2002). Teaching the literature review to international graduate students. In A. M. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the Classroom: Multiple Perspectives (pp. 105–119). Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Tardy, C. M. (2009). Building Genre Knowledge. Parlor Press.   
Tardy, C. M., Caplan, N. A., & Johns, A. (2023). Genre Explained: Frequently Asked Questions and Answers about Genre-Based Instruction. University of Michigan Press ELT.   
Thomas, D. R. (2006). A general inductive approach for analyzing qualitative evaluation data. American Journal of Evaluation, 27, 237–246. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/1098214005283748   
Wette, R. (2017). Source text use by undergraduate post-novice L2 writers in disciplinary assignments: progress and ongoing challenges. Journal of Second Language Writing, 37, 46–58. https://doi:10.1016/j.jslw.2017.05.015.   
Wette, R. (2018). Source-based writing in a health sciences essay: year 1 students’ perceptions, abilities and strategies. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 36, 61–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.09.006   
Wingate, U. (2012). ‘Argument!’ helping students understand what essay writing is about. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 11(2), 145–154. http://dx. doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2011.11.001   
Woodward-Kron, R. (2002). Critical analysis versus description. Examining the relationship in successful student writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1(2), 121–143. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1475-1585(02)00013-9

# Further reading

Dugartsyrenova, V. A. (2016). Trudnosti obucheniya inoyazychnomu akademicheskomu pismu [Issues and challenges in teaching academic writing to Russian EFL learners]. Vysshee Obrazovaniye v Rossii, 6, 106–113.   
Dugartsyrenova, V. A. (2017). A Student’s Guide to Writing Research Proposals in the Social Sciences: Rukovodstvo Po Napisaniyu Proektov Nauchnogo Issledovaniya Na Angliyskom Yazyke (Dlya Sotsialnykh Disciplin). Moscow: URSS.   
Dugartsyrenova, V. A. (2020). Supporting genre instruction with an online academic writing tutor: insights from novice L2 writers. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 44, 100830. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2019.100830   
Dugartsyrenova, V. A., & Sardegna, V. G. (2022). Enhancing genre instruction on research proposal introductions with an online academic writing tutor. Journal of Second Language Writing, 58, 100908. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2022.100908

Vera A. Dugartsyrenova teaches language courses at the School of Foreign Languages at the National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia. Her research interests include blended and distance language learning, CMC for language and intercultural learning, intercultura communication, and academic writing.