Book reviewMariya Tseptsura and Todd Ruecke(2024) Mariya Tseptsura and Todd Ruecker (2024). Nonnative English-Speaking Teachers of U.S. College Composition: Exploring Identities and Negotiating Difference, 231 pp., \$XX.

Nativespeakism and its ideological effects on language teaching and writing studies have been at the forefront of debate in the field of applied linguistics and L2 writing studies. "Nonnative English-Speaking Teachers of U.S. College Composition: Exploring Identities and Negotiating Difference,” edited by Tseptsura and Ruecker, offers a plethora of voices and experiences that support professionals and policymakers in the decolonization of the native English speaker (NES) paradigm and acknowledges the legitimacy of Nonnative English-Speaking (NNES) movements in English Language Teaching (ELT).

The main intention of the authors is to encourage writing teachers to develop a more critical appreciation of the linguistic diversity that writing instructors bring into U.S. classrooms. Moreover, this critical work deconstructs the hegemony of native speaker norms as an absolute truth (Holliday, 2015). This stance also promotes a rhetoric of inclusivity that influences instructors’ pedagogical and ideological decisions in their everyday writing classroom practices. The editors’ main message in this work is that writing studies have not yet critically examined the impact and the richness that nonnative English writing teachers can bring—by leveraging their diverse linguistic repertoire—into the field of writing studies, which eventually also engenders a sense of social justice for NNES teachers. The discourse within this work highlights the innovative contributions of nonnative English speaking (NNES) teachers in the US, improving our understanding of the teaching of writing and strategically promoting students’ critical awareness of effective writing instructions.

Combatting the deficit model of non-white teachers, the manuscript is inspired by the framework of intersectionality as it represents organic ideas and hands-on experiences written by 22 NNES authors from different ideological, cultural, linguistic, professional, and pedagogical stances all over the US. What caught our attention in this work is the utilization of diversity, not only through the use of terms like ’diversity,’ but also through the diversification of authors’ range of experiences and gender, and the comprehensive array of research methods used, including reflective studies, mixed-methods research, and autobiographical narratives. The manuscript consists of 11 chapters, excluding the introduction and the afterword section. Each of these chapters informs the others in terms of the critical role that NNES teachers can play in writing programs. The systematic arrangement of these chapters informs readers and writing practitioners about the experience of NNES instructors and their students’ reflections on the role of multilingual capital in the writing processes. In the following sections, we will review five chapters from the edited volume that particularly exemplify the diverse themes and approaches discussed.

Examining the influences of micro and macro factors on teachers’ professional identity, Hebbard (Chapter 2) analyzed data from five NNES teachers. She demonstrates how elements such as academic background, social support, and academic capital shape teachers’ professional identity in first-year writing courses. These elements could positively or negatively influence writing teachers’ self-perceptions and self-esteem in their daily practices. For social support, composition teachers who were motivated and encouraged by family, friends, and colleagues projected high self-esteem and a strong sense of self. Furthermore, status and expertise in English writing instruction were shown to shape and sustain a more balanced professional identity. For example, when asked about their sense of belonging to the writing teachers’ community, a participant in Hebbard’s study remarked, "To some extent I do, but I feel I don’t have any authority in sharing what I think, what I’ve done, or what I’ve implemented because I don’t have a PhD" (p. 36). Conversely, some teachers expressed that feeling included in the professional circle empowered them to confidently (re)navigate their identities in the field. Hebbard’s argument motivates readers, including L2 teachers and policymakers, to openly interrogate and challenge the concept of a ‘nonnative English speaker.’ She advocates for an open dialogue to problematize this notion and to acknowledge and value linguistic diversity. Hebbard recommends that this binary, racist division should not be perpetuated as a tool to create superiority and inferiority among writing scholars, as the term "native" is epistemologically and socio-historically complex.

Along similar lines, Hijazi in Chapter 4 calls for continually interrogating the term “nonnative English speaker,” from a critical macro level. Hijazi, an Arab Muslim woman, reflected on the challenges she encountered when teaching first-year writing at the university level. In her class, students, native and nonnative alike, seemed to expect a native English-speaking teacher’s norm in performance and instructional strategies in the course. Each semester, Hijazi asserts, “I encounter different forms of microaggression with my students’ looks, questioning if they are or I am in the right classroom, occupying the rightful space, with some whispering, ‘Is this the teacher?’” (p. 66). Adding insult to injury, other racially privileged students were checking their phones to confirm that they were in the right classroom. Moreover, Hijazi’s multifaceted identities caused her to encounter consistent microaggressions and racial prejudice, and thus, advises teachers, students, and researchers to acknowledge NNESs as sources of strength and empowerment, qualities that students will undoubtedly find immensely valuable. In this chapter, she provides clear practical strategies for writing teachers to implement in their daily teaching to overcome such denigrating gestures towards NNES teachers. According to her, NNES teachers frankly confront the stereotypes held by students and use them strategically. When a teacher’s race, accent, religion, and other attributes are made an open topic of discussion, students are more likely to broaden their perspectives, reconsider their biases, and be more receptive to the diverse identities of educators. The second strategy Hijazi advocates for is digital storytelling, where students are encouraged to critically question their beliefs and viewpoints in ways that eventually help students dismantle the negative stereotypes associated with teacher’s identities that do not conform to the (typically White) norm in U.S. writing classrooms. Reflecting on their digital storytelling assignments, according to Hijazi, teachers are encouraged to increase students’ awareness about any preconceived notions they might have about NNES teachers and empower NNES teachers to gain confidence, take ownership over their pedagogical choices, and work in a healthier, more academically fair environment.

Expanding the discourse on factors that influence NNES teachers’ identity, Tseptsura, in chapter 5, suggests that teachers should bear in mind the cultural and ideological influences on their self-esteem. Tseptsura asserts that “the most desirable type of teacher authority stems from confidence in one’s abilities and students’ trust” (p. 81). Having transnational experience, teaching both in Russia and the US, Tseptsura advises that one way for NNES teachers to gain confidence in the classroom is to convince students of their expertise and that NNESs hold a unique linguistic and social capital, which adds to students’ overall performance in writing skills. Based on her findings, Tseptsura recommends teachers use systematic self-observation (i.e., videotaping classes and then analyzing and reflecting on them) to enhance their methods and self-reflexivity, to make sure their actual teaching matches their target methods, and to ultimately legitimize their pedagogical choice. After utilizing these methods herself, Tseptsura noted that she is diverging from the mode of “lecturing” to enabling learner autonomy and student writers’ agency. For instance, students at some points were supposed to read and summarize articles. When the articles posed challenges to NNES students and they sought assistance from her, Tseptsura asserted that “instead of spoon-feeding them the answers as most teachers in my past experiences would do, I was able to guide them to arrive at their understanding through a series of questions” (p. 87). In addition to teachers’ reflective practices, the author recommends promoting assertiveness among NNES teachers through programs and institutions, as well as improving student attitudes toward these teachers.

Along these lines, authority is at the center of teacher legitimization, especially for NNES teachers who have little or no racial or social capital within their host institutions. In Chapter 6, Kasztalska and Maune examine the issue of students expressing an inability to comprehend NNES teachers. The authors employed legitimation code theory, “a model of how knowledge and people become legitimate in a social field” (p. 99), to provide further insight into the mechanics of native-speakerism by analyzing interviews, focus groups, and questionnaires, collected from 15 international teaching assistants (TAs). They aimed to unpack the historically longstanding stereotypes concerning nonwhite writing teachers and their competence. Thus, they explored whether student perceptions of NNES teachers had a stronger relationship to the teacher’s knowledge of the subject matter (an epistemic relationship, considered a good result) or to the teacher’s status as a knower (a social relationship, considered a negative result). Surprisingly, the chapter’s findings indicate that the native speaker is perceived as a “knower.” One participant, for example, related the status of NES to a person’s skin color. Another shocking instance of racialized ideology that delegitimizes teachers’ authority is that the field itself prioritizes them as competent language users simply because they are native (knower code). Another fallacy deeply entrenched in students’ perception of a ‘good writing teacher’ is that, according to the authors’ findings, students believe that skilled writing is inherently acquired rather than achieved through a process. Therefore, to put theories into practice and to deconstruct such politically and socially constructed myths, the authors recommend that students have intense exposure to intercultural training sessions that guide them on how to relate to NNES teachers. Moreover, writing program administrators should acknowledge that skilled writing teachers’ proficiency is not determined by their skin color or accent.

Wang-Hiles also investigates raciolinguistic views and remarks in Chapter 7. Although students admitted they improved their writing and research skills in Wang-Hiles’ class, some still expressed racial and linguistic biases against her. This situation is unsettling as Wang-Hiles puts it, “some students’ negative comments about my [NNESness] status and linguistic competence made me intellectually and emotionally restless” and “their linguistic and racial bias against [NNES teachers] is damaging” (p.115). Therefore, Wang-Hiles wanted to explore why such entrenched ideology is engraved in student’s mindsets. She conducted two surveys and a round of follow-up interviews with five students to ask about her role as an NNES teacher, the efficacy of her teaching, and her language proficiency. Most NES students accepted Wang-Hiles’s status as an NNES teacher and expressed satisfaction with her teaching and language proficiency. In this section, Wang-Hiles showcases how some students are linguistically aware that having an accent doesn’t disqualify writing teachers from being effective instructors, emphasizing the role of students in the learning process. A few still showed doubts about her credibility, projecting prejudice toward NNES teachers based on the teacher’s language proficiency, personality, racial background, and gender. For instance, one student-writer boldly confessed, “It bothered me greatly that you are a nonnative [and you teach writing],” while another commented, “You don’t speak English well” (p. 121). Wang-Hiles suggests that NNES teachers should embrace the journey of their professional identity growth and unapologetically introduce themselves to students, including their linguistic and cultural backgrounds. Such a stance will undoubtedly help students appreciate NNES teachers’ intellectual and linguistic capital.

Informed by the extensive literature on L2 writing and sociolinguistics along with her rich experience teaching English as a second language (ESL) writing and overseeing the university’s ESL program, Reichelt proposes several working suggestions in Chapter 11 for effectively preparing writing instructors, particularly NNES teachers and TAs. Reichelt asserts that “It should not be assumed that NNES teachers are qualified to teach ESL writers simply because of their own NNES status” (p.195). Therefore, in this section, she provided several recommendations, including offering high-quality teacher education to NNES teachers in ESL writing programs; implementing a dedicated course on teaching and research in ESL writing and sociolinguistic matters such as linguistic diversity and language variation; treating NNES teachers as on par with NES teachers and providing them with mentoring opportunities (e.g., pairing TAs together—a new TA with a more experienced TA) based on their expertise and skills rather than linguistic background. Another great way for NNES writing teachers to establish their professional identities is to proudly discuss the complexity of bilingual writer mindsets and their unique cultural and educational environments, in workshops or staff meetings. In such settings, teachers can exchange experiences of writing in different languages and gain insight into non-standard varieties of English.

The edited volume is a great addition to the discourse on teacher identity and composition studies, as it showcases how identity is shaped and reshaped by neo-racist ideologies (Holliday, 2015)—historically transferred to our modern, multilingual environments—at both institutional and individual levels. The collective effort to appreciate translingual identity and gifted writing teachers within writing studies marks a significant step towards denormalizing the ever-evolving rhetoric of idealism in language teaching and writing. The writers of this manuscript have reimagined the epistemology of effective writing teaching, candidly addressing their emotional frustrations stemming from students’ implicit and explicit raciolinguistic discourses and strategic forms of otherness. Therefore, the authors advocate for non-white writing teachers in their chapters by presenting, theorizing, and proposing a decentralized approach to open dialogue on how we, as academics, should be liberated from the narrow and binary division of the dichotomy of native and nonnative spectrums (Jenks & Lee, 2020). Students should be trained and challenged to understand that language is rooted in a colonial legacy and that speaking/writing idealized language carries political and imperial dimensions (Saraceni, 2015). Such a stance imposes a significant responsibility on teachers to guide students in challenging rather than reinforcing the racialized and politically motivated ideologies that cause division and grant deference to linguistically privileged teachers (Kubota, 2022).

We do see Tseptsura’s and Ruecker’s work as a critical move forward in writing studies that pushes back epistemological racism and chauvinistic attitudes towards non-white writing teachers; it also delegitimizes white normativity and saviorism in mainstream writing courses in the US. This thoughtfully written text, loaded with teachers’ experiences and emotions at the micro and macro level, should not go unnoticed as it is an effort to realign and reclaim intellectually stimulating teaching rooted in teachers’ practices and experience rather than merely teachers’ color or accent. It also reflects the unique myriad of each author’s linguistic identities, making the manuscript accessible for readers at all academic levels.

Future research in writing studies might endorse an open scholarly conversation and spread awareness among all students, especially monolingual English-speaking students, that accents, varieties of Englishes, and different forms of English rhetorical expression are meaningful linguistic norms. To further enrich the complexity of writing teachers’ identities, future studies should consider the role of teachers’ linguistic repertoires, the social class of each NNET, and raciolinguistic practices at both micro and macro levels as fundamental frameworks in the decolonization of writing studies. These considerations are critical in rapidly growing multilingual contexts.

The textbook’s exclusive focus on U.S. classrooms may limit the generalizability of such amazing work and puts pressure on scholars in English medium instruction (EMI) contexts to critically explore the nuances of microaggressions in classrooms beyond the US. All in all, the authors adeptly enrich the discourse on idealism and nativism in language education, emphasizing its subtleties as a form of microaggression, in comparison to the contributions of Holliday et al. (2015). Additionally, they challenge the commodified industry of native speaker idealism, particularly within the realm of writing and composition studies.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Omar Ahmed Alkhonini: Funding acquisition. Majed Alharbi: Writing – original draft.

# Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the Deanship of Scientific Research at Majmaah University for supporting this work under project number: R-2024–1258.

# References

Holliday, A. (2015). Native-speakerism: Taking the concept forward and achieving cultural belief. In A. Swan, P. Aboshiha, & A. Holliday (Eds.), (En) countering native speakerism: Global perspectives (pp. 11–25). Palgrave Macmillan.   
Jenks, C. J., & Lee, J. W. (2020). Native speaker saviorism: A racialized teaching ideology. Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 17(3), 186–205.   
Kubota, R. (2022). Decolonizing second language writing: Possibilities and challenges. Journal of Second Language Writing, 58, Article 100946.   
Saraceni, M. (2015). World Englishes: A critical analysis. Bloomsbury Publishing.