# A narrow-angled corpus analysis of moves and strategies of the genre: \`Letter of Application'

Alex Henry \*, Robert L. Roseberry

Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Department of English Language and Applied Linguistics, Bandar Seri Begawan 2028, Brunei

# Abstract

Nowadays, the term \`genre' is thought of as sociolinguistic activity through which members of a discourse community achieve their communicative goals. A genre approach to language teaching attempts to teach learners the main parts, \`moves', of a genre and the most common linguistic features associated with the moves. To date, many genre analyses have been carried out in academic and ESP settings. Some of these studies have shown that writers or speakers can realise moves through di€erent rhetorical options which following Bhatia [(1993). Analysing genre: language use in professional settings. London: Longman], we call \`strategies'. None of these studies, however, has made full use of computer analysis to obtain exact linguistic information on the moves and strategies of a genre. This paper reports on a genre analysis, complemented by the Wordsmith suite of computer programs for corpus analysis (Scott, M. (1996). Wordsmith tools [computer program]. Oxford University Press, Oxford. (Internet: http:// www.oup.co.uk/elt/software/wsmith)), of the moves and strategies of the Letter of Application. The results show striking di€erences between the di€erent levels of analyses and from \`general' English. The paper concludes that this type of analysis provides language teachers with essential information that can make teaching and learning more e€ective. $©$ 2001 The American University. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Nowadays, the term \`genre' is thought of as referring to a sociolinguistic activity in which the participants are able to achieve particular goals. Miller (1984, p. 165) suggests that learning a genre is not simply about learning linguistic forms and conventions, but also about learning how to \`participate in the actions of a community'. The aim of genre analysis, then, is to relate the linguistic features of a genre to the actions they perform. The purpose of a particular genre, and the context in which it is set should, therefore, play a crucial role in a genre-based approach to language learning.

From a language teaching perspective, it is useful to think of a genre as consisting of a series of moves (Swales, 1981, 1990). A move can be thought of as part of a text, written or spoken, which achieves a particular purpose within the text. The move contributes in some way to ful®lling the overall purpose of the genre. For example, the move Facilities and Activities of a brief tourist information text (Henry & Roseberry, 1996, 1998) describes in an interesting way what a visitor to a particular place might do. This contributes to the overall purpose of the genre: to persuade tourists to visit the site. Adopting Hasan's (1989) notion that some \`elements' of texts are obligatory and some optional, we can consider some moves to be obligatory and some optional.

In this paper, we use the term \`register' to mean the totality of all lexico-grammatical realisations of a genre (cf Leckie-Tarry, 1993) and the term \`move register' to mean the language features and patterns typically associated with a particular move (Henry & Roseberry, 1996). We use the term \`strategy' to mean how the writer or speaker chooses to realise, or execute the move (Bhatia, 1993, pp. 30±31). For example, the writer of the Central Idea (thesis statement) in an essay introduction may choose from a variety of rhetorical options how to interest the reader, for instance, by asking a question, or by stating a fact (Henry & Roseberry, 1997). If the move can only be realised by a series of strategies in a particular order then, following Swales (1990), strategies can be thought of as \`steps'.

The general aim of a genre analysis is to identify the moves and strategies of a genre, the allowable order of the moves, and the key linguistic features. The next step is to explain why these features were chosen by expert users of the genre to achieve their communicative purpose (Bhatia, 1993). Genre analyses have been carried out in the academic domain (e.g. Swales, 1981; Dudley-Evans, 1986; Hopkins & Dudley-Evans, 1988; Thompson, 1994; Swales, 1996), and also in speci®c purpose English contexts (e.g. Bhatia, 1993; Henry & Roseberry, 1996).

The results of such form-purpose-explanation analyses have resulted in teaching approaches in EAP (e.g. Jacoby, Leech & Holten, 1995) and ESP (Bhatia, 1991), and in the publication of English language teaching course books (Weissberg & Buker, 1990; Swales & Feak, 1994). These approaches and materials attempt to teach language learners the main parts of a genre and the most common linguistic features associated with those parts. However, none of these studies has made full use of computer analysis within a genre framework to obtain exact linguistic information on each of the moves. Flowerdew (1993) showed that a small specialised corpus can di€er signi®cantly from a general corpus and was therefore of more bene®t in ESP. His study thus paved the way for specialised, small-corpus analyses of genres for pedagogical purposes. Gledhill (2000) uses computer analysis to investigate scienti®c phraseology in cancer research article introductions, and succeeds in relating ®xed and variable phrases with discourse functions but makes no attempt to associate these relationships with the individual moves of the introductions. From a pedagogical perspective, it would be helpful to know in which moves in the introductions these expressions occur. In a previous study of the genre Brief Tourist Information (Henry & Roseberry, 1996), we showed that the move registers di€ered signi®cantly from each other, from the genre as a whole and from the \`general English' of the Cobuild corpus of 20 million words (cf Sinclair, 1991). One of the implications of that study was that for e€ective teaching of the genre, knowledge of the language of the genre as a whole needed to be supplemented by a knowledge of the speci®c language associated with each move. The level of lexico-grammatical analysis of that study was the move; however, as noted earlier, moves in some genres can be accomplished by a variety of strategies, in other words the writer has a choice as to how he or she realises the move. For example, Swales (1981) shows how writers of research article introductions \`establish the ®eld' in three main ways: by asserting centrality, stating current knowledge, or by ascribing key characteristics. Henry and Roseberry (1997) found nine di€erent strategies for accomplishing the move Introducing the Topic in their analysis of 40 introductions of essays. In order to teach strategies e€ectively, language teachers need to know which linguistic features are associated with each strategy in a particular move of a particular genre. The aim of this paper is to demonstrate how this important information can be obtained through a narrow angled analysis using a genre approach.

The genre chosen for the analysis was the Letter of Application. The communicative aim of this genre is to obtain an interview for a job by highlighting the most relevant information in the candidate's curriculum vitae. It also allows the writer an \`open-ended creative opportunity for favourable self-presentation' (James, Schol®eld & Ypsiladis, 1994, p. 325). Despite its obvious importance in an era of globalisation and multi-national companies, little empirical research has been carried out on this genre. Swales (1996) lists the Letter of Application as one of the genres largely ignored by genre analysts. Bhatia (1993, p. 61) does suggest seven moves of a letter of application, but his main concern is to show how the structure of a \`typical example' of a letter of application is similar to the structure of a sales promotion letter. He does not appear to have based his analysis on a corpus of native speaker letters, nor does he attempt to identify the strategies, or their salient linguistic features. A detailed analysis of native speaker Letters of Application would also create a baseline against which rhetorical and linguistic comparisons could in future be made across cultures. There are, therefore, several good reasons why this genre written by native speakers should be investigated in some detail. The aim of this research, however, is not to sensitise language learners to cross-cultural di€erences in the writing of the genre, but to help them compete with native speakers, who already know the genre, for jobs with western, multinational companies.

# 2. The study

# 2.1. Aims

The study was a genre analysis of a corpus of native speaker letters of application to determine what discourse and linguistic features they had in common. In particular, the study aimed to identify the moves of the Letter of Application, the allowable move order, and the strategies used to realise the moves. A second aim was to compare the registers of the strategies of one of the moves with the register of the move as a whole, and with the register of the entire genre. The initial comparison was made in terms of most frequent words of each of the corpora. A third aim was to identify the key syntactic patterns and word collocations of each of the strategies. Wherever relevant, comparisons were also made with the Cobuild corpus as described in Sinclair (1991).

# 2.2. Method

A corpus of 40 letters of application, consisting of 1895 words written by native English speakers, was created. The letters were obtained from several sources: 11 from a department of English language and applied linguistics in a South East Asian university; 13 from a science department in a British university; nine from a personnel department in a British horticultural company; and seven from a legal ®rm in the United States of America. The positions applied for included secretarial and administrative posts, senior management posts and a range of academic positions from post-doctoral research fellow to full professor. The letters were written by American, British, Australian, Canadian and New Zealand candidates. All names and any other information likely to identify the applicant or the institution receiving the application were removed. The obligatory and optional moves were identi®ed, and, following the procedure of Henry and Roseberry (1996), a separate corpus was created for each move. The di€erent strategies used to achieve each of the moves were identi®ed.

Given the limitations of using empirical methods to calculate inter-rater reliability for this type of analysis (Crookes, 1986, p. 65), reliability was established by the following procedure. Fourteen letters from the corpus were selected, four with a relatively straightforward structure, and ten selected at random from the remaining 36. These 14 letters were then used to create a set of teaching materials for use by six lecturers in the Department of English Language and Applied Linguistics in their English language classes. The ®rst stage involved presenting the de®nitions of the moves to the students for discussion and clari®cation. This was followed by the presentation of a worked example (Fig. 1). The second stage involved the learners analysing the four simple letters whose structure had already been agreed by the lecturers. The lecturers and students had previous experience of identifying moves of a genre based on de®nitions as they had employed a similar approach for the genre Brief Tourist Information. Our analysis of the genre moves and de®nitions was re®ned based on feedback, discussion and consensus with the lecturers and their students. One example of the type of discussion that took place concerned the sentence \`I look forward to hearing from you'. Initially we had considered this to be a separate move which we named Soliciting a Response. However, both lecturers and students seemed to think that this was simply a rather facile ®xed phrase for ending the letter. After much consideration it was agreed that the purpose of this sentence was indeed to end the body of the letter rather than to request a reply, and so this was rede®ned as a strategy of the Polite Ending move. A second example, this time identifying strategies, concerned the strategies of the Promotion move. Our initial analysis identi®ed a strategy as \`Experience' and was de®ned as the candidate simply listing experience relevant to the job. However, closer investigation revealed that two

Dear Sir   
<--opening->   
I wish to apply for the position of Business Development Manager as advertised in the <----offering candidature. ><- referring to a job Economist.   
advertisement->

I have over twelve years experience in business development, management, sales and marketing <----promoting the candidate both domestic and international. I have been very successful in taking two small companies into international markets, and oversaw Bollinger Incorporated's international growth in the

European Union. In addition to developing exports to over 15 different countries, I was instrumental in maintaining and developing major domestic accounts. As one of the three Vice

Presidents of Bollinger, I was acting general manager in charge of the day-to-day running ofthe company as well as long-term strategic planning. I have an undergraduate degree in finance and information systems and am highly skilled with computers. I have excellent verbal and written communicationskills and enjoy publicspeaking.

Currently, I am a partner in a small company which is going well and does not require my full <---stating reasons for applying. attention. Therefore, I have been exploring the possibility of taking up a position which will utilize and challenge my considerable talents, abilities and drive. The position in London is

exactly what I have been searching for.

I have enclosed a copy of my resume for your perusal. I look forward to the opportunity to <---- enclosing documents -- ><----polite endingspeak with you in person.

Best regards,

separate strategies could be identi®ed: \`listing relevant skills and abilities' and \`stating how skills and abilities were obtained'.

The ®nal stage of establishing the reliability of the analysis entailed the lecturers and students analysing the remaining ten letters from the corpus. Although these letters were more complex, agreement was reached after a series of discussions between lecturers, students and the authors. This process of establishing the reliability of the move analysis di€ers from Crookes (1986) in that the raters did not consider the sentence to be the \`unit of coding': during previous analysis of Brief Tourist Information texts they had found that two moves could be found in one sentence. A ®nal di€erence was that as the Letter of Application does not seem to have any obvious linguistic markers of move boundaries, our raters were not given any training in identifying \`formulaic expressions' (Brown & Yule, 1983, p. 69) which function as boundary markers. Rather our analysis depended on what Brown and Yule call the \`intuitive notion of topic'. Crookes on the other hand was able to identify boundary markers and was able to train his raters to make use of such markers in Research Article Introductions.

To test the hypothesis that analysis of the register of a strategy would reveal new important information, a separate corpus was then created for each strategy of the move \`promotion'. Using the Wordsmith suite of computer programs for corpus analysis (Scott, 1996), the corpus of each strategy was compared with the promotion move corpus as well as the letter of application corpus as a whole. This series of comparisons revealed the most frequent and important words of each strategy.

# 2.3. Results

The moves, the allowable move order and the strategies identi®ed will be presented ®rst. This will be followed by a comparison of the most frequent words of the corpus as a whole, the promotion move corpus, and the corpora of the strategies of the promotion move. Finally, the syntactic features of the most important strategies will be described.

# 2.4. Analysis of moves and strategies

Eleven moves were identi®ed, as shown in Table 1, with their de®nitions.

Three of the moves, Opening, Polite Ending and Signing O€, are common to all business letters. The most wide-ranging move in terms of linguistic features was the Promotion move. We consider our de®nition of the Promotion move to encompass Bhatia's (1993) moves Establishing Credentials, and O€ering Incentives. Although we found candidates stating when they could take up the position (Stating Availability), they did not use this information as a pressure tactic as in Bhatia's example of the move Using Pressure Tactics; in fact, we found no evidence of pressure tactics at all. This may, in part, be due to the type of jobs being applied for in our corpus. It is obviously possible for someone well known in their profession to use some kind of pressure tactic with success. We also di€er from Bhatia in that the only examples resembling his move Soliciting Response were sentences like \`I look forward to hearing from you' which, as mentioned earlier, we consider to be \`institutionalised expressions' functioning as \`bookends' to the text (Nattinger & DeCarrico, 1992, p. 39) and were, therefore, considered a strategy of Ending Politely. Given the widespread use of such ®xed sentences, it was felt that the purpose was simply to end the letter, rather than to persuade someone to reply. In addition, we identi®ed four moves not present in Bhatia's typical example: Referring to a Job Advertisement, Stating Reasons for Applying, Naming Referees, and Stipulating Terms and Conditions. Fig. 1 is an analysed text showing the moves. This letter was one selected for use as teaching material and, based on the de®nitions above, our students were able to analyse this and other similar letters and arrive at a consensus. Obviously context plays a crucial role in deciding which moves are optional and which obligatory. If the writer is replying to an advertisement then (AD) would be optional, but this move would not be found in a \`mail shot'. In general, though, it would be hard to imagine an e€ective letter without the moves O, CA, P, PE, SO. They appear in all the letters in the corpus and were thus considered obligatory. From the corpus the allowable move order of the obligatory moves appears to be O, CA, P, PE, SO, with P and CA being interchangeable.

Table 1 Moves of the Letter of Application, their de®nitions and frequencies   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move</td><td>Definition (No. of letters in which the move was present in a corpus of 40)</td></tr><tr><td>Opening (O)</td><td>The writer identifies the target and invites the target to read the letter (40)</td></tr><tr><td>Referring to a Job Advertisement (AD)</td><td>The writer refers to the advertisement in which the position</td></tr><tr><td>Offering Candidature (CA)</td><td>was named and described (19) The writer states an interest in applying for the position (40)</td></tr><tr><td>Stating Reasons for Applying (RA)</td><td>The writer gives reasons for wanting the position (11)</td></tr><tr><td>Stating Availability (A)</td><td>The writer indicates when he or she would be able to take up the position (2)</td></tr><tr><td>Promoting the Candidate (P)</td><td>The writer presents selected information demonstrating qualifications and abilities relevant to the desired position (40)</td></tr><tr><td>Stipulating Terms and Conditions of</td><td>The writer indicates expectations regarding salary, working</td></tr><tr><td>Employment (TC)</td><td>hours, and other relevant contractual matters (4)</td></tr><tr><td>Naming Referees (R)</td><td>The writer names referees who will support the candidature (2)</td></tr><tr><td>Enclosing Documents (EN) Polite Ending (PE)</td><td>The writer lists documents enclosed with the letter (34)</td></tr><tr><td>Signing Off (SO)</td><td>The writer ends the letter in a conventional manner (40)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>The writer signs his or her name in a respectful manner, thus claiming ownership of the letter (40)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Of the 11 moves identi®ed, two can be accomplished by di€erent strategies as shown in Table 2. Where more than one strategy was used to realise a move none appeared to be part of a series in a speci®c order and so none was considered to be \`steps'.

In nearly all cases the names of the strategies indicate quite clearly what functions they perform. The strategies \`listing relevant skills, abilities' and \`stating how skills and experience were obtained' perhaps need di€erentiating. The ®rst strategy is an emphasis on skills and experience without any regard for how these were acquired, as in this example from the corpus $^ { \circ } \mathrm { I }$ have ®ve years industrial experience as a fermentation scientist'. The second is an emphasis on how the skills and experience were gained: \`I recently ®nished teaching a seven-week short course for radio and TV announcers and newsreaders'. From a teaching perspective, it is interesting to note that as the emphasis changes so does the tense and this will be discussed below.

Table 2 List of moves which can be accomplished by di€erent strategies   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move</td><td>Strategies (number of letters in which strategy was present in corpus of 40)</td></tr><tr><td>Promoting the Candidate (P)</td><td>Listing relevant skills, abilities (34)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Stating how skills, abilities were obtained (21)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Listing qualifications (12)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Naming present job (12)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Predicting success (5)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Listing publications (2)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Giving reasons for leaving present job (2)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Demonstrating knowledge of target position (1)</td></tr><tr><td>Polite Ending (PE)</td><td>Welcoming response (21)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Inviting favourable consideration (9)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Thanking (7)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Offering to provide further information (6)</td></tr></table></body></html>

To investigate whether there were any signi®cant linguistic di€erences between strategies, those which occurred in more than $1 0 \%$ of the letters, i.e. more than four times, were selected for more detailed analysis. It was felt that four occurrences would provide the minimum data necessary for identifying common linguistic features. The ®ve strategies were: listing relevant skills, abilities; stating how skills, abilities were obtained; listing quali®cations; naming present job; and predicting success.

# 2.5. Most frequent words

Table 3 shows the word frequency lists of the Letter of Application as a whole, and the corpora created from the di€erent strategies. The Cobuild list is included in order to compare these specialised corpora with \`general English'.

Perhaps the most striking feature of the Letter of Application corpus as a whole corpus is that the most frequent word is \`I'. The frequent use of \`I' as a cohesive device enables the genre as a whole to lack the wide range of cohesive ties found in other genres, such as essay introductions and endings where a full range of cohesive ties can be found (Henry & Roseberry, 1997). Other interesting di€erences include \`my' (eighth in the Letter of Application corpus, and 56th in the Cobuild list), \`your' (16, 106) and \`would' (20, 46).

The word \`and' is also interesting in that although it is in exactly the same position, third, in the Letter of Application as a whole corpus and the Cobuild list, it is in top position in the corpus of the strategy \`listing relevant skills abilities' with a frequency more than twice that of \`the', which is twice as frequent as any other word in the Cobuild corpus. The reason for this will be discussed below. The frequency of \`English' is explained by the fact that several letters in the corpus were applications for English language teaching positions in an English department, with all the candidates having had experience of teaching English in English departments. The words lists provided useful clues and starting points for the analysis of each strategy.

rds occurring at least three times in a corpus ar   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Cobuild &#x27;000 s</td><td></td><td>Whole Corpus: Letters of application</td><td>Promotion move</td><td></td><td>Listing skills and abilities</td><td></td><td>Stating how skills and abilities were obtained</td><td>Naming present job</td><td>Listing qualifications</td><td></td><td>Predicting success</td></tr><tr><td>the</td><td>309</td><td></td><td>361 355</td><td></td><td>257 and 223</td><td></td><td>the</td><td>124 102</td><td></td><td>in and</td><td>19 1 15</td></tr><tr><td>of</td><td>155</td><td></td><td>the</td><td></td><td>in</td><td>97</td><td>and</td><td>of</td><td>17</td><td></td><td>of</td></tr><tr><td>and</td><td>154</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>211</td><td>1</td><td>91</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>15</td><td>14 13</td><td>be</td></tr><tr><td>to</td><td>137</td><td></td><td>in</td><td>206</td><td>of</td><td>84</td><td></td><td>in</td><td>14</td><td></td><td>my 4</td></tr><tr><td>a</td><td>130</td><td></td><td>of</td><td>205</td><td>the</td><td>66</td><td></td><td>a</td><td>12</td><td></td><td>the 4</td></tr><tr><td>in</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>a</td><td>122</td><td>to</td><td>53</td><td></td><td>and</td><td>8</td><td></td><td>to 4</td></tr><tr><td>that</td><td>67</td><td></td><td>to</td><td>116</td><td>a</td><td>52</td><td></td><td>50 to</td><td>8 7</td><td>have</td><td>and 3</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>65</td><td></td><td>my</td><td></td><td>my</td><td>44</td><td>as</td><td>44 at</td><td>6</td><td>an</td><td>experience 3</td></tr><tr><td>it</td><td>61</td><td></td><td>have</td><td></td><td> have</td><td>36</td><td>for</td><td>39 am</td><td></td><td>English</td><td>that 3 3</td></tr><tr><td>was</td><td>55</td><td>have</td><td>as</td><td></td><td>with</td><td>29</td><td>my</td><td>34 as</td><td>6</td><td>the</td><td>with</td></tr><tr><td>is</td><td>49</td><td></td><td>for</td><td></td><td>am</td><td>25</td><td></td><td>33</td><td>currently 6 6</td><td>as</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>he</td><td>42</td><td></td><td>at</td><td></td><td>ex perience</td><td>25</td><td>have</td><td>32 have</td><td></td><td>degree</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>for</td><td>41</td><td></td><td>with</td><td></td><td>as</td><td>21</td><td>was</td><td>27</td><td>Auckland</td><td> language</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>you</td><td>37</td><td></td><td>English</td><td></td><td>from</td><td>21</td><td>English</td><td>26</td><td>project</td><td>to</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>on</td><td>36</td><td></td><td>an</td><td></td><td>English</td><td>20</td><td>university</td><td>18 by</td><td></td><td>with</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>with</td><td>36</td><td>your</td><td>ex perience</td><td></td><td>an</td><td>18</td><td>an</td><td>17</td><td>classes</td><td>from</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>as</td><td>35</td><td>English</td><td>am</td><td></td><td>skills</td><td>17</td><td>that</td><td>17</td><td>department</td><td>Ph.D.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>31</td><td></td><td>teaching</td><td></td><td>teaching</td><td>16 16</td><td>teaching</td><td>16</td><td>employed</td><td>studies</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>be</td><td>30</td><td></td><td>was</td><td></td><td>would</td><td></td><td>during</td><td>15</td><td>engineering</td><td> technology</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>had</td><td>30</td><td>would</td><td> university</td><td></td><td>is</td><td>15 14</td><td>with been</td><td>15</td><td></td><td> university</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>but</td><td>30</td><td></td><td> language</td><td></td><td> language</td><td>12</td><td></td><td>14 14</td><td> language</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>they</td><td>30</td><td></td><td>on</td><td></td><td>at</td><td></td><td>on</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>at</td><td>29</td><td>from</td><td>that</td><td></td><td>on</td><td>12</td><td>years</td><td>13</td><td>school</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>his</td><td>26</td><td></td><td>skills</td><td></td><td>both</td><td>10</td><td>this</td><td>12</td><td>technical</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>have</td><td>26</td><td></td><td>this</td><td></td><td>this</td><td>10</td><td>were</td><td>12</td><td>university</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# 2.6. Linguistic features of the promotion strategies

The ®ndings ranged from the identi®cation of a few key lexical phrases to a much wider more general description of the mode of discourse, for example narrative versus expository text.

# 2.6.1. Listing relevant skills, abilities

One very striking feature of this strategy, as mentioned, is the high frequency of the word \`and'. Our analysis revealed that it is frequently used in binary phrases mainly with two nouns but also with two verbs, and occasionally with two adjectives. The writers use this strategy to list their skills, experience and abilities, and on many occasions both words are near synonyms. Table 4 shows a representative set.

Such pairs bring to mind TV advertisement slogans such as the one for a well known washing powder \`Cleans and Whitens'. The use of \`and' in this move and in corresponding moves of other promotional genres might be an interesting area for further investigation. When listing relevant skills and abilities, native speaker writers most likely feel that binary expressions of this kind seem more complete, and provide an additional promotional opportunity. The fact that \`and' is used to join two binary expressions may not at ®rst appear to be particularly signi®cant. However, it is used in this genre primarily in this strategy. From a pedagogical perspective, it is important to teach language learners this use of \`and' so that their own promotion move will have face validity to a prospective employer. In other words, doing this will help their letters to look like a Letter of Application.

Another word which is strongly associated with this strategy is \`experience'. This is the strategy used when candidates wish to emphasise how their experience relates to the job. Wordsmith identi®es seven collocates of experience in the corpus: \`I', \`and', \`have', \`my', \`in', \`of' and \`years'. Such information allows us to identify the following lexical phrase containing \`experience':

Table 4 Pairs of nouns, verbs and adjectives   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Nouns</td><td>Verbs</td><td>Adjectives</td></tr><tr><td>Ability and tenacity</td><td>Assess and implement</td><td>Adaptable and able</td></tr><tr><td>Administration and</td><td>Identify and solve</td><td>Interesting and meaningful</td></tr><tr><td>development</td><td></td><td>manner</td></tr><tr><td>Announcers and newsreaders</td><td>Meet and exceed</td><td>Internal and external</td></tr><tr><td>Background and experience</td><td>Motivate and communicate well with</td><td>Applied and theoretical</td></tr><tr><td>Skills and knowledge</td><td>Set up and operate</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

I …also† have $^ +$ adj† experience i $\mathrm { \Omega } _ { 1 } + \mathrm { N P }$ and NP†

The adjective slot is ®lled with words such as \`tertiary', \`post-doctoral', \`much', \`Xyears', \`industrial', \`considerable', \`extensive', \`valuable', \`practical', \`signi®cant'. The use of pairs of nouns with \`experience' (e.g. \`Lotus and Windows', \`administration and development', \`instructing and training') is common. The above information obtained from this narrow analysis is of some signi®cance to language teaching. Instead of teaching the word \`experience' as a lemma (i.e. experience $( \boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } ) + \boldsymbol { \mathrm { a t } } + \boldsymbol { \mathrm { i n } }$ ; experience (v, transitive, regular) $+ \operatorname { a t } + \operatorname { i n }$ ; experienced $( \mathrm { p p } , \mathrm { a d j } ) + \mathrm { a t } + \mathrm { i n }$ , etc.), as in many textbooks, our analysis suggests that when teaching the Letter of Application, lexical phrase (1) should be taught rather than other forms of the word which would not be presented until they arise signi®cantly in some other context. A second interesting comparison is with a dictionary entry for \`experience'. The Collins Cobuild English Language Dictionary (1987), itself based on a huge corpus, has four sub-entries with examples for \`experience'. None of these entries, however, feature binary phrases with \`and', nor do they include \`also'. This suggests that large corpus analyses are not sensitive to the ®ner points of word grammar as they are used in speci®c genres.

In addition, three other sets of linguistic features were identi®ed which all describe the candidates' skills, abilities and experience in a very direct way. The ®rst set includes sentences \`I am a technical writer', \`I am very skilled with $X '$ , \`I am experienced in $\mathbf { X } '$ , \`I am responsible for $\mathbf { X } '$ . These sentences are produced from two common syntactic patterns:

$$
\begin{array} { l } { \mathrm { { I \ a m + N P } } } \\ { \mathrm { { I \ a m + a d j e c t i v e / p a r t i c l e } } } \end{array}
$$

The second feature is the use of verbs which are used to introduce positive self evaluation in a rather direct manner: \`I consider myself to be an overachiever', $^ { 6 } \mathrm { I }$ consider myself adaptable', \`I feel that I possess the ability to do $X '$ . These sentences are produced from lexical phrase frames (3a) and (3b) below

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { \mathrm { I + c o n s i d e r + N P + ( A d j ) + ( t o \ b e + N P ) } } } \\ { { \mathrm { I + f e e l + t h a t + c l a u s e } } } \end{array}
$$

In our corpus, the ®rst NP in (3a) is always \`myself', but it is possible this slot could be ®lled with another item, such as \`my skills'. Similarly, \`my skills' could be the initial element in the clause in (3b), although in our corpus \`I' always ®lls that slot. Frame (3a) is of particular interest to language learners and teachers because it illustrates quite clearly how one verb can generate two di€erent syntactic patterns. The third feature is the use of modals with \`I' which allow the writer to be direct: \`I can use my strong capabilities'; to be very polite: \`which I would respectfully suggest make me eminently suitable for $\mathbf { X } '$ ; or a little more modest: \`I consider that I could provide $\mathbf { X } '$ . These are produced from frame (4) and are very important for language learners because mastery of such modals and the syntagmatic variation allows them linguistic control over their degree of modesty, an area known to be problematic from a cross cultural perspective (cf James et al., 1994).

$$
\mathrm { ( I + v e r b + t h a t ) \ I + m o d a l + ( a d v ) + v e r b + N P }
$$

As this move requires the writers to combine several pieces of information, i.e. skills, abilities and experience, the use of connectives is obviously important. The most commonly used connective in our corpus is \`also' which clusters with the verbs \`have' and \`be', as in the examples \`I also have experience in $\mathbf { X } '$ and $^ { \circ } \mathrm { I }$ am also familiar with $X '$ . The other less frequent connectives were \`In addition' and \`Furthermore'.

# 2.6.2. Stating how skills, abilities were obtained

The most interesting feature of this strategy is the mode of discourse. Unlike the other strategies which are expository, this strategy is realised through past tense narrative. While clearly narrative, it di€ers from Biber's (1988) description of narrative in that the use of \`I' is common (cf third person is preferred in most narrative), while synthetic negation (not, neither, etc.), present participles, and public verbs (hint, assert, etc.), are not common. In agreement with Biber, the present tenses, attributive adjectives and past participial $\mathbf { \nabla } \cdot \mathbf { W } \mathbf { H } + \mathbf { B } \mathbf { E } { \bf { \nabla } }$ deletions are uncommon.

In keeping with the purpose of the genre, certain interesting linguistic features are employed by the writers to promote themselves. The use of \`and' is again prominent and is used to link noun phrases as in the examples: . . . demanded extreme organization, attention to detail, and information management; . . . experience in business development, management, marketing and sales; . . . used for fermenter operations, standard document and report writing. A wide range of verbs was found, all indicating participation in important activity (e.g. \`involved', \`developed', \`designed', \`monitored'). These verbs are used either in the present perfect or the simple past. One of the most frequent words of this strategy is \`during', which, together with other adverbs and adverbials of time, is used to describe when the meaningful activities mentioned above took place (e.g. \`for the last $\mathrm { \Delta X }$ years', \`since 19XX', \`during 19XX', \`during my career', \`during that time').

# 2.6.3. Listing quali®cations

Our corpus only contained examples of listing academic quali®cations, but obviously professional, technical and vocational quali®cations would be found in a larger corpus. Three lexical phrase frames (5a), (5b), (5c) were used to realise this strategy; the choice seemed to depend on whether the writer wished to include the date the quali®cation was obtained. The ®rst of these, represented by the frame (5a), accounted for $7 5 \%$ of the occurrences, and produced sentences with no date of graduation like \`I have a bachelor of Science degree in $X '$ , \`I hold a Ph.D. in X', \`I am a graduate of $\mathbf { X } '$

When candidates wished to include the dates their quali®cations were obtained, two choices were used as shown in (5b) and (5c), with the verbs \`graduate' and \`complete' in the past tense. Examples include $^ { \circ } \mathrm { I }$ graduated from $\mathbf { X }$ in 1995 with a degree in biotechnology' and \`I completed an MA in English in 1995 at $X '$ .

$$
{ \begin{array} { r l } & { { \mathrm { I + g r a d u a t e d + P r e p ~ P h r a s e ~ ( p l a c e ) + P r e p ~ P h r a s e ~ ( t i m e ) + w i t h + N P } } } \\ & { { \mathrm { I + c o m p l e t e d + N P + P r e p ~ P h r a s e ~ ( t i m e ) + a t + N P } } } \end{array} }
$$

The di€erent syntax generated by the two verbs again illustrates the importance of teaching the grammar of the word (Sinclair, 1991).

# 2.6.4. Naming present job

The main features of this strategy are the three choices of present tense available to the candidates in lexical phrase (6) below, and the adverbials of time which accompany each tense. An example of the present continuous is \`Currently I am working as $\mathbf { X } '$ , the present simple \`Presently I am employed as $X '$ and the present perfect \`For the past two years, I have held the post of $\mathbf { X } '$ . While \`currently' and \`presently' are the most common adverbs with the continuous and simple tenses, the present perfect allows more variety such as \`Since returning to $\mathbf { Y } '$ , and \`Recently'.

Adverb …time† $+ \mathrm { I } +$ Verb …present continuous; simple or perfect† ‡ NP

# 2.6.5. Predicting success

Although there were only ®ve occurrences of this strategy, a clear claim-justi®cation discourse pattern emerges with pairs of positive attributes being chosen to justify why the candidate will be a valuable asset to the potential employers. Two examples of justi®cation from the corpus are: \`with my experience and education I can be a strong asset to . . .' and \`my experience of coordinating X and coresponding with Y should put me in good stead to . . .'

Table 5 Summary of results   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Strategy (Promotion Move)</td><td>Common linguistic features</td><td>Important words</td></tr><tr><td>Listing relevant skills and abilities</td><td>Exposition, present simple tense,. binary phrases with &#x27;and&#x27;, modals</td><td>Experience, have, am, and</td></tr><tr><td>Stating how skills and abilities were obtained</td><td>Past tense narrative, adverbials. of time</td><td>Activity verbs</td></tr><tr><td>Listing qualifications</td><td>Expository, simple past tense,. adverbials of time</td><td>Have, hold, am, graduate, complete</td></tr><tr><td>Naming present job</td><td>Expository, single lexical phrase. frame, present tenses</td><td>Work, employ, hold</td></tr><tr><td>Predicting success</td><td>Claim-justification pattern</td><td>And, know, feel</td></tr></table></body></html>

Examples of the claims, described by frame (7), include: \`I know that I can be a strong asset to $\mathbf { X } '$ and $^ { \circ } \mathrm { I }$ feel that I would be particularly suited to $X '$ .

$$
\mathrm { I + v e r b + t h a t + I + m o d a l + v e r b + ( N P ) + ( a d j ) }
$$

The results of this series of narrow-angled analyses, summarised in Table 5, show quite de®nite form±function±purpose relationships at the strategy level in the Letter of Application genre.

# 3. Conclusions

The aim of this paper has been to demonstrate the e€ectiveness of an analysis at the level of the strategy, rather than at the level of the move or genre register. The analysis has revealed that within one move of the genre, a very wide range of discourse and syntactic features can be found which provide more detailed genre speci®c information than can be obtained from existing textbooks or from a dictionary. In order to teach the Letter of Application, ESP practitioners need to be aware of not just this range of features, but where they are used and for what purpose.

# Acknowledgements

We would like to thank members of the Department of English Language and Applied Linguistics, University of Brunei Darussalam, and their students for providing feedback on our initial analysis of the genre.

# References

Bhatia, V. K. (1991). A genre-based approach to ESP materials development. World Englishes, 10(2), 1±14.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analysing genre: Language use in professional settings. London: Longman.   
Biber, D. (1988). Variation across speech and writing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Brown, G., & Yule, G. (1983). Discourse analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Collins cobuild English language dictionary (1987). London: Harper Collins.   
Crookes, G. (1986). Towards a validated analysis of scienti®c text structure. Applied Linguistics, 7, 57±70.   
Dudley-Evans, A. (1986). Genre analysis: an investigation of the introduction and discussion sections of M.Sc. dissertations. In M. Coulthard, Talking about text. Birmingham, UK: English Language Research, Birmingham University.   
Flowerdew, J. (1993). Concordancing as a tool in course design. System, 21, 231±244.   
Gledhill, C. (2000). The discourse function of collocation in research article introductions. English for Speci®c Purposes, 19, 115±136.   
Hasan, R. (1989). The structure of a text. In M. A. K. Halliday, & R. Hasan, Language, context, and text: Aspects of language in a social-semiotic perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Henry, A., & Roseberry, R. L. (1996). A corpus-based investigation of the language and linguistic patterns of one genre and the implications for language teaching. Research in the Teaching of English, 30, 472±489.   
Henry, A., & Roseberry, R. L. (1997). An investigation of the functions, strategies and linguistic features of the introductions and conclusions of essays. System, 25, 479±495.   
Henry, A., & Roseberry, R. L. (1998). An evaluation of a genre-based approach to the teaching of EAP/ ESP writing. TESOL Quarterly, 32(1), 147±156, Brief Reports and Summaries.   
Hopkins, A., & Dudley-Evans, A. (1988). A genre-based investigation of the discussion sections in articles and dissertations. English for Speci®c Purposes, 7, 113±122.   
Jacoby, S., Leech, D., & Holten, C. (1995). A genre-based developmental writing course for undergraduate ESL science majors. In D. Belcher, & G. Braine, Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
James, C., Schol®eld, P., & Ypsiladis, G. (1994). Cross-cultural correspondence. World Englishes, 13(3), 325±340.   
Leckie-Tarry, H. (1993). The speci®cation of a text: register, genre and language teaching. In M. Ghadessy, Register analysis: Theory and practice. London: Pinter.   
Miller, C. R. (1984). Genre as social action. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70, 151±167.   
Nattinger, J. R., & DeCarrico, J. S. (1992). Lexical phrases and language teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.   
Scott, M. (1996). Wordsmith tools [Computer program]. Oxford University Press, Oxford. (Internet: http://www.oup.co.uk/elt/software/wsmith).   
Sinclair, J. M. (1991). Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (1981). Aspects of article introductions. Aston ESP Research Report No. 1, Language Studies Unit, University of Aston in Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (1996). Occluded genres in the academy: the case of the letter of submission. In E. Ventola, & A. Mauranen, Academic writing: Intercultural and textual issues (pp. 45±58). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (1994). Academic writing for graduate students: A course for non-native speakers of English. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Thompson, S. (1994). Frameworks and contexts: a genre-based approach to analysing lecture introductions. English for Speci®c Purposes, 13, 171±186.   
Weissberg, R., & Buker, S. (1990). Writing up research: Experimental report writing for students of English. Englewood Cli€s, NJ: Prentice-Hall Regents.

Alex Henry received his M.Sc. in Applied Linguistics from the University of Edinburgh. He has taught ESP/EAP in Japan, Malaysia, and Saudi Arabia. His ESP experience includes working with many leading multi-national pharmaceutical companies, banks, and trading companies. He presently teaches in the Department of English Language and Applied Linguistics at the University of Brunei Darussalam, where he also coordinates language training consultancies between the university and the public and private sectors.

He has published in international journals in the areas of vocabulary learning (Bilingualism and Bilingual Education), business writing (Language Awareness), teaching ESP oral skills (English for Speci®c Purposes); and with Robert Roseberry, in the areas of genre analysis (System), move registers (Research in the Teaching of English), and the evaluation of a genre-approach to ESP/EAP (TESOL Quarterly, Brief Reports and Summaries).

Robert L. Roseberry received his A.B. from the University of California, his M.A. and Ph.D. in German Language and Literature from the University of Toronto, and his M.Ed. in Language Education from the University of British Columbia. He has taught at the Universities of Nigeria, British Columbia, Winnipeg and Alberta, at Vancouver Community College, at the York University English Language Institute, and at Chancellor College, University of Malawi, among others. He has written and published a curriculum for the Japanese exchange program at Vancouver Community College, and has taught at the Toronto Oce Skills Training Project for Southeast Asian Refugee Women. He presently teaches at the University of Brunei Darussalam.

Together with Rachael Weinstock, he has written Reading, etc.: An integrated skills text (Prentice-Hall) for academic ESL students preparing for university studies, and has co-authored, with Moira Chimombo, The power of discourse: An introduction to discourse analysis, published by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (1998). Currently he is researching texture, genre, and register in ®rst- and second-language writing and has published in $1 9 9 5 \ { } ^ { \cdot } \mathrm { A }$ texture index: measuring texture in discourse', in the International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 5/2, 205±223.