# Developing language teachers' professional generative AI competence: An intervention study in an initial language teacher education course

Benjamin Luke Moorhousea, Yuwei Wana,\*, Chenze Wua, Lucas Kohnkeb, Tsz Ying Hoa, Theresa Kwongc

a Department of Education Studies, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China b Department of English Language Education, The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China c Centre for Holistic Teaching and Learning, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China

# ABSTRACT

Gnerative Aficilnllic (Gl) ools ae  aued  haeaomtie ti in ion e xsting ite gt that langag c l ck the aii to e th s eiy an criil. in an  l cation programme t on Kng unierst, this mixed-mh ntrtion stdy ms txplrehfts f explicit n fr uin G ol for language eching n rising pre-service language teacers professonal GeAI competence P-GeAI-C). 54M.Ed students tok part i an11-week course inervention aming to enance the five aspect in the P-GenAl- framework. Analysis of pre- and post-intervention questionnaires, which encompassed a mix of open and closed items to gather participants nowledge and percetions of utilising Genl tool, as well s the follow-up interviews, reealed that the inervention was efftie  strtching allapct of pre-ervice tchers P-enAl-. hil thee was grar eidence of improvement in participants pedagogical competence and critical awarenes of GenAl tools deployment, there was les evidence of development i thr apet, uch as teachers capacty to guide thr studts to use GnA tols eftively and reonsibly. This dscrepancy might be atributed to the lack of such content in the course intervention. Implications for incorporating elements of P-GenAl-C into teacher preparation courses and programmes are discussed.

# 1. Introduction

Since the release of ChatGPT in November 2022, many articles have been written about the transformative potential of Generative AI (GenAl) tools in language teaching, as well as the disruptiv effct they could have on job markets, eucational intitutions, creative industries, civic society and virtuall all aspects of human life (e.g., Jeon & Lee, 2023; Ulla et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024). Unlike traditional AI, which can engage in specific, pre-defined tass and offer pre-programmed responses to prompts, GenAI leverages deep learning to produce human-like content, including audio, code, images, text, simulations, 3D objects, and videos. It draws on data and/or the Internet to create new, unexpected responses to various complex prompts (e.g., instructions and questions; Lim et al. 2023. In addition, GenAI's ability to learn' means it can complete many unique tasks without being programmed. The types and functions of GenAI tools have been expanding rapidly. To date, GenAI tools have competently performed tasks that include text generation, ide gneration, mag geration, data anaysis and evaluation, text sumarisation, trnslation, converations, sentiment analysis, text classfication, paraphrasing, code generation, image caption generation, music generation and named entity recognition.

GenAI tools have been adopted at a staggering pace, significantly faster than previous technological advancements (Chan, 2023). Early studies exploring the use of GenAI among language teachers have also found high uptake rates (Moorhouse, 2024; Kohnke et al. 2023; Chiu, 2023). Given the rapid advancement and adoption of these tools, there are urgent cll for language teachers to develop the knowleg and skll nedto use thm proctiely,citiclly and thiclly in thr professional lie and uide thir stdnts to do so. Indeed, teachers will be essential agents in society's response to GenAI (Hockly, 2023).

This article concerns one aspect of professional development: initial language teacher education (ILTE).ILTE refers to the speci. alised preparation language teachers receive before they enter the profession, which plays a vital role in helping them develop the knowledge and skills they need (Korthagen, 2017). Therefore, ILTE programmes must be continuously revised and reformed. In response to the need for evidence-based ILTE practices (la Vell, 2022), the team of researchers in this study developed and implemented an 11-wee intervention for two sections of a course for students at a Hong Kong university pursuing a Master of Education in English Language Teaching (MEd: ELT) entitled 'Grammar for Teaching'.

The intervention aimed to increase the teachers' knowledge and skills related to using GenAI in teaching, conceptualised as professional GenAI competence (P-GenAI-C) This mixed-method study explores the impact of this intervention on the participants PGenAI-C. It has significant implications for future studies: i serves as an example of how to integrate GenAI elements into an ILTE course and sheds light on the effects of explicit training and aspects that require further development. Given the disruptive and transformative nature of GenAI (Yang et al., 2024), it is imperative to explore ways for teachers to develop P-GenAI-C.

# 1.1. Language teaching and GenAI

There has been substantial speculation and debate about the possible impact of GenAI tools on language teaching. Several studies have been conducted exploring language teachers perceptions of this sue. Most have sugested teachers have concerns, such as overreliance on GenAl tols, plagiarism and improper usage, personal and institutional integrity, and ssues related to bia, accuracy and copyright (e.g., Barrot, 2023; Yan, 2023; Yeo, 2023).

Despite these concerns, teachers have begun integrating GenAl tools into their professional practices. Language teachers have reported using them to create lesson plans, personalise materials, check content, provide information, and offer learners feedback (Moorhouse, 2024; Kohnke et a., 2023). These toos allow them to save time on planning and preparation work, as well s confirm the scope of their material (Moorhouse, 2024). In addition, scholars have proposed other potential uses of GenAl in language teaching: acting as a conversational partner, tutor, expert, peer and guide (Hwang & Chen, 2023) or providing personalized, real-time feedback on production tasks (e.g., speaking and writing; Barrot, 2023; Yan, 2023; Wan & Moorhouse, 2024).

However, although language teachers have reported using GenAI in their professonal practices, their scope seems imited. Most studies have found that one tol, ChatGPT, dominates, with others (e.g. image generators) being rare. The research suggests that Ianguage teachers often use GenAI to aid their esson planning and preparation outside of the classroom, with limite evidence of integration into their instructional practices (Ulla et al., 2023). For example, a qualitative study exploring Hong Kong early-career English language teachers use of GenAI in their professional practices, involving interviews with 27 teachers found that the majority were using GenAI to help with lesson planning and preparation as i saved-time and increased opportunities for differentiation (Moorhouse, 2024). However, only a couple of the interviewees were using GenAl in class with their learners Similarly, in the Thai context, Ull et al. (2023), using a mixed-method approach involving a survey of seventeen English language teachers and three follow-up interviews, found the participants were largely positive about ChatGPT in language teaching and learning and saw its potential in supporting leson planning and language activity creation. There is also emerging evidence that teachers lack the abilities required to use GenAI productively and impactfull (e.g. prompt enginering) and have varying degrees of awareness of is risks, limitations, and potential negative impacts (Yang et al., 2024).

Although there is limited literature on the use of GenAl by language teachers, some studies have explored these toos utility, which has implications for teachers practices. For example, Mizumoto and Eguchi's (2023) study involving 12,100 student esays found that ChatGPT can be used to score the linguisic accuracy of essays reliably and rapidly. This could save language teachers time and provide students with consistent, quick, and useful feedback. In another study, Ali et al. (2023) used a quantitative survey to explore the perspectives of 80 Saudi Arabian language instructors and learners regarding the impact of ChatGPT-based teaching' on language learning motivation. They found that participants believed the approach could positively afect learners autonomous, intrinsic, and extrinsic motivation. However, they did not define ChatGPT-based teaching or explicitly explain how it impacts motivation.

# 1.2. Teacher education and GenAI

ILTE is arguably the most inluential stage of language teachers' professional preparation and development. The knowledge and skill they acquire during their ILE experience can shape ther profesional practice, belief, identit, attitude, and commitment to the career (Clark & Newberry, 2019; Korthagen, 2017; Harhtt, 2014) However, teacher education programmes have truggled to keep up with recent technological advancements (Park & Son, 2022 Starkey, 2020). In various international contexts, beginning teachers have reported feeing underprepared to use technology as they enter the profession (Gudmundsdotti & Hatlevik, 2018; Wang, 2023) For example, Gudmundsdottir and Hatlevik (2018) conducted a nationwide survey of 356 Norwegian early-carer teachers to explore how well they felt their intial teacher education programme prepared them for using technology in their instructional practices. They found that the teachers generally believed they were poorly prepared for the profession. This can lead to a mismatch between the requirements of the profession and the skills and knowledge provided by ILTE (Moorhouse et al, 2023).

There are several reasons for this discrepancy. First, teacher education programmes can be difficult and cotly to reform as they are often acedited by external oganisations (e.g. government gencies; Clark & Newberr, 2019). In addition, some teacher educators lack the competence required to teach their students how to us technology for teaching or are sctical about is vale (Lindfor t al 2021; Ngao, Sang, & Kihwele, 2022). Finally, intitutions may lack the technological infrastructure needed for hands-on use of digital and GenAI tools.

Widespread speculation about the efects of GenAl, is rapid expansion in various domains and the ethical and social complexity of its implementation (Chiu, 2023) suggest that teacher education should be rformed. Indeed, Moorhouse and Kohnke (2024), through the use of in-depth interviews with thirtee teacher educators in Hong Kong, found that teacher educators believe GenAI willsustantially afect ITE curricula instruction and asessment. These findings have been supported by research in other subject areas within higher education (e.g., Chan, 2023).

Therefore, it i crucial to explore the competencies pre-service language teachers willned to employ GenAI tols productively and responsibly, as well as example of how they can be developed through explicit instruction in ILTE courses and programmes. The study reported in this article addresses these needs.

# 1.3. Professional GenAI competence

Given that GenAI tools have only recently been made available publicly, there are no specific competence frameworks that explicitly address the subject-specific knowledge and skills language teachers need. Therefore, this study draws on the established concept of Professional Digital Competence (PDC) to conceptualise a new framework: P-GenAI-C. In recent years, researchers have sought to understand the knowledge and skills teachers ned to utilse technolog in ther profesional practices efectively (tarkey, 2020). Scholars have arued that, like ther professinals, techer have scific uses fr technlogy that require spfic comtencies (Instefjord & Munthe, 2017). Teachers need to develop PDC to teach effctively in increasingly digitl school contexts (Starkey & Yates, 2022). Although PDC is context- and subject-specific (Lindfors et al., 2021), general PDC frameworks have been developed, which can be adopted by teacher education programmes to develop courses and instructional methods that prepare pre-service teachers to use technology for teaching (see Fallon, 2020, for a review of PDC frameworks and a proposal of one). In this study, we modify the PDC framework developed by Moorhouse et al. (2023) to highlight the competencies needed by English language teachers in the Hong Kong context.

We chose this framework because it encapsulates the knowledge and skills needed to utilise GenAl tools inside and outside of the classroom and prepare leaners to employ them critically and productively in their learning, rcreation time and future work (Gisbert Cervera & Caena, 2022). Moorhouse et al's (2023) framework includes five aspects: 1) Technological proficiency, 2) Pedagogical compatibility, 3) Preparing students for the digital world, 4) Risk, well-being and ethical awareness and 5) Professional work. We modified the five aspects to conceptualise the knowledge and skills needed in the GenAI world, or P-GenAI-C.

1. GenAI technological proficiency (TP)   
2. Pedagogical compatibility of GenAI in English language teaching (PC)   
3. Teachers' professional work (PW)   
4. Risk, well-being and the ethical use of GenAI (EU)   
5. Preparation of students for a GenAI world (PS) (see Table 1 for the descriptors of each aspect.)

We recognize that the original PDC framework could encompass GenAI. However, we decided to adapt the framework specifically for GenAl. We did this due to the complexity of these tols given their generative capabilites and the unique ethical and social concerns associated with them. In addition, scholars have argued that current frameworks do not consider competencies pertaining to the use of AI $\mathrm { N g }$ et al., 2023). Therefore, our framework allows for focused consideration of GenAI in teachers' competencies development - helping guide us to think about the knowledge and skills necessary to utilise GenAI effectively and responsibly in professional practices. The framework was used to develop the intervention, design the data collection tool and deductively code the open questionnaire items and interview data.

Table 1 P-GenAI-C aspects and descriptors.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>P-GenAI-C aspects</td><td>Descriptor</td></tr><tr><td>TP</td><td>TP is concerned with teachers&#x27; awareness of a variety of GenAI tools, including their functions, uses, and affordances.</td></tr><tr><td>PC</td><td>PC refers to teachers use of GenAl tols to supplement and enhance their students English language learning, including using GenAl tools to help them achieve their learning objectives.</td></tr><tr><td>PW</td><td>PW is concerned with the use of GenAl tool in teachers professonal work outside of the classrom, including grading and giving feedack. communicating with stakeholders and school administration.</td></tr><tr><td>EU</td><td>E refers to cher awas of te riss asca t sing , theffects  tools ma a on tchr and er well-bng, and the ethical issues pertaining to the use of GenAI tools.</td></tr><tr><td>PS</td><td>PS elate to tachers abilities to preare thr studnts th the owege and skills dd t criticlly and podctively ge n GenI tools in their learning, recreation time, and future work.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 2. The study

The study, adopting a mixed-method approach with two primary data collection methods, was designed to explore the effect of an 11-week intervention conducted in a one-year full-time MEd: ELT programme in a Hong Kong university on pre-service language teachers' subject-specific P-GenAI-. The following research question informed it: What effect does explicit training for using GenAI tools for language teaching have on pre-service language teachers' P-GenAI-C?

# 2.1. Context and intervention

As part of the MEd:ELT programme, students are required to take a core course entitled, Grammar for Teaching'. According to the syllabi, the course "ams at enhancing students knowledge of English grammar and enabling them to gain systematic insight into how grammar works in English language teaching. I examines the essential components of grammar both at the sentence and the discourse level'. The course provides a good venue for implementing the intervention for the following reasons 1) it i taken by allstudents in the MEd: ELT; 2) the course content allows for the demonstration and discussion of GenAI; and 3) two of the researchers (course instructor and teaching asstant) were responsible for teaching the course. They, along with the other four researchers, have expertise in ILTE, ELT, teacher development and GenAI.

To design the intervention, the course instructor (author 1) and teaching asstant (author 2) reviewed the course content, lesson activitie, and assessment tasks, along with the emerging literature on GenAI (e.g. Barrot, 2023; Chan, 2023; Hockly, 2023). They designed learning activities and asessment tass that aligned with the P-GenAI-C framework. Table 2 presents an overview of the course sessions, the GenAl integration, and the alignment with the P-GenAI-C framework. GenAI tools were integrated into 8of the 11 sessions. The sessions were designed to be developmental and progressive, coverin all fieaspects of P-GenAI-C, with sesons 10 and 11 involving students engaging in experiential tass that required the use ofGenI (see ig. 1 for the experiential tass). Sesons were delivered using the Flipped Classroom Approach (Lo & Hew, 2017) -students engaged with the session content via annotated presentation slides (approx 20-40 min long) out of clas before 2-h in-person tutorials. The course ran from September 2023 to December 2023.

In addition to integrating GenAl into the course sessions, the use of GenAI was also integrated into the course assignment tasks. In total, the course had three assignments. The first assignment was an in-clas language analysis task where no GenAl tools were permitted. The second assignment was a group activity where students weretasked with developing a lesson plan and materias for a specific grammar item and group of learners. In this assignment, students could use GenAl tool for the following functions: brainstorming ideas, checking definitions, formulating objectives, translation, and checking language acuracy. In the third assgnment, students were required to work with GenAI tools' to make three improvements to the lesson plan and materials they developed for assignment 2, write a pedagogical rationale for the changes made, and a reflection on their use of GenAl in the assgnment task. They

Table 2 Overview of the course sessions, the GenAI integration, and the alignment with the P-GenAI-C framework.   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Session</td><td>Content</td><td>GenAI integration</td><td>P-GenAI-C</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Introduction to the teaching of grammar</td><td>A) Introduce GenAI: (1) university principles and guidelines; (2) functions; (3) types of GenAI tools; (4) concerns and potential of GenAI in language education; B) Demonstrate of ChatGPT/hotpot.ai (image generator)</td><td>TP, EU</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Teacher pedagogical grammar awareness 1 a. Parts of speech</td><td>A) Discuss the use of GenAI for developing teacher pedagogical grammar awareness; B) Prompt engineering: Introduce principles of effective prompting;</td><td>TP, PC, PW</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Grammar and function Teacher pedagogical grammar awareness 2 -</td><td>C) Use ChatGPT for exploring word classes A) Prompt refining and maintaining interacting with ChatGPT;.</td><td>TP, PC</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Sentence and discourse grammar Learner grammar - &#x27;Error&#x27; analysis and</td><td>B) Create language exercises with ChatGPT A) Use of GenAI for error detection and analysis;</td><td>PC, PW,</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>feedback</td><td>B) Use of GenAI for personalized corrective feedback;</td><td>EU, PS</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Teaching grammar: A deductive approach</td><td>C) Discuss ethical issues of using GenAI for grading and assessing learners work A) Critique lesson plan generated on ChatGPT-4 prompted to follow the deductive</td><td>PC, EU</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>Teaching grammar: An inductive approach</td><td>approach A) Create a lesson plan using ChatGPT-4 for a specific group of learners and grammar</td><td>TP, PC, PW</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>items. B) Interact with ChatGPT-4 to refine the plan based on the inductive approach - No explicit GenAI integration - students engaged in micro-teaching</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>Teaching grammar: Teaching procedures and classroom activities</td><td></td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>Teaching grammar: Teaching procedures and classroom activities</td><td> - No explicit GenAI integration - students engaged in micro-teaching</td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>Teaching grammar: Planning for a grammar lesson</td><td> - No explicit GenAI integration - students engaged in micro-teaching</td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>Teaching grammar: Materials development and AI</td><td>A) Introduce and explore specific GenAI tools that can be used for language teaching (Alayna.us, magicschool.ai) and learning (e.g. Call Annie/Quilbot) B) Experiential tasks using GenAI tools and evaluation of the experience in terms of 1)</td><td>TP, PC, PW</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Learning grammar with AI</td><td>Accuracy; 2) Creativity; 3) Usefulness; 4) Concerns A) How to keep a record of GenAI use B) Demonstrate the use of GenAI to support language learning and self-directed learning</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Session 10 Main task   
Each group will be given an experiential task related to planning and preparing for   
Jrammar teaching using ChatGPT.   
3rammar item: Past Simple tense in stories   
Learners: Primary 2 Chinese Learners of English 1) Go to [university name] ChatGPT. Select 3.5 or 4 2) Type in the initial prompt and review the result. 3) Try some possible follow-up prompts 4) Create your own prompts. 5) Evaluate the experience -- think about 1) Accuracy; 2) Creativity; 3) Usefulness; 4) Concerns 6) Share your interaction with ChatGPT and your evaluation with the class.   
Experiential tasks assigned to each group 1. Research the grammar item -- including form, meaning use 2. Brainstorm possible exercises for a grammar item 3. Input a lesson plan and ask it to generate materials for the lesson 4. Input a lesson plan and ask it to suggest improvements that can be made to make it more engaging, student-centred / cater for differences 5. Input a lesson plan and ask it to generate pre and post-lesson tasks (e.g. preparation activities / consolidation activities / homework) 6. Input a text and ask it to simplify the text for a specific learner / group of learners 7. Ask to evaluate and give feedback/ follow-up suggestions for a piece of a student's work 8. Create \*authentic-like' texts that demonstrate the use of a specific grammar item, topic, group of learners. 9. Create differentiated exercises that have different kinds of demands and supports 10. Create a board game for a specific grammar point 11. Create items for a grammar quiz / test 12. Create fill-in-the-gap and scrambled sentences for a specific grammar item 13. Research possible difficulties various different linguistic groups may have learning a specific grammar item and suggestions for how to address the difficulties

were informed that GenAI tools should be used for the following functions: generating materials and tests, providing suggestions on lesson plans and materials, and checking language acuracy. For assinments 2 and 3, students needed to submit a declaration stating how GenAI tools were used in the assignments, and for assgnment 3, they needed to submit a record of their GenAI tools use. Assignment 3 was designed to simulate how English language teachers use GenAI in their professional work.

# 2.2. Participants

In total 87 students were enrolled in the two sections of the course. All the students were invited to participate. 59 students completed the pre-intervention questionnaire, while 70 completed the post-intervention questionnaire. To accurately compare the preand post-intervention questionnaires, participants who only completed one questionnaire were removed from the dataset Fifty-four students completed both the pre- and post-intervention questionnaires - a $6 2 \%$ participation rate. Four identified as male $( 7 . 4 \% )$ and fifty $( 9 2 . 6 \% )$ as female. This represented the gender ratio of the class. Twenty-two $( 4 0 . 7 \% )$ reported having previous work experience. Their experience ranged from es than one year o five years, with the most having les than 2 years of experience. Their experiences included translators, primary and secondary school English teachers, and internships as English tutors. The remaining thirty-two $( 5 9 . 3 \% )$ had no work experience and had just graduated from bachelor's degree programmes. All the participants originated from Mainland China. At the end of the questionnaire students were invited to self-nominate for follow-up group interviews. Three group interviews were arranged with eleven participants. See below for details of the data collection processes.

Ethical approval was provided by the Research Ethics Committe at Hong Kong BaptistUniversity. Allparticipants were informed in writing of the projectsaims, and their active consent was sought. Participants were made aware that their participation was voluntary and that they could withdraw from the study at any time with no negative consequences to themselves. As one of the researchers was the course instructor, special procedures were ollowed to ensure participants felt comfortable. The participants were made aware that their responses would not impact their course grades. A colleague of the researcher was present when the project was explained, and consent forms were distributed to ensure participants felt comfortable and not pressured.

# 2.3. Data collection methods and process

Two data collection methods were utilized to address the research question: pre- and post-questionnaires and fllow-up group interviews.

# 2.3.1. Pre- and post- questionnaires

The questionnaires were purposefully developed for the study. The pre-intervention questonnaire included a mix of open and closed items designed to gather the students (1) demographic information, including self-identified gender, previous study, and work experiences; (2) perception of competence in using technology for teaching, familiarity with GenAI tools, perceptions on the utilit f GenAI tools, and their oncerns or worries about GenAl tools. The post-questionnaire included similar items with an item addressing the students' perceived learning from the course. As there were no known validated quantitative surveys pertaining to asessing language teachers' GenAI competencies, when designing the questions, we decided to adopt a more exploratory and qualitative approach. The qualitative items allowed participants to provide \*rich and complex accounts of ther \*sense-making processes (Braun et al., 2021, p. 641), so the responses were true to participants beliefs and experience (ee Table 3for the questionnaire items). The questionnaire items were piloted with two education experts and their fedback was incorporated to increase the content and face validity. The pre-intervention questionnaire was distributed electronicall during th firs sesions of the course (September 2023), while the post-intervention questionnaire was distributed in the last sessions of the course (December 2023). The pre-questionnaire took an average time of $1 1 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ to complete, while the post-questionnaire took $1 2 \mathrm { m i n }$ . The use of pre- and post-intervention questionnaires allowed us to observe any change in the participants' P-GenAI-C over the period of the intervention (Cohen et al., 2018)

# 2.3.2. Group interviews

Three fllow-up interviews were arranged one to two weeks afe the intervention. An interview guide was designed for the study to better understand the participants beliefs and experiences about GenAI, their views towards their P-GenAI-C, and their intentions to use Al in thir future teaching. Some questions explictly addressed the questionnaire responses, so as to provide a richer and deeper understanding of their experiences (Cohen et al., 2018). The interview guide was shared within the research team and each item was discussed and modified to ensure clarity and relevance (Kallio et al., 2016). Each group intrview involved 3to 4 students and lasted about $4 0 { \mathrm { - } } 6 0 \ \operatorname* { m i n }$ . They were audio-recorded for transcription purposes.

# 2.4. Data analysis

The quantitative questionnaire items were entered into Pss 28 to analyze the impact of the intervention on participants perceived level of competence and familiarity with using generative AI tols in language teaching. A descriptive analysis and pair-samples -test analysis were conducted to measure the mean differences between the pre-intervention and post-intervention results. The $p$ -value less than 0.05 was considered as significant.

The qualitative data from both questionnaires and interviews were analysed using thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006). To capture the richnes of the data, we employed a combined pproach of inductive and deductivecoding. Intialy, inductive coding was used to ensure that the analysis was grounded in the actual data. Thre of the researchers independently read and re-read the data several times to become familiar with the content. Each researcher then coded one-third of the data independently. Then they met and discussed their codes, ensuring consistency and resolving discrepancies. A coding scheme was developed. Based on the coding scheme, they independently coded 10 percent of the data and assessed the interrater reliability. A percent agreement of $9 3 \%$ was achieved in the proces, indicating a high level of reliabilit. Minor discrepancies were resolved and the coding scheme was refined. The re searchers then proceeded to code the rest of the data, maintaining an iterative proces of reflection and discussion. Regular meetings were held to reine codes and finalize themes. Following the inductive phrase, the themes were carefully categorized and mapped to the P-GenAI- framework aspects. Finally, the reearch team carefully reviewed the themes to validate and ensure a comprehensive data analysis. Frequency of the themes mentioned in pre- and post-intervention questionnaires were counted and compared to indicate the effectivenessof the intervention. It was noted that the frequency findividual themes were highly varied, with some themes such as apabilitie in lesson planning being ver salient, while ther ike profesional relection were not. Possible rsons for this variation are proposed in the discussion section.

# 3. Findings

Both the quantitative and qualitative data analysis showed that the intervention enhanced the participants' understanding of all five aspects of P-GenAI-C. However, the extent and nature of these changes varied among different aspects (se Table 4 for an overview of the themes identified under each aspect of P-GenAI-C - these are discussed in detail below). Notably, no drastic differences were observed between the themes identified in the pre-intervention and post-intervention open responses. Sill, there was a general increase in the mentions of nearly al themes and salient depth and breadth in their responses, suggesting an enhanced awareness and understanding among the participants regarding the various areas of the P-GenAl-C framework. This observation aligns and is strengthened by the quantitative results, which demonstrated an improvement in the participants' familiarity and perceived competence in using GenAI afer the intervention. This implie that explicit instruction on the use of GenAI for language teaching did help develop the pre-service teachers P-GenAI-C, even when participants had varying levels of experience and engagement with GenAI before the intervention. Below, the findings pertaining to each aspect of P-GenAI-C along with their frequencies are presented.

# 3.1. GenAI technological proficiency (TP)

One of the most salient developments s student' GenAI technological proficiency (TP). Participants were found to become more competent in using educational technologies and more familiar with GenAI toos after the intervention. The analyses of mean and paired samples t-tests (see Table 5) demonstrated a stisticall igificant development in students capability of using educational technology and familiarity with GenAI tools after the intervention $( p < 0 . 0 5 )$ . For the participants' competency, $t \left( 5 3 \right) = 3 . 5 8 2$ $d =$ 0.487, indicating a small to medium effect size. For their familiarity with GenAI tools, $t \left( 5 3 \right) = 8 . 2 3 5$ $d = 1 . 1 2 1$ , suggesting a large effect size (Cohen, 1988).

The quantitative results above were confirmed by the themes constructed from qualitative data. Before the intervention, although some of them stated they had experience using GenAI tools such as ChatGPT (frequency $= 1 8$ , their functions were limited to lesson planning and searching for information. In contrast, there was a noticeable increase in the types of GenAI tools and the variety of functions used by students after the intervention (frequency $= 6 5$ ). Participants claimed that they "learned various kinds of AI tools that can be used from the intervention. The detaled type of GenAI tols and frequency of being mentioned are presented in Table 6. Furthermore, they used a wider range of functions of GenAI tools after the intervention.

The most frequently mentioned functions of GenAI tools were generating teaching and learning materials, checking assignments, correcting grammar mistakes, and designing lesson plans. They maintained that these functions of GenAI tools could help them "reduce the workload', \*increase eficiency", brainstorm ideas" and "refresh thoughts'. Some participants also pointed out that the lesson plans and teaching and learning materials designed by GenAI tools were "more interesting", and \*aractive", and made the teaching \*more efective and more creative" Interestingly, none of the participants mentioned ssues related to prompt engineering before the intervention (frequency $\mathit { \Theta } = 0 \mathit { \check { \Psi } } .$ , while after the intervention, many participants claimed that they "learned how to give prompts" to help them get accurate and desired responses from GenAI tools (frequency ${ \bf \tau } = { \bf 1 1 } \dot { \bf \tau }$

# 3.2. Pedagogical compatibility of GenAI in English language teaching (PC)

Participants demonstrated an increased awareness of ways in using GenAl in language teaching. Although some participants in both pre- and post-intervention stages indings suggest they understand the possbilities GenAI affords teachers in helping them withleson planning, there was an observable increase of frequency of occurrence in the post-intervention compared to the pre-intervention responses (frequency $= 3 9$ to frequency $= 6 3$ ). Specifically, participants showed a deeper understanding and more detailed elaboration on using GenAI tools to facilitate the planning proces. There was a salient change from considering GenAI as a direct esson plan generator to using it t refine existing plans and create classrom activitie. The shift might be atribute to the instructor's explicit guidance on using GenI to refine esson plans, coupled with targeted assignment tasks that encouraged such application. For example, one post-intervention questionnaire respondent emphasized, [The assignment] can help me write better leson plan, enlighten me to design more interesting and effective in-clas activities and worksheets, and give me some suggestions to make improvements". As the intervention course focused on grammar teaching, most students mentioned the usefulness of GenAI in assting grammar lesson planning, including clarifying grammar concepts, analyzing English texts, checking teachers' grammar errors, and flling teachers contextual knowledge gaps. An interviewee highlighted the power of GenAl in creating context and example sentences. She elaborated that,

Table 3 Pre and post-intervention questionnaire items.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Questionnaires items</td></tr><tr><td>Pre and Post</td><td>How competent do you think you are in using technology for teaching? (4-item Likert Scale) How familiar are you with generative AI tools (e.g., ChatGPT, New Bing, Midjourney, etc)? (4-item Likert Scale) Have you used any generative AI tools?. If yes, what are the names of tools, and how do you use them? If not, why not use them?</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Do you think generative AI tools can help you be a more effective grammar teacher? If yes, how can they help you? If not, why do you think they cannot help you? Do you have any concerns or worries about the use of generative AI tools in teaching English?</td></tr><tr><td>Pre only Post only</td><td>If yes, what are your concerns or worries? If not, why do you not have any concerns or worries? What would you like to know about the use of generative AI and the teaching of grammar? What have you learnt from this course about the use of generative AI and the teaching of grammar?</td></tr></table></body></html>

Maybe sometimes it's difficult for us [to] think about the relevant sentences or the contexts. And you can ask ChatGPT to give you [the context information], like our topic is Christmas, but we don't know that much about Christmas. We may ask ChatGPT what the festival is or what the special celebrations are during the Christmas period. So, it wil give us some events so we can create stories based on the information, so I think its useful but sill the teachers play an important role in the teaching part, so it cannot replace [teachers] but it's a very helpful tool.

A change was also observed in the use of GenAI for material development. While pre-intervention mentions were scarce frequency $= 4 \AA$ , the intervention resulted in a substantial increase (frequency $= 2 0$ ) in participants who claimed their capabilities in using GenAI :o generate tables, text, images, videos, slides, and exercises.

Another salient effec of the interventio is their transition from the teachers perspective to a more student-entered consideration of language learning. In the pre-intervention questionnaire, participants only considered GenAI tools as a means to enhance their lesson planning by meeting their own instructional needs. In contrast, fter the intervention, they began to discus how GenAI could provide creative ideas to help students learn English and how it could be utilized to cater to the diverse needs of students. For example, one interview participant highlighted the possibility of GenAI to provide students with a real context of how to apply the grammar knowledge in language acquisition. He elaborated that,

I think maybe grammar is about rules right in context, but according to a lot of researchers, language is not learnt, is acquired, language acquisition. That's why I think maybe it is possible for students to have interactions with AI, like having a real conversation with a native speaker or someone with very fluent English."

In addition, there was an increase in critical awarenes regarding the pedagogical fit of GenAl-generated content. Instead of directly accepting the GenAl-generated content in language teaching, participants egan to critically evaluate the suitabilit of the content for their teaching contexts and student language levels. A participant commented on the limitations of GenAl in understanding students anuage es, Chat is nt tht famiiar with the stdnt's lel, if you tll P that thr (tart tdts) mthr language is Chinese and they are in primary four, ChatGPT may have a misunderstanding on their language level'. This requires teachers to prompt more pedagogical context information. Similarly, a questionnaire respondent pointed out the generic nature of GenAIgenerated ideas and the necessty for personalized revision, Sometimes, the teaching methods provided by AI are quite broad and not necessarily suitable for use; I need to judge by myself, then rephrase the question (prompt) to get the content I want. Instead of directly acepting GenAl-generated content the participants realized the necessty of tailoring the content to the needs and levels of their future students.

Table 4 Themes identified organised by P-GenAI-C aspects with frequencies.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">P-GenAI-C Aspects</td><td colspan="2">Frequency</td></tr><tr><td>Pre</td><td>Post</td></tr><tr><td>TP</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Variety of GenAI tools and functions</td><td>18</td><td>65</td></tr><tr><td>Prompt engineering skills</td><td>N/A</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>PC</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Capabilities in lesson planninge</td><td>39</td><td>63</td></tr><tr><td>Capabilities in material development.</td><td>4</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>Awareness of pedagogical fit of GenAI-generated content</td><td>3</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td>Awareness of GenAI&#x27;s potential in classroom teaching.</td><td>4</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Enhancement of knowledge base.</td><td>8</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Professional reflection</td><td>N/A</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>PW</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Efficiency improvement</td><td>3</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Assessment</td><td>2</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>PS</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Awareness of preparing students.</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>EU</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Cautious of the negative impacts that GenAI could bring</td><td>36</td><td>54</td></tr><tr><td>Accuracy and quality of GenAI&#x27;s responses.</td><td>9 N/A</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td>Teachers&#x27; responsibilities</td><td></td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Students&#x27; and parents&#x27; acceptance</td><td>N/A</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Plagiarism and misuse by students.</td><td>8</td><td>N/A</td></tr></table></body></html>

N/A theme not found.

It should be noted that although there is no evidence of the pre-service teachers actual capability in teaching GenAI-integrated lessons, a notable shift in their awareness of GenAl's potential in language teaching was observed post-intervention. Previously, participants only mentioned the possbility of using GenAI tools to engage students in the classroom (frequency $= 4$ ). However, after the intervention, their understanding of GenAI's use in class broadened(frequency $= 9$ . They recognized the capacity of GenAI not only to capture students interest but also to enrich the learning experience by enhancing the richness and effctivenes of practical teaching. They also identified the potential for facilitatig diffrentiated instruction tailored to students' needs and stimulating language production in language classrooms. For example, a participant in the interview illustrated:

I never knew before that there were so many types of Al that could be used as auxiliary tools to asst in the teaching process. I was particularly impressed by the AI that creates pictures showing the difference between two words. I personall feel that such AI can help students distinguish the difference between two words to a great extent because it's very vivid and illustrative. Also, the AI that simulates dialogues with characters is very powerful, which can exercise oral English and provide some ideas for learning English.

hat's more, participants became aware that GenAl could aid in reflection and further teaching improvement. A student reflected,

I gained a deeper understanding of what AI can help me with. I also reflected on AI. Afer realizing the power of AI, I also reflected on my own teaching, becoming more cautious. believe I need to continuously strive and improve myself to adapt to this AI era.

This contrasts with the pre-intervention responses, which lacked such articulation (frequency ${ } = 0 { \mathrm { { } } }$ ), indicating a development in the articipants' self-awareness and professional mindset.

# 3.3. Professional work of teachers (PW)

Before the intervention, only a few participants mentioned that using GenAI tools was time-saving and gave no reasons for explaining this point (frequency $= 3$ ). Conversely, a threefold increase was found in the number of participants who realized that the use of GenA tols could not only save their time but also reduce their workload by \*assisting their work" with detailed elaborations after the intervention (frequency $= 9$ . They explained that GenAI tools can help them tackle many time-consuming daily work such as polishing lesson plans and generating context-based teaching materials so that they can have more time to focus on students. This might imply that they have obtained a deepened understanding of the efect of GenAI tools on efficiency enhancement in teaching. In addition, even though participants mentioned GenAI tool can help them check in-classexercises and assignments and summarize, analyze, and correct language errors in both pre-intervention and post-intervention, more participants hold this view in the postintervention (frequency $= 4 \AA$ ) than in the pre-intervention (frequency $= 2$ . In the interview, when asked about whether they will redesign the asessment to respond to the emerging technology, Elva claimed that considering the age group of hr future students, she will assign some homework that just let them (students) use the AI with the help of thir parents, which requires "communicating with parents" on the responsible use of GenAI.

# 3.4. Preparation of students for a GenAI world (PS)

Some responses suggested the participants knew the importance of preparing students for the GenAI world. They expressed the need of teachers to raise students awareness of using GenAI tools for language learning and facilitate them in interacting with the tools. Although the frequency of the theme appeared the same in both the pre and post questionnaires (frequency $= 2$ , participants demonstrated a more profound comprehension of it during the interviews. For example, one of the interviewees expressed the importance of teaching students the critical use of GenAI tools:

I think we ned to teach the students to lean to use AI criticall. I think it's quite important. Although the tols can help us think or do our homework or other stuff, this kind of thinking process their intellectual engagement, i very important for the students. They cannot just ask AI to do everything or replace the thinking process by themselves.

She also expressed her affirmation for the GenAI integrated assignment tass in the cours, I think assignments 2 and 3 are good xamples (t t d e th aue f  proess) se first, you inctr ak s   ourle th w n use AI to help us to improve it. At least you need to think first This suggested that the clas assgnments were efective in helping the preservice techers rconsider the format of asignments in futre teching. However, the limited occurrence f the theme entified from the data implied that participants awarenes of preparing their students to use GenAl in their future teaching practices might not have been fully developed through the intervention.

Table 5 Pre- and post-intervention comparison of competency and familiarity in using GenAI in language teaching   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Pre</td><td colspan="2">Post</td><td colspan="4">Paired-samples t-tests</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>m</td><td>SD</td><td>m</td><td>SD</td><td>df</td><td></td><td>Cohen&#x27;s d</td><td>95% CI</td></tr><tr><td>Competency</td><td>2.481</td><td>0.666</td><td>2.852</td><td>0.596</td><td>53</td><td>3.582*</td><td>0.487</td><td>[-0.768, 0.203]</td></tr><tr><td>Familiarity</td><td>1.926</td><td>0.610</td><td>2.722</td><td>0.596</td><td>53</td><td>8.235*</td><td>1.121</td><td>[-1.459, 0.776]</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $p$ value $< 0 . 0 0 1$

Table 6 Type of GenAI tools and frequency of being mentioned.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Type of GenAI Tools</td><td rowspan="2">Examples</td><td colspan="2">Frequency of Being Mentioned</td></tr><tr><td>Pre-intervention</td><td>Post-intervention</td></tr><tr><td>Chatbot</td><td>ChatGPT; AI Chat; Poe</td><td>11</td><td>51</td></tr><tr><td> Image generator</td><td>Midjourney; Stable Diffusion.</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>PPT generator</td><td>Mindshow</td><td>0</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Writing assistant</td><td>Quillbot; Grammarly; Grammar AI</td><td>5</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Conversation partner</td><td>Call Annie</td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Research assistant</td><td>Consensus</td><td>0</td><td>2</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.5. Risk, well-being and ethical use of GenAI (EU)

There was a positive effect observed from the intervention in terms of deepening participants understanding of the limitations and concerns about the use of GenAl in the educational setting. Firs, participants become much more aware of the potential negative impacts of GenAI after the intervention, as exemplified by the noticeable increase in frequencie of mentions from 36 to 54. Participants both before and after the intervention expressed concerns about developing reliance on GenAl; however it was only after the intervention that the participants demonstrated a more comprehensive reflection on the negative impacts assciated with GenAI over. reliance. Previously, concerns mainly revolved around the cognitive dependency students could have on GenAI; afer the intervention, concerns expanded to include multiple cognitive aspects of both teachers and students such as degenerated development on creativity, problem-solving skill and critical thinking. Additionally, there were ocasional mentions of GenAl potentially threatening further professional improvement, particularly in the pedagogical aspect, as wellas teachers "sense of achievement' in their teaching. Together, these findings suggested that participants were not just more cautious of developing over-reliance on GenAl, but also more aware of the implications that technological reliance could have on the cognitive development of themselves and their future students and on their personal professional development.

Participants showed some awareness of the inherent limitations of GenAl tools before the intervention, primarily focusing on the accuracy of GenAI responses (frequency ${ \ o }$ ). In the post-intervention questionnaire, not only did the frequency of this theme nearly double (frequency $= 1 6$ , but participants also highlighted limitations beyond accuracy. These included the lack of innovation in GenAI-generated responses and the tools inability to attend effectively to the affective aspects of their prospective students. To counteract these shortcomings in GenAl toos, teachers in the post-intervention questionnaire could articulate such responsibilities as discerning between good and poor responses and verifying the responses with more external sources (frequency $= 7$ . This contrasted with the lack of articulation (frequency ${ \it \Delta \phi } = 0 .$ ) in the pre-intervention questionnaire, meaning that participants became more critical about GenAI responses.

Regarding the ethical use of GenAI, participants expressed concerns about the riss of plagiarism and students misusing GenAI to cheat in their daily assignments or assessments in the pre-intervention data (frequency $= 8$ ). However, this concern was found absent in the post-intervention questionnaire. Istead, a new theme emerged in which the participants expressed their concerns about the acceptance and the judgement' imposed on teachers' GenAI use by students and parents (frequency $= 3$ . For example, two participants explicitly mentioned they are worried] about parents atitudes towards teachers using GenAl t assis teaching and wondered if parents gree[d] on this matter. The finding might imply that the intervention prompted the participants to develop an awareness of the challenges that their adoption of GenAI could bring to their professional image/identity.

# 4. Discussion

This study has examined the effect of explicit instruction regarding the use of GenAl tols for language teaching on the P-GenAI-C development of pre-service teachers. Responding to urgent clls to help languag teachers develop the knowledge and skill required to be effective in the GenAI age (e.g., Chiu, 2023; Hockly, 2023; Ull et al., 2023), the research team designed a semester-long intervention for one core course in the MEd: ELT programme. The sessions focused on each aspec of the P-GenAI- framework. The findings showed that the intervention improvedall aspects of the participants P-GenAlI-C, making them more digitall competent and familiar with GenAI tools.

Interestingly, the thematic analysis of the pre- and post-intervention qualitative data found similar themes, although there were differences in frequency, depth, and breadth. In additio, four themes were only identified in the post-intervention data: prompt engineering skill under the aspect of TP, professonal reflection under PC, teachers' responsibilities, and student' and parents' acceptance under EU. The similarity can be attributed to the prevalence of GenAl tools in society since the launch of ChatGPT in November 2022 thefrequency of discussions about it in popular meda and daly conversations, and specific discourse about its mpact on language education (Zucchet, 2023). However, just because teachers know about specfic digital technologies and use them in other aspects of their lives (e.g., recreational activities) does not necessarily mean they can use them efectively in their professional lives (Konig et al., 2020; Starkey, 2020). This i sugested by the increased breadth and depth of the post-intervention themes. We observed that participants moved from general awareness to the specific P-GenAI-C needed for language teaching. Several salient themes support this observation.

First, participants' gain of prompt engineering skills was a new theme in the post-intervention responses. The qualit of the prompts could significantl influence the functionality and usefulnes of the responses produced by Genl tools (Cain, 2024). It is nesary to improve pre-service teachers' skills to generate effctive prompts to satisfy the specific teching objectives and the individualized needs of students. During the intervention, participants were provided with model prompts and allowed to fine-tune their interactions until they achieved the outcomes they desired. Applying this sill to language teaching, they can craft prompts based on the specific task (e.creating an activity about a grammar point), age, proficiency level, and topic, leading to more refined and valuable outputs (Maloy & Gattupalli, 2024).

Second, there was a shift in how the participants viewed GenAI: they came to see it as an assistant for planning essons and developing materials rather than a content generator. In the post-intervention responses, the role of the teacher was more central. This suggests that participants changed from being pasive recipients of GenAI-generated content to active evaluators and creators. This change aligns with Wegerif's dialogic theory (2010), which proposes that creativity emerges within a \*dialogic space"-a space that arises from the interaction of diverse voices. In other words, the variety ofvoices in the dialogic space brings the potential for learners to come up with new perspectives and ideas. Through the intervention, participants considered GenAI as a"dialogue partner Cao & Dede, 2023). By integrating GenAI's response as additional voices in facilitatig lesson planning and material development, they understood the need to work with the GenAI tool to produce creative, student-centered lesons and recognized the gaps' in GenAI's capabilities, such as its lack of knowledge about the learners' interests, needs, and proficiencies.

Third, the participants' responses suggest they developed a more critical awareness of GenAl, including its limitations. In the post interview data, they went beyond mere acuracy to addressother shortcomings, including a lack of originality. In this context,the teacher also plays an indispensable role in evaluating the quality of the output. These are encouraging findings. GenAI can serve as an assistant for language teachers, helping them be more productive and efective without losing their agency. The shift can be atributed to the intervention's emphasi n critical reflection on the use of GenAI throughout the whole semester. Participants were encouraged to reflect on their experiences with GenAI, pushing them to scrutinize the strengths and weaknesses of the tools.

Significantly, themes related to two aspects of P-GenAI- (PW and PS), were leslient i the dataset than the others. Reflecting on the specific intervention, this is understandable. Opportunitiesto explore the use of GenAl in teachers professional work outside ofthe classroom were limted, as this was not one of the learning aims of the course. Therefore, this aspect was not fully adresed. Similarly, TP and PC are ikely prerequisites for the development of PS. Teachers must eel confident i ther ability to use GeAl tools before they can guide their students to use them effectively and responsibly. There is a need to understand how teachers develop the skill they need to prepare their students to use GenAl tools in subject-specific ways. This is essential due to these tools' multifunctionality and ability to either support or hinder language learning depending on how they are used (Dakakni & Safa, 2023).

# 5. Conclusion

This study explored the effect of a 11-week course intervention explicitly designed to develop pre-service English language teachers' P-GenAI-C. Our findings show that the intervention was potentiall effective in stretching all aspect of pre-ervice teachers P-GenAI-C. While there was greater evidence of improvement in participants pedagogical competence and critical awarenes of GenAI tools deployment, there was less evidence of development in other domains such as teachers' capacity to guide their students to use GenAI toolseffectively and responsibly. This discrepancy might be attributed to the lack of such content in the course intervention.

We argue that the development of GenAl has dramatically changed the knowledge and skill needed to be an effective teacher, and it is imperative that ILT programmes are adapted to address these developments. This wll help ensure pre-ervice language teachers can use these tols in their professional practice efectively and responsibly. Although, in the past, ITE has been slow to integrate technological advancements into programmes and courses (Park & Son, 2022), GenAI creates a pressing need for revision and reformation (Moorhouse, 2024; Moorhouse & Kohnke, 2024). In this article, we have described our integration of GenAI toos into one ILTE course and analysed its ffect on students P-GenAl-C development. We hope our course design exemplifies how to bring GenAI into such courses and prompts research investigating how to strengthen other aspects of P-GenAI-C. Importantly though, as GenAI tools develop, what constitutes P-GenAI-C willikely change, as will the existing competencies our pre-service teachers bring to ILTE. ILTE will nee to be adaptive and flexible in its response to these rapid technological advancements to ensure they stay relevant and can prepare graduates for the shifting realities of language education in the GenAI-age.

Our study had several limitations. First, we relied on self-reported data to explore the effects of the intervention. Future studies should examine how pre-service language teachers use GenAI tool, exploring how they interact with them and the tass for which they use them. Inded, we collected the participants' GenAl dialogue logs and lesson plans created during the intervention. These have been analysed for a follow-up paper. Second, the intervention was conducted in one course with specific learning aims related to teaching grammar. Additional studies should explore the integration of GenAI into other aspects of ILTE. In addition, due to logistical and curriculum constraints, we did not have a control group. The effects may have been due to other confounding variables given the length of the intervention. Studies adopting experimental designs should be conducted. Finall, we primarily adopted qualitative research methods that limit the generalizaility of the findings. There isa pressig need for the development of a validated urvey that can be used to measure language teachers' P-GenAI-C.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Benjamin Luke Moorhouse: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Yuwei Wan: Writing - original draft, Validation, Software, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Chenze Wu: Writing - original draft, Software, Resources, Formal analysis, Data curation. Lucas Kohnke: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Conceptualization. Tsz Ying Ho: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Funding acquisition. Theresa Kwong: Writing - review & editing, Conceptualization.

# References

Al, J. K M msan, MA, H T.  Md,  (2023). Imact of ChG n g mivatin chers and tdnts vo. Jol English Studies in Arabia Felix, 2(1), 41-49. https://doi.org/10.56540/jesaf.v2i1.51   
Brrt, J. 2023. ing h fr sd anag wtig Pl ad nial. sin wing 57, Aile 10745. hp/i.org/0.106/. asw.2023.100745 24(6), 641-654.   
Cain, w. (2024). Ping chnge Epig prompt enerig in ar g mode ad it pol to tranf tion. chrds, 68(1), 47-57.   
Cao,    iioh  ue1.wpmucdn.com/websites.harvard.edu/dist/a/108/files/2023/08/Cao_Dede_final_8.4.23.pdf.   
Chan .. 223.i i   t d g o Education, 20(1), 38. https:/doi.org/10.1186/s41239-023-00408-3   
Chi, 23)t  i tie  d  diti  .ie Learning Environments, 1-17. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2023.2253861   
k  e2 Teacher Education, 47(1), 32-47. https://doi.org/10.1080/1359866X.2018.1497772   
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2018). Research methods in education (8th ed.). Routledge.   
akakni   3).i thccti d o t d t hgertio eny pandora's box. Computers and Education: Artificial Inteligence, 5, Article 100179. htps://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100179   
Faot 8 (5), 2449-2472. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-020-09767-4.   
Gier    2 r     f  o () 451-45./ doi.org/10.1080/02619768.2022.2135855   
i,1 ql      c Teacher Education, 41(2), 214-231. https://doi.org/10.1080/02619768.2017.1416085.   
Hart, 01 ti q      - f c Education, 43(1), 22-35. https://doi.org/10.1080/1359866.2014.932333.   
Hockly, N. (2023. Artificial inteligence in English language teaching: The good, the bad and the ugly. RELC Journal, 54(2), 45-451.   
an    . Educational Technology & Society, 26(2). https://doi.org/10.30191/ETs.202304_26(2).0014.   
Ins    g and Teacher Education, 67, 37-45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2017.05.016   
Jeon J, e . 2023. L gg modl in cion:  fs on the complemey etionshi btw n hers and ChGr. ion and Information Technologies, 1-20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-023-11834-1   
Kallio, P on,  , (016. tc m  n rrk fo a qulttive ttured interview guide. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 72(12), 2954-2965. https:/doi.org/10.1111/jan.13031   
ne , se,    3. ie ai l  t  inr e tu. Computers and Education: Artificial Inteligence, 5, 100156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100156.   
nig ., J-  ch 00iin h n1  e cin an c mft among early carr teachers in Gemany. uopen Jounl of Techer cation, 43(4), 608-622. htps/oi.g/10.1080/02619768.2020.1809650   
rhage017  g   . h  ic  87405. https://doi.org/10.1080/13540602.2016.1211523   
aVell .  ti n c  tin   in or   rny, 83) 271-273. https://doi.org/10.1080/02607476.2022.2075189   
Li .     3i   l perspetie  r. i J of  io  ic00790. /.001/j.023.100790   
Lirso r   q,  3009. https://doi.org/10.1080/20004508.2021.1890936   
Lo, C.K . 017. ciia f  lr ll 12tio ie ions an ti  rere. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 12, 1-22.   
aly,    2  .  ..pp literacy.   
h3)      ic 2) Article 100050. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmal.2023.100050   
ose t   ti . org/10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100201.   
ose  e i    /1. 1016/j.system.2024.103290.   
ouse,     23)  t- auct-c   rk or  ih language teachers in Hong Kong. The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40299-023-00778-2.   
ohouse, , Y   W 03.aive ts ame dline f th's to-rnkg rsie. trs ctin en https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeo.2023.100151.   
g D.TK  , J, . h .. 2023 r  rs  k  the tc o. Educational Technology Research & Development, 71(1), 137-161.   
gao, A ,   e, . 202. dn c os ad Pti    c in Pram. Education Sciences, 12(8), 549. https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci12080549.   
Park,    2ic r s   g      on, 2) 320-334. https://doi.org/10.1080/02188791.2020.1815649   
Stake,  20 frh  tcr i or the l a i   o 01, 76. /./0.1080 0305764X.2019.1625867   
Stake,     r    cr   m aew Zealand perspective. European Joumal of Teacher Education, 45(4), 476-492. htp://doi.org/10.1080/02619768.2021.1975109   
U,     s .3).r  e  c ti  n s gae teaching in Thailand. Leaning: Research and Practice, 9(2), 168-182. https://doi.org/10.1080/23735082.2023.2257252   
an, . s  2   iii     . ./0. 1177/00336882231224813.   
ang. 3.       d m study. In [Master's thesis]. University of Oxford.   
Yan, D.023    n ti  nt. iond i e 11 1343-1396. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-023-11742-4   
Yang   i 024n mtr t in iv ic ni noi Journal of Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/02188791.2023.2300137   
Yeo, M. A. (2023. dmic ntity in the age f Artificil Intice (Al) thoig app.0 Joul, 143. htps://do.g/10.102/esj.716 ai-language-learning.