# Using peer review with Chinese ESL student writers

Guangwei Hu Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Peer review has a prominent place in process-oriented writing instruction. In this paper, I share my developing use of peer review in an academic writing course for Chinese ESL learners. After reviewing the relevant literature, I describe the context in which I implemented peer review and conducted practitioner research into its productive use. Next, I present and discuss the training activities and follow-ups I used to prepare my students for effective peer review. The various instructional practices have been experimented with and refined in a 3-year action research effort to best facilitate my students' acquisition of academic writing skills and hence enhance the quality of classroom life. In conclusion I summarize student performance in my most recent writing class and consider several instructional changes that are likely to help students understand better and thus benefit more from peer review.

# I Introduction

Responding to student writing has been a perennial topic for research on L1/L2 writing (Leki, 1990; Silva and Brice, 2004) and a central concern in writing instruction (Campbell, 1998; Harmer, 2004; Reid, 1994). Traditionally, only the teacher responds to student writing, but peer review (also referred to as 'peer feedback', 'peer response', 'peer revision', 'peer tutoring' and 'peer critiquing') is now a prominent feature of process-oriented writing instruction (Caulk, 1994; Nelson and Murphy, 1992; Paulus, 1999). Peer review is a collaborative activity involving students reading, critiquing and providing feedback on each other's writing, both to secure immediate textual improvement and to develop, over time, stronger writing competence via mutual scaffolding (Tsui and $\mathrm { N g }$ 2000; Zhu, 2001).

Peer review is prominent in process-based writing instruction for at least two important reasons. First, it matches the conceptualizations of writing and learning to write promoted by advocates of process approaches: that writing is a recursive, socially constructed process of invention, meaning-making and knowledge-transformation (Bereiter and Scardamalia, 1987; Berg, 1999; Susser, 1994; Zamel, 1983), and that learning to write is best supported by an 'environment in which students are acknowledged as writers, encouraged to take risks, and engaged in creating meaning' (Zamel, 1987: 697). Peer review can help students gain insights into the nature of writing and contribute to the creation of a supportive environment for learning to write (Villamil and de Guerrero, 1996; 1998), by providing opportunities for them to discover and negotiate meaning, to explore effective ways of expressing meaning, to practise a wide range of language and writing skills, and to assume a more active role in the learning process (Liu and Sadler, 2003; Mendonca and Johnson, 1994; Nelson and Carson, 1998). The second reason is that peer review meshes well with writing cycles, multiple drafting, extensive revision and pair/group work, all mainstay pedagogical activities of process approaches (Jacobs et al., 1998; Paulus, 1999; Susser, 1994), which it can provide reason and content for, or a natural follow-up to.

In this paper, I share my developing use of peer review in an English for Academic Purposes (EAP) writing course: emergent student and teacher understandings, and specific instructional practices developed to create quality learning experiences. I first review existing research, identifying some of the potential benefits and drawbacks of peer review as a pedagogical activity. After describing the context for my use of peer review and my related practitioner research, I then present the training activities and follow-ups I used to prepare my students for effective peer review. I developed these instructional practices or adapted them from published research and explored them over three years of 'exploratory action research' (Action Research informed by the ideas of Exploratory Practice, see Allwright 2003) in an effort to best facilitate my students' acquisition of academic writing skills and hence enhance 'the quality of language classroom life' (Allwright, 2003: 114). In conclusion I summarize student performance and understandings in my most recent writing class and consider several instructional changes that are likely to help students understand better and thus benefit more from peer review. I hope that sharing my experience can contribute to the work for understanding (Allwright, 2003) and offer something of interest and use to international colleagues, especially to EAP instructors teaching people whose cultural and educational backgrounds resemble those of my students.

# II Potential benefits and drawbacks

The growing literature on the use of peer review in various types of L2 writing instruction suggests that it potentially affords a number of metacognitive, cognitive, socio-affective and linguistic benefits. These benefits fall into two broad groups: those that facilitate effective (language) learning and those that enhance the acquisition of L2 writing competence.

The first group extends beyond L2 writing and concerns learner development and language acquisition in general. Specifically, peer review can:

1) encourage collaborative learning and provide valuable opportunities for learners to receive social support and scaffolding from peers (Jacobs et al., 1998);   
2) contribute to learner autonomy by weaning students from overdependence on their teachers (Tsui and $\mathrm { N g }$ , 2000) and by inducing learning behaviours conducive to the development of self-regulation, or the capacity for independent problem solving' (de Guerrero and Villamil, 1994: 484);   
3) create 'a fruitful environment for students to negotiate meaning and practice a wide range of language skills' (Liu and Sadler, 2003: 194; see also Lockhart and $\mathrm { N g }$ , 1995; Mangelsdorf and Schlumberger,   
1992; Paulus, 1999).

The potential benefits of peer review for writing development can be classified into two subcategories, depending on whether they contribute to students' general, longitudinal development as L2 writers or improve the quality of a student text. The literature frequently suggests that peer review can:

1) help prepare students for real-world writing tasks because soliciting and utilizing peer response are authentic writing activities (Berg, 1999);

2) encourage students to approach writing as a socially constructed, meaning-making process (Tuzi, 2004) and develop productive attitudes toward writing (Stanley, 1992);   
3) raise students' awareness of their strengths and weaknesses as L2 writers (Tsui and $\mathrm { N g }$ , 2000; Tuzi, 2004), foster 'an awareness of the rhetorical structure of their own writing' (Hedgcock and Lefkowitz, 1992: 255), and facilitate the acquisition of evaluative skills (Berg, 1999);   
4) provide opportunities for students to detect mismatches between intended and understood meaning, helping them develop a sense of audience (Jacobs et al., 1998; Liu and Sadler, 2003; Tsui and $\mathrm { N g }$ 2000; Paulus, 1999) and contributing to their move away from writer-based to reader-based writing (Stanley, 1992);   
5) foster a sense of text ownership (Tsui and $\mathrm { N g }$ , 2000) by giving students opportunities to 'explain, defend, and clarify their points of view' (Villamil and de Guerrero, 1996: 69);   
6) help establish 'the social basis for the development of cognitive processes that are essential to revision' (Villamil and de Guerrero, 1996: 67) and enhance students' awareness of revision strategies, which constitute 'a crucial component in the development of L1 and L2 writing skills' (Hedgcock and Lefkowitz, 1992: 256).

The literature on peer review has also suggested several ways in which it can improve the quality of student writing:

1) Students can provide very useful feedback that deals with content, rhetoric and language (Berg, 1999; Hedgcock and Lefkowitz, 1992; Lockhart and $\mathrm { N g }$ , 1995; Nelson and Murphy, 1992; Paulus, 1999; Stanley, 1992).   
2) Student writers are more likely to consider peer suggestions carefully but may feel compelled to adopt all teacher comments out of deference to authority (Mendonca and Johnson, 1994; Mittan, 1989; Tsui and $\mathrm { N g }$ , 2000).   
3) Peer feedback can constitute 'an important complementary source of feedback' (Villamil and de Guerrero, 1998: 491). Caulk (1994), for example, found that $60 \%$ of the students in his study provided valid suggestions that the teacher researcher had missed. Some researchers (e.g., Jacobs et al., 1998; Paulus, 1999; Tsui and $\mathrm { N g }$ 2000) suggest that peer feedback can even be more informative

than teacher feedback because peers are at the same level and hence understand each other better.

4) A large proportion of peer comments can prompt valid revisions: $74 \%$ in Villamil and de Guerrero (1998) and $50 \%$ in Mendonca and Johnson (1994), Nelson and Murphy (1993) and Paulus (1999). Importantly, Villamil and de Guerrero (1998) have noted that only $7 \%$ of the revisions made on the basis of peer comments were false repairs.

Overall, we can summarize the potential benefits of peer review as contributing to learners' developing understandings of themselves and others both as writers and as classroom learners of writing. We can also expect teachers to benefit from the opportunities that working with peer review will offer them to develop their own understandings of writing and the teaching and learning of writing. Thus, it can provide openings for mutual development and improvement on the quality of life in the classroom (Allwright, 2003).

It is important to stress that such benefits are not guaranteed to occur but are only potential advantages. Indeed, the research literature has also identified a number of problems associated with the use of peer review. These can prevent the potential benefits of the pedagogical activity from materializing and can even turn it into a disastrous, unproductive event. The problems fall into four groups.

The first group of problems concerns L2 students' limited knowledge of the target language and its rhetorical conventions. As L2 novice writers are still learning the language and its rhetorical conventions, they can have great difficulty in critiquing L2 texts written by their peers (Villamil and de Guerrero, 1996). For the same reason, L2 student writers may also lack the knowledge and skills to differentiate valid and invalid peer feedback (Leki, 1990; Stanley, 1992; Tsui and Ng, 2000) and to revise their writing accordingly (Liu and Sadler, 2003). Some support for L2 student writers' failure to utilize peer response comes from a study by Connor and Asenavage (1994) which found that only $5 \%$ of the revisions made by their ESL writers actually resulted from peer comments.

The second group of problems concerns the very nature of the comments offered by peers. Some researchers have noted a tendency among L2 students to neglect macro textual issues but focus on surface language concerns in their peer review (Leki, 1990; Nelson and Murphy,

1992; 1993). Even when they are concerned with larger issues concerning content, organization and idea development, they tend to provide vague comments (Liu and Sadler, 2003) or what Stanley (1992: 219) called 'rubber stamp advice', such as 'Be more specific!' and Make your ideas more smoothly connected!' In addition, peer comments may lack tact or a constructive spirit (Stanley, 1992).

The third group of problems arises from various inappropriate attitudes many L2 student writers may hold towards peer review. Some peer readers are hostile towards or over-critical of other students' writing (Nelson and Murphy, 1992). Even when such patently negative attitudes are absent, peer readers may hold other attitudes - for instance, authoritative or prescriptive reader stances - that ignore the dynamic aspect of writing' (Lockhart and $\mathrm { N g }$ , 1995: 647) and defeat the intended purposes of peer review. Mangelsdorf and Schlumberger (1992) found that of the 60 students participating in their study, $68 \%$ took a reader stance reflecting misunderstandings about peer review. Besides these reader problems, writer problems have also been observed. Some student writers fear being ridiculed by their peers for language problems (Nelson and Carson, 1998). Other student writers may react negatively to critical comments (de Guerrero and Villamil, 1994) and become over-defensive (Amores, 1997). These attitudinal problems can generate 'a sense of discomfort and uneasiness among the participants' (Liu and Sadler, 2003: 194) and turn peer review into a destructive rather than constructive activity.

The last group of problems is cross-cultural by nature. L2 students from different cultures often have varied sociolinguistic rules of peer communication and divergent notions of good writing, which can result in clashes and inappropriate suggestions in mixed response groups (Nelson and Murphy, 1992). L2 students from teacher-centred cultures may believe that their peers are not 'qualified to critique their work and may distrust their recommendations' (Paulus, 1999: 268; see also Hu, 2002; Nelson and Murphy, 1992; 1993). Finally, L2 students from collectivist cultures (e.g., Chinese students) may refrain from giving constructively critical comments to avoid tension and disagreement and to maintain interpersonal harmony (Connor and Asenavage, 1994; Carson and Nelson, 1996).

Just as the advantages are of a potential nature, so are the problems discussed above. That is, they are not inherent in peer review or inevitable. The research literature and my own experience suggest that carefully designed peer review training and 'a judicious use of a combination of feedback sources' (Zhang, 1999: 325) can overcome or alleviate most, if not all, of the problems and maximize the significant role that peer review can play in helping student writers develop understandings of their own writing processes and acquire enhanced L2 writing competence (Berg, 1999; Mittan, 1989; Paulus, 1999; Stanley, 1992).

# III Context and general procedures

As the instructional practices to be presented have been developed on the basis of my exploratory action research, it is useful to summarize the research process first. It began with my EAP writing class in 2001 and has continued to date, involving three different groups of Chinese ESL students. It has been a multi-step, reiterative process resembling the one described by Duchan (2004). Briefly, I have taken the following steps: (1) identifying peer review as a pedagogical activity I would like to explore to facilitate my students' understandings of writing as a recursive, social, meaning-making process and their acquisition of academic writing competence; (2) gathering information about peer review through reading the relevant literature and interacting with colleagues who had used the activity; (3) developing an initial plan for using peer view; (4) implementing the plan in my 2001 writing class and collecting relevant data (classroom observations, written peer comments, drafts revised in response to peer comments, student opinions gleaned in individual and small-group conferences, and student responses to an annually administered course feedback questionnaire); (5) evaluating the results of the pedagogical activity on the basis of the data collected; (6) revising the initial plan based on emergent understandings and new information found in the literature; (7) repeating Steps 4, 5 and 6 in my 2002 and 2003 writing classes. Given space constraints, I do not report details of the data collected, the analyses conducted and the results obtained. I only refer, as necessary, to analyses and conclusions drawn from the data.

The course in which I have explored peer review is entitled Academic Writing Skills (AWs), an upper-intermediate ESL course conducted annually at the National Institute of Education, Singapore, as a core component of a six-month intensive English programme to prepare freshmen from several major Chinese universities for tertiary education in Singapore. Most participants have studied English for at least six years before coming to the intensive programme. However, few have had any formal instruction in academic English writing. The students are placed in instructional groups of around 20 based on their placement examination results and remain in their respective groups throughout the programme.

AWS meets for two hours three times a week, giving a total instructional time of 150 hours. The overarching objective of AWS, as outlined in the curricular documents, is to help the students develop their academic writing competence, viz. the attitudes, knowledge, skills and strategies they will need to handle university-level English writing tasks successfully. The pedagogy adopted in AWS can be described as process-oriented, genre-centred, theme-structured and task-based. The major instructional activities include reading on specific themes, mini-lectures on target text types, textual analysis (with respect to audience, purpose, rhetorical structure and support), pre-writing tasks (e.g., brainstorming, note-taking and discussion), multiple-drafting, peer review, teacher-student conferencing and revision. These activities emphasize writing as a social act and a recursive process of 'overlapping and interconnecting stages' (Nelson and Murphy, 1992: 172); they are aimed at helping the students go through the various stages of composing and acquire strategies for producing effective academic discourse. Throughout Aws, the students are required to complete six 500-word writing assignments, each involving a different genre, plus a 1,500-2,000 word library research paper on a topic of their own choice. In the past three years, my students produced three drafts for each of the six writing assignments. For the research paper, there was an additional round of peer review for the third draft, plus a fourth draft written in response to the peer comments. With the exception of the research paper, whose writing process extended beyond two months, the writing cycle for each assignment lasted four weeks: first draft peer review second draft teacher feedback third draft publication in a collection edited by voluntary student groups. Table 1 summarizes major activities involved in each writing cycle and their timeline for my 2003 class. The activities were arranged so that the students had ample time to produce detailed, carefully thought-out feedback (one class hour for oral response and two days for written response) and revise their drafts (at least two days) in response to peer and teacher feedback. The inclusion of both oral and written response was intended to give the students opportunities to take advantage of the benefits that both response modes could afford (see Hedgcock and Lefkowitz, 1992; Liu and Sadler, 2003; de Guerrero and Villamil, 1994). In particular, social interaction in oral response spawns 'a wealth of activities, strategies, and behaviours' (Villamil and de Guerrero, 1996: 69) that can activate and enhance cognitive processes essential for acquiring effective discourse strategies and writing skills; written response, on the other hand, allows students extra time to think through their comments and suggestions (Zhu, 2001).

Table 1 The writing cycle   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Week</td><td>Session</td><td>Activity</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>1st session</td><td>Start of an assignment</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>1st session</td><td>Exchange of 1st drafts</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>3rd session</td><td>Oral response to 1st drafts Exchange of written comments on 1st drafts</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>1st session</td><td>Submission of 1st and 2nd drafts together with written</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td></td><td>peer comments Return of marked drafts and teacher feedback</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1st session 3rd session</td><td>Submission of 3rd drafts for editorial group to work on</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>and publish in a collection</td></tr></table></body></html>

The procedures that I adopted in 2001 and 2002 differed from those presented above. In 2001, no class time was devoted to peer review, and the students were asked to find time after class to complete their oral and written responses. Unfortunately, most of the students either did not take the trouble to negotiate with their partner a time slot for oral response or rushed it through. In view of the many potential benefits oral response could offer, I decided to allot one hour of class time for each oral response session in my 2002 class. Following some published studies on peer review (e.g., McGroarty and Zhu, 1997; Nelson and Murphy, 1992; Paulus, 1999), I had the students respond first in writing and then orally to their peers' essays. This order of written and oral response often proved to be problematic. Sometimes the peer reviewers misunderstood the writers' intentions and consequently offered irrelevant or unhelpful written comments. I therefore reversed the order of the response modes for my 2003 class, so that the peer reviewers had opportunities to clarify their understandings of the essays and confirm with the writers their intended meaning. This greatly reduced the number of irrelevant written comments resulting from misunderstandings.

All the peer review sessions took the form of pair work, for two reasons. First, both Paulus (1999) and Mittan (1989) have pointed out that pair work can provide greater opportunity for intensive discussion of a peer's writing. Secondly, Nelson and Murphy (1992) suggest that students in dyads are more comfortable sharing each other's work. To avoid possible affective stress that might arise from working with peers they did not know well, I initially allowed my students to choose their own partners but encouraged them to work with different peers over the course so as to benefit from the distributed expertise or the varying levels of 'strategic assistance' (de Guerrero and Villamil, 1994: 493) that their peers could provide. My encouragement, however, was not very effective, as the students tended to work with the same partners throughout the course. Furthermore, I noticed a strong tendency for the more proficient student writers to form pairs among themselves, thus denying the less proficient writers the opportunity to benefit from their greater writing expertise. Consequently, I required that each student work with a different peer reviewer for each assignment.

While many researchers (e.g., McGroarty and Zhu, 1997; Nelson and Murphy, 1992; Paulus, 1999) suggest that to pre-empt their inclination to attend predominantly to surface issues students should be asked to focus on rhetorical aspects and ignore language use in peer review, I asked my students to attend to both global and local issues. This decision was based on my understanding that attending to language use problems would be a valuable language learning activity to my students, who were still learning their L2. To counteract some students' tendency to focus exclusively on low-level issues (Leki, 1990; Nelson and Murphy, 1992; 1993), however, my students and I agreed on a three-step procedure: (1) to read peer writing carefully to understand intended meaning; (2) to respond to macro issues (i.e., content, audience, purpose, organization, and development of ideas); and (3) to deal with language problems. This three-step procedure was followed in both oral and written response. To guide the students in their peer response, I provided a list of macro-level questions addressing global issues, a list of micro-level questions dealing with language use, and a list of language errors (explained and illustrated) that was updated constantly according to the common problems I found in student essays.

Although most of the procedures described above were important in that they established the basic conditions for and facilitated peer review, they were insufficient because they could not guarantee the quality of peer response in and of themselves. My exploratory action research suggested, in line with the literature, that only when the procedures were coupled with extensive and appropriate training could it become pedagogically productive.

# IV Training for effective peer review

My use of peer review in the 2001 class was unsuccessful. There were various problems that rendered the pedagogical activity unproductive. Briefly, most of the students distrusted their peers' ability to critique each other's writing, felt unable to judge the validity of peer comments, were reluctant to respond critically, made only a limited number of comments and suggestions, paid predominant attention to language and mechanics in response, expressed comments in inappropriate ways, and incorporated few peer comments in revision. Throughout the course, I had many informal conversations with the students in which I elicited their opinions of peer review. Although none of them voiced strong opposition to it, I had a sense that many considered the activity anything but useful. My judgement was clearly supported by the students' anonymous responses to an end-of-course feedback questionnaire. None of the students mentioned peer review in answer to 'What did you like best about this course?' On the other hand, several students suggested that peer review should be dropped in response to 'What could be done to make this course better?'

My analyses of and reflections on the unsuccessful attempt to use peer review led me to conclude that the students had not yet developed an adequate understanding of the peer review process and its potential benefits, and that my inadequate training of the students for the activity was probably a major cause of my failure. To generalize somewhat, I had been able to think globally (i.e., to understand from published research that effective training would be vital for a successful use of peer review) but had failed to take adequate local action (i.e., to work out the precise implications of effective training in my specific teaching context), due to my insufficient understanding of my students and lack of prior experience with the pedagogical activity (see Allwright, 2003, for the importance of thinking globally and acting locally). The peer review training that I provided in 2001 consisted of the following: (1) a teacher-led whole-class discussion of the potential advantages and problems of peer review as well as possible solutions to the identified problems; (2) my explanation of how peer review was to be carried out and what I expected the students to do before, during and after peer review; and (3) provision and explanation of response guidelines before each peer review assignment. In hindsight, these training activities had been insufficient to make my students share my enthusiasm for peer review and my understanding of its value in facilitating the process of learning to write. Consequently, I searched the literature for various training activities and found many useful suggestions in Berg (1999), McGroarty and Zhu (1997), Paulus (1999), Stanley (1992), Villamil and de Guerrero (1998), among others. I adapted several training activities and created my own ones for the 2002 and 2003 classes. Table 2 presents the major training activities I used. The order of presentation roughly corresponds to the order of implementation for each class.

For the 2002 class, I used 13 training activities, divided into six groups according to aim and function. The first group was intended to raise the students' awareness of the potential advantages and problems of peer review. Researchers (e.g., Berg, 1999; Paulus, 1999; Stanley, 1992) suggest that awareness-raising is an important step towards ensuring that students develop appropriate attitudes towards the pedagogical activity. Researchers (Carson and Nelson, 1996; Nelson and Carson, 1998; Nelson and Murphy, 1992; 1993) also suggest that awarenessraising is particularly necessary for students from some Asian countries whose cultural norms may be antithetical to the pedagogical principles underlying peer review. I used two awareness-raising activities. In the first, small groups of students discussed the potential benefits and problems of peer review and possible solutions to these problems before presenting their discussion results to the whole class. The second consisted of my presentation and explanation of relevant research findings.

These awareness-raising activities were followed by demonstration activities. I reasoned that the students would need to look at actual examples of good and poor peer comments to develop an understanding of how peer response might work. In these activities, the students examined sample written peer comments on excerpts of essays written by previous students and discussed, in small groups, how the peer comments would help or fail to improve the excerpts. They also examined the revisions made by the previous students in response to the peer comments and considered whether the revisions made good use of them. In a following session, the students were given opportunities to practice reviewing and revising a text. Specifically, the students responded as a class to a short draft written by a previous student, examining larger rhetorical issues before local language problems. Comments were recorded on the whiteboard, and in small groups the students then revised the text accordingly. Finally, students from different groups formed new groups and shared their revised drafts.

Table 2 Training activities   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Training activity</td><td>2001 class</td><td>2002 class</td><td>200 clas</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Awareness-raising</td></tr><tr><td>. whole-class discussion: benefits, problems and solutions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> small-group discussion: benefits, problems and solutions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>teacher summary of research findings about peer review examples of academic writers benefiting from peer</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>response</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Demonstration</td></tr><tr><td>examination and discussion of sample peer comments on excerpts</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>examination and discussion of revisions made to the excerpts</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>. discussion of drafts in progress: peer feedback and revisions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>. teacher demonstration of response via thinking aloud</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Practice . whole-class response to a draft written by a previous student</td></tr><tr><td>. whole-class discussion of the appropriacy of the comments</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>: group revision of the draft and sharing of revised drafts</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Reflection and instruction</td></tr><tr><td>: group discussion of appropriate reader stances to take</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>: group discussion of appropriate types of response to make</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>. instruction in appropriate response behaviour . instruction in appropriate use of language in peer response</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Explanation of procedures</td></tr><tr><td>. explanation of how peer review would work in a writing cycle . explanation of the three steps to follow in peer response</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>J</td></tr><tr><td>. explanation of the use of the guiding questions and error list</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Pre-response review</td></tr><tr><td>. a teacher-led brief review of key aspects of peer review before the 2nd and 3rd peer review sessions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

The initial training was reinforced by teacher-guided reflection and explicit instruction. The students were led to consider their initial training experience and reflect on the appropriate reader stances to take during peer review, namely, being constructively critical and collaborative as opposed to being 'interpretative' or 'prescriptive' (see Mangelsdorf and Schlumberger, 1992, for definitions). Additionally, they were guided to discuss appropriate types of response to include in peer review and came to understand that they could do a number of things, including praising, questioning, eliciting, requesting information, pointing, clarifying, suggesting alternatives, justifying and elaborating. In view of common problems in the previous students' language use in oral and written response, I explicitly instructed this group of students in appropriate language for effective communication (Berg, 1999; Stanley, 1992). Specifically, I showed the students examples of inappropriate comments - noncommittal comments, vague and general suggestions, overly critical statements, sarcastic expressions, opinions expressed as facts, suggestions expressed as commands, and impolite comments -- and asked them to identify the problems. I also presented vocabulary and expressions for making clear, specific, constructive and tactful comments, which the students practised using in pairs.

A fifth group of training activities consisted mainly of procedural explanations. Before the students started their first peer review session, I explained the writing cycle for each assignment and the general procedures for carrying out oral/written response. I also emphasized the three-step response procedure to follow in undertaking peer review. In addition, I gave each student a copy of guiding questions and common language problems and explained how to use them. The last training component did not introduce any new content but was a teacher-led brief review of the procedures to follow, appropriate attitudes to assume, and useful strategies to adopt before the second and the third peer review session. No such review was conducted before the remaining peer review sessions because by the fourth session the students had already internalized the key aspects of the activity.

Judging by student performance, the training was successful. Compared with the previous group, these students were much more positive about and developed much better attitudes towards peer review. Their peer comments were far superior both in quantity and quality to those made by the previous students. All the students also made serious efforts to incorporate at least some peer suggestions in each of their revised drafts, and the second drafts improved ostensibly as a result of the revisions. In their responses to the end-of-course feedback questionnaire, all the students rated peer review \*useful': $3 5 \%$ considered it very useful, $45 \%$ quite useful and $20 \%$ somewhat useful. Inspired by the results, I planned to develop even more effective training activities for 2003. I therefore asked the students to evaluate the effectiveness of the training activities. Encouragingly, a great majority of the students indicated that all the training activities had been more or less useful in preparing them for effective peer review. Their responses demonstrated emergent understandings of what effective peer review entailed and how it had contributed to their development as L2 writers -- its contribution to their enhanced audience awareness, to their understanding of writing as a recursive process, to their realization of the importance of revision, and to their adoption of a more critical attitude towards their own writing.

Based on the student evaluations, I retained 10 of the 13 training activities for 2003 and incorporated several new ones. Following Berg (1999), I presented examples of how academic writers benefit from peer response to raise the students' awareness of the value of peer review. The examples included the 'acknowledgements' sections of published papers and my own experiences of getting papers published with the help of expert reviewers. The original demonstration activities were replaced with two new ones. Rather than have them examine peer comments on excerpts of student writings and the changes made to the excerpts in response to the comments, I asked the students to examine and discuss complete drafts in progress (i.e., two drafts of an essay written by a previous student, written peer comments on the first draft, and revisions made in the second draft) because excerpts could not demonstrate global issues as adequately as complete drafts. In the second modelling activity, I provided opportunities for 'online' vicarious learning by thinking aloud my response to a student essay projected on a screen. Another activity was introduced into the practice session: after the class responded to a sample draft, I led a whole-class discussion of the appropriateness and usefulness of the comments on the whiteboard. The reader-stance discussion was dropped; instead, the various stances were covered in the teacher summary of research findings. As specific guidance for appropriate response behaviours, I presented Elbow's four general guidelines (1973; as cited in Nelson and

Murphy, 1992: 175): '(a) never quarrel with someone else's reaction, (b) be quiet and attentive, (c) give specific reactions to specific parts, and (d) do not reject out of hand what readers tell you without giving their concerns careful consideration.'

The students' performance and reactions, as summarized in the Conclusion section, suggested that the training activities were at least as effective as those used in my previous class in helping them better understand the whole process of peer review and how to make the most of it.

# V Teacher follow-ups

When analysing the causes of my unsuccessful use of peer review in 2001, I came to the conclusion that a lack of adequate teacher followups to student work had been a major contributing factor. In fact, the only follow-up consisted in collecting written peer comments together with first and revised drafts. My conclusion was supported by relevant discussions in the literature. Mangelsdorf and Schlumberger (1992: 236), for example, point out that 'teacher response to student writing no doubt affects how students respond to student writing'. Baumlin and Baumlin (1989) also observe that students learn to respond to and evaluate their peers' writing by reading teacher comments on their own writing. Similarly, Jacobs et al. (1998: 309) point out the need for teachers to [stand] ready to intervene with the necessary support'. In light of these observations and suggestions, I incorporated several teacher follow-up activities into my 2002 and 2003 classes (see Table 3).

One follow-up I adopted in 2002 was to affirm peer comments I considered valid and helpful by ticking them, to encourage peer readers to continue coming up with good suggestions on the one hand and to remind peer writers of the usefulness of peer comments on the other. A second follow-up was to examine revisions in relation to peer comments and to draw students' attention both to valid peer suggestions they had failed to incorporate and to problematic peer advice they had followed indiscriminatingly. This would, I hoped, not only communicate to them, and help them understand, the importance of giving peer comments careful consideration but also demonstrate some useful strategies for distinguishing between useful and invalid peer comments. The last type of follow-up was to model appropriate ways of responding to others' writing through my own comments on the drafts. Here I tried to accomplish a number of things. I advised the students as a collaborator rather than an authority, following Mangelsdorf and Schlumberger's (1992: 249) suggestion that 'if we see ourselves as collaborators with our students in the creation and expression of meaning in a particular rhetorical context, then it is likely that peer reviewers will act collaboratively with each other as well'. I demonstrated how to use appropriate language to make clear, specific, supportive and critical comments. I focused my attention on content, purpose, idea development and rhetorical organization, hoping to encourage the students to attend to macrolevel issues in their own peer responses. Following Nelson and Murphy (1993), I made a special effort to use concepts introduced in AWS to demonstrate how they could be used to discuss writing.

Table 3Teacher follow-ups   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Follow-up</td><td>2002 class class</td><td>2003 class</td></tr><tr><td>Collecting written peer comments</td><td>J</td><td>J</td></tr><tr><td>Marking written peer comments.</td><td></td><td>J</td></tr><tr><td>Presenting useful and problematic peer comments</td><td>J</td><td>J</td></tr><tr><td>Responding to written peer comments.</td><td></td><td>J</td></tr><tr><td>Demonstrating how to make helpful comments.</td><td>J</td><td>J</td></tr><tr><td>Providing feedback on peer response.</td><td></td><td>J</td></tr></table></body></html>

I used two additional follow-ups with my 2003 class. One was to respond in writing to written student comments, raising questions about problematic comments, encouraging reviewers to turn general comments into more specific ones, and asking them to elaborate their suggestions, justify their opinions and consider alternatives. The other activity was to conduct a feedback session after each peer review assignment. In these sessions, I praised those students who had done very well in their peer response, presented excellent and problematic peer comments for discussion, and pointed out areas in need of improvement. One aim of the teacher feedback was to provide focused and continuous guidance. More importantly, I aimed to communicate to the students, through the feedback, my enthusiasm for peer review, my belief in its value as well as a sense of openness, trust and 'positive complicity (Perpignan, 2003: 273) in pursuit of joint goals.

Although it was impossible to precisely measure the effects of the follow-ups or to separate their effects from those of the training activities, in my professional judgment, based on my years of experience as a language teacher, both the follow-ups and the training activities were crucial to bringing out the potential advantages of peer review, and their positive effects were additive.

# VI Conclusion

On the whole, peer review was used most successfully in my 2003 class. There was compelling evidence in support of this overall assessment. Compared with the two previous groups of students, this group as a whole developed the most favourable attitudes towards peer review. They actively discussed each other's writing and stayed on task during oral response sessions. Most typed out their written comments, even though not required to do so. As for the quality of their feedback, they strove to provide constructive yet critical comments. My analyses of the written peer feedback revealed that a great majority of their suggestions were directed at what I considered problematic areas and were, in my opinion, valid because they called for revisions that could improve the drafts in one way or another. Furthermore, the students attended to both rhetorical issues and language use in their response. Notably, many of their valid suggestions had not occurred to me when I responded to the drafts. Clearly, the peer comments constituted a valuable source of information in that they supplemented my comments on many occasions or anticipated many of my suggestions, thus demonstrating the strong development of learner understandings, and helping me develop my Own in turn.

The students also made good efforts to incorporate peer suggestions in their revisions but did not take up peer advice without careful thinking. Impressively, quite a number of the students explained in writing why they did not follow particular peer suggestions. When uncertain of the validity of a peer suggestion, many of them would involve me in their discussion or e-mail me their questions. When the marked written peer responses were returned to them, almost all the students were eager to find out what I had said about their comments and would initiate a discussion with me when they disagreed with me. All this suggested that they took peer review seriously and made good use of the learning opportunities it created to develop their understandings not only of the peer review process but also of writing itself and how to work productively on it.

The students clearly recognized the value of peer review in improving their academic writing competence. In their responses to the feedback questionnaire, nine students rated peer review as 'very useful' in improving their writing skills, while the remaining 11 rated it as 'quite useful'. Seven students named peer review as one of things they liked best about AWs. When asked, in my conferences with them, why they found peer review a useful activity, the students gave a variety of reasons. The most common ones were as follows: they learned much about writing by reading each other's writing and by giving each other advice; their peers had many good suggestions to make; having a peer read one's writing was motivating; peer review made them understand the importance of considering audience; and their peers helped them to notice problems that they themselves would not have noticed.

Despite success with peer view in the 2003 class, my instructional practices can be further improved. I plan to introduce three instructional changes in my next writing class. One change is motivated by a lack of good revision strategies among many of my previous students. A solution to the problem, I believe, lies in giving explicit instruction in effective revision strategies documented in the literature and offering students opportunities to practise using these strategies in training sessions.

The second change relates to the configuration of peer reviewers. Although pair work has certain advantages, especially affective and interactive ones, some researchers suggest that group work can result in more varied and better quality feedback (Mendonca and Johnson, 1994). Caulk found that 'the quality of the feedback students ... received rose with the number of students giving feedback to each student' (1994: 186). Nelson and Murphy (1992: 189) suggest that students should 'work with a variety of classmates over time, thereby interacting with a wider audience of readers'. From a Vygotskyan perspective, de Guerrero and Villamil (1994: 493) argue that students need to have opportunities 'to interact with peers who are at different levels of regulation' because 'what one peer cannot provide in terms of strategic assistance, another one could'. To reap the benefits of both pair and group work, it makes sense to use the dyadic format in the first few response sessions and to switch to group work when students become more comfortable with the activity.

The last change concerns the integration of computer-mediated communication (CMC) into peer review. Recent studies (e.g., DiGiovanni and Nagaswami, 2001; Liu and Sadler, 2003; Tuzi, 2004) have documented several advantages of CMC-based peer response over the traditional response modes, in terms of multi-way communication, dynamism and open-endedness of interaction, logistic flexibility and collegiality. In view of these and other advantages, Liu and Sadler (2003) recommend that CMC should be combined with face-to-face interaction in the peer response process. How the three planned changes will impact on student understandings of peer review and learning to write, the quality of peer comments, and the effects of peer review on L2 writing development is a major question my continual exploratory action research now seeks to answer.

# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Dick Allwright for his valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper.

# VII References

Allwright, D. 2003: Exploratory Practice: rethinking practitioner research in language teaching. Language Teaching Research 7: 113-41.   
Amores, M.J. 1997: A new perspective on peer-editing. Foreign Language Annals 30: 513-23.   
Baumlin, J.S. and Baumlin, T.E. 1989: Paper grading and the rhetorical stance. In Lawson, B., Ryan, S.S. and Winterowd, W.R., editors, Encountering student texts: interpretive issues in reading student writing, Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English, 171-82.   
Bereiter, C. and Scardamalia, M. 1987: The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Berg, E.C. 1999: The effects of trained peer response on ESL students' revision types and writing quality. Journal of Second Language Writing 8: 215-41.   
Campbell, C. 1998: Teaching second-language writing: interacting with text. Boston, MA: Heinle and Heinle.   
Carson, J. and Nelson, G. 1996: Chinese students' perceptions of ESL peer response group interaction. Journal of Second Language Writing 5: 1-19.

Caulk, N. 1994: Comparing teacher and student responses to written work. TESOL Quarterly 28: 181-88.

Connor, U. and Asenavage, K. 1994: Peer response groups in ESL writing classes: how much impact on revision? Journal of Second Language Writing 3: 257-76.   
de Guerrero, M.C.M. and Villamil, O.S. 1994: Social-cognitive dimensions of interaction in L2 peer revision. The Modern Language Journal 78: 484-96.   
DiGiovanni, E. and Nagaswami, G. 2001: Online peer review: an alternative to face-to-face? ELT Journal 55: 263-72.   
Duchan, J.F. 2004: Frame work in language and literacy: how theory informs practice. New York: The Guilford Press.   
Harmer, J. 2004: How to teach writing. Harlow, UK: Pearson Education.   
Hedgcock, J. and Lefkowitz, N. 1992: Collaborative oral/aural revision in foreign language writing instruction. Journal of Second Language Writing 1: 255-76.   
Hu, G. 2002: Potential cultural resistance to pedagogical imports: the case of communicative language teaching in China. Language, Culture and Curriculum 15: 93-105.   
Jacobs, G.M., Curtis, A., Braine, G. and Huang, S.Y. 1998: Feedback on student writing: taking the middle path. Journal of Second Language Writing 7: 307-17.   
Leki, I. 1990: Coaching from the margins: issues in written response. In Kroll, B., editor, Second language writing: research insights for the classroom, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 57-68.   
Liu, J. and Sadler, R.W. 2003: The effect and affect of peer review in electronic versus traditional modes on L2 writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes 2: 193-227.   
Lockhart, C. and Ng, P. 1995: Analyzing talk in peer response groups: stances, functions, and content. Language Learning 45: 605-55.   
Mangelsdorf, K. and Schlumberger, A. 1992: ESL student response stances in a peer-review task. Journal of Second Language Writing 1: 235-54.   
McGroarty, M.E. and Zhu, W. 1997: Triangulation in classroom research: a study of peer revision. Language Learning 47: 1-43.   
Mendonca, C.O. and Johnson, K.E. 1994: Peer review negotiations: revision activities in ESL writing instruction. TEsOL Quarterly 28: 745-69.   
Mittan, R. 1989: The peer review process: harnessing students' communicative power. In Johnson, D.H. and Roen, D.H., editors, Richness in writing: empowering ESL students, New York: Longman, 207-19.   
Nelson, G.L. and Carson, J.G. 1998: ESL students' perceptions of effectiveness in peer response groups. Journal of Second Language Writing 7: 113-31.   
Nelson, G.L. and Murphy, J.M. 1992: An L2 writing group: task and social dimensions. Journal of Second Language Writing 1: 171-93. 1993: Peer response groups: do L2 writers use peer comments in revising their drafts? TEsOL Quarterly 27: 135-42.   
Paulus, T.M. 1999: The effect of peer and teacher feedback on student writing. Journal of Second Language Writing 8: 265-89.   
Perpignan, H. 2003: Exploring the written feedback dialogue: a research, learning and teaching practice. Language Teaching Research 7: 25978.   
Reid, J. 1994: Responding to ESL students' texts: the myths of appropriation. TESOL Quarterly 28: 273-92.   
Silva, T. and Brice, C. 2004: Research in teaching writing. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 24: 70-106.   
Stanley, J. 1992: Coaching student writers to be effective peer evaluators. Journal of Second Language Writing 1: 217-33.   
Susser, B. 1994: Process approaches in ESL/EFL writing instruction. Journal of Second Language Writing 3: 31-47.   
Tsui, A.B.M. and Ng, M. 2000: Do secondary L2 writers benefit from peer comments? Journal of Second Language Writing 9: 147-70.   
Tuzi, F. 2004: The impact of e-feedback on the revisions of L2 writers in an academic writing course. Computers and Composition 21: 217-35.   
Villamil, O.S. and de Guerrero, M.C.M. 1996: Peer revision in the L2 classroom: social-cognitive activities, mediating strategies, and aspects of social behavior. Journal of Second Language Writing 5: 51-75. 1998: Assessing the impact of peer revision on L2 writing. Applied Linguistics 19: 491-514.   
Zamel, V. 1983: The composing processes of advanced ESL students: six case studies. TESOL Quarterly 16: 165-87. 1987: Recent research on writing pedagogy. TEsOL Quarterly 21: 697-715.   
Zhang, S. 1999: Thoughts on some recent evidence concerning the affective advantage of peer feedback. Journal of Second Language Writing 8: 321-26.   
Zhu, W. 2001: Interaction and feedback in mixed peer response groups. Journal of Second Language Writing 10: 251-76.