# Contesting neoliberal discourses in EAP: Critical praxis in an IEP classroom

Christian W. Chun\*

The Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the University of Toronto, Modern Language Centre, 252 Bloor Street West, Room 10-257, Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 1V6

# Abstract

This article explores ways in which a university Intensive English Program (IEP) featuring English for Academic Purposes (EAP) at a U.S. university functions as an institutionalized discursive space of neoliberalism. By examining discourses that one program adopts in promoting itself online, and in the curriculum material used in IEP/EAP classes, I investigate how neoliberal discourses articulate with the website and academic content in their institutionally mediated interactions with students. I first present an overview of neoliberalism and discuss how its discursive practices have been taken up in everyday life. I then contextualize the university as a specific site of neoliberalism. This is followed by my multimodal analysis of one IEP website and two chapters in commonly used textbooks in an IEP/EAP curriculum. Lastly, drawing on my past teaching practices, I offer how pedagogical interventions through critical engagements with these discourses can open up spaces for alternative subjectivities in contesting neoliberalism. These interrogations in the EAP classroom can be part of an ongoing critical and self-reflexive response to the challenges that neoliberalist ideologies and practices present worldwide.

$^ { © }$ 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Critical EAP; Intensive English Programs; Neoliberalism; Critical pedagogy; Ideology; Identity

# 1. Introduction

Neoliberalism envisions the world as a ‘‘vast supermarket’’ in which ‘‘the ideal citizen is the purchaser’’ (Apple, 1999, p. 204). Underlying this vision is an ideology that is presented as ‘‘a theory of political economic practices that proposes that human well-being can best be advanced by liberating individual entrepreneurial freedoms and skills within an institutional framework characterized by strong private property rights, free markets and free trade’’ (Harvey, 2005, p. 2). Harvey counters that neoliberalism in fact works to restore the power of economic elites by re-establishing the conditions for capital accumulation by dispossession. In the past 25 years or so, the practices of neoliberal dispossession have worked to re-appropriate public wealth back into the private sector by implementing widespread privatization while championing the virtues of the ‘free’ market. Neoliberal practices in the U.S. have thus reorganized capitalism in the attempt to erase the hard-fought gains of social movements such as organized labor to allocate public resources more equitably (Campbell, 2005).

Behind neoliberalism’s Potemkin village of the ‘free’ market lies the growing wreckage of societies witnessed in their environmental degradation, social alienation, and vast disparities of wealth leading to increased poverty and despair. This massive assault on the world has been orchestrated in part by neoliberalist practices. These practices deny societies basic human rights: clean environments, publicly produced wealth to be shared by everyone, and freedom from want. What is at stake here is the urgent need to re-claim democracy as a participatory project, one that confronts neoliberal re-articulations of democracy as an entirely economic concept in which ‘‘consumer choice is the guarantor’’ (Apple, 1999, p. 204). However, neoliberalism is not an enduring, inescapable hegemony but instead a reversible set of political-economic practices. It can thus be continually contested in part by engaging in the transformational processes of accompanying sets of counter-hegemonies and discourses (Williams, 1977). By utilizing the increased social and cultural interconnections and cooperation that cross borders (Col-as, 2005), it is possible to explore and construct counter-hegemonic discourses that critique neoliberalism via ongoing collaborative practices. To avoid totalizing abstractions of neoliberalism, any critical analysis needs to address how its particular discursive practices operate in specific dimensions.

This article explores how an Intensive English Program (IEP) featuring English for Academic Purposes (EAP) at a U.S. university functions as a discursive space of neoliberalism. By analyzing discourses that one program adopts in promoting itself on its website, and in the curriculum material used in IEP/EAP classes, I investigate how neoliberal discourses articulate with the website and academic content in their institutionally mediated interactions with students.

I first present several neoliberal discursive practices. Second, I contextualize an IEP and its affiliated university as a specific site of neoliberalism. I then present my methodology, followed by a multimodal analysis of an IEP website, and two chapters in commonly used textbooks in an IEP/EAP curriculum. Lastly, drawing on 16 years of teaching EAP, I offer how critical interventions with curriculum material can open up spaces for alternative subjectivities in contesting neoliberalism. Interrogating how neoliberal discourses are taken up in the EAP classroom can be part of an ongoing critical and self-reflexive response to the challenges that neoliberalist ideologies and practices present worldwide.

# 2. Neoliberal discursive practices

In mobilizing considerable political, economic, and intellectual resources to impose on the whole world the discipline of the ‘free’ market, neoliberalism attempts to re-make societies to suit its own ideological model (Clarke, 2005). This re-making of the world involves intensifying expansion and integration of capitalist market relations into every sphere of our social lives (Col-as, 2005). The extension of neoliberal ideology infiltrates not only our social relationships, but also our very selves. In its calls to realize and liberate the hidden entrepreneur from within the individual, the neoliberal discourse of self-actualization justifies the abandonment of the social welfare system by presenting itself as ‘‘a gospel of salvation’’ (Comaroff & Comaroff, 2001, p. 2). In shifting responsibility for public well-being away from the state, neoliberal ideology puts the onus on individuals to govern themselves in a market society that should ideally be free of government. However, the neoliberal notion of less government is belied by the alternative new mode of governance in re-creating individuals as ‘‘subjects of entrepreneurial choices’’ (Rofel, 2007, p. 16). It is now up to people to continually improve and adapt themselves in becoming ‘flexible’ in a social reality that neoliberal discourse suggests already exists (Lemke, 2002).

Neoliberal subjectivities position individuals as embodying ‘‘the entirety of skills that have been acquired as the result of ‘investments’ in the corresponding stimuli’’ (Lemke, 2001, p. 199) of education, training, and language studies, for example. In this ideological formation, education has become a commodity that ‘‘can be considered economically akin to a consumer durable which has the peculiarity of being inseparable from its owner’’ (Gordon, 1991, p. 44). People are accordingly positioned as ‘‘ensembles of identity that owe less to history or society than to organically conceived human qualities’’ (Comaroff & Comaroff, 2001, p. 13). Apparently freed from history, people are able to re-make themselves without any seeming encumbrances of their past lived experiences. The individual as producer-consumer is thus ‘‘not just an enterprise, but the entrepreneur of himself or herself’’ (Gordon, 1991, p. 44). Being an entrepreneur of oneself involves the active pursuit of skills designed to make a person a more attractive, and hence, marketable commodity.

One particular discursive practice of neoliberalism in this entrepreneurial portfolio of marketable skills is the espousal of ‘‘emotional intelligence’’ or ‘‘EQ’’ (Goleman, 1995, 1998) as a form of ‘‘communication skills’’ (Cameron, 2002). The communication skill of ‘‘emotional intelligence’’ is now presented as integral for success in the workplace inasmuch as Goleman (1998) claims it is the most significant factor in career advancement and job performance. Emotional intelligence stresses the ability to handle one’s own emotions in responding to others as a better predictor for success than having a high IQ. EQ discourse thus positions a lack of this organically conceived quality as a type of personal flaw, or lack of self-actualization, explaining why employees may fail to keep their jobs. This discourse of blaming the individual has the effect of sweeping away other, more untidy reasons, such as structural or systemic downsizing to increase profit margins and maintain stock prices.

According to Cameron (2002), the discourse of developing uniform ‘‘communication skills’’ in the global marketplace has the effect of making ‘‘every language into a vehicle for the affirmation of similar values and beliefs, and for the enactment by speakers of similar social identities and roles’’ (pp. 69e70), which as she notes, conveniently resembles the preferred speech styles of mainly white educated middle-class Americans. This ‘‘new and powerful discourse on language and communication.has significant implications both for language teaching and for discussion of its politics’’ (p. 68).

Seen from the perspective of these discursive practices, Cameron suggests that English language teaching now may not be so much an agent in fostering linguistic imperialism (Phillipson, 1992) as it is a delivery system of specific interactional norms and speech-styles that are privileged across languages in ways that facilitate the processes of the global economy. She points out these norms are presented as being ‘‘maximally ‘effective’ for purposes of ‘communication’’’ (p. 69). She further observes that the instruction and training to develop these skills are not just disseminated by consultants and experts, but are now being taught by institutions, including companies and schools. In an example of how neoliberalist ideology has attempted to interconnect our sense of selves within its vision of a commodified social reality, the teaching of communication skills such as emotional intelligence is presented in schools as being applicable in all domains, be it work, business, or everyday life. These skills are advocated by their adherents as being ‘‘not merely vocational skills, but ‘life skills’’’ (Cameron, 2002, p. 75). If being an ‘effective communicator’ in the business context is the ability to create the simulacra of intimacy with customers so that they will purchase and come back for more (Cameron, 2002), it is not difficult to imagine that this utilization of ‘emotional intelligence’ may also create similar representations of intimacies in the context of personal relationships. In this scenario, an effective entrepreneur of oneself works on his or her self-improvement project by investing in these communication skills to become ‘‘better friends, better life-partners, better employees and better human beings’’ (Phillips, 1998, as cited by Cameron, 2002, p. 75).

# 3. Context

Any critique needs to foreground the context in which a study of discourse is situated (Blommaert, 2005). One example of the extension and integration of capitalist market relations into a sphere of our social lives has been the marketization of education, in particular that of the university in its articulated ‘‘vision of students as human capital’’ (Apple, 1999, p. 204). In accepting the discipline of market competition, universities have come to adhere to the neoliberal agenda for systems of education: ‘‘the provision of human capital for competitiveness in the global economy, implementing this provision through a business model of management, and opening up state education institutions to private education-for-profit companies’’ (Hatcher, 2003, as cited by Holborow, 2006, p. 91).

Intensive English programs (IEP) are by now a prominent institutional feature at many U.S. public universities. IEPs have mobilized the linguistic resource of EAP to construct a specific market for international ESL students. The selling of IEPs worldwide is part of a complex web in which the dynamics of neoliberalist practices are enacted in institutional sites and their discourses . The construction of a privileged space of an IEP, located within for-profit divisions of the larger privileged space of universities in the U.S., and its ensuing use of the language resource of EAP, has led to localized processes of capital accumulation over the last 30 years. Many IEPs have increased their status by marketing EAP, making it theoretically accessible to anyone wanting to learn English (no academic admission requirement) while simultaneously creating added value by addressing itself to a certain segment of the world population who has the means to acquire this resource. In addition, certain IEPs attempt to market themselves by capitalizing on their idealized and well-known locations, as will be shown below.

With the enormous transfer of wealth from international students in exchange for this product e the educational commodity of EAP emany IEPs have become conduits of economic, linguistic, and human capital to affiliated ‘‘corporatizing’’ universities (Starfield, 2004). Starfield defines a ‘‘corporatizing’’ university as a site in which ‘‘knowledge is marketized as a commodity, where English language degrees are part of the competitive advantage the institution has when competing globally to attract international students and where discourses on quality and flexibility begin to restructure institutional practices and identities’’ (p. 155). Classrooms in many U.S. universities have now become part of the advertising landscape with print advertisements on its walls. These advertisements, which typically feature fashion accessories and travel destinations, target their specific market: students as savvy consumers. The classroom as a commodified space in which consumerist discourses are on display is indicative of neoliberal practices by corporatizing universities, many of which have branded and marketed themselves worldwide. Many universities also benefit from the revenues they collect twice from these international students: the high tuition for the EAP classes in which they may need to enroll and the subsequent higher international tuition fees for their university classes.

To what extent are these particular ESL students different from other ESL students such as immigrant students at community colleges who may not have the same access to this language resource of EAP at an IEP? Due to their high tuition rates (posted on various IEP websites that state a range from $\$ 2,000-92,700$ for an eight or ten-week term), these IEP/EAP classes are typically affordable to a select few, who Vandrick (1995) characterizes as the ‘‘privileged international student’’ (p. 375). Learning English at an IEP may be for some ‘‘a sign one is ‘worthy’ to be an elite’’ which itself is ‘‘more and more composed of a set of signs e really a whole ‘portfolio’ of signs (i.e., the ‘right’ schools, degrees, trips, experiences, and possessions) e than it is of any substantive accomplishments’’ (Gee, 2000e2001, p. 116). To the extent that many workplaces are no longer primary sites of value or identity creation (Sennett, 1998, as cited by Comaroff & Comaroff, 2001, p. 4), IEPs may be partially filling this role as a site in helping to create neoliberal values and identities of students as entrepreneurs managing their ‘‘portfolio of signs’’ to increase their human capital.

# 4. Methodology

I will next analyze how neoliberalist discourses are articulated and adopted within the context of an IEP in two primary ways: an institutional website of an IEP affiliated with a U.S. university, and representative EAP textbooks that are used in an IEP curriculum. I have chosen to focus on this particular IEP website because I view it as being fairly representative of many IEP websites and their online brochures in its style and purpose. For my second data set, I have selected one chapter each in two commonly featured IEP/EAP textbooks that I used extensively as an IEP instructor.

As part of my method and approach to discourse analysis, I situate my concept of ideologizing collocations with Williams’ (1985) notion of ‘‘keywords.’’ I maintain that our collocations in everyday discourses connect disparate words or ideas within the same syntactic domain in a way that this linkage or relationship eventually becomes an accepted, ‘common sense’ association. However, these common sense associations function ideologically in that these words or concepts adhere together in complex ways at historical conjunctures. Examples of ideologizing collocations might be ‘democracy $=$ capitalism’ and ‘Islam $=$ fundamentalism $=$ terrorism’.

Williams’ keywords concept is used to examine how the situated meanings of discourse depend not only on their actual context of use, but also their historical context. Keywords are ‘‘significant, binding.indicative words in certain forms of thought’’ (p. 15) in society. Their meanings are never static in that they are often sites of contestation. Keyword meanings are always rooted in relationships and both are ‘‘typically diverse and variable, within the structures of particular social orders and the processes of social and historical change’’ (p. 22). I draw on both these concepts to examine how they are imbricated in the discourses that circulate throughout this IEP. By contextualizing these discourses in their material and institutional environments, my analysis attends to the need ‘‘to investigate the ways in which the message is organised, mediated, modulated, and reconstructed by the ideological actors using it’’ (Blommaert, 2005, p. 163).

However, textual analysis alone is not sufficient, as Blommaert (2005) warns. Therefore, I employ a multimodal discourse analysis, which ‘‘takes into account the functions and meaning of the visual images, together with the meaning arising from the integrated use of the two semiotic resources’’ (O’Halloran, 2004, p. 1). This approach allows me to analyze how the inter-semiotic mechanisms of visual designs and semiotic images featured on the IEP website and in two IEP/EAP textbooks are constructed to interact with their textual referents.

# 5. Data analysis

# 5.1. Websites

Many IEP websites and online brochures present an educational and financial model that reflects their acceptance of the market discipline: aggressive overseas recruitment of students by the IEP staff (sometimes former ESL instructors), marketing of the university name with which the IEP is affiliated (although often conveniently omitting mention that IEP students will not be accorded full university student rights and privileges), advertisements of housing features and student services, and at times explicitly naming students as ‘‘clients.’’ Thus even before students step into an IEP classroom, they are already positioned by the institutional discourses that view them as purchasers who will receive education for ‘‘value.’’ This keyword collocates with the education the IEP students will receive so it becomes yet another quality product.

Handsomely designed, one online IEP brochure features an impressive layout of colorful graphics and photographs of the campus and the surrounding region famous for its culture.1 Many of the photographs do not show students studying; instead they display people engaged in various sports and leisure activities that are common in the region. The cover of this IEP brochure at first glance could be a travel brochure to the state in which the school is located. The letters of the state’s name are boldly colored and dominate the entire cover. Aside from the one lone photograph of a generic building that could be a library, corporate headquarters, or exhibition hall, the other photographs show a winter sport activity, a landmark feature of a near-by city, hot-air ballooning, an antique car, and smiling faces staring back at the viewer. The glossy slickness of this cover duplicates the graphic styles of other heavily promoted products such as high-end leisure and international travel magazines, investment company prospectuses, and apparel catalogues. In this context of semiotic intertextuality, education is merely another commodity to be advertised and sold to those who have the resources to obtain the cachet that it promises. The only giveaway that this brochure is for a school is the IEP name set in a plain white box that is dominated by the other vivid, striking images.

The images and the text in this brochure work to construct a certain ‘lifestyle’ that is associated with the area, and by implication, the university. Amenities such as outdoor living due to pleasant weather, plenty of leisure activities, and excellent wine and food are all prominently advertised in the first few pages to underscore this point. This lifestyle is explicitly mentioned throughout the brochure as a matter of choice for the students who are presumably faced with a plethora of other choices of schools and their ‘lifestyles’. The brochure discursively positions students as consumers considering this particular program and its accompanying ‘lifestyle’ as an entrepreneurial choice. The creation and production of desire to gain coveted access to a lifestyle that has been marketed internationally is a central feature of neoliberal subjectivities (Rofel, 2007).

The design of this brochure is also identical to that of a corporate annual report in its layout of photographs showing people at work and play, bold graphics, mission statement, and the usual citation of relevant statistics. Included is a slogan, ‘‘achieve excellence,’’ set in a small space by itself, devoid of any context. Class offerings and their schedules are shown below it, presumably underscoring the slogan. However, this slogan can easily be found in any number of corporate publications. Also running throughout this brochure are student testimonials that function as product endorsements by peers. The students’ smiling, well-groomed faces, and enthusiastic praises of the program function in the same manner as the profiles of contented workers in which their tributes to the company are similarly highlighted in corporate reports.

An example of a neoliberal discursive practice positioning the individual as an unfinished project to be continually worked on and improved is evidenced in the brochure advertising the IEP’s services of a ‘‘personal advisor.’’ As a major selling point for prospective students, this IEP ‘‘personal advisor’’ is on hand to coach the students to stay (or become) motivated so that they will ‘‘achieve excellence’’ in their academic studies, and perhaps beyond school. The brochure presents individual coaching with the students as a way to help them realize what the brochure calls their ‘‘hidden talents’’ and potential ‘‘resources.’’ This discourse and its positioning of students is identical to that of ‘life coaching consultants’ who sell their ability to ‘empower’ people to change and improve their professional and personal lives.

# 5.2. Textbooks

Neoliberal discourses are also taken up in several ESL textbooks that are used in IEP curricula. One popular textbook, NorthStar: Focus on Listening and Speaking/High Intermediate (Ferree & Sanabria, 2003), as part of an integrated series, features several units that draw upon discourses of self-actualization and entrepreneurial choices. One unit explores the communication skill of ‘‘emotional intelligence’’ (Goleman, 1995, 1998) as an exercise in teaching students how to become better communicators. However, in this chapter, communicating more effectively for these ESL students does not mean learning any specific second language acquisition strategy, but instead involves learning about the particular interactional norm of ‘‘emotional intelligence’’, defined in the chapter as ‘‘skills such as understanding one’s own emotions and relating well to other people’’ (Ferree & Sanabria, 2003, p. 139).

Why this discourse of the importance of relating well to other people has emerged now is worth examining, for as Cameron (2000) suggests, the techniques of learning how to talk and listen openly and empathetically are used in global service encounter sites such as the call centres she researched. Why are the seemingly natural activities of speaking and listening to one another now the focus of intense attention, with the purpose of developing and improving these abilities (Cameron, 2002)? Exactly what is being communicated here?

On the unit’s opening page, students are asked to respond to a cartoon of a ‘genius’ scientist (signified by his unkempt hair and glazed bespectacled eyes) deep in thought, mumbling a complex mathematical equation in response to a female colleague’s friendly greeting of ‘‘good morning.’’ This framing device implies that although you may be brilliant and have a high IQ, if you do not possess a high ‘‘EQ’’ you are somehow less than complete. The message is reinforced through the cartoon’s presentation of essentialized, sexist notions of gendered personalities and abilities. It is not coincidental that the semiotic construction here showcases the male scientist as brilliant but emotionally ‘remote’ or ‘underdeveloped’, while the female scientist, in her facial demeanor and her pleasantries, is shown to have the ‘requisite’ (and perhaps ‘inherent’) emotional intelligence with the ideological subtext that this is more important than her intellectual capabilities for success. The accompanying question underscores this by asking what the cartoon says about intelligence, directing the student toward perhaps acknowledging the importance of empathetic communicative skills for success.

In the exercise following the cartoon, students are asked to decide the importance of listed qualities and abilities that differentiate individual intelligence; these include solving problems, coming up with new ideas, working hard, and learning quickly. Also included in this list of qualities are understanding each other’s feelings, and one’s own emotions. The strategy in this exercise of placing ‘‘emotionally intelligent’’ qualities alongside traditionally defined notions of intelligence presents a frame in which the emerging industry of emotional intelligence, including the promotion of its practices, are legitimated throughout the rest of the chapter.

These practices are on display in the focal point of the unit e the main listening section that showcases a radio interview with an ‘‘EQ’’ expert weighing in on how the lack of ‘‘EQ’’ is a hindrance in the search for success. The expert is heard to opine, ‘‘people have realized the way you control your feelings is just as important as your education e maybe even more important.’’ Since audience members for this listening task are IEP students, it is more than faintly ironic that they are being told that controlling their emotions may be more important for their careers than any education they have spent considerable time and money to obtain.

In the interview, the ‘‘EQ’’ expert talks with a management training consultant and a marriage counselor, reinforcing the point that emotional intelligence is not only a vocational but also a ‘life skill’. This fittingly underscores Cameron’s (2002) observation of these experts’ claim of the ubiquitous utilization of this ‘communication skill’. The relevance of emotional intelligence in workplace is legitimated by the management consultant in his stating ‘‘this EQ idea is definitely important.’’ He supports this by citing successful people in his field as ‘‘taking life in stride’’ and ‘‘who respond well to change.’’ In contrast, his observation of ‘‘people with a low EQ have a difficult time seeing how their behavior affects other people’’ strongly implies a connection between ‘‘low EQ’’ and lack of success in the future. The marriage counselor is then interviewed. Her assessment of the keys to successful marriages e controlling one’s emotions and working hard to understand the other’s feelings e are nearly identical to the management consultant’s criteria for successful careers. The one example she gives of a successful marriage in action is of a husband reconciling his ambivalent feelings toward his wife because she was promoted at work while he was stuck on his company ladder rung. In these scenarios, the key to successfully managing one’s own personal life and managing others in business is by acquiring the necessary skills of ‘‘emotional intelligence.’’

Students are thus positioned to identify features that will presumably facilitate their quest for success. The EAP content foregrounds this ‘‘communication skill’’ as a necessary component in the neoliberal culture of seeing oneself as project or enterprise to be continually worked on and improved. The content also serves to explicitly teach ways of communicating adopted by institutions, such as corporations, in their desire for productive workers in the burgeoning service sector, which includes telemarketing, customer relations, and so on. Students are thus taught a specific ‘communicative skill’ education that will hopefully equip them to better compete in the job market. However, the forms of capital resources (e.g., social, academic, cultural) that many international elite students in IEPs can draw upon for their job quest in their countries upon returning render communicative skills such as ‘‘emotional intelligence’’ meaningless. For immigrant students at community colleges who may have little or no access to these forms of capital, communicative skills education positions them as trainees for future low-paying jobs in the global service sector.

The theme of ‘‘EQ’’ and its relevance for success is highlighted in one exercise that asks students to see how high their ‘‘EQ’’ is by responding to hypothetical scenarios that involve evaluating (future) parenting skills, and several work situations in which students are given roles as manager and team leader. The adjacent ideologies of family and corporate values in the same exercise does not seem to be coincidental in that from the viewpoint of ‘‘emotional intelligence’’ communicative skills, managing wayward children is no different than managing wayward workers. In the neoliberal world, in becoming an entrepreneur of oneself, one can become an entrepreneur over others.

In another IEP/EAP textbook, Reason to Write: Strategies for Success in Academic Writing/Intermediate (Cohen & Miller, 2003), a unit profiles business owners who care about their employees. The cartoon on the opening page of this unit is the American comic strip, Dilbert, which satirizes the ‘foibles’ of corporate life and its values. In this cartoon, a dog named ‘‘Dogbert’’ is a C.E.O. who plans to slash the company’s budget (which presumably involves laying off employees) to cash in on the resulting boost of the stock price. The punch line in the last panel is that this corporate head doesn’t know and doesn’t care what the company produces. The cartoon demonstrates this unit’s message as a case of business ethics: owners who do not care about their company (unethical) versus those who do (very ethical).

As an example of ethical business practices, the unit profiles Ben & Jerry’s, a U.S. ice cream company. The phrase ‘‘caring capitalism’’, coined by the founders of the company, is the unit’s focal theme. The ideologizing collocation of ‘‘caring capitalism’’ draws on the neoliberal ideology that maintains the free market can take care of people better than any elected government can. This discursive practice is evident in the reading section, which commends Ben & Jerry’s support of the homeless, literacy, environmental clean-up, and world peace. All these are cited as examples of ‘‘caring capitalism.’’ The implication here is clear: if only businesses would look after their employees more (and the world as well), the systemic inequities and environmental degradation wrought by capitalism can then be seen as a result of a simple lack of caring rather than being an integral effect of the capital logic of accumulation.

The ideologizing collocation of ‘‘caring’’ and ‘‘capitalism’’ is reinforced by the smiling, friendly faces of Ben and Jerry featured in the reading section. Looking at their affable demeanor in the photograph, it is impossible to dislike these two Vermont ex-hippies wearing their non-threatening t-shirts with pictures of ice cream and cows on their chests instead of the requisite ‘power’ ties usually worn by corporate executives. The semiotic images in this photograph and the text work in tandem to construct the message that capitalism can produce (if it wishes to) caring, benevolent bosses who are more responsive to our well-being than any inefficient, coldly bureaucratic elected government. Significantly, the reading mentions that a multinational has bought out the founders, but that there is hope that this corporation will continue in the vein of ‘‘caring capitalism’’ by allowing the workers to continue having their free three pints of ice cream every week. The reading does not mention whether or not these workers continued to have company health insurance.

The other reading in the unit reiterates the theme of the ‘‘caring capitalist’’ in its profile of another American business owner who is shown to be a caring company boss due to his beneficence toward his workers after a factory mill disaster in which all the employees lost their jobs. The owner decided to keep them on the payroll for several months while rebuilding the mill, a commendable act to be sure; however, the way the textbook frames this is revealing. Stating that the owner’s action to continue paying the workers was criticized by other manufacturers as ‘‘contradicting the spirit of free enterprise’’ (Cohen & Miller, 2003, p. 161), the textbook defines free enterprise as the ‘‘freedom of private business to organize and operate for a profit in a competitive system without government interference’’ (p. 161). The reading goes on to suggest that the owner’s actions in doing the ‘right’ thing in caring for his employees and supporting charities for the homeless and disaster victims are in fact evidence of free enterprise at its finest. Without any government ‘‘interference,’’ the caring capitalist was able to effectively care for his employees and the community. In this neoliberal discourse, the caring capitalist replaces the agency of the government in looking after citizens in the community because he can do so more efficiently (obeying the law of profit) and more personally (he cares for people he knows). The ideological subtext here is quite clear in what is absent in the reading. The dismantling of government services in the U.S. that served as a social safety net for millions (curtailment of unemployment compensation and housing assistance) is never mentioned; thus, students are positioned to respond positively to this caring capitalist rushing in to fill the resulting void. Due to the unit’s ideological silence, students are also positioned to forego questioning why it has come to pass that there is a need for someone to have to do this. In its praise for caring capitalists, these two profiles exemplify discourses of the market that are ‘‘increasingly articulated in moral and civilizational terms,’’ instead of ‘‘traditional terms of self-interest and efficiency’’ (Fourcade & Healy, 2007, p. 305).

From observations of this website (and others like it), and my own pedagogical encounters with many IEP/EAP textbooks whose content similarly features neoliberal discursive positioning of students as consumers and entrepreneurs of self and others, I see many IEPs being a delivery system of several things simultaneously: 1) a staging area in which not only English, but also specific interactional norms are presented as being necessary elements for success in the global economy; 2) a vector in which neoliberalist discourses are articulated and mediated in multimodal dimensions such as websites and classrooms; and 3) a corporatizing mechanism in its centralizing function of training people how to become better entrepreneurs of themselves.

# 6. Critical interventions in IEP/EAP

The increased social and cultural interconnections that have transcended national boundaries offer a positive globalized resource to draw upon in any effort to collaboratively construct counter-hegemonic discourses and present alternative subjectivities to contest neoliberalism. The neoliberal ideologies articulated in these EAP textbooks can be interrogated through counter-hegemonic discourses by animating social and cultural interconnections between teachers and students in the IEP/EAP classroom. Since ideologizing collocations permeate discourses in EAP content in attempting to create common sense, what are specific strategies to dislocate these collocations? Inasmuch as these classrooms are sometimes sites of contestation and opposition by students, it is important to respond to content that attempts to create specific subject positions as shown in the IEP/EAP textbook chapters. In this section, I offer how pedagogical interventions through critical, dialogic engagements with these discourses in EAP content can open up spaces for alternative subjectivities in contesting neoliberalism. I relate my critical EAP teaching experiences (Benesch, 2001) in addressing the two chapters critiqued above.

As Benesch (1999) observes, ‘‘teaching critical thinking dialogically allows students to articulate their unstated assumptions and consider a variety of views’’ (p. 576). Critical teaching also allows teachers and students who may feel silenced or frustrated by certain content to begin constructing counter-hegemonic discourses. When I first taught the unit on ‘‘emotional intelligence,’’ I was struck by one of my normally voluble student’s silence. When I asked her if she had anything to share about what she thought were the merits of emotional intelligence in the workplace and in school, she replied something to the effect that it was not useful for her as the culture in her country did not accept the utility of this notion. At first, I started to frame this discussion in terms of cultural relativity until I realized it was rapidly reaching a dead-end: ‘‘emotional intelligence’’ ‘works’ in the American workplace, but it doesn’t work in (fill in the blank) workplace. What else could anyone say? This was borne out when the students had to discuss the questions in a mock interview exercise at the close of the unit. Questions included asking how people could improve their emotional intelligence, if employers should teach these skills to their employees, and how employers would be able to evaluate an applicant’s emotional intelligence. My normally talkative, enthusiastic class quickly ran out of things to say or even stayed sullenly silent, perhaps a reflection of the content’s positioning students in unfamiliar, slightly threatening ways.

After examining my own initial assumptions about the content in the unit, I began revising my approach to teaching this theme of emotional intelligence. In the next few days I engaged with the content to open up alternative subject positions for both me and my students. Starting with the cartoon of the brilliant but ‘emotionally inept’ male scientist and the ‘evolved’ female scientist, I asked the students to forget about the question about intelligence. Instead, for their group activity, their assignment was to first discuss the cartoon itself while ignoring the framing device of emotion versus intellect. Several groups began offering observations about the specific gender roles these scientists were made to perform. Comments such as ‘‘women are caring’’ and ‘‘men don’t like to show emotion’’ began to circulate, presenting the opportunity to start examining the genderized messages in the cartoon with the class.

In the ensuing class discussion on the cartoon’s messages, we first started to explore notions of essentialized traits that adhere to gender that are so prevalent in many discourses such as men are from one planet, women from another (Cameron, 2007). In this context, we began questioning the assumptions underlying the cartoon: why is the female scientist the one to be ‘‘emotionally intelligent’’ and not her male colleague? Why isn’t intellect sufficient for these professionals to function properly in their work environment of the laboratory? From these discussions, I was able to start bridging toward other aspects that this unit was foregrounding. In my attempt to deconstruct this ‘‘communication skill,’’ I asked the class to make a list of all the negative elements and consequences of ‘‘emotional intelligence.’’ Rather than accepting the assumption this was necessarily a good thing for everyone, we approached it to see how it might be humiliating for someone.

In one hypothetical scenario in the unit, the students, in their roles as managers, are asked to decide how to handle an employee who has made an ethnic joke. The choices are: ignore it (it’s only a joke), reprimand the person privately, or make an announcement to the company that these jokes are unacceptable. Although the ‘‘high EQ’’ (i.e., the correct) answer is the last choice, many students argued for the first two choices on various grounds, including the humiliating aspect of public shaming, even without naming the offender. Instead of contesting their ‘wrong’ answers, I saw this as another opportunity to dislocate notions of ‘‘communicative skills’’ as essential interactional norms privileged, across languages, for the workplace by encouraging the students’ disputes of the validity of the ‘correct’ answers provided in the text.

Given that some of the IEP students in my classes came from highly privileged backgrounds and were intent on pursuing graduate degrees in business, economics, and marketing, challenging their assumptions underlying the ‘‘caring capitalism’’ unit was obviously not without its own challenges. The chapter frames this issue partly in terms of small businesses (‘‘David’’) versus large ‘impersonal’ corporations (‘‘Goliath’’). In designing an alternative syllabus to question the ideologizing collocation of ‘‘caring capitalism,’’ I first asked the students to discuss and separately list things they associated with caring and capitalism. Afterwards, we examined what they came up with.

In discussing caring, I directed the dialogue toward notions of the agency of caring. What does it mean to care in different contexts? Who cares, and why should this agent care? From these discussions, I moved in the direction of foregrounding dialogues about capitalism. Many of my students at the time were from Asia, and it was only a few years removed from the so-called East Asian Financial Crisis, or what my students termed the IMF (International Monetary Fund) crisis. Some of them knew people whose families had lost everything. For those in the class who were unsure of the role of the IMF, other students explained its function. We began to discuss the roles of corporations and governments agencies like the IMF in times of crises, and what impact they had on daily lives. In this context, the collocation of ‘‘caring capitalism’’ began to be deconstructed by the class in productive dialogues.

I had the students continue these dialogues in their writing. The textbook unit asks students to write a comparison and contrast essay. One writing topic is to find another company that practices ‘‘caring capitalism’’ and compare it with Ben & Jerry’s. Instead of having students do this, I asked them to compare practices of the IMF, governments, and corporations (or they could select just one) with the practices of the agents of caring they had listed, such as families, friends, teachers, religious and spiritual advisors, and so on. In their writings, they contextualized notions of ‘‘caring’’ and began to problematize the ideologizing collocation of ‘‘caring capitalism.’’ The students displayed an enjoyment in the exercise of contesting ‘common sense’ meanings.

As a final exercise, I had the students look up discourses of corporations promoting global sustainability on the Internet to see how these intersected with ‘‘caring capitalism’’. We started a dialogue on how these neoliberal discourses, in their disputing and discrediting the role of democratically-elected governments, sought to reposition the role of markets in deciding who would care for the community and the planet. We also discussed how the agencies of individuals were framed in terms of consumer choice, rather than any meaningful possible political action.

# 7. Conclusion

Pedagogical interventions through critical interrogations of neoliberal discourses can open up spaces for alternative subject positions in contesting ideologies of neoliberalism. These dialogic interrogations in the classroom with students can facilitate their interpretations and contestations of the ideological underpinnings of the discourses they draw upon in indexing their social identities and experiences. Interrogations in the EAP classroom can act as part of a collaborative critical and self-reflexive response to the challenges these ideologies and practices present worldwide.

Critical EAP can help students to analyze textbook discourses in ways that could ‘‘increase their level of engagement not only in academic life but also in public issues’’ (Benesch, 2006, p. 50). Utilizing critical approaches toward texts and discourses can enable EAP instructors and students to co-construct discourses that problematize identities of ideal citizens as consumers and commodities in the neoliberal world. As shown above, this can be achieved in part through examinations of discourses in the classroom that articulate with discourses of power such as neoliberal ideologies. Engaging students in productive dialogues on the interconnections between everyday life and the systemic processes that facilitate or constrain lived identities is an ongoing process in critical EAP curricula. To that end, it can be seen as part of what Williams (1961) called ‘‘the long revolution.’’

# Acknowledgments

Earlier versions of this article were presented at the Language and Neoliberalism Workshop at the University of Toronto, ISLS 2007 in Honolulu, and AAAL 2008 in Washington, D.C. I thank Normand Labrie, Stephanie Vandrick, and Robert Kohls for their generous feedback on earlier drafts. I also thank the two anonymous reviewers for their instructive comments, and I am especially grateful to Sarah Benesch for her invaluable editorial guidance in helping to bring this article to its fruition.

# References

Apple, M. W. (1999). Power, meaning, and identity: Essays in critical educational studies. New York: Peter Lang Publishing.   
Benesch, S. (1999). Thinking critically, thinking dialogically. TESOL Quarterly, 33(3), 573e580.   
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes: Theory, politics, and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Benesch, S. (2006). Critical media awareness: Teaching resistance to interpellation. In J. Edge (Ed.), (Re-)Locating TESOL in an age of empire (pp. 49e64). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Blommaert, J. (2005). Discourse: A critical introduction. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Cameron, D. (2000). Styling the worker: Gender and the commodification of language in the globalized service economy. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 4(3), 323e347.   
Cameron, D. (2002). Globalization and the teaching of ‘communication skills’. In D. Block, & D. Cameron (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 67e82). London: Routledge.   
Cameron, D. (2007). The myth of Mars and Venus. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.   
Campbell, A. (2005). The birth of neoliberalism in the United States: A reorganisation of capitalism. In A. Saad-Fiho, & D. Johnston (Eds.), Neoliberalism: A critical reader (pp. 187e198). London: Pluto Press.   
Clarke, S. (2005). The neoliberal theory of society. In A. Saad-Fiho, & D. Johnston (Eds.), Neoliberalism: A critical reader (pp. 50e59). London: Pluto Press.   
Cohen, R. F., & Miller, J. L. (2003). Reason to write: Strategies for success in academic writing, Intermediate. New York: Oxford University Press.   
Col-as, A. (2005). Neoliberalism, globalisation and international relations. In A. Saad-Fiho, & D. Johnston (Eds.), Neoliberalism: A critical reader (pp. 70e79). London: Pluto Press.   
Comaroff, J., & Comaroff, J. L. (2001). Millennial capitalism: First thoughts on a second coming. In J. Comaroff, & J. L. Comaroff (Eds.), Millennial capitalism and the culture of neoliberalism (pp. 1e56). Durham, NC: Duke University Press.   
Ferree, T., & Sanabria, K. (2003). NorthStar focus on listening and speaking, high intermediate (2nd ed.). New York: Longman.   
Fourcade, M., & Healy, K. (2007). Moral views of market society. Annual Review of Sociology, 33, 285e311.   
Gee, J. P. (2000e2001). Identity as an analytic lens for research in education. Review of Research in Education, 25, 99e125.   
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam Books.   
Goleman, D. (1998). Working with emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam Books.   
Gordon, C. (1991). Governmental rationality: An introduction. In G. Burchell, C. Gordon, & P. Miller (Eds.), The Foucault effect: Studies in governmentality (pp. 1e51). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
Harvey, D. (2005). A brief history of neoliberalism. New York: Oxford University Press.   
Holborow, M. (2006). Ideology and language: Interconnections between neo-liberalism and English. In J. Edge (Ed.), (Re-)Locating TESOL in an age of empire (pp. 84e103). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Lemke, T. (2001). ‘The birth of bio-politics’: Michel Foucault’s lecture at the Colle\`ge de France on neo-liberal governmentality. Economy and Society, 30(2), 190e207.   
Lemke, T. (2002). Foucault, governmentality, and critique. Rethinking Marxism, 14(3), 49e64.   
O’Halloran, K. L. (Ed.). (2004). Multimodal discourse analysis: Systemic-functional perspectives. New York: Continuum.   
Phillipson, R. (1992). Linguistic imperialism. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.   
Rofel, L. (2007). Desiring China: Experiments in neoliberalism, sexuality, and public culture. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.   
Starfield, S. (2004). Why does this feel empowering? Thesis writing, concordancing, and the corporatizing university In B. Norton, & K. Toohey (Eds.), Critical pedagogies and language learning (pp. 138e157) New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Vandrick, S. (1995). Privileged ESL university students. TESOL Quarterly, 29(2), 375e381.   
Williams, R. (1961). The long revolution. New York: Columbia University Press.   
Williams, R. (1977). Marxism and literature. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.   
Williams, R. (1985). Keywords: A vocabulary of culture and society (Rev. ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.   
Yarymowich, M. (2004). ‘‘Language tourism’’ in Canada: A mixed discourse. In F. Baider, M. Burger, & D. Goutsos (Eds.), Tourist communication: Discursive approaches to identity and otherness (pp. 257e273). Paris: L’Harmattan.