# Exploring EFL learners’ engagement and draft quality in a multi-stage expository writing task using model texts as a feedback facilitator: A mixed-methods study

Long Quoc Nguyen a,b,\*,1 , Duy Van Vu b,c,2

a University of Foreign Languages and International Studies, Hue University, Vietnam   
b FPT University, Vietnam   
c East Asia University of Technology, Vietnam

# A R T I C L E I N F O

# A B S T R A C T

Keywords:   
Model texts   
Feedback   
EFL learners   
Expository writing   
Engagement   
Text quality

To enhance EFL learners’ engagement and writing, model texts as a feedback instrument (MTFI) have been used for the past two decades. This approach includes three primary stages: i) initial written output, ii) comparison of the output and model texts, and iii) rewriting of original drafts. However, the multidimensional nature of learners’ engagement and its relationship with text quality remain underexplored, particularly in expository writing. This study addresses these gaps by examining how learners engaged with MTFI emotionally, cognitively, and behaviorally, and how this engagement correlates with text quality. Sixty-eight Vietnamese EFL undergraduates were divided into a control group (CG, $N = 3 3$ ) and an experimental group (EG, $N = 3 5$ . The EG participated in all three stages, while the CG did not partake in stage two. Data included notetaking sheets, written texts, follow-up questionnaires, and semi-structured interviews. Results showed that learners had a favorable attitude towards MTFI and displayed higher levels of cognitive and behavioral engagement with content-related and organizational features compared to lexical and grammatical aspects. Moreover, although both groups exhibited similar quality in the first drafts, the EG outperformed the CG in the rewritten compositions. Additionally, modeltext awareness, a dimension of cognitive engagement, was moderately associated with learners’ overall text quality.

# 1. Introduction

Written feedback has long been considered as a pivotal instructional approach to enhance learners’ writing skills (Graham et al., 2016; MacArthur, 2016). However, the process of providing detailed and accurate feedback for different students across multiple tasks and large-sized classes remains highly time-consuming and labor-intensive, which poses a great burden on teachers (Graham, 2019; Steiss et al., 2024). Such feedback may even be counterproductive and detrimental to learning motivation (Lee, 2019; Truscott, 2007). To lessen the pressure placed on teachers as sole feedback providers, alternative methods, especially those communicating to learners “what quality performance looks like” to direct them towards improved writing (Steiss et al., 2024, p.1), are needed. One such pproach is the use of model texts as a feedback instrument (MTFI).

MTFI typically features a three-stage writing task: composing an initial draft (stage one), comparing it with high-quality model texts written by competent users of the target language and customized to learners’ age and proficiency levels (Coyle et al., 2018) (stage two), and rewrite the original draft (stage three). It has been commonly utilized in English as a foreign language (EFL) writing classrooms for the past decades and proved effective in bolstering learners’ writing performance (e.g., Kang, 2020, 2023; Wu et al., 2023) as well as metalinguistic awareness (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). By comparing their drafts with model texts, EFL learners can proactively identify their own errors and adjust learning to their internal syllabus (Qi & Lapkin, 2001), and thereby engage in deeper feedback processing (Sachs & Polio, 2007).

Despite the prominence of MTFI, little is known about learners’ engagement with MTFI as a multidimensional construct (i.e., affective, cognitive, behavioral engagement) (Ellis, 2010) during writing tasks. Previous studies on MTFI have explored aspects of learners’ engagement, but most focused on one (e.g., Lazaro-Ibarrola ´ & Villarreal, 2021; Roothooft et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023), or two dimensions (e.g., Canovas ´ Guirao et al., 2015; Lazaro-Ibarrola, ´ 2021; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). A comprehensive picture of learners’ engagement in an MTFI task remains largely unclear, particularly concerning expository writing, a key yet underexplored genre in higher education (Yang et al., 2023). The examination of expository compositions is essential as different genres may influence learners’ writing in various ways (Kang, 2020; Lee, 2021). Moreover, since learners’ engagement is crucial in feedback (Zhang & Hyland, 2018) and “central to connecting feedback provision with learning outcomes” (Mao & Lee, 2022, p. 788), it is essential to also probe into the relationship between learners’ engagement with MTFI and their writing performance. This investigation addresses a significant gap in MTFI literature by exploring the connection between writing process and product. Such insights can potentially enable teachers and educators to adjust their instruction to provide students with needed support throughout the writing stages.

Additionally, feedback is a form of social action taking place in particular institutional and cultural contexts (Hyland & Hyland, 2019). However, most previous research on MTFI was conducted in European countries (e.g., Luquin & García Mayo, 2021, 2024; Roothooft et al., 2022), with small sample sizes $( M = 3 8 . 3 6$ , $S D = 2 1 . 2 9 $ (for a review, see Nguyen et al., 2024a). Research on MTFI in underrepresented contexts, such as Vietnam, is needed to help address sampling bias and the issue of generalizability in applied linguistics (Andringa & Godfroid, 2020). There is a recent study by Nguyen et al. (2024b) that has explored the writing process and product of Vietnamese EFL learners through an expository MTFI task. Nonetheless, it fell short of comprehensively measuring learners’ engagement as a multifaceted construct and did not investigate the correlation between engagement and text quality.

For the above reasons, the present study employed a mixed-methods approach to investigate how Vietnamese EFL learners engaged affectively, cognitively, and behaviorally with MTFI, as well as the relationship between their engagement and text quality in an expository writing task.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Theoretical frameworks for the use of MTFI

The use of model texts as a feedback facilitator draws support from both cognitive and sociocultural theories. On the cognitive side, MTFI is mainly framed within the Output Hypothesis (Swain, 2000) in which learners identify knowledge gaps during writing (output–composing stage), seek and process solutions from model texts (noticing–comparing stage), and reflect on their previous noticing in the form of language to choose the best information to incorporate into their rewritten texts (hypothesis testing and metalinguistic awareness–rewriting stage). This process is purported to help learners to understand form-meaning connections and promote L2 development (Swain, 2000). It is further corroborated by the Noticing Hypothesis (Schmidt, 2001) with the claim that a higher level of noticing is associated with better learning outcomes.

On the sociocultural side, model texts act as text-mediated instruments (mediating tools) (Hamano-Bunce, 2022), offering scaf folded support by exposing learners to expert users’ language that is tailored to learners’ proficiency level and background knowledge. In other words, this approach creates the Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD), defined as “the distance between the actual devel opmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers” (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 86). The process of analyzing model texts allows learners to identify areas for improvement and potentially develop L2 knowledge (Luquin & García Mayo, 2021), which contributes to achieving particular learning goals within structured writing tasks (activity). In brief, the use of MTFI aligns with the three core concepts of the sociocultural theory (SCT): activity, mediating tools, and ZPD (Storch, 2018).

# 2.2. The framework of learners’ engagement with feedback

Learners’ engagement with feedback is "a complex process" (Zhang & Hyland, 2022, p.1) which has been conceptualized as a multidimensional construct with the interconnectedness of three elements: affective, cognitive, and behavioral engagement (e.g., Ellis, 2010; Zhang & Hyland, 2018). The first component, affective engagement, refers to learners’ attitudinal and emotional responses to feedback (Ellis, 2010; Zhang & Hyland, 2018), which can be captured via three categories including interest (i.e., students’ willingness to interact with feedback), value (i.e., the usefulness of feedback), and affect (i.e., the emotions when receiving and reading feedback) (Fan & Xu, 2020). Cognitive engagement encompasses awareness of feedback (i.e., understanding of feedback) and cognitive and metacognitive operations (i.e., mental endeavors to process the received feedback) (Fan & Xu, 2020; Zhang & Hyland, 2018). Notably, cognitive and metacognitive operations could be assigned into one category due to their overlaps (Zhang & Gao, 2024). Finally, behavioral engagement pertains to the strategies learners utilize to revise their texts such as feedback uptake (Han & Hyland, 2015).

# 2.3. Learners’ engagement with MTFI

# 2.3.1. Affective engagement

On the one hand, some studies have examined learners’ affective engagement with MTFI by tapping into only one of its subdimensions (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; Kang, 2020, 2023; Nguyen and Le, 2022). In a multi-stage narrative writing task, Hanaoka (2007) required 37 Japanese EFL undergraduates to rate their eagerness (affect) when they compared their initial drafts with two model texts. The results showed that the participants’ eagerness was high, demonstrating positive emotions. In addition to affect, previous research also explored how learners perceived the usefulness (value) of MTFI. For instance, Kang (2020) investigated how Korean EFL teenage learners viewed MTFI in an argumentative task. The author found that the students deemed the model texts quite useful for their writing improvement. This finding was corroborated by subsequent studies such as Kang (2023) and Nguyen and Le (2022), which also examined the perceived value of MTFI.

On the other hand, several studies have attempted to measure learners’ affective engagement across its three sub-dimensions (affect, value, and interst)(e.g., García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017; L´azaro-Ibarrola & Villarreal, 2021; Roothooft et al., 2022; Villarreal & L´azaro-Ibarrola, 2022). García Mayo and Loidi Labandibar (2017) employed a questionnaire to capture Basque-Spanish EFL teenage learners’ attitude towards MTFI. The questionnaire included three aspects: eagerness (affect), usefulness (value), and enjoyment (interest). It was found that while learners valued the model texts, their eagerness and enjoyment were low. The reason was because the students found the models difficult to understand. In another study, Lazaro-Ibarrola ´ and Villarreal (2021) measured Spanish EFL learners’ motivation multiple times based on a 10-point thermometer accompanied with a list of reasons encompassing all three sub-dimensions of affective engagement. The results indicated that the participants’ motivation was high but dropped slightly prior to the final draft. These findings were further supported by Roothooft et al. (2022) as well as Villarreal and Lazaro-Ibarrola´ (2022), though the decline in motivational scores was more substantial in the latter study.

Insightful as these studies are, the tools used to capture affective engagement were relatively simplistic, with a multi-point item (e. g., Hanaoka, 2007; Roothooft et al., 2022), a five-item questionnaire (Kang, 2023) or semi-structured interviews involving only a few students (e.g., Nguyen & Le, 2022). The motivation thermometer could be a useful instrument; however, it restricted participants to selecting only one reason from a list, thereby capturing only a single element of affective engagement at a time. To gain a deeper understanding of this element within MTFI research, a more comprehensive questionnaire addressing its three sub-dimensions, complemented by interviews, is needed.

# 2.3.2. Cognitive engagement

Prior MTFI research primarily measured learners’ cognitive engagement via cognitive and metacognitive operations (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). In these studies, learners were required to read given model texts, compare these models with their initial drafts, and identify any differences as well as useful features. This process was often captured in three main ways: note-taking (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007), pair discussions (e.g., Luquin & García Mayo, 2021), or a combination of both (C´anovas Guirao et al., 2015). Learners’ notes or discussions were then coded into categories such as content, grammar, organization, and others, which were referred to as Features Noticed (FNs) (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023). For example, Baleghizadeh and Arab (2011) found that 34 Iranian EFL learners directed $6 6 . 4 \%$ of their attention to lexis, $2 2 . 3 \%$ to grammar, $0 . 3 \%$ to organization, $1 0 . 1 ~ \%$ to content, and $0 . 9 ~ \%$ to others after comparing two narrative models with their own writing. Kang (2020) reported that via note-taking, learners focused on five aspects: vocabulary $( 5 6 \% )$ , content $( 1 6 . 5 \% )$ ), grammar $( 1 5 . 7 \% )$ , organization $( 4 . 7 \% )$ , and others $( 7 . 2 ~ \% )$ ). These studies indicated that via a wide range of cognitive and metacognitive operations, learners processed MTFI by concentrating largely on lexical features.

However, a recent study (Nguyen et al., 2024b) has revealed a quite different landscape. Through a three-stage expository paragraph writing task, Nguyen et al. (2024b) found that Vietnamese EFL learners noticed more content-related aspects $( 3 5 . 3 8 ~ \% )$ ) and organizational features $( 3 3 . 2 3 \% )$ in a given model text than those that were lexical $( 2 1 . 5 4 \% )$ ) or grammatical $( 7 . 3 9 \% )$ . These findings contrast with previous MTFI research, which has primarily reported a strong emphasis on vocabulary (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; Kang, 2020). Nguyen et al. (2024b) attributed these differences to several factors, including variations in writing genre (narrative vs. expository), writing type (essay vs. paragraph), the number of model texts provided (one vs. two), and the calculation of noticed features highlighting similarities between learners’ drafts and the model text, which was not included in most prior MTFI studies (e.g., Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023).

Such inconsistencies, coupled with the underexplored aspect of feedback understanding in previous MTFI research, warrant further investigation. Capturing this dimension of feedback awareness is essential, as a lack of model-text comprehension is likely to incur costs in motivation and feedback processing (García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017).

# 2.3.3. Behavioral engagement

In MTFI research, behavioral engagement was measured by calculating what noticed features in the comparing stage learners chose to incorporate into their rewritten texts (feedback uptake). These incorporations were termed as Features Noticed and Incorporated (FNIs) (Hanaoka, 2007) and mainly categorized into vocabulary, content, grammar, and organization. In a study with 37 Japanese EFL learners, Hanaoka (2007) found that the participants concentrated most on lexical features $( 7 5 ~ \% )$ during the comparison of their initial writing with two narrative model texts and incorporated about $9 2 \%$ of these noticed points in their revised drafts. This finding was corroborated by subsequent studies (e.g., Canovas ´ Guirao et al., 2015; Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). For instance, Luquin and García Mayo (2021) reported that learners focused on vocabulary the most in the comparing stage and incorporated around $4 0 ~ \%$ of these features in their rewritten text.

These results suggest that L2 learners endeavored to integrate a large portion of noticed features, primarily vocabulary, in model texts into their subsequent drafts. Nonetheless, such findings were at odds with the study by Nguyen et al. (2024b), who observed a higher incorporation of content-related $( 4 4 . 2 1 ~ \% )$ ) and organizational $( 3 2 . 1 1 ~ \% )$ features compared to vocabulary $( 2 1 . 0 5 ~ \% )$ . This inconsistency, along with the insufficient exploration of the role of Features Noticed but Not Incorporated (FNNIs) (L´azaro-Ibarrola, 2021), an indicator of revision strategy, necessitates additional research.

# 2.3.4. Learners’ engagement, as a multidimensional construct, with MTFI

Although engagement has been recognized as a multifaceted construct (Ellis, 2010), the majority of MTFI studies have examined it in isolation—either affectively (e.g., Lazaro-Ibarrola ´ & Villarreal, 2021; Roothooft et al., 2022), cognitively (Wu et al., 2023), or both cognitively and behaviorally (e.g., C´anovas Guirao et al., 2015; Lazaro-Ibarrola, ´ 2021; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). To date, it appears that only two studies (García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017; Hanaoka, 2007) have explored learners’ engagement across its three sub-constructs in relation to MTFI. Both studies found that learners exhibited higher levels of engagement with lexis when compared to other features (content, grammar) in cognitive (noticed features) and behavioral (incorporations) aspects. These findings indicate an association between cognitive and behavioral engagement (more noticing, more incorporations), as confirmed by sub sequent research (Luquin & García Mayo, 2021; Montealegre Ramon, ´ 2019).

Furthermore, the high rates of noticing and incorporations observed in Hanaoka (2007) might have been influenced by positive emotions among the students. Similarly, García Mayo and Loidi Labandibar (2017) noted that "those who rated them [model texts] higher in terms of enjoyment […] were found to have incorporated significantly more target features in their revisions" (pp. 13–14). Thus, it can be inferred that there might be a possible link between affective engagement and cognitive as well as behavioral engagement.

Taken together, learners’ affective, cognitive, and behavioral engagement with MTFI appears to be interconnected, contributing to a more holistic understanding of learners’ writing. Nonetheless, MTFI studies on engagement as a multifaceted construct remain limited and have predominantly focused on narratives. Additionally, each sub-construct of engagement, as discussed earlier, has not yet been comprehensively measured. These issues underscore the need for further research on learners’ engagement with MTFI.

# 2.4. Learners’ engagement with MTFI and their text quality

Several studies have explored the impact of MTFI on L2 learners’ text quality, using either narrative (e.g., Lazaro-Ibarrola, ´ 2021) or expository (e.g., Kang, 2022; 2023; Nguyen et al., 2024b) writing. In general, it was consistently reported that MTFI had a positive effect on learners’ writing quality, measured holistically (e.g., Roothooft et al., 2022) or analytically (e.g., Wu et al., 2023). An example can be found in Kang’s (2020) study which reported that learners enhanced their writing in terms of vocabulary and content after being exposed to two model argumentative essays. In a recent study, Mujtaba et al. (2024) also found that learners significantly improved their vocabulary and organization scores after participating in an argumentative MTFI task. Similarly, Luquin and García Mayo (2024) revealed that MTFI considerably enhanced learners’ draft quality, particularly in terms of cohesion and coherence. These gains were attributed to learners’ noticing and incorporations of features in given model texts into their rewritten drafts (Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023).

Overall, MTFI has proven to be an effective method for facilitating L2 learners’ writing development. However, it appears that no studies to date have explored the relationship between learners’ engagement, as a multidimensional construct, with MTFI and their writing performance. Kang (2023) examined the correlation between Korean EFL learners’ perceptions of MTFI and their writing quality and found a moderate positive association between the two variables. Yet, the study only addressed affective engagement (attitudinal responses). Since engagement is a complex process (Zhang & Hyland, 2022) and crucial to the connection between feedback and learning gains (Mao & Lee, 2022), it is valuable to investigate the correlation between learners’ engagement as a multifaceted construct and text quality in an MTFI task.

# 3. The present study

The literature review has identified two main limitations in previous MTFI research: i) a lack of scholarship on learners’ engagement, as a multidimensional construct, with MTFI, especially regarding expository writing, and ii) a paucity of investigation into the relationship between learners’ engagement and text quality. To fill these gaps, the present study sought to explore how Vietnamese EFL learners engaged emotionally, cognitively, and behaviorally with MTFI. The secondary aim was to examine the correlation between these engagement sub-constructs and learners’ text quality. The two following research questions (RQs) were formulated to guide the present study:

1. How do Vietnamese EFL learners engage with MTFI in an expository writing task?   
2. What is the relationship between Vietnamese EFL learners’ engagement with MTFI and their expository text quality?

Given the exploratory focus on learner’ engagement in the first RQ, hypotheses were only formulated for the second RQ. We hypothesize that affective, cognitive and behavioral engagement may correlate with writing quality, in light of findings from Mao and Lee (2022) and Kang (2023).

# 4. Methodology

# 4.1. Participants

The participants in the current study were 68 first-year EFL students (54 males and 14 females) from two intact classes at a Vietnamese university, with an average age of 18.2 years $\left( S D = . 8 5 \right)$ . They were enrolled in an English course aimed at improving their ability to write effective expository paragraphs. They had approximately ten years of English learning experience within Vietnam and had not received any overseas training. Their English proficiency, assessed via the Oxford Quick Placement Test (OQPT) (UCLES, 2001), ranged from B1 to B2 levels according to the Common European Framework of References for Languages (CEFR). A Mann-Whitney U test showed that there was no significant difference between the two classes in the OQPT scores $( U = 5 7 7 , p = . 9 8 )$ , indicating their comparability in English proficiency levels. One class was randomly assigned as an experimental group (EG, $N = 3 5$ ) and the other as a control group (CG, $N = 3 3$ ).

# 4.2. Research materials and instruments

# 4.2.1. Material

The research material in the present study was a model text (see Appendix A) composed by the class instructor, which followed a review procedure employed in Nguyen et al. (2024b). Specifically, it was revised by an American teacher before being reviewed by two other EFL teachers, all of whom had a master’s degree in English Language Teaching and were experienced in teaching writing to Vietnamese undergraduates. Following this, the model was input into the Write&Improve with Cambridge website (writeandimprove. com) for level checking and the yielded outcome was B2 (CEFR), which was the course’s target level. A pilot study involving ten students with a similar background to the participants revealed that the model was comprehensible $\mathbf { \mathit { M } } = 8 . 6$ , $S D = . 9 7 $ ) on a scale from 1.0 (very low understanding) to 10.0 (very high understanding).

# 4.2.2. Data collection instruments

There were four data collection instruments (writing prompt, note-taking sheets, affective-engagement questionnaire, semistructured interviews) which were reviewed carefully by the two experienced researchers in applied linguistics prior to the fullscale research to ensure content validity. The first one refers to the writing prompt that required students to compose a paragraph of at least 120 words to propose solutions to increasing temperatures worldwide.

The second tool was the FN (Features Noticed) sheet (see Appendix B) which was adapted from previous studies (Hanaoka, 2007; Kang, 2020). The participants were required to rate their understanding level of the model text on a scale from 1.0 (very low) to 10.0 (very high), compare their drafts with the model, and fill in this sheet. Particularly, the FN sheet consisted of four sections: the understanding level, similarities, differences and useful features in the model text.

The third instrument was the questionnaire used to measure learners’ affective engagement with MTFI. It contained a total of 12 items, which were based on Fan and Xu (2020) (interest and affect: items 1–7) as well as Kang (2023) (value: items 8–12). The ques tionnaire was designed in English and translated into Vietnamese before being distributed to the participants.

Finally, semi-structured interviews were used to triangulate quantitative data, which included five key questions (see Appendix C). Specifically, the first and third items were about the learners’ emotional and attitudinal responses to MTFI. The second and fourth questions tapped into their cognitive and behavioral engagement, respectively. The last one focused on their beliefs in the impact of MTFI on their text quality. The reasons for their responses to each question were also explored.

# 4.3. Procedure

The present study commenced in the middle of the course. Before partaking in the study, the participants signed an informed consent form. In stage one, both groups were asked to compose a paper-based paragraph on the given prompt within $2 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ , which was later collected by the class instructor. One week later, only the EG joined stage two in which they received a copy of their initial draft, a model text, and an FN sheet. They were required to compare the two compositions and fill in the sheet, in either Vietnamese or English. The students completed the sheets in about $3 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ and returned all the documents to the instructor. In the next week (stage three), both groups were tasked with the same writing prompt for $2 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ , without any prior notice, and the paragraphs were collected upon completion. No discussions, extra materials, or any other kinds of support were allowed in all the stages. Following this, the EG received the affective engagement questionnaire (in Vietnamese to avoid any misunderstanding) in the Google Form format. Finally, ten random participants in the EG were invited to partake in the individual face-to-face semi-structured interviews in Vietnamese. Each interview, which lasted for about $2 0 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ , was audio-recorded using a personal smartphone. During the interviews, the participants were allowed to read the model text again, when necessary, to assist their memory and to assure the accuracy of the reported in formation as much as possible.

# 4.4. Data coding and analysis

# 4.4.1. Affective engagement questionnaire

To examine the affective engagement questionnaire’s reliability, Cronbach’s alpha $( \alpha )$ coefficients were calculated in SPSS version 27.0. The $\alpha$ value for the whole questionnaire was .907, for the interest and affect items (based on Fan & Xu, 2020) being .923, and for the value items (based on Kang, 2023) being .801. Furthermore, the Total-Item Correlations scores of all 12 items exceeded .30. These statistics indicated that the questionnaire had high reliability and internal consistency (Pallant, 2020). The mean values were reported and interpreted as low (under 2.5), medium (2.5–3.49), and high (3.5 or higher), following the guidelines of Oxford and Burry-Stock (1995).

# 4.4.2. Cognitive and behavioral engagement

Cognitive engagement was measured through two main components: depth of feedback processing (feedback noticing and un derstanding) as well as cognitive and metacognitive operations (Han & Hyland, 2015). However, in the present study, cognitive and metacognitive operations were combined into one category based on Zhang and Gao’s (2024) argument that these operations often overlapped. Specifically, depth of feedback processing was captured via learners’ comprehension of the model text, assessed using a 10-point scale (feedback awareness, Fan & Xu, 2020). Cognitive/metacognitive operations were operationalized as the noticed features (Dao et al., 2021) recorded in the note-taking sheet, which reflected not only learners’ noticing but also their cognitive and meta cognitive processes. Indeed, the FN sheet prompted learners to identify similarities and differences between their draft and the model text, and to note what they learned from the model. Completing this task required learners to analyze, evaluate, and reflect on both their own work and the model text, thus showcasing their cognitive and metacognitive strategies. These noticed features were further classified into five categories following the guidelines of Hanaoka (2007) and Kang (2020): content, grammar, organization, vocabulary, and others (e.g., time, spelling, generic comments) (Table 1). Notably, only unique features were counted, following Nguyen et al. (2024b); in other words, if a word such as “eco-friendly” was mentioned multiple times, it was considered as one feature.

To account for behavioral engagement, which pertained to how learners’ revision actions, particularly feedback uptake (Han & Hyland, 2015), the quantity of incorporations of FN in the model into the rewritten drafts was counted. Specifically, learners’ notes in the FN sheet were compared with their original and revised texts to examine whether the noticed features were incorporated (Features Noticed and Incorporated or FNIs) or not (Features Noticed but Not Incorporated or FNNIs). Guided by Hanaoka (2007) and Kang (2020), FNIs (Table 2) were grouped into vocabulary, grammar, organization, content, and others. For noticed features that were too general (e.g., I used simple vocabulary, but the model used more advanced words), they were not counted as an FNI since such features could not be traced. Of note, we also regarded FNNIs as an indicator of behavioral engagement because they also indicated learners’ strategies (i.e., not to incorporate). Moreover, given their large quantity (see Table 6), the inclusion of FNNIs would provide insights into the overall picture of behavioral engagement.

Previous studies on learners’ cognitive and behavioral engagement with teacher feedback (Zhang & Hyland, 2018) or peer feed back (Fan & Xu, 2020) often tapped into strategies such as checking a dictionary, asking peers, and using online resources. However, in an MTFI task, the students rewrote their text without discussions or access to any documents including their initial draft. Therefore, such strategies were absent and not counted. In other words, written notes (FNs) and incorporated (FNIs) as well as unincorporated (FNNIs) features were the only employed measurements.

# 4.4.3. Scoring of text quality

Learners’ paragraphs in stages one and three were scored using analytic rating via a writing rubric adopted from Nguyen et al. (2024b). It contained four 6-point criteria: content, vocabulary, grammar, and organization, each ranging from 0 (lowest) to 5 (highest). It had been carefully reviewed by the mentioned American teacher and piloted with the two EFL teachers before being employed for the official study.

Regarding interrater reliability, the first author and a trained research assistant with a master’s degree in applied linguistics jointly coded three FN sheets and three paragraphs (for capturing FNIs and FNNIs and text quality) before independently working on 6 additional FN sheets $( 1 8 . 8 \% )$ and 20 additional paragraphs $( 1 5 . 0 \% )$ . The agreement rates between the two coders were $8 6 . 7 \%$ for the FN sheets, $8 1 . 7 ~ \%$ for FNIs/FNNIs, and $8 3 ~ \%$ for text quality, indicating substantial agreement (McHugh, 2012). Any differences between the coders were resolved before the remaining data were coded by the first author.

# 4.4.4. Semi-structured interviews

For interview analysis, several steps were undertaken following the guidelines by Creswell and Creswell (2017). Initially, the first author listened to each recording and created verbatim transcripts which were then verified by the mentioned research assistant. Next, the transcripts were sent back to the interviewees for member checking. Once all participants confirmed the accuracy of the transcriptions, a content-based analysis was conducted. The analysis centered on four pre-established themes from the research questions: affective engagement (emotional responses, value), cognitive engagement (noticed features), behavioral engagement (feedback incorporations), and the impact of MTFI. The categories and reasons related to these themes were analyzed inductively. Relevant segments were highlighted and coded, which were then grouped to identify recurring patterns and broader categories. An iterative process of refinements was made before these categories were finalized.

Table 1 Examples of Features Noticed in the comparing stage.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>Participants&#x27; notes</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>i) I learned some new words in the model text such as &quot;eco-friendly&quot; and &quot;greenhouse gases&quot;.</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>ii) I did not use passive voice in my paragraph, but the model used this structure multiple times.</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>iii) The model text was written in a direct and coherent way, but my paragraph was quite lengthy and unorganized.</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>iv) The model text proposed the idea of protecting natural sources, but I did not use this idea.</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>v) After comparing my paragraph with the model text, I need to practice more to improve my writing.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 A sample of Features Noticed and Incorporated across three stages.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>An EG participant&#x27;s notes and texts</td></tr><tr><td>Original draft (Stage 1): Upgrade your social responsibility and your knowledge every day is make your world be better. Model text (t 2): In osion we cn oeth iss f lirn in cite thogh tio, strict sms, oisin f tsh can.</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>[Organization]. Rewrittet (tg)  sotion, t ing  y  d e  goi w his p  onent]</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Descriptive statistics for the affective engagement questionnaire.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Statement</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>1. I was willing to participate in the writing task using the model text.</td><td>4.49</td><td>.70</td></tr><tr><td>2. I was willing to read the model text.</td><td>4.60</td><td>.60</td></tr><tr><td>3. I was willing to compare my draft with the model text.</td><td>4.54</td><td>.70</td></tr><tr><td>4. I was willing to rewrite my draft after comparing it with the model text.</td><td>4.29</td><td>.75</td></tr><tr><td>5. I felt excited when reading the model text.</td><td>4.20</td><td>.83</td></tr><tr><td>6. I felt excited when comparing my draft with the model text.</td><td>4.01</td><td>.91</td></tr><tr><td>7. I felt excited in rewriting my draft after comparing it with the model text.</td><td>4.09</td><td>.85</td></tr><tr><td>General Mean (interest and affect)</td><td>4.31</td><td>.64</td></tr><tr><td>8. The model text was useful to improve my draft in general.</td><td>4.46</td><td>.61</td></tr><tr><td>9. The model text was useful to improve my draft&#x27;s vocabulary.</td><td>4.31</td><td>.68</td></tr><tr><td>10. The model text was useful to improve my draft&#x27;s organization.</td><td>4.23</td><td>.77</td></tr><tr><td>11. The model text was useful to improve my draft&#x27;s grammar.</td><td>3.83</td><td>.89</td></tr><tr><td>12. The model text was useful to improve my draft&#x27;s content/ideas.</td><td>4.49</td><td>.61</td></tr><tr><td>General Mean (value)</td><td>4.26</td><td>.54</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 The features noticed by the EG $\left( N = 3 5 \right)$ in the comparing stage.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>n</td><td>%</td><td>Mdn</td><td>IQR</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>118.0</td><td>41.70</td><td>3.00</td><td>3.00</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>17.0</td><td>6.01</td><td>0.00</td><td>1.00</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>75.0</td><td>26.50</td><td>2.00</td><td>1.50</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>62.0</td><td>21.90</td><td>1.00</td><td>1.00</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>11.0</td><td>3.89</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>283.0</td><td>100.0</td><td>7.00</td><td>4.00</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 The features noticed and incorporated by the EG $\left( N = 3 5 \right)$ ).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>n</td><td>%</td><td>Mdn</td><td>IQR</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>55.0</td><td>51.40</td><td>1.00</td><td>1.00</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>1.0</td><td>0.90</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>43.0</td><td>40.20</td><td>1.00</td><td>1.50</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>8.0</td><td>7.50</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>107.0</td><td>100.0</td><td>3.00</td><td>1.50</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 Relationship between FNs and FNIs as well as FNNIs by the EG $\left( N = 3 5 \right)$ ).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>FNs</td><td>FNIs</td><td>FNNIS</td><td>% (FNIs/FNs)</td><td>% (FNNIs/FNs)</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>118.0</td><td>55.0</td><td>63.0</td><td>46.61</td><td>53.39</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>17.0</td><td>1.0</td><td>16.0</td><td>5.88</td><td>94.20</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>75.0</td><td>43.0</td><td>32.0</td><td>57.33</td><td>42.67</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>62.0</td><td>8.0</td><td>54.0</td><td>7.02</td><td>92.98</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>11.0</td><td>0.0</td><td>11.0</td><td>0.00</td><td>100.0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>283.0</td><td>107.0</td><td>176.0</td><td>37.81</td><td>62.19</td></tr></table></body></html>

The first author and the mentioned research assistant collaboratively coded one interview prior to independent coding of two additional transcripts $( 2 2 . 2 \% )$ . The agreement proportions for the categories were as follows: $1 0 0 \%$ for affective engagement, $9 0 \%$ for cognitive engagement, $8 7 . 5 \%$ for behavioral engagement, $1 0 0 \%$ for beliefs about the impact of MTFI, and $8 9 . 7 \%$ for the reasons, indicating considerable consensus (McHugh, 2012). All differences between the coders were discussed and resolved before the remaining transcripts were coded. The number of mentions was calculated and input into an Excel spreadsheet. The interviewees’ sample remarks were translated into English and used to triangulate quantitative results. Pseudonyms were adopted to protect the participants’ personal identity.

The obtained data in the current study were analyzed quantitatively via SPSS version 27.0. Descriptive statistics, such as mean (M) and standard deviation (SD), was used to demonstrate the degrees of the EG’s affective engagement with MTFI. For cognitive and behavioral engagement as well as text quality, as most data were not normally distributed, descriptive analysis with reports of median (Mdn) and interquartile range (IQR), which represents the middle $5 0 ~ \%$ of the data and can be obtained by subtracting the upper quartile (75th percentile) from the lower quartile (25th percentile), was employed to provide an overview of the outcomes. Furthermore, to examine whether MTFI had a significant impact on the EG’s writing quality, Mann-Whitney U tests were used, with the significance value adjusted following the Bonferroni method for multiple comparisons. Effect sizes were calculated using the formula $( \mathsf { Z } / \sqrt \mathrm { N } )$ (Field, 2018), and the $r$ (rank biserial correlation) values were interpreted as small (close to .20), medium (close to .40), or large (close to .60) (Plonsky & Oswald, 2014). To further support the results of the Mann-Whitney U tests, gain score comparisons (posttest minus pretest) between the two groups were conducted.

Overall, qualitative data were used to triangulate quantitative findings. Specifically, the affective engagement questionnaire was analyzed quantitatively, which was further validated through insights provided by learners in the semi-structured interviews (items 1 and 3). For cognitive engagement, learners’ note-taking sheets were quantified via a 10-point comprehension scale, and the number of noticed features were categorized into content, organization, vocabulary, grammar, and others. These quantitative results were compared with the qualitative data in the interviews in which learners reflected on their feedback awareness and processing (item 2). Regarding behavioral engagement, feedback uptake was quantified using the same categories (content, organization, vocabulary, grammar, and others), and the statistics were cross-verified through both interviews (item 4) and analysis of the learners’ paragraphs. Similarly, text-quality scores were substantiated by insights from interviews (item 5) and the learners’ written texts. This integration of qualitative and quantitative provided a more comprehensive understanding of learners’ engagement with MTFI and the quality of their drafts.

Finally, to measure the correlations between learners’ engagement with MTFI and text quality, a series of Spearman’s rho corre lation tests were performed. Specifically, each EG participant’s affective engagement score was calculated by summing all 12 items’ points (5.0 each, minimum $= 1 2 . 0$ , maximum $= 6 0 . 0 \mathrm { \cdot }$ ). The total numbers of FNs and model-text understanding levels (from 1.0 to 10.0) were used to indicate learners’ cognitive engagement while those of FNIs and FNNIs represented learners’ behavioral engagement. The gain scores (posttest minus pretest) in the total and the four criteria (content, vocabulary, grammar, organization) by the EG were employed as indicators of learners’ text quality, following Kang (2023). The correlation coefficients $\left( r _ { s } \right)$ were interpreted as weak (.10), moderate (.30) or strong (.50) (Larson-Hall, 2016).

# 5. Results

# 5.1. Learners’ engagement with MTFI in an expository writing task

# 5.1.1. Affective engagement

Descriptive statistics with mean and standard deviation values were presented to demonstrate the levels of learners’ affective engagement. As can be seen from Table 3, participants in the EG were highly willing and excited when partaking in the MTFI task (General $M = 4 . 3 1$ , $S D = . 6 4 ) $ . Particularly, they were willing and excited to read the model text, compare it with their drafts, and even rewrite their paragraphs (all M values $> 4 . 0$ ). Similarly, they also found the given model useful (General $M = 4 . 2 6$ , $S D = . 5 4 _ { . }$ ) for their writing. Specifically, they believed that MTFI helped improve content-related aspects the most $M = 4 . 4 9$ , $S D = . 6 1$ ) whereas the least enhanced area was grammar $( M = 3 . 8 3$ , $S D = . 8 9$ ). Overall, the EG’s affective engagement with MTFI was highly positive.

Data from semi-structured interviews supported the results from the questionnaire, with a majority of students perceiving the MTFI task positively. Eight out of ten respondents reported that they had favorable attitudes towards comparing their paragraphs with the model text because they were able to recognize areas in need of improvement, as in the following instances:

I was really happy because I got to know what aspects I needed to improve. (Hai Duong)

When comparing my paragraph with the model text, I felt excited since I could identify where I did not do well in the first draft. (Tai Duong)

In the rewriting stage, the majority of the interviewees $( n = 9$ ) viewed MTFI positively for it helped them improve their writing quality. For example, two participants stated:

I was quite happy because I could enhance my paragraph quality by reusing some ideas, cohesive devices, and vocabulary in the model text in my second draft. (Yen Vu)

I thought that my paragraph was improved a lot. That made me feel more confident in my writing. (Gia Huy)

However, two students had negative feelings because they were disappointed with their own abilities (comparing stage) or confused due to information overload (rewriting stage):

I was quite sad during the comparison. The model text was, like, perfect, but my paragraph had so many mistakes. (Gia Huy)

It was a bit confusing at first because there was too much information to process. (Minh Tuyet)

# 5.1.2. Cognitive engagement

Descriptive statistics for FNs, indicators of learners’ cognitive engagement with MTFI, in Table 4 show that the EG paid most of their attention to content $( 4 1 . 7 0 \% )$ ) and organization $( 2 6 . 5 0 \% )$ , followed by vocabulary $( 2 1 . 9 0 \% )$ , grammar $( 6 . 0 1 \% )$ ), and others $( 3 . 8 9 \% )$ . In general, they noticed a total of 283 (Mdn $= 7 . 0 0$ , $I Q R = 4 . 0 0 $ ) features in the model text in phase two. Additionally, the EG demonstrated a high level of understanding of the given model $( M = 9 . 2 6$ out of 10.0, $S D = . 9 2 $ ). Taken together, it could be indicated that the learners’ cognitive engagement with content-related and organizational aspects was higher than grammatical and lexical features.

Analysis of interview data also revealed a similar picture: most participants reported focusing on content $( n = 9 )$ , organization $\mathbf { \hat { \boldsymbol { n } } = }$ 10), and vocabulary $( n = 1 0 )$ ) when reading the model text, with only a few paying attention to grammar $( n = 4 )$ ). The main reason was that they could recognize their knowledge gaps when comparing their paragraphs with the given model $6 6 . 7 \%$ for content, $7 0 \%$ for organization, $1 0 0 ~ \%$ for vocabulary and grammar).

I paid attention to the example about China because I did not have this kind of information in my first draft. (content–Gia Huy)

The model text is well-organized and brief while my paragraph was lengthy. (organization–Minh Tuyet)

I noticed some words such as greenhouse gases and fossil fuels because I did not know them before. (vocabulary–Hai Duong)

I realized that the model text used adverbs to modify verbs. I did not use this grammatical point in my draft. (grammar–Quang Anh)

Beside recognition of knowledge gaps, students also paid attention to content and vocabulary because they found the ideas interesting $( n = 4 )$ ) and the lexis effectively used $( n = 2$ ).

I noticed the example about China. It was practical and interesting. (Quang Anh)

I paid attention to some words such as “greenhouse gases” and “environmentally-friendly choices”. I knew these words, but I did not use them as effectively as the writer of the model text. (Yen Vu)

Nonetheless, several students $( n = 6 )$ ) did not pay attention to grammatical features. The first reason was that they did not prioritize this aspect in paragraph writing $( n = 5$ ).

I did not care much about grammar. I paid attention to other aspects. (Kim Ly)

Additionally, one interviewee reported that he was satisfied with his own grammatical use.

I think that the grammar in my paragraph was OK, so I did not pay attention to this aspect much. (An My)

# 5.1.3. Behavioral engagement

Regarding learners’ behavioral engagement with MTFI, the number of FNIs and FNNIs was counted. Table 5 illustrates that the EG incorporated a total of 107 (Mdn $= 3 . 0$ , $I Q R = 1 . 5 0 \mathrm { ^ { \circ } }$ ) features noticed in the comparing stage into their rewritten paragraphs in the subsequent stage. Particularly, their most incorporations were content-related and organizational features $( 5 1 . 4 0 ~ \%$ and $4 0 . 2 0 \ \%$ , respectively). The integration of other aspects such as vocabulary $( 7 . 5 0 ~ \% )$ ) and grammar $\left( 0 . 9 0 ~ \% \right)$ was very low. Noticeably, no features in the others category were incorporated in the rewritten paragraphs. Table 6 further reveals that the FNIs were far lower than the FNNIs, at $3 7 . 8 1 ~ \%$ and $6 2 . 9 1 \ \%$ , respectively.

Semi-structured interviews corroborated the results in Table 5: many students reported incorporating features related to content (n $= 9$ ), organization $( n = 1 0 )$ ), and vocabulary $( n = 8 )$ ), for two primary reasons. The first reason for their incorporations was that these features helped them bridge their knowledge gaps and thereby improved their paragraphs $( 7 7 . 8 ~ \%$ for content, $7 0 . 0 ~ \%$ for organization, $1 0 0 ~ \%$ for vocabulary).

I reused the idea of public transportation because I did not have this content in my first draft. (content– An My)

In my second draft, I used the cohesive device “for instance” again to clearly show the example. I did not know about this connector before. (organization–Kim Ly)

I incorporated the words “protect natural resources” and “released into” because I did not use them in my previous paragraph. (vocabulary–Gia Huy)

In addition, some students also incorporated content-related $( n = 2$ ) and organizational $( n = 3$ ) aspects since they also used these features in their first drafts. In other words, similarities between their paragraphs and the model text encouraged them to retain the information.

I had three ideas in my first paragraph, two of them similar to the model text. In the rewritten draft, I reused the first two ideas because I knew they were the right ideas. (Tai Duong)

The organization in my second paragraph was the same as the first one. This is because the overall structure was similar to the model text. (Hai Duong)

Nonetheless, certain noticed features were not incorporated in the rewritten texts. For instance, the majority of the interviewees (n $= 9$ ) did not incorporate any grammatical features in the model text into their second paragraphs. The main reason was due to their low prioritization of this aspect $( n = 5$ ):

I did not incorporate anything about grammar in my second draft because I did not pay attention to this aspect. (Minh Tuyet)

dditionally, four students shared that they used different structures to express their intended messages.

“I wrote the paragraph with my own limited knowledge of grammar. I did not use any grammar in the model. (Quang Anh)

5.2. The relationship between learners’ engagement with MTFI and text quality

# 5.2.1. Text quality

Descriptive statistics of the analytic measures in Table 7 illustrate that the EG scored higher in terms of content (Mdn $= 3 . 0 0$ , IQR $= 1 . 0 0 )$ ), organization (Mdn $= 3 . 0 0$ , $I Q R = 1 . 0 0 \mathrm { \Omega }$ ), and the overall $( M d n \quad = 2 . 8 8 $ , $I Q R = . 6 3 )$ ) than the CG (content Mdn $= 2 . 5 0$ , IQR $= . 5 0$ ; organization $\begin{array} { r l } { M d n } & { { } = 2 . 5 0 } \end{array}$ ; $I Q R = . 5 0$ ; overall Mdn $= 2 . 5 0$ ; $I Q R = . 6 3 )$ ) in the composing stage. However, in the rewriting stage, the scores across five categories in both groups were quite similar.

Further analysis employing Mann-Whitney $U$ tests (Table 8) indicates that the writing scores of both groups in the composing stage were considerably similar across all five criteria (all adjusted $p$ values $> . 0 1 \AA$ ), with small effect sizes (all $r$ values close to .20). Nonetheless, the EG achieved significantly better scores than the CG regarding content $U = 3 6 9 . 0$ , $p = . 0 0 7$ , $M _ { \mathrm { E G - C G } } = . 1 0 \}$ and organization $U = 3 3 9 . 5$ , $p = . 0 0 3$ , $M _ { \mathrm { E G - C G } } = . 1 1 $ ), with medium effect sizes $\acute { \boldsymbol { r } }$ values close to .40) in the rewriting stage. There were no statistically significant differences in the scores of vocabulary and grammar between the two groups (adjusted $p > . O 1 $ ) with small effect sizes $( r$ values smaller than or close to .20) in both stages. The overall scores of both groups were also similar across two stages (adjusted $p > . 0 1 $ ). Generally, it could be indicated that MTFI had a positive impact on the EG’s content and organization scores.

The interview data also corroborated the obtained quantitative results. All 10 interviewees perceived MTFI as a useful means to help them improve their writing quality, particularly regarding content $( n = 6$ ) and organization $( n = 6$ ). The main reason was attributed to the acquisition of new knowledge, as exemplified below:

The writing task is really useful in many ways. The model text provided me with a lot of interesting ideas. I can reuse them for my subsequent writing. (content–An My)

The information in the model text clarified everything for me. When I wrote the first paragraph, I did not know what to write about, but after reading the model, I had a lot of ideas for the writing prompt (content–Phuong Nhu)

The model text started in a direct and brief way without discussing reasons. In the rewritten paragraph, I also followed this way. (organization–Minh Tuyet)

Although vocabulary did not witness a statistically significant improvement, five interviewees believed that MTFI helped them learn new lexical items, illustrated in the extract below:

I think it [the model] helped me improve my writing, especially vocabulary. I could learn new words from the model text. (Hai Duong)

Besides, refinement of the current knowledge $( n = 8 )$ ) was also a major factor why students perceived the impact of MTFI positively,

Table 7 Descriptive statistics for text quality by the two groups.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">Criteria</td><td colspan="4">Composing stage</td><td colspan="4"> Rewriting stage</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">CG (N = 33)</td><td colspan="2">EG (N = 35)</td><td colspan="2">CG (N = 33)</td><td colspan="2">EG (N = 35)</td></tr><tr><td>Mdn</td><td>IQR</td><td>Mdn</td><td>IQR</td><td>Mdn</td><td>IQR</td><td>Mdn</td><td>IQR</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>2.50</td><td>0.50</td><td>3.00</td><td>1.00</td><td>3.00</td><td>0.50</td><td>3.00</td><td>0.50</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>2.50</td><td>0.50</td><td>3.00</td><td>1.00</td><td></td><td>0.50</td><td>3.00</td><td>0.50</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>2.50</td><td>0.80</td><td>2.50</td><td>0.50</td><td>3.00</td><td>0.50</td><td>2.50</td><td>0.50</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>2.50</td><td>0.50</td><td>2.50</td><td>0.00</td><td>2.50</td><td>0.80</td><td>2.50</td><td>0.50</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>2.50</td><td>0.63</td><td>2.88</td><td>0.63</td><td>2.50 2.75</td><td>0.69</td><td>2.88</td><td>0.38</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: $\mathbf { M a x } = 5 . 0$ each criterion.

Table 8 Comparisons of text quality between the two groups.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Indices</td><td colspan="3">Composing stage</td><td colspan="3">Rewriting stage</td><td colspan="2">Gain scores (M)</td><td>Differences (M)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>U</td><td>p</td><td>r</td><td>U</td><td>p</td><td>r</td><td>CG (N = 33)</td><td>EG (N = 35)</td><td>EG-CG</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>419.0</td><td>.044</td><td>.25</td><td>369.0</td><td>.007</td><td>.33</td><td>.03</td><td>.13</td><td>.10</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>416.0</td><td>.042</td><td>.25</td><td>339.5</td><td>.003</td><td>.37</td><td>.02</td><td>.13</td><td>.11</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>404.5</td><td>.021</td><td>.28</td><td>525.0</td><td>.489</td><td>.09</td><td>.20</td><td>.06</td><td> .14</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>498.5</td><td>.274</td><td>.13</td><td>452.0</td><td>.089</td><td>.21</td><td>.11</td><td>.17</td><td>.06</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>388.5</td><td>.020</td><td>.28</td><td>378.5</td><td>.014</td><td>.30</td><td>.35</td><td>.49</td><td>.14</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: $\mathbf { r } =$ effect size; significance level was adjusted at .01 $( =$ .05/5) for 5 comparisons.

as in the two following remarks:

After comparing my paragraph with the model text, I knew how to fix my mistakes. This made my writing better. (Gia Han)

This activity was really helpful. It helped me realize what points I needed to review to improve my writing. (Quang Anh)

A concrete instance can be found in a participant’s written paragraph (Fig. 1). In the first stage, the participant wrote a longer text that contained many lexical and grammatical errors. In the third stage, however, he was able to follow the organization used in the model text, which was more concise. He could also include some words from the model such as “eco-friendly” (lexical aspect), “for example” and “in conclusion” (organization). Noticeably, the participant also changed the idea in accordance with the one in the model (using eco-friendly products) and provided an example. The concluding sentence in the rewritten draft was succinct and effectively summarized the main ideas. These changes, coupled with fewer errors in the second text, helped the participant gain better scores in text quality.

To further demonstrate the EG’s improved writing before and after exposure to MTFI, another student’s complete paragraphs were provided in Fig. 2. It can be seen that in Stage 1, although he could provide some solutions to global warming, these ideas were not well supported and explained. Furthermore, he did not include the topic sentence but instead used the first half of the paragraph to provide reasons for increasing temperatures, which was quite off topic. Moreover, in the concluding sentence, he simply called for environment protection without summarizing the key solutions. In contrast, in Stage 3, he managed to write the topic sentence (the first one) clearly and briefly. He did not discuss the causes but focused on the required solutions and gave sufficient explanations and/or examples for each major idea. The paragraph ended with a summary of two key remedies to the issue rather than giving general advice. Addi tionally, he managed to integrate some important ideas (e.g., use of renewable energy and public transport, protection of forests and

Fig. 1. Extracts from a participant’s (Hoan Vu) paragraphs in the EG in two stages.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Stage</td><td>Sample writing</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">1</td><td>Finally, people are not awareness of the weather is getting hotter and hotter</td></tr><tr><td>everyday. To solve this, we must tell everyone about its negative effects through</td></tr><tr><td>social media and education. [.] In clusion, if we can reduce the CO2 in our</td></tr><tr><td>atmosphere, protect the environment and raising people&#x27;s awarness, we can reduce</td></tr><tr><td>or maybe stopping the weather getting hotter in many places around the world.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">3</td><td>transport is famous for using electrical instead of gas which also decrease CO2 in</td></tr><tr><td>our air. In conclusion, we can use green energy, protect the forests, and support</td></tr><tr><td>eco-friendly produce to solve this problem..</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Many country in around the world, the temperture is getting hotter by many reason. First, greenhouse gases is one of the serious reason that make our planet hotter everytime. For example, VietNam and many country in Asia they still use old transport that create very much cacbon dioxide. We can use electric transport to increase cacbon dioxide and methane. Second, littering is also one of them. In many large city such as US, China, Japan, some citizen had bad habit that throw trash and chemistry waste into the environment. It made many animals died by our waste. In my opinion, we need to engage our friend or family to use, recycle bag and make sure that everyone will know how to protect our planet. Thirdly, deforestation is the most serious problem because forest in surround the world alway absorb cacbon dioxide and release oxygen at day. For instance, the weather in Australia is very hot, it create fire and burn the forest. So there is a solution that we need to cool down and protect our forest if we want to cool down the weather. In conclusion, if we want to cool down the weather or protect our planet.

To address problem of the weather is getting hotter in many places, a number of measure can be taken. First, we need to use renewable fuel such as wind, solar energy because use of solar energy and wind can reduce a lot of greenhouse effect. For example, many household in our country are using solar energy. This decision can help them reduce greenhouse effect also invest very much money. Second, natural resources such as forest and oceans is very important to protect because these areas can absorb carbon dioxide from being released into the atmosphere. Finally, people can use public transport or electric car or bike instead of cars, motobikes. By informing people of the negative effects of greenhouse effect, the goverment can encourage everyone to use public transport. In conclusion, renewable resources, natural protect and public transport are the possible ways to reduce the tempeture in many places in the world.

(152 words)

(199 words)

oceans), topic-related vocabulary (e.g., natural resources, public transport), cohesive devices (e.g., this decision, finally), and even grammar (e.g., from being released into) from the model text (features in italics) into his second paragraph. These incorporations helped him considerably enhance his writing performance, mainly in terms of content, organization, and vocabulary.

In contrast, a sample in Fig. 3 demonstrates that Tai Phuong, a participant in the CG, did not experience any substantial improvement in his writing across the two compositions. In the first stage, while he provided some solutions to the issue of increasing temperatures, partially meeting the task requirements, his supporting details were insufficiently developed, especially in the latter half of the paragraph. Regarding organization, despite the use of cohesive devices (e.g., Firstly, Secondly), the lack of clear topic and concluding sentences, along with the use of some phrases that impeded comprehension (e.g., Government neverously introduce …, We have to avoid immeditely [immediately]…), weakened the paragraph’s coherence. As for grammar, his writing was dominated by simple sentences and frequent errors (e.g., fragments, inappropriate use of pronouns). In terms of vocabulary, several less common words were used (e.g., exhaust fumes, impact), but many lexical items were inappropriate and hindered understanding (e.g., endengered [endangered], solution to decide, neverously). In the rewriting stage, the errors related to all four criteria (content, organization, grammar, vocabulary) were repeated. Additionally, the student introduced information about the causes and effects of global warming (the second and third sentences), and the omission of cohesive devices further compromised the paragraph’s organization.

.2.2. The relationship between the EG’s engagement with MTFI and text quality

Table 9 presents the correlation matrix between the EG’s engagement with MTFI including affective, cognitive and behavioral engagement and the gain scores in their text quality. As can be seen, there were significant positive relationships between learners’ understanding of the model text and their text quality concerning content $( r _ { s } = . 3 6 4 $ , moderate), organization $( r _ { s } = . 5 2 5 $ , strong), and total scores $( r _ { s } = . 4 4 7$ , moderate). Put differently, the more the EG understood the model, the higher gain scores they received. However, no considerable correlations were found between model-text comprehension and other aspects of text quality such as vo cabulary $( r _ { s } = 1 . 9 0 ) $ ) and grammar $( r _ { s } = . 1 7 9 )$ . Similar non-significant results were recorded for the EG’s text-quality and their affective engagement, behavioral engagement, and the total FNs (another category of cognitive engagement) (all $p$ values $>$ .05). Overall, it can be indicated that learners’ overall text quality was moderately correlated with an aspect of their cognitive engagement (understanding of the model text).

<html><body><table><tr><td>Stage 1</td><td>Stage 3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Fig. 3. Complete paragraphs written by a participant (Tai Phuong) in the CG in two stages.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Slage Slag Sinceseveraltheglobal warmingproblems,many We live in an age that many modern</td></tr><tr><td>impact of people have been caused problem with building, crowded street... are very large the Earth that people have to reduce human&#x27; quantity. This has caused global warming. activities. Firstly, people have to change your So, the weather is getting hotter in many behavior to the Earth. We can choose public country day to day. It makes abad influence transport instead of private transport which can for people to live in the earth. We need to cause exhaust fumes into environment. protect immediately many harmful Government need to introduce law to citizens to activities that have caused the world. The buy electronic cars, take buses, or public govermentshouldintroducelawthatpeople transport. Secondly, people have to understand frequently use public transport instead of problem the world is happening that have solution private transport such as car, motorbike. to decide.  Goverment clearly promote People need to plant many trees that you introduction about global warming in the world interested in to make air fresh and greener. and show citizens many dangerous, harmful The goverment also promote citizens take problemwill beendengered. We all ears focuson part in planting trees and protect and always protect your area. Government environment event in their area. neverously introduce law to many factories, Dangerously, the goverment neverously which always release air pollution into introduce law that companies need to environment. We have to avoid immeditely then reduce air pollution into enviroment. Let&#x27;s the weather will be normally, greener and clear. to deal many wrong activities such as Forest also need to protect, it make the world cutting trees, heating jungles, throwing green and help usefully for people. Eventually, the trash into street. Instead of, we can protect weather will be beautiful if we change your your area. Eventually, the weather will not behavior with it. Basically, always throw waste get hotter and we will live in a beautiful into the garbage, you can recycle it frequently. place. (162 words) (179 words)</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 9 The correlation matrix between the EG’s engagement with MTFI and text quality gains.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Affective Engagement</td><td colspan="2">Cognitive Engagement</td><td colspan="2">Behavioral Engagement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td> Understanding</td><td>Total FNs</td><td>Total FNIs</td><td>Total FNNIs</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>.280</td><td>.364*</td><td>.093</td><td>.129</td><td> .020</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>.019</td><td>.525**</td><td>.035</td><td>.079</td><td>- .066</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td> .071</td><td>.190</td><td> .090</td><td> .201</td><td> .020</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>.053</td><td>.179</td><td>.195</td><td> .128</td><td>.167</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>.090</td><td>.447**</td><td>.060</td><td> .007</td><td>.004</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* Correlation significant at .05. Correlation significant at .01.

# 6. Discussion

# 6.1. EFL learners’ engagement with MTFI

# 6.1.1. Affective engagement

The first major finding in the current study was that learners’ affective engagement was highly positive. This finding aligns with those from prior MTFI research (Kang, 2020, 2023; Roothooft et al., 2022), which highlights learners’ favorable perspectives on this instructional approach. The positive attitude may stem from the perception that models provide reliable and useful information for learners to improve their writing (Kang, 2023). Supporting evidence could be found in semi-structured interviews with all ten re spondents showing favorable attitudes towards the use of MTFI. Furthermore, model texts were noted to correspond with learners’ internal syllabus (Qi & Lapkin, 2001), which possibly led to a higher level of endorsement. Nonetheless, the positivity contrasts with the finding by García Mayo and Loidi Labandibar (2017), who observed generally negative task motivation among the participants. A plausible reason for this difference is that the model texts in the study by García Mayo and Loidi Labandibar (2017) were reported to be challenging, whereas the model in the current study was highly comprehensible for the intended learners $( M = 9 . 2 6$ out of 10.0, $s D =$ .92). This underscores the importance of tailoring model texts to learners’ proficiency levels and background (Coyle et al., 2018).

# 6.1.2. Cognitive and behavioral engagement

Another notable finding was that the EG demonstrated higher levels of cognitive and behavioral engagement with content-related and organizational features in the model text but a far lower level of engagement with vocabulary. These results were similar to Nguyen et al. (2024b) but differed from other studies (e.g., Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; Hanaoka, 2007) which reported a high proportion of noticed and incorporated vocabulary but low figures for content and organization. This discrepancy could be due to writing genres: exposition in the current study and narrative in others (Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; Hanaoka, 2007). In a narrative task, learners were asked to construct a story using a sequence of picture frames which inherently prompted the content and orga nization as well as elicited lexical recall to describe the given actions or items, as argued by Kang (2020). In an expository writing task, such cues, however, were not presented; moreover, the students needed to provide reasons and examples to substantiate their ideas (Kang, 2020) and find ways to organize the writing in a logical way, leading to more focus on content and organization.

Notably, in some expository-based research (Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023), while content and organization received a moderate amount of attention from the learners, vocabulary was still the most noticed and incorporated aspect. There were two possible reasons for the higher level of engagement with lexical features in such studies. First, they employed two model texts (over 400 words) instead of one (150 words) as in the present study. A larger number of words might require more effort to handle vocabulary and thereby draw more attention from the learners. Second, Kang’s (2020) and Wu et al.’s (2023) only explored the differences between students’ initial drafts and given models whereas the current study also counted similarities. A closer examination of the FN sheets revealed that a large portion of noticed features were reported in the similarity section (see Appendix D), as also the case reported in Nguyen et al. (2024b). As identification of similarities helped learners to confirm their existing knowledge (Sachs & Polio, 2007), tapping into this aspect was essential. Additionally, the EG in the current study primarily engaged with content-related and organizational features in the model text because they could identify their knowledge gaps (cognitively) in the comparing stage and bridge these gaps in the rewriting stage, as evidenced in the interviews. Such a finding resonates with the Output Hypothesis (Swain, 2000), which posits that through output production, learners are able to recognize their knowledge gaps or holes. This kind of noticing can trigger the need to look for solutions, eventually leading to learning gains.

Regarding grammar, the levels of cognitive and behavioral engagement were found to be the lowest, corroborating previous MTFI studies that employed either narrative (e.g., Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; Hanaoka, 2007) or expository (e.g., Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023) genres. The low engagement was probably due to the EG’s low prioritization of this aspect, as already demonstrated in the interviews. This aligns with the Trade-off Hypothesis (Skehan, 1998), stating that learners tended to sacrifice some aspects (i.e., grammar) for others (i.e., content, organization). Indeed, given the nature of the expository task, meaning was prioritized over form (Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023), especially with time pressure in a writing test.

One noteworthy finding lied in the substantial proportion of FNNIs $( 6 2 . 1 9 \% )$ , indicating that the EG only incorporated over a third of their noticed features in the model text. This is coincidental with previous research (e.g., Luquin & García Mayo, 2021) that found a large percentage of FNNIs. The underlying factor could be working memory as Kang (2022) reported that this variable significantly impacted learners’ writing. Data from the current study’s interviews were evidence, with two respondents sharing that they had to recall too much information at the outset of the rewriting stage, possibly affecting their incorporations. Another reason could be that general noticed features (e.g., I used simple vocabulary, but the model used more advanced words) were not considered as an FNI and thereby counted as an FNNI. In the above sample note, although the learner did notice vocabulary (counted as an FN), the statement was not specific enough to trigger implementations (thereby not counted as an FNI, leaving it under the FNNI label). This highlights the importance of classifying FNs into implementable notes, as in the case of coding peer feedback (Wu & Schunn, 2020; Zhang & Gao, 2024), before counting FNIs to provide a more comprehensive understanding of learners’ cognitive and behavioral engagement (feedback uptake). This also underscores the necessity to employ an instrument or a combination of instruments that can promote a higher portion of specific noticing in expository MTFI tasks.

# .2. The relationship between learners’ engagement with MTFI and text quality

It was found that while both groups had similar scores in all observed criteria in the pretest, the EG outperformed the CG in the posttest scores regarding content and organization. This finding is in line with most studies on expository MTFI (e.g., Kang, 2020; 2023; Nguyen & Le, 2022; Tieu & Baker, 2022; Wu et al., 2023). In light of the Noticing Hypothesis (Schmidt, 2001), learners’ substantial focus on content-related and organizational features in the comparing stage was likely to lead to better outcomes in terms of these two aspects in the rewriting stage.

With respect to the relationship between learners’ engagement with MTFI and text quality, only awareness of feedback (an aspect of cognitive engagement) was significantly associated with gain scores in overall quality as well as content and organization, the two aspects that were noticed the most and substantially improved in the rewritten texts, which is partially in line with our hypothesis mentioned in Section 3. It could therefore be indicated that a better understanding of feedback (i.e., model text) facilitated learners’ noticing which in turn promoted learning gains. This finding highlights the importance of comprehensible input that is slightly beyond learners’ current knowledge, also referred to as the Zone of Proximal Development rooted in sociocultural theory (Vygotsky, 1978). It also underscores the necessity of composing model texts that are suitable for the target learners (Coyle et al., 2018). Nonetheless, there was no considerable relationship between learners’ text quality and affective engagement. Such a result diverges from Kang’s (2023) study, which found a moderate positive association between learners’ perceived usefulness of MTFI and their overall text quality. The discrepancy can be attributed to the brief duration of her research, which lasted only seven days. This short timespan may have allowed learners to better memorize the information in the model texts, resulting in higher-quality drafts. In other words, the short timeframe might have strengthened the connection between learners’ beliefs and the quality of their texts.

Turning to the relationships between the total FNs (another aspect of cognitive engagement) as well as behavioral engagement (total FNIs and FNNIs) and draft quality, no significant results were established. This finding deviates from previous research which claimed that engagement was associated with academic outcomes (e.g., Dao et al., 2021; Fredricks et al., 2004). There are two possible explanations for the discrepancy. First, the lack of correlations in the present study was probably due to the mediating roles of learner-related factors such as working memory (Kang, 2022), analytic abilities (Wu et al., 2023), vocabulary size (Mujtaba et al., 2024) and feedback-processing trajectories (Coyle et al., 2018). Put differently, these individual differences on learners’ writing might have influenced the correlations between engagement and text quality. Second, the one-week interval between stages two and three, coupled with test-conditions (no prior notice, no access to extra materials or discussions), could have diminished the link between engagement and text quality. As the current study seemed to be the first to explore the relationships between engagement as a multifaceted construct and text quality, further research is needed to clarify the obtained outcomes.

# 6.3. Theoretical and pedagogical implications

The present study embodies several important implications for L2 research and pedagogy. Theoretically, it lends further support to the adoption of both cognitive and sociocultural perspectives, termed as sociocognitive perspectives (see Batstone, 2010), in understanding MTFI by providing empirical evidence that this instructional approach could promote engagement and writing development through both lenses. Indeed, language learning, encompassing affective, cognitive, and behavioral aspects, is inherently socially sit uated (Mercer, 2019).

Pedagogically, it is recommended that teachers employ MTFI in L2 writing classrooms to foster learners’ autonomy, metalinguistic awareness, and focus on macro-level features such as content and organization. For micro-level ones (vocabulary, grammar), more explicit instruction may be needed (Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). Moreover, teachers should compose or find model texts that are suitable for the target learners since comprehensibility plays an important role in learners’ motivation and feedback processing (García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017). Additionally, although learners might demonstrate positive attitude towards MTFI and active involvement in the process, their engagement levels should not be considered as indicators of text quality. Instead, frequent practice with and more exposure to MTFI need to be organized to yield better writing outcomes (Luquin & García Mayo, 2024; Roothooft et al., 2022).

# 6.4. Limitations and suggestions for future research

The current study has several limitations that could be addressed in future research. First, it only employed one model text, which might not provide learners with rich and varied input needed to enhance their writing even more significantly. Future research is recommended to explore the use of at least two expository model texts to expose learners to more diversified input. Second, the intervention was quite short, with only a single exposure to the given model. Longer treatments and repeated encounters with MTFI might trigger more substantial outcomes (Roothooft et al., 2022). Third, to measure text quality, the current study adopted a test-condition format and thereby restricted the use of extra materials or discussions, which might have limited the strategies used to process feedback and revise original drafts. Additional research may need to lift these barriers to examine learners’ engagement in a more natural and comprehensive way. Fourth, the current study’s sample size was quite small; thus, to enhance statistical power, future research should aim to recruit larger samples. Fifth, it did not address other learner-related factors, such as proficiency levels (e. g., Hanaoka, 2007), working memory (e.g., Kang, 2022), analytic abilities (e.g., Wu et al., 2023), and topic familiarity (e.g., Abdi Tabari et al., 2021; McDonough & Crawford, 2018). Examining these factors could be a promising direction for future research to shed greater light on the efficacy of MTFI given their important role in language learning (Pawlak & Kruk, 2022).

Furthermore, although the present study considered FNNIs, it did not investigate the factors underlying these unincorporated features. Therefore, future research could explore why learners fail to incorporate certain features to provide valuable insights into their interlanguage development. Additionally, future studies could employ textual enhancement (i.e., bolding, underlining, itali cizing) in model texts to draw learners’ attention to grammatical and lexical features that may go unnoticed by learners. This, including grammatical explanations if necessary, could enhance feedback awareness and make target features more accessible as well as encourage incorporations of these elements into students’ rewritten texts. Indeed, research has suggested that textual enhancement could promote learners’ attention to and uptake of target linguistic features (e.g., Vu & Peters, 2022, 2023). Finally, the present study can be expanded with the employment of more complex writing tasks (i.e., essays, reports), the exploration of the influence of teachers’ instruction on the use of MTFI, and the adoption of additional instruments (e.g., think-aloud protocols combined with note-taking) to provide a more comprehensive understanding of students’ engagement with MTFI.

# 7. Conclusion

The current study aimed to explore EFL learners’ engagement with MTFI and text quality in a three-stage expository writing task. The relationship between these two aspects was also investigated. Via analyses of rich data sources including written texts, questionnaires, note-taking sheets, and semi-structured interviews, three major findings emerged. First, it was found that learners held a highly positive attitude towards the use of MTFI and demonstrated higher levels of cognitive and behavioral engagement with contentrelated and organizational features than lexical and grammatical aspects in the model text. Moreover, this instructional approach had a positive impact on learners’ rewritten text quality, particularly regarding content and organization. Besides, awareness of feedback, an aspect of cognitive engagement, was found to be significantly correlated with gain scores in overall text quality, particularly regarding content and organization criteria. With its potential to direct learners to macro-level features (content, organization) in expository writing, MTFI can be combined with automatic writing evaluation, which typically targets micro-level aspects (vocabulary, grammar) (Cheng & Zhang, 2024), to provide a more balanced focus on both meaning and form. We hope that this integration can help promote learner autonomy while also alleviating teachers’ workload in L2 writing classrooms.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Long Quoc Nguyen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Duy Van Vu: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Methodology, Data curation, Conceptualization.

# Ethics statement

All participants voluntarily provided written informed consent to partake in this study.

# Funding

No funding was received to assist with the preparation of this manuscript.

# Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this article.

# Acknowledgements

We sincerely thank the handling editor and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable and insightful feedback. We are grateful to the Vietnamese students who participated in this study. The first author would like to express sincere thanks to the senior lecturers at the University of Foreign Languages and International Studies, Hue University, Vietnam, for their constructive feedback on the early design of the study.

# Appendix A. The model text

To solve the problem of increasing temperatures, a number of methods can be taken. First, we need to change from fossil fuels such as gas, oil, and coal to clean energy. Regular use of solar and wind power can help reduce greenhouse gases. For instance, the Chinese government is investing millions of dollars in producing solar power for its citizens. This decision has greatly decreased the amount of carbon dioxide in China. Second, it is important to protect natural resources such as forests and oceans. This is because these areas can keep greenhouse gases from being released into the atmosphere. Finally, people need to be encouraged to make more eco-friendly choices. For example, people can use public transport such as buses and trains instead of private cars and motorbikes. In conclu sion, clean energy, nature protection, and environmentally-friendly choices are the possible ways to help reduce global warming in many places.

# Appendix B. Features noticed sheet

Instruction: Read your paragraph and the model text. Write answers to the following questions as detailed as possible. 1. How much do you understand the model text on a scale from 1.0 (very low) to 10.0 (very high)? Choose one number: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 2. What similarities did you notice between your paragraph and the model text? 3. What differences did you notice between your paragraph and the model text?

4. What have you learned from the model text?

# Appendix C. Interview questions

1. How did you feel when comparing your paragraph with the model text? Why?   
2. When reading the model text, what aspects did you focus on? Why?   
3. How did you feel when rewriting your paragraph? Why?   
4. Did you incorporate any features from the model text into your rewritten paragraph? If yes, what aspects? If no, why not?   
5. In general, do you think the writing task using the model text had any impact on your paragraph writing? If yes, how? If no, why   
not?

Appendix D. Similarity percentages in the features noticed sheet in stage 2 by the EG $( N = 3 5$ )   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>Total FNs</td><td>Similarities</td><td>% (Similarities/Total FNs)</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>118.0</td><td>53.0</td><td>44.9</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>17.0</td><td>1.0</td><td>5.9</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>75.0</td><td>29.0</td><td>38.7</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>62.0</td><td>1.0</td><td>5.9</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>11.0</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>283.0</td><td>84.0</td><td>29.7</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

# References

Abdi Tabari, M., Bui, G., & Wang, Y. (2021). The effects of topic familiarity on emotionality and linguistic complexity in EAP writing. Language Teaching Research, 28 (4), 1616–1634. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688211033565   
Andringa, S., & Godfroid, A. (2020). Sampling bias and the problem of generalizability in applied linguistics. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 40, 134–142. https:// doi.org/10.1017/S0267190520000033   
Baleghizadeh, S., & Arab, F. (2011). Comparing native models and peer feedback in promoting noticing through written output. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 5(1), 63–79. https://doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2010.517535   
Batstone, R. (Ed.). (2010). Sociocognitive perspectives on language use and language learning. Oxford University Press.   
Canovas ´ Guirao, J., Roca de Larios, J., & Coyle, Y. (2015). The use of models as a written feedback technique with young EFL learners. System, 52, 63–77. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.system.2015.04.002   
Cheng, X., & Zhang, L. J. (2024). Examining second language (L2) learners’ engagement with AWE-teacher integrated feedback in a technology-empowered context. The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 33, 1023–1035. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40299-024-00877-8   
Coyle, Y., & Roca de Larios, J. (2014). Exploring the role played by error correction and models on children’s reported noticing and output production in a L2 writing task. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 36(3), 451–485. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263113000612   
Coyle, Y., Canovas, G., & Roca de Larios, J. (2018). Identifying the trajectories of young EFL learners across multi-stage writing and feedback processing tasks with model texts. Journal of Second Language Writing, 42, 25–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2018.09.002   
Creswell, J. W., & Creswell, J. D. (2017). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-methods approaches. Sage publications.   
Dao, P., Nguyen, M. X. N. C., Duong, P. T., & Tran–Thanh, V. (2021). Learners’ engagement in L2 computer-mediated interaction: Chat mode, interlocutor familiarity, and text quality. The Modern Language Journal, 105(4), 767–791. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12737   
Ellis, R. (2010). Epilogue: A framework for investigating oral and written corrective feedback. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 32(2), 335–349. https://doi.org/ 10.1017/S0272263109990544   
Fan, Y., & Xu, J. (2020). Exploring student engagement with peer feedback on L2 writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 50, Article 100775. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jslw.2020.100775   
Field, A. (2018). Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics. Sage Publications.   
Fredricks, J. A., Blumenfeld, P. C., & Paris, A. H. (2004). School engagement: Potential of the concept, state of the evidence. Review of Educational Research, 74(1), 59–109. https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543074001059   
García Mayo, M. P., & Loidi Labandibar, U. (2017). The use of models as written corrective feedback in English as a foreign language (EFL) writing. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 37, 110–127. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190517000071   
Graham, S. (2019). Changing how writing is taught. Review of Research in Education, 43(1), 277–303. https://doi.org/10.3102/0091732X18821125   
Graham, S., Harris, K. R., & Chambers, A. B. (2016). Evidence-based practice and writing instruction: A review of reviews. In C. A. MacArthur, S. Graham, & J. Fitzgerald (Eds.), Handbook of writing research (2nd ed., pp. 211–226). Guilford.   
Hamano-Bunce, D. (2022). The effects of direct written corrective feedback and comparator texts on the complexity and accuracy of revisions and new pieces of writing. Language Teaching Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688221127643 (13621688221127643).   
Han, Y., & Hyland, F. (2015). Exploring learner engagement with written corrective feedback in a Chinese tertiary EFL classroom. Journal of Second Language Writing, 30, 31–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2015.08.002   
Hanaoka, O. (2007). Output, noticing, and learning: An investigation into the role of spontaneous attention to form in a four-stage writing task. Language Teaching Research, 11(4), 459–479. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168807080963   
Hyland, K., & Hyland, F. (2019). Contexts and issues in feedback on L2 writing: An introduction. In K. Hyland, & F. Hyland (Eds.), Feedback in second language writing: Contexts and issues (pp. 1–22). Cambridge University Press.   
Kang, E. Y. (2020). Using model texts as a form of feedback in L2 writing. System, 89, Article 102196. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2019.102196   
Kang, E. Y. (2022). The role of working memory in the effects of models as a written corrective strategy. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 61(4), 1725–1753. https://doi.org/10.1515/iral-2021-0207   
Kang, E. Y. (2023). EFL learners’ perceptions and their association with the effectiveness of model texts as a feedback tool. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 18(1), 47–58. https://doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2023.2226144   
Larson-Hall, J. (2016). A guide to doing statistics in second language research using SPSS and R. Routledge.   
L´azaro-Ibarrola, A., & Villarreal, I. (2021). Are EFL writers motivated or demotivated by model texts and task repetition? Evidence from young collaborative writers. International Journal of English Studies, 21(2), 29–55. https://doi.org/10.6018/ijes.466401   
L´azaro-Ibarrola, A. (2021). Model texts in collaborative and individual writing among EFL children: noticing, incorporations, and draft quality. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 61(2), 329–359. https://doi.org/10.1515/iral-2020-0160   
Lee, I. (2019). Teacher written corrective feedback: Less is more. Language Teaching, 52(4), 524–536. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444819000247 (2021). Using erimenta effects in writing. System, 100, Article 102563   
Luquin, M., & García Mayo, M. P. (2021). Exploring the use of models as a written corrective feedback technique among EFL children. System, 98, Article 102465. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2021.102465   
Luquin, M., & García Mayo, M. P. (2024). A longitudinal study of the effects of model texts on EFL children’s written production. System, 120, Article 103190. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2023.103190   
MacArthur, C. A. (2016). Instruction in evaluation and revision. In C. MacArthur, S. Graham, & J. Fitzgerald (Eds.), Handbook of writing research (pp. 272–287). Guilford.   
Mao, Z., & Lee, I. (2022). Researching L2 student engagement with written feedback: Insights from sociocultural theory. TESOL Quarterly, 56(2), 788–798. https://doi. org/10.1002/tesq.3071   
McDonough, K., & Crawford, W. J. (2018). Identifying effective writing tasks for use in EFL write-to-learn language contexts. The Language Learning Journal, 48(4), 469–480. https://doi.org/10.1080/09571736.2018.1465990   
McHugh, M. L. (2012). Interrater reliability: The kappa statistic. Biochemia Medica, 22(3), 276–282. https://doi.org/10.11613/BM.2012.031   
Mercer, S. (201 . Language learner engagement: Setting the scen X. Gao (Ed.), Second handbook of english language teaching (pp. 643–660). Springer.   
Montealegre Ramon, ´ F. (2019). Exploring the learning potential of models with secondary school EFL learners. Revista Espanola ˜ de Lingüística Aplicada/Spanish Journal of Applied Linguistics, 32(1), 155–184. https://doi.org/10.1075/resla.00013.mon   
Mujtaba, S. M., Zhang, T., Mao, S., & Ahmed, N. (2024). Model text as corrective feedback in L2 writing: The role of working memory and vocabulary size. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching. https://doi.org/10.1515/iral-2023-0242 (Advance online publication).   
Nguyen, L. Q., Dao, P., & Nguyen, B. T. T. (2024a). Model texts as a feedback instrument in second language writing: A systematic review. Language Teaching Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688241291336 (Advance online publication).   
Nguyen, L. Q., Nguyen, B. T. T., & Phuong, H. Y. (2024b). Exploring the use of model texts as a feedback instrument in expository writing: EFL learners’ noticing, incorporations, and text quality. Assessing Writing, 62, Article 100890. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2024.100890   
Nguyen, L. Q., & Le, H. V. (2022). Improving L2 learners’ IELTS task 2 writing: The role of model essays and noticing hypothesis. Language Testing in Asia, 12(58), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40468-022-00206-0   
Oxford, R. L., & Burry-Stock, J. A. (1995). Assessing the use of language learning strategies worldwide with the ESL/EFL version of the Strategy Inventory for Language Learning (SILL). System, 23(1), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/0346-251X(94)00047-A   
Pallant, J. (2020). SPSS survival manual: A step by step guide to data analysis using IBM SPSS. McGraw-hill Education.   
Pawlak, M., & Kruk, M. (2022). Individual differences in computer assisted language learning research. Taylor & Francis.   
Plonsky, L., & Oswald, F. L. (2014). How big is “big”? Interpreting effect sizes in L2 research. Language Learning, 64(4), 878–912. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12079   
Qi, D. S., & Lapkin, S. (2001). Exploring the role of noticing in a three-stage second language writing task. Journal of Second Language Writing, 10(4), 277–303. https:// doi.org/10.1016/S1060-3743(01)00046-7   
Roothooft, H., L´azaro-Ibarrola, A., & Bult´e, B. (2022). Task repetition and corrective feedback via models and direct corrections among young EFL writers: Draft quality and task motivation. Language Teaching Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688221082041 (Advance online publication).   
Sachs, R., & Polio, C. (2007). Learners’ uses of two types of written feedback on a L2 writing revision task. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 29(1), 67–100. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263107070039   
Schmidt, R. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 3–32). Cambridge University Press.   
Skehan, P. (1998). A cognitive approach to language learning. Oxford University Press.   
Steiss, J., Tate, T. P., Graham, S., Cruz, J., Hebert, M., Wang, J., Moon, Y., Tseng, W., Warschauer, M., & Olson, C. (2024). Comparing the quality of human and ChatGPT feedback of students’ writing. Learning and Instruction, 91, Article 101894. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2024.101894   
Storch, N. (2018). Written corrective feedback from sociocultural theoretical perspectives: A research agenda. Language Teaching, 51(2), 262–277. https://doi.org/ 10.1017/S0261444818000034   
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypotheses and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). Oxford University Press.   
Tieu, L., & Baker, J. R. (2022). Using model essays in conjunction with noticing as a feedback instrument in IELTS writing preparation. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 17(2), 380–392. https://doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2022.2049799   
Truscott, J. (2007). The effect of error correction on learners’ ability to write accurately. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16(4), 255–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jslw.2007.06.003   
UCLES. (2001). Oxford quick placement test. Oxford University Press.   
Villarreal, I., & L´azaro-Ibarrola, A. (2022). Models in collaborative writing among CLIL learners of English in primary school: Linguistic outcomes and motivation matters. System, 110, Article 102922. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2022.102922   
Vu, D. V., & Peters, E. (2022). Incidental learning of collocations from meaningful input: A longitudinal study into three reading modes and factors that affect learning. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 44(3), 685–707. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263121000462   
Vu, D. V., & Peters, E. (2023). A longitudinal study on the effect of mode of reading on incidental collocation learning and predictors of learning gains. TESOL Quarterly, 57(1), 5–32. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.3111   
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press.   
Wu, Y., & Schunn, C. D. (2020). From feedback to revisions: Effects of feedback features and perceptions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 60, Article 101826. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2019.101826   
Wu, Z., Qie, J., & Wang, X. (2023). Using model texts as a type of feedback in EFL writing. Frontiers in Psychology, 14, Article 1156553. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fpsyg.2023.1156553   
Yang, Y., Yap, N. T., & Ali, A. M. (2023). Predicting EFL expository writing quality with measures of lexical richness. Assessing Writing, 57, Article 100762. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.asw.2023.100762   
Zhang, Y., & Gao, Y. (2024). Exploring the dynamics of student engagement with receiving peer feedback in L2 writing. Assessing Writing, 60, Article 100842. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2024.100842   
Zhang, Z. V., & Hyland, K. (2018). Student engagement with teacher and automated feedback on L2 writing. Assessing Writing, 36, 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. asw.2018.02.004   
Zhang, Z. V., & Hyland, K. (2022). Fostering student engagement with feedback: An integrated approach. Assessing Writing, 51, Article 100586. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.asw.2021.100586