# Constructing proximity in popularization discourse: Evidence from lexical bundles in TED talks

Wei Wang a, \*, Eniko Csomay b

a Business School, Xi’an International Studies University, South Wenyuan Road, Education and Sci-Tech Industrial Development Zone, 710128, Xi’an, China   
b Department of Linguistics and Asian/Middle Eastern Languages, San Diego State University, 5500 Campanile Dr. MC 7727 92182-7727, San Diego, USA

# a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history: Available online 3 November 2023

Keywords:   
Popularization discourse   
Proximity   
Lexical bundles   
Indexicality   
TED talks

# a b s t r a c t

Taking Hyland’s (2010) proximity as its conceptual orientation and lexical bundles as its analytical lens, the present study explores the extent to which phraseological configurations in TED talks encode the five facets of proximity. Adopting a corpus-informed discourse analytical approach to lexical bundles (frequently occurring four-word sequences in text), we aim to describe the popularizing features TED talks present. Lexical bundles are identified and extracted from a corpus of 500 TED talks totaling about 1.1 million words, followed by an analysis of their indexicality related to proximity. This study reveals that, in addition to communicating the lay version of knowledge, TED talks are devoted to both a democratic means of communication by facilitating audience comprehension and mitigating speaker-audience asymmetry and to a promotional agenda not dissimilar to that of advertising. These characteristics allow for movement between proximity of commitment and proximity of membership. This study demonstrates the indexical function of lexical bundles, expanding on their role as a discovery tool for obtaining a generic profile of a particular genre.

$\circledcirc$ 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Research on popularization discourse has emerged in response to new social demand on disseminating scientific knowledge beyond experts in order to promote civic engagement and a cultural trend towards “the democratization of knowledge” (Kranich et al., 2012, p. 332). Popularization communication has been increasingly recognized as sites of interaction between experts and non-experts rather than simply communicating the lay version of specialized knowledge from experts to non-experts. The expert-lay communication has become more complicated with the recent proliferation of webmediated genres, such as science blogs, Wikipedia, Twitters, and TED talks. One of the main foci of academic inquiries into these digital genres (e.g. Giltrow and Stein, 2009; Kelly and Miller, 2016; Luzón and Pérez-Llantada, 2019) is to investigate how online media revolutionize the way science accommodates the lay public while increasing the potential for interaction between the scientific community and the public. Given the complexity of participant roles and the latest democratic trends of popularization, it is necessary to explore how the popularizer (that is, the presenter of knowledge) locates him- or herself in relation to both the materials presented and the relations managed. This dual focus can be captured well by the framework of proximity developed by Hyland (2010), which “helps us to understand how writers [or speakers] typically position themselves and their work in relation to others” (p. 117).

Proximity encompasses a set of facets operating as an integrated framework for analyzing popularization. The salient features of proximity are identified through counting the number of occurrences of various linguistic and rhetorical clues, thus bringing frequency to a central place as to what is worth discussing. Yet, while seeking proximity is regarded as an essential aspect of popularization, limited studies have used corpora to provide systematic evidence of frequently recurrent lexico-grammatical characteristics that index proximity. A corpus-driven approach to phraseology has proved to be highly effective in the study of naturally occurring discourse (Hunston, 2002). The present study will, therefore, investigate proximity through the lens of phraseological units, specifically, lexical bundles.

This approach was adopted for the following reasons. Lexical bundles, as important “building blocks of discourse” (Biber et al., 2004, p. 401), can help convey the communicative purposes of genres. The automated frequency-based bundle extraction (see methodology section) can reveal linguistic patterns that may not be intuitively ascertained. Also, categorizing grammatical constructs and discourse functions of lexical bundles usually follow standard procedures, making this approach easily replicable.

Amongst the various web-based genres mentioned above (blogs, etc.), we focus on TED talks. With its initiative as ‘ideas worth spreading’, TED talks have become a prototypical form of online spoken popularization. The insightful talks, while delivered originally in front of a live audience, have been considered one of the best examples of knowledge dissemination in the digital age. Previous studies have demonstrated TED’s reduced technicality (e.g. Ludewig, 2017) and its multimodal strategies used in explaining science (e.g. Xia, 2023). Some studies also investigated TED’s suitability as classroom material (e.g. Bell et al., 2019). However, issues revolving around TED, particularly its stock of recurring lexico-grammatical characteristics capturing its popularizing nature, have not been fully discussed except for Liu and Chen (2020) who compared functions of lexical bundles between TED talks and academic lectures with the focus on inter-register bundle variations.

Drawing on the notion of proximity as a pragmatic construct and lexical bundles as an analytical lens, the present study aims to explore the extent to which four-word sequences can encode proximity, thus shedding light on the popularizing nature of TED talks.

# 2. Background

# 2.1. Popularization discourse

The popularization of specialist discourse is a rather recent academic inquiry. Though not unanimously agreed upon, a basic consensus is to define popularization as “a social process consisting of a large class of discursive-semiotic practices [.] aiming to communicate lay versions of scientific knowledge” (Calsamiglia and Van Dijk, 2004, p. 371) or “the transmission of scientific knowledge from scientists to the lay public for purposes of edification, legitimation, and training” (Whitley, 1985, p. 3). Communication or transmission of knowledge in popularization involves a process of reformulation and recontextualization of specialized knowledge, which reacts and adapts to new communicative events and new media constraints/affordances (Gotti, 2014). Much of the literature on popularization, though from varied perspectives, focuses on the differences between professional science and popular science (e.g. Blanchard, 2011; Hyland and Zou, 2020; Luzón, 2013). This strand of studies usually builds upon the assumption of “narrative of science” in research articles versus “narrative of nature” in popular texts (Myers, 1990). Their differences are largely determined by differences in purpose, audience, and context. For instance, Hyland and Zou (2020), comparing metadiscoursal use in research articles and academic blogs, found “important differences in the two rhetorical contexts and the sensitivity writers have to the very different readerships and purposes they are engaged in” (p. 3). Tracked down by a historical snapshot of science popularization, variation in purpose, audience, and context also sheds light on the evolution of popularization. Different models of popularization were sketched by Perrault (2013) as the history of shifts of relations between scientific knowledge and public knowledge. He posited that, starting from the two “knowledges” inseparable, through time, they became balanced, followed by science gaining higher status, and now, the most recent rising skepticism against the traditional-idealist construct of science is apparent.

Popularization emerges as an area of inquiry in its own right when science becomes more specialized. The non-scientist recipients assume the deficit side of the binary division, resulting in popularization known as the “deficit model” (Perrault, 2013, p. 12). Underpinning this model is the stark demarcation between the scientists and the public, with the former upholding absolute authority over knowledge while the latter trapped in a “blank state of ignorance on which scientists write knowledge” (Myers, 2003, p. 266). This type of knowledge transmission is considered unidirectional. Criticism of the “deficit model” led to the movement towards a more interactive “dialog model” in which scientists engage the public. The center of gravity, however, still rests upon science and the dialog is intended primarily to make science less intimidating. A more recent advancement is the democratic engagement with science, which suggests that science communication is multi-directional rather than solely diffusing ‘downwards’ from the scientists. The democratic model is advantageous over previous models due to its relational focus that gives prominence to interaction and influence between scientific and social spheres. Moreover, expertise is regarded as multiple constructs that take varieties of knowledge into account, either scientific or non-scientific. Therefore, “communication about science takes place between diverse groups on the basis that all can contribute, and that all have a stake in the outcome of the deliberations and discussions” (Trench, 2008, p. 132).

Although distinctions have been drawn among previous models of science communication, they are in fact evolutions from one to another with different coexisting models. For instance, the deficit view is by no means out of date when dialog and participation prevail since the persisting goal of science communication is to disseminate new findings (Miller, 2001). Therefore, the democratization of knowledge, though a trend, awaits further investigation. In addition, findings of many studies in popularization are achieved by selecting a particular linguistic exponent rather than utilizing a comprehensive analytical framework. Hyland’s (2010) proximity framework lends itself as a fitting instance of an integrated framework for analyzing popularization more comprehensively.

# 2.2. Proximity

Proximity is a relatively new concept used in language studies. Its verbal form “proximise/proximising”, the act of bringing (conceptually) closer, was originally proposed by Chilton (2004) and later developed by Cap (2006, 2008, 2013) as a discourse-analytic concept (in its nominal term “proximization”), taking account of symbolic distance-crossing between writers and readers and a way of presenting (and thus legitimizing) peripheral elements of discourse space as central ones. A tripartite model of proximization (i.e. spatial, temporal, and axiological) was postulated and tested whereby set patterns of lexical-grammatical items were configured to measure the performance of proximization (see Cap, 2013). Though most commonly applied in the field of Critical Discourse Analysis mainly of political discourse, proximization, either as a construct or a methodological tool, seems applicable to various other discourse domains as well. Given its explanatory power, the tripartite model of proximization has been adopted across a broad spectrum of research agenda, including those free from ideological and political commitment. In science communication, similar in many ways to Cap’s promixization, the concept of proximity proposed by Hyland (2010) is designed to demarcate the two different but related genres along the continuum of science communication: the upstream research papers and the downstream popular science articles. Proximity refers to “a writer’s [or a speaker’s] control of rhetorical features which display both authority as an expert and a personal position towards issues in an unfolding text” (Hyland, 2010, p. 117). As such, proximity entails a dual focus namely membership and commitment. It was originally applied to investigate variation in research papers versus popular science articles in terms of rhetorical and linguistic strategies that professional writers use to manage their display of expertise and interact with readers. Though motivated by the consideration of interpersonal affinity, proximity does not limit its emphasis on how writers manage themselves and interact with readers. It is also concerned with the ideational aspect, i.e. what the text is about and how it is presented.

Proximity can be achieved in various ways. To operationalize this open construct examining written academic discourse, Hyland (2010) worked out a framework composed of five elements: organization, argument structure, credibility, stance, and engagement. The first three facets deal with the ways in which writers shape material and demonstrate authority through the use of academic or general writing conventions. Of the latter two, stance concerns the expression of a textual voice or community-recognized personality. Main resources that realize stance include hedges, boosters, attitude markers and selfmentions. Engagement, relating to ways in which writers acknowledge the presence of readers and guide them through the text, is realized by reader pronouns, directives, questions, shared knowledge, and personal asides (Hyland, 2010). The five facets are by no means exhaustive but can be a useful guideline for identifying and classifying the instances in which a panoramic view of proximity can be achieved.Yet, applications and discussions of proximity are still in their infancy. Only limited studies draw upon Hyland’s (2010) five-facets framework to explore the recontextualization strategies in popular texts. Scotto di Carlo (2014), for example, retrieved proximity resources largely manually from 84 TED talks, revealing that speakers are more personally involved in their presentation rather than concentrating on their identity and reputation.To compare how proximity resources differ in tweets compared to those source science texts on which the tweets draw, Orpin (2019) also based her analysis on the five elements with the resources of organization, argument, and credibility all being manually retrieved while checking the keyword list in AntConc for possible markers of stance and engagement. Other studies have also drawn on proximity as the conceptual lens through which they developed their own expanded categories of popularization strategies. For instance, following works by Hyland (2010) and others, Luzón (2013) classified science bloggers’ rhetorical strategies into two broad categories (i.e. tailing information to the assumed knowledge of potential readers and engaging the readers by arousing their interest) and thereby a series of subcategories. The corpus incorporating 75 blog posts was then scanned manually for particular strategies, and the strategies were then tallied for a final count. Results showed that while spreading scientific knowledge to the public, their strategies were also deployed to position the bloggers in relation to the research reported and to persuade audiences of their interpretation. Sokół (2018) followed Luzón’s (2013) method to explore the popularization strategies in medical weblogs, but with a smaller dataset for more manageable manual analysis. As we can see from previous research, analyses concerning proximity in a given genre are conducted by selecting rather limited sets of data which are then analyzed manually for particular pre-defined linguistic and rhetorical clues that point to proximity.

It is worth noting that, rather than directly addressing phraseological units, investigations into certain facets of proximity often end up with a list of items that contain multi-word constructions, such as expressions relating to definitions, e.g. $X ,$ which means that $P$ ; importance markers, e.g. why is this important; stance/engagement markers, e.g. I’m sure you will. We may, therefore, conclude that although facets of proximity can be signaled by multiple linguistic categories, multi-word expressions, specifically lexical bundles as reported in this study, can signal proximity (see Hyland, 2012, p. 67).

# 2.3. Lexical bundles

Lexical bundles, also referred to as lexical phrases/chunks, formulaic sequences, and multi-word units/expressions (Cortes, 2015), are the most frequently recurring sequences of three or more words in a given register (Biber et al., 1999). Although they do not constitute structurally complete units, are not idiomatic, and may go unnoticed, lexical bundles can reveal a great deal about the distinct linguistic features and communicative functions that shape registers (Barbieri, 2018). They are “building blocks of discourse” (Biber et al., 2004, p. 401). It must be noted, however, that lexical bundles can only take on their significance when they have been structurally and functionally categorized into meaningful sets. Much of the literature focuses on the functions that lexical bundles fulfill. Several classification schemes have been developed and adopted for the functional analysis of lexical bundles. Biber et al. (2004) introduced a taxonomy to categorize bundles in both spoken and written academic registers. Their taxonomy comprises three main categories: stance bundles, discourse organizers, and referential bundles. In contrast, Hyland’s (2008) taxonomy has a specific focus on written texts, mostly published research articles. The three categories in his taxonomy are research-oriented, text-oriented, and participant-oriented. Both taxonomies were later modified and extended to better represent lexical bundle functions in genres under study (see Simpson-Vlach and Ellis, 2010, pp. 498–502; Salazar, 2011, pp. 32–33 for further details). While benefiting greatly from these fine-grained taxonomies, later studies extended the functional analysis of lexical bundles by investigating the extent to which the extracted bundles can index traces of distinctive communicative purposes of texts, such as intersubjectivity (Barbieri, 2018), or interpersonal positioning (Herbel-Eisenmann and Wagner, 2010).The present study falls into this research perspective. We focus on how the functions of lexical bundles indexes proximity.

Over the past two decades, lexical bundles have spawned a large body of literature and the momentum continues apace. The bulk of the studies is focused on academic writing, particularly research articles and second language writing. Lexical bundles in spoken register, however, receive less attention except for academic lectures (Csomay, 2013; Liu and Chen, 2020; Nesi and Basturkmen, 2006). Lexical bundles outside of academic contexts are under-explored with only a limited number of studies spanning their attention from highly specialized written genres, such as legal documents (Breeze, 2013) and corporate press releases (De Cock and Granger, 2021) to genres of wider consumption, in particular, web-mediated texts, such as hotel websites (Fuster-Márquez, 2014) and blogs (Barbieri, 2018). Fuster-Márquez (2014) found that lexical bundles in hotel websites convey stance and reference to a far greater extent than academic genres. This could be attributable to the promotional motivation of hotel websites to influence customers’ choices. Similarly, blogs rely mainly on stance bundles while also substantially on referential expressions and narrative expressions, a hybrid of features determined by both the online mode and the multiple communicative purposes of blog writing (Barbieri, 2018). These findings contribute further insights into online genres which possess properties that traditional spoken and written genres do not have (Giltrow and Stein, 2009). However, whatever genres and sub-genres are at play, previous research has confirmed Biber and Barbieri’s (2007) proposition that each and every register is characterized by distinct sets of lexical bundles reflecting its typical communicative purposes. Likewise, lexical bundles in popularizing discourse (e.g. TED talks) are expected to constitute linguistic repertoires that can encode proximity, one of the major characteristics of popularization.

From the above review, we can say that lexical bundles may signal proximity, thereby revealing the popularizing nature of TED talks. Thus, this study addresses the following research questions:

(1) What are the discourse functions of highly frequent lexical bundles in TED talks？ (2) To what extent can the target bundles encode proximity constructed in TED talks？ (3) How can proximity be used to explain the popularizing nature of TED talks?

# 3. Methodology

# 3.1. The corpus

This study is based on a collection of TED talks from the official website (https://www.ted.com/) where videos and transcripts are released and can be downloaded freely. To ensure the coverage of a broad range of topics, Scotto di Carlo’s (2014) classification scheme was adopted dividing TED into five broad subject areas: Arts and Design, Business, Education and Culture, Politics and Global Issues, and Science and Technology (Table 1). To build a balanced corpus-internal composition across topical domains, an equal number of talks from different topic areas were selected, resulting in a similar size in each sub-corpus except that Arts/Design TED is smaller since talks in this field usually last shorter in time than those of other topics (Table 1). Moreover, to ensure that the selected talks share the generic similarity of the conventional monologic presentation format, this study focuses on speakers’ monologic performances. Segments related to interviews, onstage videos, poetry recitations, and demonstration of new techniques were excluded.

Table 1 Description of the corpus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Disciplinary domain</td><td>Abbreviation</td><td>Number</td><td>Tokens</td></tr><tr><td> Arts/design</td><td>AT/DE</td><td>100</td><td>196,229</td></tr><tr><td>Business</td><td>BS</td><td>100</td><td>245,561</td></tr><tr><td>Education/culture</td><td>ED/CL</td><td>100</td><td>226,112</td></tr><tr><td>Politics/global issues</td><td>PO/GL</td><td>100</td><td>218,509</td></tr><tr><td> Science/technology</td><td>SC/TE</td><td>100</td><td>217,462</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td> 500</td><td>1,103,873</td></tr></table></body></html>

As Table 1 shows, 100 talks for each of the five topic areas were selected, totaling 500 talks. The total corpus size for this study is 1,103,873 running words, with the average length at around 2,000 words and an approximate average duration of 15 min for each talk. All the talks included in the current corpus were filmed between 1984 and 2020. The majority of the talks were made available after 2006 when the official TED website was launched. Transcriptions of the talks were retrieved from the TED official website and then saved in text files for further corpus analysis. To keep track of the data, transcriptions were saved by the abbreviated subdomain name followed by numerical order (e.g. BS_28). Finally, English transcripts of TED talks are provided by volunteers worldwide and cross-checked by experts. The transcriptions collected in this study were checked manually accompanied by corresponding video clips to confirm accuracy.

# 3.2. Analytical procedures

# 3.2.1. Identification of lexical bundles

The freeware AntConc 3.5.8 (Anthony, 2019) was used to identify lexical bundles in this study. As for bundle-length, fourword lexical bundles were extracted as most bundle studies do (e.g. Hyland, 2008) with its relatively manageable size and more identifiable structures and functions. The frequency threshold, somewhat arbitrary, vary in previous studies from 10 occurrences per million (Biber et al., 1999) to 40 per million (Biber et al., 2004). Given the exploratory nature of this study and also the intent to obtain a manageable list of bundles, we set a minimum frequency of 20 times in the corpus, which corresponds to a raw frequency of 18. Range or dispersion is also a crucial factor to ensure that bundles do not reflect an idiosyncratic use typical to a specific text. After repeated trials, the dispersion rate was set at 10, meaning that bundles to be extracted have to occur in at least 10 texts from the corpus.

According to Biber et al. (2004), contracted words (e.g. I’m and don’t) are viewed as one word. Although overlaps occur in bundle extraction that may inflate the quantitative results (Chen and Baker, 2010), lexical bundles such as at the end of and the end of the will not be merged as one longer bundle at the end of the since at the end of is sometimes followed by it, this, that or a and the end of the is also preceded by by, to, or is/are in the corpus. More importantly, as this study is exploratory in examining how four-word lexical bundles can index proximity rather than making comparisons across corpora, overlaps will not affect our results.

# 3.2.2. Functional classification

Although both Biber et al.’s (2004) and Simpson-Vlach and Ellis’ (2010) functional taxonomies are suitable and have been used for categorizing lexical bundle functions of spoken genres, with the latter providing an expanded classification scheme, in our study, we applied Simpson-Vlach and Ellis’ (2010) because their more extensive classification scheme is expected to yield more insights regarding distinctive features of texts, resulting in a more pedagogically suitable list of bundles that could facilitate ESP/EAP teaching. Bundles extracted have been manually examined in context and grouped into different functional categories (see Tables 2 and 3). To ensure appropriate classification, two researchers of this study worked independently to assign functional roles to each target bundle after a close reading of KWIC lines or longer stretches of discourse using AntConc. In any instance of disagreement, both researchers returned to the original transcript to double-check the bundle use in context and resolve the discrepancies.

Adopting a corpus-informed discourse approach, the current study analyzes the overall functional characteristics of lexical bundles which are expected to provide a window to proximity.

# 4. Findings

# 4.1. Functional characteristics of the target bundles

A total of 192 lexical bundle types were identified, amounting to a total of 6,664 bundle tokens, making up $2 . 4 \%$ of the onemillion-word corpus. Table 2 presents the list of target bundles while Table 3 lists the functional (sub-)categories of the target bundles (both types and tokens) and their respective percentages.

Table 2 List of target bundles in TED talks classified by their discourse functions.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="5">Referential expressions</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">(1) Specification of attributes</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">a. Intangible framing attributes of the things that in a way that</td></tr><tr><td>b. Tangible framing attributes</td><td></td><td> in terms of the</td><td>the way that we</td><td> in the face of</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">the size of the this part of the</td></tr><tr><td>c. Quantity specification</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>a little bit of</td><td>the rest of the</td><td>a lot of people</td><td>there&#x27;s a lot of</td><td>a little bit more</td></tr><tr><td>a lot of the</td><td>tens of thousands of</td><td>have a lot of</td><td>lots and lots of</td><td>hundreds of thousands</td></tr><tr><td>with a lot of</td><td>for the rest of</td><td>in a lot of</td><td>and a lot of</td><td>a bit of a</td></tr><tr><td>percent of the world&#x27;s</td><td>a lot of time</td><td>some of the most</td><td>the vast majority of</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(2) Identification and focus</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> one of the most</td><td> one of the things</td><td>is one of the</td><td>and one of the</td><td> and this is a.</td></tr><tr><td>and this is the</td><td>so this is a</td><td>and this is what</td><td>this is one of</td><td>and it&#x27;s not just</td></tr><tr><td>this is not a</td><td> was one of the</td><td>to do with the</td><td> and it was a</td><td>and that is the</td></tr><tr><td> how many of you</td><td>this is what we</td><td>so this is the</td><td>this is a very</td><td> one of them is</td></tr><tr><td>that there is a.</td><td>those of you who</td><td>for those of you</td><td>nothing to do with</td><td>to do is to</td></tr><tr><td>(3) Deictics and locatives</td><td></td><td> in the middle of</td><td>for the first time</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>at the end of in the United States</td><td>the end of the the middle of the</td><td>a few years ago</td><td>the top of the</td><td>at the same time all over the world</td></tr><tr><td>the first time in</td><td>all of a sudden</td><td>by the end of</td><td>at the university of</td><td>the center of the</td></tr><tr><td>the side of the</td><td></td><td>the other side of</td><td>the end of this</td><td>the United States and</td></tr><tr><td>at the heart of</td><td>from all over the</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(4) Vagueness markers</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">and so on and</td></tr><tr><td>Stance expressions (1) Hedges </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>a little bit about</td><td> some of you may</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(2) Epistemic stance</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>I think we can and I think that</td><td>trying to figure out to figure out how</td><td>figure out how to to figure out what</td><td>I don&#x27;t know if and I think that&#x27;s</td><td>I think this is to learn how to</td></tr><tr><td>so how do we</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(3) Obligation and directive</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>I want you to</td><td>take a look at</td><td>going to have to</td><td>and we need to</td><td>you don&#x27;t have to</td></tr><tr><td>and we have to</td><td>we need to do</td><td>that we need to</td><td>to make sure that</td><td>we have to do</td></tr><tr><td>have to do is</td><td> you have to do</td><td>that we have to</td><td> you have to have</td><td>we need to be</td></tr><tr><td>(4) Expressions of abilities and possibilities</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> to be able to</td><td>and you can see</td><td> you can see the</td><td> you can see that</td><td>as you can see</td></tr><tr><td>we were able to</td><td> going to be able</td><td>will be able to</td><td>I can tell you</td><td> so you can see</td></tr><tr><td>you can see it</td><td>I was able to</td><td>to take care of</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(5) Evaluation</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>the best way to (6) Intention/volition, predication</td><td> the only way to</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>if you want to</td><td> is going to be</td><td>and I want to</td><td> are going to be</td><td> and I&#x27;m going to</td></tr><tr><td>are we going to</td><td>if we want to</td><td>I was going to</td><td>not going to be</td><td>I don&#x27;t want to</td></tr><tr><td>going to be a</td><td>so I&#x27;m going to</td><td>we are going to</td><td>I just want to</td><td>that I want to</td></tr><tr><td>going to be the</td><td>are you going to</td><td>I want to do</td><td>you want to know</td><td>and I wanted to</td></tr><tr><td>but I want to</td><td>it&#x27;s going to be</td><td>it&#x27;s not going to</td><td>this is going to</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>that we&#x27;re going to</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>we&#x27;re going to have</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>was going to be</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Discourse organizing functions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(1) Topic introduction and focus if you look at</td><td>when it comes to</td><td> I want to talk</td><td>I&#x27;m going to show</td><td>you look at the</td></tr><tr><td> going to show you</td><td>when I was a</td><td>I want to tell</td><td>I would like to</td><td>want to tell you</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m not going to</td><td> to talk to you</td><td>want to talk about</td><td>what I want to</td><td> Iet me tell you</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m going to talk</td><td>to share with you</td><td> go back to the</td><td>I grew up in</td><td> if you think about</td></tr><tr><td> so I want to</td><td>what I&#x27;m going to</td><td> to give you a</td><td> going to talk about</td><td>talk to you about</td></tr><tr><td>to go back to</td><td>we live in a.</td><td> et me show you</td><td>to tell you that</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>want to talk to</td><td> and if you look</td><td>going to tell you</td><td>if we look at</td><td>to tell you about</td></tr><tr><td>when you look at</td><td>I&#x27;m going to tell</td><td></td><td></td><td> let&#x27;s go back to</td></tr><tr><td>(2) Topic elaboration</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> a. Non-causal</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>it turns out that</td><td> on the other hand</td><td> let me give you</td><td>to come up with</td><td>and it turns out</td></tr><tr><td>but at the same</td><td>has to do with</td><td>I went back to</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>b. Cause and effect</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>so that we can</td><td> one of the reasons</td><td>so that they can</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(3) Discourse markers</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>thank you very much</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Types/Tokens of target bundles in different functional categories.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Discourse function</td><td>Type</td><td>%</td><td>Token</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Referential expressions</td><td>73</td><td>38%</td><td>2728</td><td>41%</td></tr><tr><td>Intangible framing attributes</td><td>5</td><td></td><td>171</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Tangible framing attributes</td><td>2</td><td></td><td>55</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Quantity specification</td><td>19</td><td></td><td>621</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Identification and focus</td><td>24</td><td></td><td>871</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Deictics and locatives</td><td>21</td><td></td><td>946</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Contrast and comparison</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>43</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Vagueness markers</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>21</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Stance expressions</td><td>72</td><td>38%</td><td>2312</td><td>35%</td></tr><tr><td>Hedges</td><td>2.</td><td></td><td>56</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Epistemic stance</td><td>12</td><td></td><td>279</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Obligation and directive</td><td>22</td><td></td><td>730</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Expressions of ability and possibility</td><td>7</td><td></td><td>291</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Evaluation</td><td>2</td><td></td><td>42</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Intention/volition, prediction</td><td>27</td><td></td><td>914</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Discourse organizing functions</td><td>47</td><td>24%</td><td>1624</td><td>24%</td></tr><tr><td>Topic introduction and focus</td><td>35</td><td></td><td>1191</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Topic elaboration (non-causal) Topic elaboration (cause and effect)</td><td>8</td><td></td><td>230</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Discourse markers</td><td>3 1</td><td></td><td>74.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>129</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>192</td><td>100%</td><td>6664</td><td>100%</td></tr></table></body></html>

Of the three broad functional categories of the target bundles, referential expressions $( n = 7 3$ ) and stance expressions $( n = 7 2 )$ ) make up almost equal percentages at $3 8 \%$ of the total bundle types. However, referential expressions are relatively more frequently used than stance expressions within the entire corpus, accounting for $4 1 \%$ of total bundle tokens while stance bundles for $3 5 \%$ . Discourse organizers are the least frequent bundles with $2 4 \%$ of both types $[ n = 4 7 ]$ ) and tokens $\begin{array} { r } { n = 1 6 2 4 . } \end{array}$ ). On a further look, referential expressions, the most common category, are mainly attributed to three subfunctions: identification and focus (24 types, $1 3 \%$ ; 871 tokens, $1 3 \%$ , deictic and locatives (21 types, $1 1 \%$ ; 946 tokens, $1 4 \%$ ), and quantity specification (19 types, $1 0 \%$ ; 621 tokens, $9 \%$ ). Three stance bundles high on the frequency list are: intention/volition, predication (27 types, $1 4 \%$ ; 914 tokens, $1 4 \%$ ), obligation and directives (22 types, $1 1 \%$ ; 730 tokens, $1 1 \%$ ), and epistemic stance (12 types, $6 \%$ ; 279 tokens, $4 \%$ ). Discourse organizing bundles are overwhelmingly composed of topic introduction and focus (35 types, $1 8 \%$ ; 1214 tokens, $1 8 \%$ ).

Functions of four-word lexical bundles, aided with follow-up qualitative analysis, can offer rich insights into the unique design of the genre of TED talks, thereby confirming the claim that lexical bundles are building blocks of discourse and strongly associated with the mode and communicative purposes of a genre (Biber and Barbieri, 2007). Yet it is not our major interest to unpack unique functional features. Instead, in response to the central question, we will discuss how the phraseological resources can index proximity.

# 4.2. Lexical bundles as a window to proximity

Following the research questions, the above results of functional characteristics of the target bundles are discussed within the five-facet framework for proximity construction, thus shedding light on the popularizing nature of TED takes.

# 4.2.1. Organization and argument

The focus here is primarily local, that is, to summarize what the indications emerging from the functional insights of the target bundles may tell us about TED’s organizational formats. Through and within the lexical bundle resources, scientific discourse, pedagogic discourse and journalistic discourse, if not more, are identified. Specifically, referential bundles are heavily employed for identifying and explaining concepts and ideas. A fairly large number of intention/volition bundles, obligation/directive bundles and topic introducers are used, signaling speaker agency in determining what comes up and directing the audience attention. As such, TED talks display their didactic potential that resonates with its mission to spread ideas to a diverse lay audience. This is similar in many ways to university lectures that teach how knowledge is communicated to unskilled learners (e.g. Csomay, 2013; Liu and Chen, 2020). In addition, what makes TED prototypically popularizing is its emphasis on spectacularity and newsworthiness, a typical journalistic device (Hyland, 2010). This is explicitly manifested in a wide range of bundles such as the top frequent referential bundles for the first time, one of the most, is one of the, and other bundles containing words that express extremity (e.g. top, only, and best).

The interdiscursivity in TED talks, unpacked through the target bundles, may at the same time shed light on its argument structures. Regarding the focus of arguments, a limited use of (in-)tangible attributes bundles and topic elaboration bundles suggests TED’s preference for journalism that focuses on the objects of study rather than the scientific methods or procedures (Hyland, 2010). Framing is achieved by adapting information to the background knowledge of potential readers. Upon inspection of the target bundles in context, TED talks rely mainly on the following three strategies: narrative arguments, exemplifications, and visual-graphics. First, the narrative style of TED results essentially from the clustering of first-person pronoun plus verb fragments (e.g. I was going to, I went back to), dependent clause fragments (e.g. to take care of, it turns out that), deictics and locatives (e.g. a few years ago, all of a sudden), and story starters (e.g. when I was a, I grew up in). Some of these narrative markers are unique to TED as shown in Example 1 to set the scene with the speaker’s personal experience.

Example 1

When I was a kid, I was afraid of the dark. The darkness is where the monsters are. And I had this little night light outside of my bedroom so that it would never get too dark. But over time, my fear of the dark turned to curiosity. (TE_13)

Narratives help engender trust from the audience based on subjective evidence (Simmons, 2006), thus speaker presentation is less likely to be objected as the audiences’ potential opportunity to construct counterarguments is reduced or closed down (Busselle and Bilandzic, 2008).

Another frequent device that strengthens speakers’ arguments is exemplification. This is supported mostly by the lexical bundles of speaker intention/volition (e.g. and I want to, and I’m going to), topic introduction/focus (e.g. if you look at, to give you a), and topic elaboration (e.g. let me give you, let me show you). These bundles overtly announce that what follows would be example(s) or further explanations, as illustrated in Figure 1.

Street Week." which was the show of the time. Just to give you a flavor of that, I've got a clip   
we also deal with the people management. 08:44 In order to give you a glimmer into what this looks like, I'd the economy. So let's start talking about that. I wanted to give you a current picture of the economy. That's what and screaming, into the 21st century, and I'm just going to give you a couple of examples of what a few facts as on how they ought to be construed. Just to give you a few examples:"ending a pregnancy" versus "kiling can pretty much do anything, but it's 20,000 dollars, and to give you a sense of who wears this veterans, American were looking for a better knee, and I just wanted to give you a sense of what a leg system looks it needs to be economically sustainable. 08:13 So I want to give you a sense of where we are at. We transformative ittle bits of help can be. But I want to give you a reality check. Look: U.S. aid, helping people 10:38 But in the last few minutes, I just want to give you a different perspective of what I think --   
follow their progress and support them as needed. 03:07 To give you a better sense, I'm going to show you . Some of them are extraordinarily precise. 02:45 I want to give you a couple examples from my own work. I beings have voices that mean something. And so, I want to give you a greeting, as from a chimpanzee im the repeat itself, but it does rhyme. 05:37 This is just to give you a taste of what's happening in this part like the movie "The Matrix."  04:02 But I'm here today to give you a choice. You can either take the blue 01:42 Now in order to consider this, I first need to give you a crash course in how the brain works. mple, you'l get motor neuron disease. 03:01 So Id like to give you a real-life ilustration of what happens with motor space, tuns out to be quite effective. 04:07 And just to give you a flavor of how well this works, this 14 feet to go. That's a lot in sprinter land. To give you a sense of how much it is, I engine would be the best one to use. I want to give you a brief explanation of how we looked at

Exemplifications can serve the argument-support function as narratives do since both examples and stories help to make a talk easy-to-follow in the form of descriptive and explanatory language without delving into particular theories or research procedures.

Moreover, visual-graphic resources permeate within TED. They can liven up the talk and improve comprehension while avoiding abstraction or misunderstanding. The use of multimedia can be evidenced through a great variety of lexical bundles. For instance, a concordance list search in Figure 2. shows that so this is a is often followed by website, word clouding, graph and brain scan. Visual-graphics are inserted on-the-fly to reinforce the meaning of abstract concepts, which may partially explain the scarcity of (in-)tangible attributes bundles in TED. Aside from facilitating comprehension, multimedia resources can also enhance interpersonal engagement, thus reducing speaker-audience asymmetry.

At a more local level, lexical bundles can signal what speakers intend to talk about so as to keep the audience on track. Though it is well documented in the literature that lectures apply various devices to guide the audience through the unfolding topic and intermittently remind them of important points (see Crawford Camiciottoli, 2007), TED talks seem to rely more on structure-signaling bundles than lectures (Liu and Chen, 2020). To be specific, discourse organizing bundles, as the category name indicates, are primarily designed to serve the goal of organizing the talk. As the preceding analysis showed, a variety of

many as you can, companies' house registrations databases. So this is a website that tries to agglomerate all of comes ..." 09:59 You see it. I was conned. So this is a classic con called the pigeon drop, and you get a huge penalty of being arrested for bribery. So this is a rather fraught situation.  16:13 On the other ur movie. 13:20 Also, optimistic language matters a lot. So this is a word cloud highighting the most popular words   
? You might want to leave now. 00:17 (Laughter) 00:19 So this is a vending machime for crows. Over the past about making things kind of neat and fim. 00:43 And so this is a Philippe Starck juicer, produced by Alessi. It's favorites. These city designs are what I love the most. So this is a tiered city by Confictnerd, and the basic And you don't even think about it, do you? 14:21 So this is a favorite quote of mine that takes us rt of measuring some parameters. Or it's used for..(Music) So this is a musical interface built by astudent from technology. people and places that are different.10:52 So this is a school in a bus on a bulding I can't tel you anything about 1993 or 1983. 08:04 So this is a problem for policy. It was a problem   
ent than what UNAIDS tes us the prevalences are. 09:20 So this is a graph of prevalence estmated by UNAIDS, and   
ting trend, is when new power gets powerful, what happens? So this is a framework you should look at and think to help ensure the sanctity of the vote overal.  01:01 So this is a pattern that assumes we're allin this 05:45 Now this is ITER, pronounced in French: EE-taih. So this is a big collaboration of diferent countries that are ife ilustration of what happens with motor neuron disease. So this is a patient of mine called John. John I to do their job, wake up, lay down new myelin. So this is a proof of concept. I'm very excited about logical sense, in terms of different temperature gradients. So this is a satelite photograph based on temperatures -- red who chooses, the other one feeds both of them. 10:53 So this is a study we did with Vicki Homer. And show you what an actual woman's brain can look like. So this is a kind of brain scan called positron emission

patterns were found beyond the conventional first-person pronoun plus verb fragments. Discourse organizers also contain bundles that take audience into imagining scenarios (e.g. if you look at, if you think about) or stories and examples (e.g. to give you a, when I was a). It is important to note that some identification/focus bundles (e.g. one of the things, so this is a) and intention/volition bundles (e.g. if you want to, so I’m going to) can also perform discourse structuring function as illustrated in Example 2.

Example 2

OK, now, if you want to understand autism: animals. I want to talk to you now about different ways of thinking. (ED_15)

The proliferation of discourse-structuring bundles can be understood considering the time constraints of TED and its voluntary nature of viewing that require speakers to signpost the main points to retain audiences’ attention throughout the talk.

# 4.2.2. Credibility

In contrast to scientific research writing in which credibility is bestowed directly through disciplinary knowledge and practice, popular texts often give credence to the professional positions of the speaker. Constructing credibility is especially pivotal in popularizations that aim to seek proximity with non-specialist receivers. TED talks are a new model of oral popularization with rare quotes and delivered by scientists themselves instead of journalists and other mediators. Through the recurring sequences of words and their surrounding texts, traces of projected credibility or how TED speakers’ credibility is (re-)constructed in the process of delivery, was discovered.

The most crucial feature of achieving credibility in TED talks is that speakers tend to embed their own credentials in the process of storytelling or in their explanation of ideas. As discussed above, the storytelling technique, while serving to reinforce the argument, can foster trust from the audience thus making the talk more credible (Simmons, 2006). As Figure 3.shows, the ability bundle we were able to, with an exclusive use of the first-person pronoun we that may indicate an overt sign of authorial identity, is used to demonstrate what the speaker and his/her team have achieved in their specialized field.

The bundle we were able to in Example 3 demonstrates a marked tendency to be exclusive referring to the speaker’s or their professional group’s past achievements in DNA profiling. This bundle helps to build credible authorial identity by presenting TEDsters as originators of new ideas, thus demonstrating proximity of membership. Furthermore, from longer stretches of discourse, we found that the time bundle for the first time co-occurs with we were able to. A cluster of the two bundles creates an intensifying effect. Their co-concurrence helps to reinforce the newness of their achievements, thus capturing more attention and interest. This is an indication of a potential of interplay of lexical bundles

forth, and by and by, thanks to Mitch and Jay, we were able to buy the whole property for 140,000 dollars India into Pakistan, just to get the permits, over time we were able to start a company with Dr. Sono, who often go and post these passwords on the Intemet. So we were able to get access to some of these stolen s. In this example, although the mammogram found one tumor, we were able to demonstrate three discrete tumors -- one is see each logo is a ittle bit different. It's because we were able to nun, during the manufacturing process, 20 colors where you see the dragon-king as these big loops and we were able to apply tiny perturbations at the right times meantime? As food became plentiful here, it also meant that we were able to decrease the number of people working n athy, logic, authenticity were all wobbling like crazy. But we were able to find super efective, super quick fixes for the MacArthur Foundation and Omidyar Network. 02:28 And we were able to grow this software footprint, and a few fferent, who's responsible to whom, and the result was that we were able to provide owners protection for their own driving ut again, those rewards could be calibrated so precisely if we were able to use the vast expertise of gaming systems Planet." And we were using a special trawling net that we were able to bring these animals up alive. So we a piece based on shadows and light. And through that, we were able to develop a shadow-catcher that would talk about us money. The National Park Service built the bathroom. So we were able to go ahead because we had empathy. 07:09 s fell into disrepair. With the San Francisco Arts Council, we were able to raise money and to actually refurbish the to raise money and to actual refurbish the place. And we were able to have a community meeting. And within the 're bringing the community back. American Disability Act -- we were able to get five milion dollars. And now, the When I was mayor of Bogota, in only three years, we were able to create 70 kilometers, in one of the and we came up with this New Yorker cover, which we were able to -- we didn't know what we were the Fashtoonks, Botoxia, Pashmina, Khlintunisia, you know, we were able to take the city and make fun of

Example 3

For example, for the first time, a few years ago, by simply collecting little fecal samples we were able to have them analyzed – to have DNA profiling done – so for the first time, we actually know which male chimps are the fathers of each individual infant. (GL_46)

In some other cases, ability bundles suggest the speaker’s familiarity with the topic under discussion through his/her personal experience as illustrated in the example “I was able to see that in a firsthand way” (CL_05). Credibility is also interwoven into various other parts of the talk when speakers identify the theme of the talk out of their professional experience and interest, e.g. “one of the things that really excites me in my artistic practice and being trained as a potter is that . ” (AT_21); when elaborating on ideas based on their expertise, e.g. “Let me give you a quick idea of a couple of these sorts of questions. I’m a neuroscientist, so . ” (ED_23); when telling stories with a short mention of speaker title or affiliation, e.g. “I saw it firsthand when I was a university professor” (ED_05); or when describing events or processes mixed with speaker achievement, e.g. “we mobilized tens of thousands of people . ” (PO_27).

The analysis has confirmed the “memoir aspect” of TED talks (Ludewig, 2017, p. 4), claiming that “they are not only geared toward briefing the listeners about technological and artistic novelties, they also serve to familiarize the audience with the speakers’ biographies and achievements”. The speakers’ identity or scholarly competence unveiled through qualitative narrative analysis was revisited via the lexical bundle approach in this study. The practice of inserting credibility into the process of storytelling or explanation to assert credentials seems to resonate with the claim that subtle and implicit persuasion is more effective (Slater and Rouner, 2002). This can also be explained by the TED rule that asks for “no intellectual dazzle” and forbids “selling” from the stage. Accordingly, speakers downplay their credentials by embedding them into the narratives of their talks rather than making them formally announced.

# 4.2.3. Stance and engagement

Regarded as two sides of the same coin, stance and engagement are often deployed together to explore interpersonality. Stance bundles are a major source of expressing stance and engagement out of the three sub-functions of lexical bundles. The largest category of intention/volition bundles is predominately structured by the first-person pronoun plus (semi-)modals to convey speakers’ sense of intention or willingness (e.g. and I want to, and I’m going to). These bundles represent speakers’ certainty about upcoming discourse, reflecting speakers’ discursive authority to invoke storylines in which they are in control (Herbel-Eisenmann and Wagner, 2010). In the meantime, some “going to” bundles are impersonal, announcing speakers’ predictions based on current trends instead of entailing speaker volition and they are usually used for the explanatory purpose (Biber et al., 2004). The second-largest category involves explicit engagement markers: you and we that acknowledge the physical presence of the audience. The heavy use of these personal references signals interactivity of discourse, an engaging nature of TED talks in which speakers align with their audience in knowledge sharing, thus maintaining audiences’ positive face (Jiang, 2020). A series of stance bundles framed by you can see (e.g. as you can see, so you can see) can be explained by the multimedia affordance and the physical presence of audiences. Speakers take on an authoritative role, directing their audience to what is important, special or relevant (Ädel, 2010). Meanwhile, the guiding role of these bundles shows the speakers’ intention to allow their audience to acquire knowledge through their senses, thus increasing the trustworthiness and engagement of TED (Jiang, 2020). The rest of obligation/directive bundles occur with have to and need to (e.g. you have to do, we need to do). The modality adopted here denotes obligation imposed by external sources rather than the speaker (Collins, 2009). Furthermore, you and have to occur together mostly in imagining scenarios, and need to is accompanied by we, thereby both pointing to a generalizing sense of personal reference instead of the audience present.

Example 4

If you want to change any of the patterns I just talked about, all you have to do is hire female directors. (BS_68)

Example 5

And so what we need to do is to be much more efficient in a way that we can go from seven tons of carbon per capita per person, per year, into something like one. (PO_34)

In doing so, face-threatening forces with these obligation/directive bundles have been avoided, resulting in speakers increased proximity with audience in an engaging atmosphere.

On the other hand, characteristics of lexical bundles expressing epistemic stance, evaluation, ability and hedges show an apparent tendency towards popularization. The frequent adoption of attitude markers is an indication of speakers’ affective responses to their presentations (Hyland, 2010). Intensifying expressions are frequently used since TED speakers often glamorize their talks, highlighting the newsworthiness of the themes (e.g. the best way to, I think this is), and being positive about making real changes (e.g. I think we can, to be able to). In contrast, few hedges were found in the corpus. This finding aligns with Orpin’s (2019) investigation on Twitter’s way of popularization. The most frequent hedging bundle in the corpus a little bit about (Figure 4.) is used as a topic introducer in all cases in TED presentations with the limited time allotted, rather than a device indicating caution when speakers comment on a statement.

a little bit about our process for fixing the city, a little bit about Detroit, and I want to do that   
Louis and the Wright Flyer. Isn't that great? (Applause) So a ittle bit about the future, steps to space, what's avalable expands the network, and I think you might have heard a ittle bit about it before. 08:24 I'm going to give of our working lives. 02:23 So I'm going to talk a little bit about what business can do and what a adequate response to what is happening. I want to talk a ittl bit about the Democratic Republic of Congo. For me her from going to join ISIs. 10:08 I've told you a litle bit about how Islamophobia affects me and my family. just making absolutely beautful pictures. I'm talking here a ittle bit about display technologies. 02:26 Let me talk about who did this is a physicist. And here he'll explain a ittle bit about what it does. 02:47 (Video) Richard Carter. 00:10 I think I'll start out and just talk a little bit about what exactly autism is. Autism is a down to our education system, so I'm gong to talk a lile bit about ignorance and education, because I think that's So, what I'd like to do today is tell you a little bit about myself, because I'd like to put in I put that in context, I'd like to tell you a litle bit about technology: why I believe technology is a became so famous in the world. And would tell me a ittle bit about history too, when he'd play the 1812 or their investment of time and effort. 06:38 Let's talk a ittle bit about some of the components that go into e ambition.  04:25 (Laughter) 04:26 But I want to talk a littl bit about happiness, and the relationship to this whole to reconsider. 0:00 So I want to explain to you a litle bit about how the current system works. How does   
in media or politics or education. 06:29 So we've talked a little bit about what new power is. Let's for a and it's an important shift. But let me tell you a little bit about the other shift that I'm talking about. change things.03:22 Now, I want to talk to you a little bit about the risks that cities are facing -- a form of therapy. So I want to tell you a little bit about both of those in the next few

A piece of further evidence for the focus on newsworthiness came from referential bundles. Some identification/focus bundles (e.g. is one of the, so this is a), deictics/locatives (e.g. for the first time, at the heart of) and quantity bundles (e.g. lots and lots of, a lot of time), though not stance bundles in themselves, often precede or follow speakers’ unhedged stances. This observation was, however, obtained by examining the co-textual environments of relevant lexical bundles in the corpus (e.g. lots and lots of in Figure 5.)

way up close, you realize that it's actually made of lots and lots of plastic cups. And in fact, this is smoking cigarettes. And so, this piece is made up of lots and lots of boxes of cigarettes. And, as you slowly what the next piece is about. 04:45 This is just lots and lots of cigarettes: 65,000 cigarettes, which is equal to prescription drugs. This is an image I've made out of lots and lots of Vicodin. Well actually, I only had one Well, actually. I only had one Vicodin that I scanned lots and lots of times. (Laughter) And $\bar { \mathsf { S } } \bar { \mathsf { O } } _ { \bar { \mathsf { \Lambda } } }$ as you stand 000 pies, boring, 15 pies, interesting. So, you give people lots and lots of different tasks. You say, it's about doing already all married and well on their way to having lots and lots of children, and I felt like I was are piles and piles of food on our table, also lots and lots of bottles of wine. So we're nearing the   
Laughter) 14:46 (Applause) 14:50 And as it tuns out, lots and lots of men wanted to date me. So I they will do it with a passion, I hope. And lots and lots of that little bit down there, sacrifice. You when I'm there, I do enjoy it. And I get lots and lots of kids coming. I'm a contaminator for all making airlines safer. Yeah, I'm a milion-mile flier. I do lots and lots of flying, and if I was at the As if. Now, the reason this matters is we pay lots and lots of money for teaching people -- we might it, see f we could make it possible. And afer lots and lots of meetings obviously, I'm delighted that this man. have this wonderful free speech. We can tweet, and oh, lots and lots of people can see our tweets, except when it's going, and so on. So Wolfram Alpha knows about lots and lots of kinds of things. It's got, by now.   
olfram Alpha is a monumentally huge, long-term project with lots and lots of challenges. For a start, one has to And we've dealt with it by killing off lots and lots and lots of chickens, and unfortmately often not reimbursing th to have a vibrant market economy, you've got to have lots and lots of consumers that are really capable of buying that with the right structres, with a global outlook and lots and lots of transparency, you can build something that will

The analyses above suggest that TED talks emphasize both proximity of commitment and proximity of membership, though not equally devoted. While applying various rhetorical and linguistic techniques to engage the audience and improve their comprehension, TED presenters do not seem to merely have these in mind. Content simplification per se is not the main, or at least not the only, communicative purpose of popularization. The speakers’ affiliations, achievements or competencies are also introduced on the TED stage in a subtle way that appears as nudges throughout. Overall, it seems that neither deficit nor democratic, but a dialogue view is identified as more suited to delimit the TED talk genre as the premise is still the authority on expert presenters despite various strategies of engagement. Alternatively, it can be described as the “hunchedshouldered authority” (Billig et al., 1988) that speakers are on a “see-sawing between expressions of expertise and equality” (Dyer and Keller-Cohen, 2000, p. 283). As with other similar digital genres, the institutional constraints and individual intentions intertwine and negotiate with each other on the TED stage. TED talks seem to become a new home of the public intellectual where they cement relations with multiple audiences and promote their research or themselves.

# 5. Conclusion, pedagogical implications, and limitations

In this study, we set out to explore what lexical bundles can tell us regarding proximity construction in TED talks. Though language-centered, this study has an overt sociological intent. It builds on the hypothesis that popularization is much more than what the “canonical” or “dominant” view holds, i.e. the translation of science to non-scientist audiences, or just the effort to make difficult things easier. There is always more going on in knowledge dissemination. The current research is significant since it demonstrates that, although interactive space has been created between experts and laypersons, it seems too early to draw a definite conclusion regarding the democratic trend of science communication. Moreover, the functional characteristics of lexical bundles in TED talks have contributed valuable insights into how TED lends itself as a new format from which norms of popularization culture can be detected. In addition, this study is significant in relation to the lexical-bundle approach. While confirming the power and potential of multi-word sequences to reflect generic features of texts, this study showcases the indexicality of lexical bundles, a powerful window to a diverse range of inquiries, such as proximity as elucidated in this study. The lexical-bundle approach also has methodological implication with regards to corpus-assisted discourse studies (Gillings et al., 2023). Target bundles extracted are just raw materials that serve as a springboard for deeper contextual analysis. On the other hand, discourse analysis is limited by its lack of formal linguistic features on which micro-analyses are based. Therefore, identifying lexical bundles provides concrete analytical tools for further manual analysis while the discourse-analytic approach could offer descriptions and interpretations of the selected items derived by frequency criteria. The corpus-driven approach to phraseology and qualitative discourse analysis mutually reinforce each other.

Exploring lexical bundles and providing in-depth analysis of their discourse functions facilitate our understanding of the formulaic profile of a genre. In our study, we looked at bundles and their discourse functions in TED talks – 15 min presentations by content experts to a non-expert audience – , delivered in English and with specific content domains. Our findings have pedagogical implications for English for Specific Purposes where English is taught with specific content domains, and, perhaps more specifically and most prominently, for English for Academic Purposes.

While students may be taught public speaking in secondary educational contexts in some countries (e.g. in the U.S.A.), in other countries such training is not part of the curriculum. Also, it is less likely that students receive practical training in this area in higher educational settings despite the fact that they may be required to take communication classes as undergraduates. These classes often teach communication theories with less practical training, severely lacking any linguistic training, and again, in some educational settings it is not even part of the curriculum. At the same time, relatively few linguistic studies have looked at students’ oral presentations in the academic context, although findings of such studies could provide further insights as to how well students are actually able to verbally communicate content to various audiences. For example, Csomay (2015) found that, compared to teachers in the classroom, in a 10-min talk, students over-used lexicogrammatical features associated with informational discourse while the audience they presented to was a non-expert audience in their field as it is in TED talks or in the classroom setting. This finding suggests that students could benefit from linguistic training on how to use certain linguistic features (e.g. lexical bundles) to bring the audience closer to the content they are communicating so the lay audience understands the content better.

The findings in the present study inform and can assist instructors in assessing the relative importance of particular items that need to be taught in order to facilitate students’ production of speech as well as comprehension in various $\mathsf { E S P } /$ EAP settings. As Biber and Barbieri (2007) have noted, an overt instruction of the discourse functions of lexical bundles is recommended because they are not perceptually salient. As such, the list of bundles found in our study coupled with their in-depth analysis of proximity – “a writer’s [or a speaker’s] control of rhetorical features which display both authority as an expert and a personal position towards issues in an unfolding text” (Hyland, 2010, p. 117) – could be used as a reference for ESP/EAP instructors as they develop course materials to expand students’ phraseological repertoires. As an example, instructors could refer to concordance lines or longer stretches of TED scripts for sufficient contextual information to provide students with examples of patterned uses of lexical bundles. Instructors could also lead a discussion on specific groups of functions of lexical bundles (like the findings presented in this article), helping students acquire skills useful in their future career, such as telling a story, introducing a topic, describing charts/graphs. However, the opposite instruction also applies, that is, instructors can use a data-driven approach, asking students to explore how lexical bundles function in TED by reading concordance lines or longer segments of a text. In addition to the list of bundles and the transcripts, the audios/ videos of TED talks, accessible from the TED website, could align with certain lexical bundles for the merit of multimedia integrated teaching/learning. In this regard, the TED Corpus Search Engine (TCSE), an online corpus system developed by Hasebe (2015), can be used to query phraseological items and also many other linguistic features with the videos available for the matched text, thereby permitting the playback of video in synchrony with display of the text. This is an illustration of the potential of TED talks as authentic audiovisual input in ESP/EAP classrooms to enhance exposure to various phraseological items.

Although this study has revealed the proximity construction in popularization through lexical bundles, inevitable limitations also arise. Analyzing four-word lexical bundles is far from an exhaustive investigation of proximity resources. This approach, though proved effective in sketching out the uniqueness of TED, may miss out on many other linguistic items that can signal proximity, including single words or expressions shorter than four-word bundles or those that do not meet the frequency cut-off yet important. Therefore, the findings should be treated cautiously.

Despite the exploratory nature of this study, it points to several areas of further research. For instance, the relatively unexplored phenomenon of the interplay of lexical bundles that serve various discourse functions is waiting to be explored. Moreover, the distribution of narrative bundles supports Scotto di Carlo’s (2016) finding that TED appreciates “snippet” personal narratives rather than single drawn-out stories. Yet more empirical research is needed to examine the rhetorical aim and the design of these small stories. There is also scope for further studies by incorporating the views of gatekeepers, presenters, and audiences, or by observing the video recordings of the live TED events for nonverbal behaviors to obtain a fuller description and interpretation of TED’s popularizing nature. Last but not least, the indexical nature of lexical bundles would call for a more diversified body of research.

# A funding statement

This research was supported by Xi’an International Studies University [17XWZD04] and the Youth Innovation Team of Shaanxi Universities.

# Declaration of competing interest

The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

# Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

# References

Ädel, A. (2010). Just to give you kind of a map of where we are going: a taxonomy of metadiscourse in spoken and written academic English. Nordic Journal of English Studies, 9, 69-97. https://doi: 10.35360/njes.218.   
Anthony, L. (2019). AntConc. Retrieved from: Version 3.5.8. https://www.laurenceanthony.net/ (Accessed 28 May 2022).   
Barbieri, F. (2018). I don’t want to and don’t get me wrong: lexical bundles as a window to subjectivity and intersubjectivity in American blogs. In J. Jopaczyk, & J. Tyrkkö (Eds.), Applications of Pattern-driven Methods in Corpus Linguistics (pp. 251-275). John Benjamins.   
Bell, E., Panayiotou, A., & Sayers, J. (2019). Reading the TED talks genres: contradictions and pedagogical pleasures in spreading ideas about management. The Academy of Management Learning and Education, 18(4), 547-563. https://doi.org/10.5465/amle.2017.0323.   
Biber, D., & Barbieri, F. (2007). Lexical bundles in university spoken and written registers. English for Specific Purposes, 26(3), 263-286. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.esp.2006.08.003.   
Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Cortes, V. (2004). If you look at.: lexical bundles in university teaching and textbooks. Applied Linguistics, 25(3), 371-405. https://doi. org/10.1093/applin/25.3.371.   
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English. Longman.   
Billig, M., Condor, S., Edwards, D., Gane, M., Middleton, D., & Radley, A. (1988). Ideological Dilemmas: A Social Psychology of Everyday Thinking. Sage.   
Blanchard, A. (2011). Science blogs in research and popularization of science: why, how and for whom? In M. Cockell, B. Jerome, D. Federic, & W. Francis (Eds.), Common Knowledge: The Challenge of Transdisciplinarity (pp. 219-232) EPFL Press.   
Breeze, R. (2013). Lexical bundles across four legal genres. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 18(2), 229-253. https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.18.2.03bre.   
Busselle, R., & Bilandzic, H. (2008). Fictionality and perceived realism in experiencing stories: a model of narrative comprehension and engagement. Communication Theory, 18(2), 255-280. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2008.00322.x.   
Calsamiglia, H., & van Dijk, T. A. (2004). Popularization discourse and the knowledge about the genome. Discourse & Society, 15(4), 369-389. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/0957926504043705.   
Cap, P. (2006). Legitimization in Political Discourse: A Cross-Disciplinary Perspective on the Modern US War Rhetoric. Cambridge Scholars Press.   
Cap, P. (2008). Towards the proximization model of the analysis of legitimization in political discourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 40, 17-41. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.pragma.2007.10.002.   
Cap, P. (2013). Proximization: the Pragmatics of Symbolic Distance Crossing. John Benjamins.   
Chen, Y. H., & Baker, P. (2010). Lexical bundles in L1 and L2 academic writing. Language, Learning and Technology, 14(2), 30-49. https://dx.doi.org/10125/ 44213.   
Chilton, P. (2004). Analysing Political Discourse: Theory and Practice. Routledge.   
Collins, P. (2009). Modals and Quasi-modals in English. Rodopi.   
Cortes, V. (2015). Situating lexical bundles in the formulaic language spectrum: origins and functional analysis developments. In V. Cortes, & E. Csomay (Eds.), Corpus-based Research in Applied Linguistics: Studies in Honor of Doug Biber (pp. 197-216). John Benjamins.   
Crawford Camiciottoli, B. (2007). The Language of Business Studies Lectures: A Corpus-Assisted Analysis. John Benjamins.   
Csomay, E. (2013). Lexical bundles in discourse structure: a corpus-based study of classroom discourse. Applied linguistics, 34(3), 369-388. https://doi.org/10. 1093/applin/ams045.   
Csomay, E. (2015). A corpus-based analysis of linguistic variation in teacher and student presentations in university settings. In V. Cortes, & E. Csomay (Eds.), Corpus-based Research in Applied Linguistics. Studies in Honor of Doug Biber (pp. 1-23). John Benjamins.   
De Cock, S., & Granger, S. (2021). Stance in press releases versus business news: a lexical bundle approach. Text & Talk, 41(5–6), 691-713. https://doi.org/10. 1515/text-2020-0040.   
Dyer, J., & Keller-Cohen, D. (2000). The discursive construction of professional self through narratives of personal experience. Discourse Studies, 2(3), 283- 304. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461445600002003002.   
Fuster-Márquez, M. (2014). Lexical bundles and lexical frames in the language of hotel websites. English Text Construction, 7(1), 84-121. https://doi.org/10. 1075/etc.7.1.04fus   
Gillings, M., Mautner, G., & Baker, P. (2023). Corpus-assisted Discourse Studies. Cambridge University Press.   
Giltrow, J., & Stein, D. (2009). Genres in the Internet: Issues in the Theory of Genres. John Benjamins.   
Gotti, M. (2014). Reformulation and recontextualization in popularization discourse. Iberica, 27, 15-34.   
Hasebe, Y. (2015). Design and implementation of an online corpus of presentation transcripts of TED talks. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 198, 174- 182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.07.434.   
Herbel-Eisenmann, B., & Wagner, D. (2010). Appraising lexical bundles in mathematics classroom discourse: obligation and choice. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 75(1), 43-63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-010-9240-y.   
Hunston, S. (2002). Corpora in Applied Linguistics. Cambridge University Press.   
Hyland, K. (2008). As can be seen: lexical bundles and disciplinary variation. English for Specific Purposes, 27(1), 4-21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2007.06. 001.   
Hyland, K. (2010). Constructing proximity: relating to readers in popular and professional science. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9(2), 116-127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2010.02.003.   
Hyland, K. (2012). Disciplinary Identities: Individuality and Community in Academic Discourse. Cambridge University Press.   
Hyland, K., & Zou, H. (2020). In the frame: signalling structure in academic articles and blogs. Journal of Pragmatics, 165, 31-44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. pragma.2020.05.002.   
Jiang, H. (2020). A metapragmatic analysis of audience-oriented metadiscourse in TED talks. Foreign Languages and Their Teaching, (4), 25-35. http://10. 13458/j.cnki.flatt.004694.   
Kelly, A. R., & Miller, C. R. (2016). Intersections: scientific and parascientific communication on the internet. In A. Gross, & J. Buehl (Eds.), Science and the Internet: Communicating Knowledge in a Digital Age (pp. 221-245). Baywood.   
Kranich, S., Juliane, H., & Viktor, B. (2012). Changing conventions in English-German translations of popular scientific texts. In K. Braunmüller, & C. Gabriel (Eds.), Multilingual Individuals and Multilingual Societies (pp. 315-334). John Benjamins.   
Liu, C., & Chen, H. (2020). Functional variations of lexical bundles in academic lectures and TED talks. Register Studies, 2(2), 176-208. https://doi.org/10.1075/ rs.18003.liu.   
Ludewig, J. (2017). TED talks as an emergent genre. Comparative Literature and Culture, 19(1). https://doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.2946.   
Luzón, M. J. (2013). Public communication of science in blogs: recontextualizing scientific discourse for a diversified audience. Written Communication, 30(4), 428-457. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741088313493610.   
Luzón, M. J., & Pérez-Llantada, C. (2019). Science Communication on the Internet: Old Genres Meet New Genres. John Benjamins.   
Miller, S. (2001). Public understanding of science at the crossroads. Public Understanding of Science, $1 0 ( 1 )$ , 115-120. https://doi.org/10.3109/a036859.   
Myers, G. (1990). Writing Biology: Texts in the Social Construction of Scientific Knowledge. University of Wisconsin Press.   
Myers, G. (2003). Discourse studies of scientific popularization: questioning the boundaries. Discourse Studies, 5(2), 265-279. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 1461445603005002006.   
Nesi, H., & Basturkmen, H. (2006). Lexical bundles and discourse signaling in academic lectures. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 11(3), 283-304. https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.11.3.04nes.   
Orpin, D. (2019). #Vaccineswork: recontextualizing the content of epidemiology reports on Twitter. In M. Luzón, & C. Pérez-Llantada (Eds.), Science Communication on the Internet: Old Genres Meet New Genres (pp. 173-194). John Benjamins.   
Perrault, S. T. (2013). Communicating Popular Science: from Deficit to Democracy. Palgrave Macmillan.   
Salazar, D. (2011). Lexical Bundles in Scientific English: A Corpus-Based Study of Native and Non-native Writing (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Barcelona.   
Scotto di Carlo, G. (2014). The role of proximity in online popularizations: the case of TED talks. Discourse Studies, 16(5), 591-606. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 1461445614538565.   
Scotto di Carlo, G. (2016). Storytelling in science popularisation: the role of personal narratives in TED talks. Metaphors: Contemporary Studies in Literature and Language, 1(2), 59-72.   
Simmons, A. (2006). The Story Factor: Secrets of Influence from the Art of Storytelling. Perseus Publishing.   
Simpson-Vlach, R., & Ellis, N. C. (2010). An academic formulas list: new methods in phraseology research. Applied Linguistics, 31(4), 487-512. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/applin/amp058.   
Slater, M. D., & Rouner, D. (2002). Entertainment-education and elaboration likelihood: understanding the processing of narrative persuasion. Communication Theory, 12(2), 173-191. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2002.tb00265.x.   
Sokół, M. (2018). ‘Have you wondered why sportspeople die?’ The medical weblog as a popularisation tool. Discourse, Context & Media, 25, 13-24. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.dcm.2018.07.004.   
Trench, B. (2008). Towards an analytical framework of science communication models. In D. Cheng, M. Claessens, T. Gascoigne, J. Metcalfe, B. Schieve, & S. Shi (Eds.), Communicating Science in Social Contexts: New Models, New Practices (pp. 119-135). Springer.   
Whitley, R. (1985). Knowledge producers and knowledge acquirers. Popularisation as a relation between scientific fields and their publics. In T. Shinn, & R. Whitley (Eds.), Expository Science: Forms and Functions of Popularisation (pp. 3-28). Reidel.   
Xia, S. (2023). Explaining science to the non-specialist online audience: a multimodal genre analysis of TED talks videos. English for Specific Purposes, 70, 70- 85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2022.11.007.

Wei Wang received his PhD in Applied Linguistics from Xi’an International Studies University and is currently Associate Professor at XISU. His research interests include corpus-based discourse analysis and English for specific purposes.

Eniko Csomay received her PhD in Applied Linguistics from Northern Arizona University and is currently Professor at San Diego State University. Her research interests include corpus-based discourse analyses of text structure, with a special focus on spoken and written university registers.