# Studies in Italian as a heritage language

edited by Francesco Bryan Romano, Berlin, Boston, De Gruyter Mouton, 2023, iv $^ +$ pp. 324, €114.95 (Hardback), ISBN: 9783110759587

# Francesca La Morgia

To cite this article: Francesca La Morgia (2024) Studies in Italian as a heritage language, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:10, 1440-1442, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2024.2394864

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2024.2394864 acquiring new skills and knowledge and to help them feel more successful in the classroom. A potential limitation of the book is that it provides limited examples of implementing scaffolding techniques in skills-based classes, such as those that focus on teaching speaking, writing, and reading in the context of English language learning. Providing additional examples would greatly benefit teachers of English as a foreign or second language as they seek to effectively integrated scaffolding strategies into their teaching practices.

# Notes on contributor

is faculty member of Teacher Training and Education, The Universitas Singaperbangsa Karawang, Indonesia. His research interests include language teacher professional development, Systemic Functional Linguistics in language education, and qualitative research in ELT. Email: elih.sutisna@fkip.unsika.ac.id.

# References

Athanases, S. Z., and L. C. de Oliveira. 2014. “Scaffolding Versus Routine Support for Latina/o Youth in an Urban School.” Journal of Literacy Research 46 (2): 263–299. https://doi.org/10.1177/1086296x14535328.   
de Oliveira, L. C., and R. Westerlund. 2022. “Scaffolding for Multilingual Learners.” In Scaffolding for Multilingual Learners in Elementary and Secondary Schools, edited By L. C. de Oliveira and R. Westerlund, 1–6. Taylor & Francis Ltd. https:// doi.org/10.4324/9781003196228-1.   
Gibbons, P. 2002. Scaffolding Language, Scaffolding Learning. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.   
Hammond, J., and P. Gibbons. 2005. “Putting Scaffolding to Work: The Contribution of Scaffolding in Articulating ESL Education.” Propesct 20 (1): 6–30.   
Vygotsky, L. S. 1962. Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Vygotsky, L. S. 1978. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Studies in Italian as a heritage language, edited by Francesco Bryan Romano, Berlin, Boston, De Gruyter Mouton, 2023, iv + pp. 324, €114.95 (Hardback), ISBN: 9783110759587

# ABSTRACT

Studies in Italian as a Heritage Language represents the first edited volume that brings together a wide range of perspectives on the acquisition of Italian in different socio-linguistic context and in contact with languages such as Swedish, German and English. The volume provides a valuable contribution to our broader understanding of heritage language competence and encourages the reader to reflect on some of the key variables that can impact heritage language acquisition and performance. The range of methodologies employed in the nine empirical studies shows that studying Italian heritage language speakers requires a multi-faceted approach that takes into consideration linguistic and extra-linguistic factors.

# KEYWORDS

Heritage language; Heritage language; bilingualism; la

This volume advances our understanding of the Italian used by heritage language speakers. The various perspectives presented show us Italian as a language acquired and used by a range of speakers of different ages, with different histories of migration and in different sociolinguistic contexts. Italian has historically lived ‘in contact’ with other languages, including languages of dominators, of neighbouring countries and communities, dialects and historical minority languages, but most experimental studies represent Italian as a homogeneous entity, sometimes failing to account for the significant regional variation and for its evolutions outside of Italy.

Studies on Italian as a Heritage Language is the first collection of studies that specifically focus on heritage speakers of Italian in different linguistic and cultural contexts. The volume presents an overview of some of the key issues in the research on heritage Italian, spanning across a range of theoretical perspectives and presenting a wide range of methodologies of data collection and analysis, therefore showing how different approaches can contribute to a more global understanding of the complexity of heritage language systems.

The book starts with an introductory chapter in which Montrul discusses heritage languages in a range of socio-linguistic contexts and highlights the importance of further investigations into sociopolitical factors to explain aspects of language competency, proficiency, maintenance and loss, raising some important questions that lay the foundations for the following chapters.

Chapter 2 opens the first part of the book, which is dedicated to experimental studies. The chapter by Guijarro-Fuentes, Bello-Viruega, García-Alcaraz and Viveros-Guzmán presents a study on the use of clitics in adults who have grown up with Italian but have been in Spain and reached good competence in Spanish. This is an interesting and potentially controversial reading of the concept of heritage speaker, interpreted as someone who started off as monolingual, but is now mostly using an L2, causing the L1 to undergo attrition. The findings, based on grammaticality judgment tasks aimed at investigating the Italian partitive ne, indicate that firstgeneration heritage Italian immigrants do not show instances of attrition. Interestingly, some deviance in the expected results comes from the data from Italian native speakers (one of the control groups), which the authors explain as a result of regional variation. As the authors state, this unexpected result is indeed worth investigating, as it further highlights the complexity of the study of heritage speakers even in the simple comparison to monolingual speakers. Chapter 3 by Smith, Spelorzi, Sorace, and Garraffa explores the linguistic markers often employed to diagnose atypical monolingual profiles in Italian children as a possible source for the detection of differences in the grammatical patterns of adult heritage speakers of Italian living in the UK. Like in the previous chapter, the authors analyse data from three groups of speakers, but group them differently, with the categories of Adult Immigrants, referring to people of recent migration to the UK and of Heritage Speakers, referring to those who have grown up speaking Italian as a heritage language in the UK. The results highlight differences between the two groups in terms of accuracy, with heritage speakers showing little use of clitic pronouns and a higher number of sentence repetition errors. The chapter by Romano also investigates the assignment of gender, this time introducing a language combination that has been less widely studied, namely Italian-Swedish. The findings from this study indicate that there are more similarities in the processing of gender between L2 speakers and heritage speakers than between these groups and monolingual Italian speakers.

What is interesting in these first three studies is that their results may superficially seem to be conflicting, but in my view, they shed additional light onto the complex nuances of heritage language competence.

An alternative inter-group comparison is presented in Bonfatti-Sabbioni’s chapter, which presents an analysis of the language of parents born in Italy and living in the United States and their teenage and adult children, all born and raised in the United States. The findings from this study indicate that heritage speakers of Italian select auxiliaries according to the semantic properties of verbs in a similar fashion to monolingual speakers. By using data from parents and their children, this study raises important questions about studying heritage speakers in relation to the source of their input to understand the nature of their linguistic competencies. A more careful examination of the input is carried out in the study by Torregrossa, Caloi and Listanti, who investigate the acquisition of different types of clauses in children between the ages of 6 and 12 whose dominant language is German, also employing a longitudinal examination of their linguistic experience. The results of these analyses show that early exposure to Italian is found to be a predictor of the mastery of complement clauses. Interestingly, the findings indicate that more complex structures are more vulnerable under limited input, and the authors argue for the need of in-depth analyses of language exposure at specific developmental stages that could be crucial for the acquisition of these structures. In the last chapter of Part I, Schmitz and Diaubalick present findings from a study of Italian-German bilingual adults, which show that cross-linguistic influence does not impact the production of modality expressions.

The second part of the book includes three chapters presenting data gathered through nonexperimental methodologies. Ferrini’s chapter 8 is different from all other chapters in its analysis of the spoken-typed written language of third-generation speakers of Italian on Facebook groups in the US. The following chapter by De Cristofaro and Badan analyses the spontaneous speech of Italian speakers in Flanders, focusing on both quantitative and qualitative aspects of the use of discourse markers in Italian. In the final chapter of the book, Di Salvo and Goria focus on auxiliary selection in two different Italo-Romance varieties used as heritage languages in two migratory settings, the Piedmontese dialect in Argentina and the Campanian dialect of Montefalcione in England. As the authors suggest, a comparative approach in the study of heritage speakers needs to take into account the different socio-linguistic contexts and migration histories, and these studies contribute to our understanding of this important aspect of linguistic variation.

Overall, the volume offers a reflection on the complexity of interpreting data from heritage Italian speakers, when so many internal and external variables can play a role. The authors have contributed to shaping our understanding of variables such as age of acquisition, exposure to input, the influence of dialects or regional variation and also the variability that we can find across generations of speakers and in different sociolinguistic contexts. While this is an initial step into a deeper understanding of Italian as a heritage language, this volume also offers an insight that can be generalised or applied to other languages, therefore contributing to our understanding of bilingualism, intergenerational language transmission and language change.

# Notes on contributor

’ is a research fellow at the University of Bologna. Her research interests focus on bilingual language acquisition in educational contexts and within the process of family language transmission.

Languages and social cohesion: a transdisciplinary literature review, by Gabriela Meier and Simone Smala, London, Routledge, 2022, 1–144 pp., US\$47.96 (Hardback), ISBN 978-0- 367-63720-0

Language is an important component in social cohesion and plays a key role in managing conflict in situations where various languages come into contact. In light of this, Languages and social cohesion: