# The peer seminar, a spoken research process genre

Marta Aguilar\*

Universitat Polite\`cnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain

# Abstract

This study aims to report on another research process genre, namely the peer seminar. Work exists [English for Specific Purposes, 12 (1993) 23; 18 (1999) 63] which studies different aspects of the seminar as understood in the Anglo-Saxon world (an expert-to-novice situation with an asymmetrical status of participants) but little attention has been paid so far to this ‘occluded genre’ (Swales, J. Academic writing. Intercultural and textual issues, 1996) within the academic world. Even though the peer seminar has mixed features from the lecture, the written research article, and the conference presentation, several peculiarities have been identified which seem to suggest a niche can be identified. Therefore, the peer seminar should be considered a research process genre in the scientific and academic community playing a role in the informal dissemination of scientific research and knowledge.

$©$ 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Academic discourse; Academic genres; Seminars

# 1. Introduction

Most literature on spoken academic genres revolves around situations involving a hierarchical relationship between their participants. Examples of this can be found in the lecture, the laboratory session, the discussion group, the advising session or the seminar as understood in the Anglo-Saxon academic culture, i.e. the graduate or student-mentor seminar (Hartford & Bardovi-Hardig, 1992; Weissberg, 1993; Thompson, 1994; Basturkmen, 1999; Northcott, 2001). Among these genres, it is probably the lecture that has received most attention during the past 20 years (Brown, 1978; Murphy & Candlin, 1979; Goffman, 1981; Coulthard & Montgomery, 1981). The engineering lecture discourse (Murphy & Candlin, 1979;

Goffman, 1981), the identification of styles of lecturing (Brown, 1978; Dudley-Evans & Johns, 1981; Brown & Bakhtar, 1983), as well as the study of the lecture within second language classroom research and lecture comprehension (Gass & Madden, 1985; Chaudron, 1988; Benson, 1994), have stood out as fields of interest. More recently, lectures have been investigated from different approaches; worth noting are those examining the rhetorical and discourse structure (Flowerdew, 1994; DudleyEvans, 1994; Young, 1994; Allison & Tauroza, 1995), certain genre features (Thompson 1994), structure-signalling devices (Nattinger & DeCarrico, 1992; Hansen, 1994; Dunkel & Davies, 1994), several attitudinal and interpersonal features (Rounds, 1987a, 1987b; Strodt-Lo´ pez, 1991; Flowerdew, 1992), or cultural factors and expectations of different kind (Flowerdew & Miller, 1995, 1996).

On the other hand, research on spoken research process genres where participants are peers has mainly focused on plenary lectures, poster sessions and slide talks being held in conferences or workshops (Dubois, 1980a, 1980b, 1981, 1984, 1985, 1987; Shalom, 1993). However, little or no attention has been given to the peer seminar so far. The study of peer seminars can be interesting because information about the different stages in the development of science, as envisaged by Ziman (1974, in Dubois 1987) could be obtained. According to Ziman’s model, science is a corporate endeavour consisting of a first stage where data are derived in the laboratory, a second one where data are published as information, and a last one where only that information that has withstood peer review survives as ‘science’. Talks in professional meetings or conferences, and many other communication forms in the academic and scientific community, usually take place in an intermediate stage prior to the published journal article. Therefore, it is hoped that an analysis of a genre like the peer seminar, reflecting and perpetuating the transfer, evolution, and construction of scientific knowledge, provides us with some insight into the developmental process of science.

Assuming that genres are communicative events and vehicles for the achievement of purposes that are recognised by the members of a discourse community (Swales, 1990), the peer seminar could certainly be regarded as another spoken genre in the scientific community because it seems to comply with the most basic of these considerations. I will try to map some singularities of the peer seminar and compare and contrast it with other related academic genres in an attempt to shed some light on the particular purpose and audience in peer seminars and to show that this contributes to portraying and characterising it in some way. Perhaps the peer seminar has been paid relatively little attention, when compared to the written research article (RA) and the conference presentation, because it is a genre that academics and researchers use less frequently to disseminate their work and because it rarely appears in print. In this sense, a peer seminar could be regarded as an ‘occluded genre’ (Swales, 1996). It is important to note that a peer seminar is not to be equated with a lecturer-student meeting or tutorial situation with an asymmetrical status of participants, as it is in the Anglo-Saxon world. A peer seminar is not an expert-tonovice situation but an expert-to-expert event consisting of a talk or extended monologue that an invited speaker gives on a (highly) specialised topic. The invited speaker (seminar speaker), expert in a given field, addresses his oral presentation to a small peer audience comprising university professors, lecturers, and a few PhD students; i.e. scholars interested in a particular research area of the speciality. The topic of the seminar may be suggested by the host professor, but it is obviously the speaker himself who decides. Typically, a seminar speaker can decide to explain his ongoing research informally, to explain the research work he has been performing during his stay at a foreign (host) university, or simply to inform about the latest development or advance in the research work as carried out with his home university team.

# 2. Method

The corpus of data consists of four seminars belonging to the engineering discipline, together with the information elicited from an informal interview with the speakers either before or after the seminar took place. The four seminars were given at the Universitat Polite\` cnica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, and were subsequently taped and transcribed by this researcher, who also took notes of the main ideas highlighted by the speakers, of the type and number of attendants1 , and of the type of visual display the speaker was making use of.

Connections were found to exist between a peer seminar and other spoken and written lay professional communication, and the structure of the four seminars was analysed. In particular, special attention was paid to introductions, as a cursory look indicated that they seemed to be a salient and distinguishing feature of seminars. To do so, Dubois’ study of conference slide talks (Dubois 1980a, 1980b, 1985, 1987) and Swales’ move analysis (Swales, 1990)—more specifically, his CARS model for article introductions—were drawn upon. Dubois (1980a:151) proposed the following maximal structure of biology conference slide presentations:

I. Introduction (A)Listener orientation (B) Content orientation (optional nontechnical segment $^ +$ technical segment)

II. Body (one or more episodes) (A)Situation (B) Event (C)Commentary

III. Termination (A)Content orientation (B) Listener orientation

In Dubois’ view, ‘listener orientation’ is a consequence of the real time and faceto-face situation and it includes: (i) acknowledging the chairman’s introduction, (ii) calling the audience to attention (‘Ladies and Gentlemen’) or addressing the projectionist (iii) informing listeners that questions can be answered at the end, and (iv) signalling that the presentation is over in the termination (silence or ‘Thank you’).

The seminars in this work are studied and contrasted with the structure proposed by Dubois, as well as with Swales’ CARS model. We may recall that Swales’ benchmark model is based on the assumption that in an introduction there are three Moves, rhetorically realised by several steps or strategies:

# Move 1 Establishing a territory

-Step 1-claiming centrality and/or -Step2-making topic generalisation and/or -Step 3-reviewing items of previous research

# Move 3 Occupying a niche

-Step 1A-outlining purposes, or -Step 1B-announcing present research -Step 2-announcing principal findings -Step3-indicating RA structure

# Move 2 Establishing a niche

-Step1A-counter-claiming, or -Step 1B-indicating a gap, or -Step 1C-question-raising, or -Step 1D-continuing a tradition

Additionally, the data were also analysed in terms of the type and quantity of certain metadiscursive items and chunks uttered by the seminar speakers. Following Crismore, Markkanen & Steffensen (1993) and Hyland (1999), metadiscursive items were divided in two types: textual metadiscourse (titling devices, frame markers, sequencers) and interpersonal metadiscourse (mainly hedges and attitudinal and evaluative commentary). The results of the analyses were contrasted with those of another rater. On those few occasions where differences occurred, agreement was sought and eventually found.

The four seminar speakers were male, native English lecturers or professors well known in their field, and with an average of 20 years of experience in teaching. They all came from British universities (Aberdeen, Sheffield, Lancaster and Southampton) and were visiting Barcelona because they had been invited by different departments at the UPC. Speaker 1 was a visiting professor from the University of Aberdeen who had stayed in Barcelona for 6 months; he collaborated with the Department of Thermic Machines and Motors, and near the end of his stay he gave a talk to explain the work he had been engaged in during his 6-month stay at the UPC. Two of them (speakers 2 and 4) had been invited to give a talk, and stayed in Barcelona for about 4 or 5 days. Finally, speaker 3 was going to participate in a conference being held in Barcelona 2 days after and had been asked to give an additional talk outside the conference. Their specialities or fields of research were varied but related to engineering: Thermic Machines and Motors in the case of Seminar 1, Applied Mathematics and Telematics in the case of Seminar 2, and Statistics and Operation Research for Seminars 3 and 4. The number of experts attending the seminar was always quite small—it ranged from 8 to 15 people. The atmosphere was somewhat relaxed, and the main organiser or person responsible for the invitation and the seminar always gave a short speech to introduce the speaker. Since host and guest usually knew each other—they had met before more than once—the tone used was warm and polite.

# 3. Results

An examination of the four seminars and the speakers’ views on the event (pressure, formality, expectations, etc.) yielded several results. More specifically, three general properties of peer seminars were identified: (i) their informal, unofficial nature, (ii) their hybrid nature, and (iii) their pre-introductions.

# 3.1. Informal nature

A peer seminar could be taken to be an example of Bazerman’s informal dissemination of science. Bazerman (1983) states that when scientific literature is communicated formally it is published in journals, where a referee system and citation act as gatekeepers. If literature is disseminated informally, it is then disseminated through organised networks of active members who get important information by means of accidental personal contacts. The circulation of drafts, ‘word of mouth’ transmission through contacts and, it is here claimed, informal talks like peer seminars could fall within this second type of dissemination. The unofficial nature of peer seminars is particularly noticeable if they are contrasted with conference presentations, slide talks or poster sessions. Peer seminars are usually isolated events which do not belong to any official professional meeting like a conference or a workshop. Three consequences arise from this fact. First, there is no scientific or organiser committee performing the gatekeeping function; i.e. the abstract is not ‘filtered’ but simply submitted to the academic host, who then attaches it to the announcement of the seminar sent to the university community. That may be the reason why, when asked, the four speakers agreed that when they presented research in seminars they were perfectly aware of the less weighty and official nature of a seminar. Second, seminar speakers do not have the same time pressure as conference speakers do. The duration of the four seminars (75, 70, 85, and $5 5 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ ) illustrates this flexibility in terms of time. Third, seminar speakers can be interrupted by any attendant and a short dialogue or aside can be established at any time during the talk, as in the example below:

(Seminar 4: 11) in other words, in Barcelona (2) it’s very famous (.) er, there were epidemics, due to the soy seeds coming from the ships (.) and I’ll show you, in fact (.) I have another diagram here, coming from a (.) serial of the counts (2) er (.) and could see asthma emergency visits rising here in Barcelona, from 86 to 89 (.) $/ . . . /$ ((a person from the audience comments on the Barcelona case)) ((a second person adds further information)) Exactly (.) well (2) it’s not an epidemic in the medical sense, er (.) but it’s the epidemic in the sense of, er, the larger number of events which are not caused by air pollution, okay?

In conference presentations, questions and commentaries are usually made at the end.

Closely related to this feature is audience composition. Among the attendants, we find mostly scholars from the same speciality who have done no research on the specific topic of the talk; only a minority may have worked in the same area or collaborated with the speaker. Thus, attendants are members of the ‘invisible college’, but this ‘invisible college’ proves to be an amalgam of peers who could be classified into peer non-experts (experts in the speciality but not in the specific topic) and peer experts in both the speciality and topic. Additionally, every seminar is surrounded by its particular pressures and seminar speakers may have covert purposes apart from the ostensive ‘informal communication’ purpose. Sometimes a seminar speaker may feel under great pressure because of the presence of one or two highly renowned attendants (Seminar 4:1-I feel rather(.) daunted by all these experts, in time series). Sometimes a seminar speaker may feel strongly pressed because he is striving to reach or draw up a future agreement with the host research team by the end of his stay at a foreign university. At other times, the preliminary results are presented with some reservation but with the hope that expert listeners detect any inconsistency and that this contributes to the construction and re-construction of the research. The use of hedges and other evaluative metadiscourse in the example below illustrates this:

(Seminar 1: 15) Er (8) one might wonder (3) why this is not being noted (.) well, I think it’s being noted, if I’ve read the literature correctly (.) not noted by others (.) er, that there is this shift, most er, most of the literature references I’ve seen, consider this transformation to be, an absolute value to rise ((Non-Perceptible))(.) in terms of glass transition (.) I think the answer is (.) because(.) (4) the range of the periods that are used (.) in Modulated DSC, is actually rather limited (2)

Whether it is external pressure or not, it is clear that speakers are presenting their data to the ‘invisible college’ in seminars as well as in conference presentations and so seminar speakers are expected to feel peer pressure. Whether the audience is made up of experts in the topic or not, seminar speakers know that their research is exposed for the scrutiny of their audience. For these reasons, seminar speakers are claimed to address their talk to a peer and rival audience. For these reasons, too, seminar speakers are claimed to try to be as relevant as possible when giving a seminar to this peer and rival audience.

# 3.2. Hybrid nature

Peer seminars seem to deploy a hybrid and flexible nature. They seem to have a mixture of features from at least three different genres in the academic and scientific community: the lecture, the conference presentation, and the written research article. In this sense, seminar speakers could be said to be equipped with a given genre knowledge (Berkenkotter and Huckin, 1995) which they resort to when giving a seminar. Such knowledge is not encapsulated rigid knowledge which scientists and engineering academics possess but rather a situated cognition or knowledge (Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995) which they dynamically adapt to every situation. Since seminar speakers regularly lecture at their home university, their experience in lecturing is expected to influence them. At the very least, they are expected to be familiar with speaking before an audience and managing verbal and visual display. At the most, certain ‘know-how’ or scientific idiolect ranging from rhetorical organisational patterns to linguistic and discourse devices is expected to help these speaking scientists. Some porosity has been identified between the three genres and this is reflected in different ways.

Firstly, the peer seminar shares certain didacticism with the lecture, given that the speakers regularly lecture apart from investigating in their home university, and given that a lecture and a seminar essentially constitute transactional and expository discourse with a varying degree of didacticism. Explanation and understanding are at the heart of teaching and learning, and these two concepts are present in seminars and lectures. When explaining, redundancy goes hand in hand with clarity. As Bourdieu, Passeron, and de Saint Martin (1994: 5) argue, ‘‘teaching is at its most effective not when it succeeds in transmitting the greatest quantity of information in the shortest time (and at the least cost), but rather when most of the information conveyed by the teacher is received‘‘. Moreover, both a lecturer and a scientist speaker are aware of the

(. . .) contradictory demands that pedagogical communication must satisfy, neither of which can be completely satisfied: first, to maximize the absolute quantity of information conveyed (which implies reducing repetition and redundancy to the minimum; second, to minimize loss of information (which, among other measures, may imply an increase in redundancy). (Bourdieu, Passeron, & Saint Martin, 1994: 6)

The speakers in both situations have to find a compromise between these two opposing tendencies: redundancy, calculated repetition, and explicitness on the one hand, and conciseness or need for economy on the other. Additionally, in both cases not only brevity but also a varied or graceful style can be certainly sacrificed in order to secure comprehensibility and understandability, which is the main concern among scientists and engineering lecturers (Brown & Bakhtar, 1983: 31). Both when lecturing and giving a seminar, relevance and clarity usually override brevity; this entails that scientists giving a seminar are likely to resort to certain metadiscursive elements in order to explicitly signal the topic, structure, or scope of their talk. Below are some examples of metadiscourse at the beginning or end of the lecture/ seminar and, at a different level, of commentary conveying a given attitude or opinion when having to cope with difficult situations. This is language expected to be present in both lecturers and seminar speakers’ genre knowledge:

-(Seminar 2: 1) Okay (.) I’ll be talking today on Backstepping (3): textual marker

-(Seminar 4: 2) But I’m not actually going to talk about SID, today (.) we’re going to talk about environmental epidemiology, the effect of air pollution on health (.) ‘cause the problem is quite similar (.) er this is what I’ve been doing ((Non-Perceptible)) and we have some data from Barcelona (.) in a minute we’ll talk about that (.) but the background original problem was the, Sudden Infant Death (3): textual m.

-(Seminar $1 \colon 1 0 ) \mathrm { E r }$ (2) And there’s the strange thing (.) if I can understand them correctly (.) er, they say that there is a phase angle $/ . . . /$ Now (2) er, either it is incorrect (.) or, I don’t understand correctly what they done (2) but er (.) it’s clear they got a little bit confused, to my mind (3): interpersonal m.

Secondly, the peer seminar is partly indebted to the conference presentation and to the written RA in that they all use certain argumentation in order to persuasively address the talk to a peer audience. For example, if a seminar and a conference presentation are compared, both types of speakers share a similar aim: to publicise their work and gain their peers’ respect. In both cases, speakers have had to travel to a foreign university or research centre and may be even indirectly judged as spokesmen or representatives of the research carried out in their home university. When the same speakers give a talk to a local audience (e.g. their department colleagues), they probably feel more relaxed and not so concerned about making a mistake. Some of the seminars analysed are retrospective (i.e. devoted to verbally summarising and publicising one or several published research articles on a given topic), and in this sense a peer seminar resembles a conference presentation. Only some external factors surrounding both speeches are going to differ: in seminars the time constraint is not so important as in conferences, the number of participants is smaller (8–15 people), no written record (e.g. proceedings) is usually kept of the seminar and no referee system exists; as a result, a somewhat more relaxed and collegial atmosphere is likely to exist in seminars. In brief, the conference presentation is more of an established genre whose conventions are fixed and known to inside members with experience in conference attendance and participation.

Drawing on the continuum of lay professional biomedical communication as envisioned by Dubois (1987: 539), one could perhaps compare seminars with ‘colloquium talks’:

Plenary invited slide talk pre or post-session poster local lab Lecture colloquium colloquium talk session colloquium meeting

Seminars are not ‘local colloquia’ because seminars are not informal departmental talks given to colleagues. Peer seminars also differ from laboratory meetings in that scientists may feel less pressed to present preliminary results among their university colleagues than they are when staying at a foreign university. Seminars cannot be paralleled to ‘invited colloquia’ either because they are not held within a formal professional meeting whose celebration has been publicised and spread to the national/international community. The peer seminar host organiser usually announces the seminar via an electronic mail sent to the faculty or university members. In some cases, seminars can be ‘pre-conference colloquia’, as for example seminar 3. Given that the British scientist (expert 3) was to participate in an international conference taking place in Barcelona, a scientist from the UPC invited him to speak and organised the seminar ‘outside’ the conference. Seminar 3 was given the day before the conference began. Another difference found between seminars and other genres in this continuum lies in their attempt to popularise content. Dubois (1985) found out that biomedical poster sessions and slide presentations embody scientific popularisation at the highest level because scientists have to present their data and information in an understandable and interesting form so that fully trained fellow scientists practising another speciality can follow their speech. In fact, other scholars (Huckin, 1987; Myers 1989) have sliced audience into a generalised audience and a specialist audience, both of which are addressed at the same time. In principle seminar speakers need not make such an important popularisation effort because their audience belongs to the same speciality. However, the recipients’ expert knowledge about the specific topic in particular may be very varied, and seminar speakers appear to be highly sensitised to their audience’s knowledge about the topic in particular. They can even directly inquire about their audience’s expertise, as can be seen in the example below:

(Seminar 3: 2) Er (2) certainly, it would be useful for me to know (2) first of all (5) this is embarrassing for you (2) if I were to (3) ask you whether in terms of (.) Computer Simulation, Methods (.) as from your research (.) would you describe yourselves as experts?

A typical commentary seminar speakers make at the beginning is that since not everybody among listeners is an expert in the topic, they are going to accommodate the content so that a non-expert in the topic can understand the talk:

(Seminar 2: 1) Er (.) I I’d rather not go perhaps into too much detail (.) ‘cause there are lots of different types of knowledge

It is difficult to determine the extent to which such commentaries can be attributed to seminar speakers’ genre knowledge of conference presentations or to which extent they are driven by a need to protect their face and their reputation against possible criticism from a peer expert. If expectations are lowered, speakers may feel less pressed and therefore more secure.

Finally, as active members of their community speakers are clearly acquainted with the structure of the written research article (RA). Peer seminars seem to somewhat adhere to the RA structure, which is not replicated but usually taken as an approximate model. Thus, peer seminars deviate slightly from the Introduction– Methods–Results–Discussion (IMRD) structure pattern of the RA. For example, they do not usually explicitly signal the sections, except the Introduction and Results/Conclusions. Neither do they use the same terminology as in a written RA.

An analysis of the samples in this work reveals that speakers do not announce that the ‘Methods Section’ is about to be broached; instead, they seem to prefer the word ‘Analysis’. Under this broader title, the Methods and Results–Discussion sections are usually subsumed. An analysis of the data shows that all speakers follow the following general-specific-general pattern:

(1) description and review of analyses and results in the literature,   
(2) discussion of the problems posed by existing methods in previous research, (3) presentation of their own analyses,   
(4) claim-making and conclusion(s).

Indeed, seminar speakers seem to place great emphasis on the identification of drawbacks/ problems in previous research. As can be seen, the frequent moves (Swales, 1990) appearing in the Results–Discussion and Conclusions sections (background information, statement of results, (un)expected results, reference to previous research, explanation, exemplification, deduction/hypothesis, recommendation and further work) are more or less followed. Briefly, the findings of the examination of seminars point to the fact that the IMRD pattern is flexibly adhered to and that seminar speakers sometimes go back and forth, like conference presentation speakers (Shalom, 1993). Another instantiation of the hybrid nature of seminars is to be found in an analysis of pre-introductions and introductions based on Swales’ CARS model (1990). Swales’ cognitive moves are not replicated in any of the four seminar introductions but some of the moves in this model–in particular Move 3–are found in pre-introductions as can be seen in Table 1 and below in Table 3.

# 3.3. Pre-introductions and tone shift

Perhaps the most noticeable feature of seminars is that they are preceded by a preintroduction. That is, a speaker-and listener-oriented warm-up metadiscursive portion is present before the real content-oriented introduction begins. This pre-introduction is uttered in a more casual and subjective tone than the rest of the talk. This one can sometimes be adopted by speakers at the end of seminars, thus forming a sandwich like this:

Table 1 Moves in pre-introductions   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>CARS moves in pre-introductions</td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 1</td><td>Move 3, Step 1B</td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 2</td><td>Move 3, step 1A/B</td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 3</td><td>Move 3, step 1A/B</td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 4</td><td>Move 3, step 1B</td></tr></table></body></html>

WARM-UP/PRE-INTRODUCTION: subjective, personal tone (metadiscourse, largely of the interpersonal type)

BODY OF TALK: objective tone, impersonal style

CONCLUSION: a) slightly subjective tone (interpersonal metadiscourse), and/ or b) an impersonal closure with minimal textual metadiscourse.

Although occasional and brief switches to a more personal and subjective tone may be found within the body of the talk, most examples of such casual tone have been found in the pre-introductions of all the seminars studied. In order to study tone shift in pre-introductions in more detail, it was found interesting to identify and analyse the metadiscourse. It was found that the metadiscursive commentary in preintroductions has the function of politely greeting the audience, warming up the atmosphere, relieving pressure, prefacing the topic and maybe giving a ‘human’ touch. Once seminar speakers have thanked the Spanish host professor, they typically resort to ‘ice-breaking’ interpersonal metadiscourse to project a human scientist persona. Next, they speak, make several asides, laugh or try to make the audience laugh, inquire about the topic or expertise of the audience and, in a word, directly appeal and interact with the audience. Then speakers typically resort to textual metadiscourse to explain their purpose, scope, and aims (Move 3). A couple of examples from seminars 1 and 2 are provided.

The pre-introduction in Seminar 1 is basically a first-person narration by means of which a certain collegial atmosphere is created. The subjective tone can be found in the speaker’s informal narration of the problems he encountered before and during his research, or in the speaker’s referring to a colleague researcher in another university by her first name (Laura) and not her surname. In this pre-introduction, the speaker opens his talk by giving some explanatory background into the reasons that motivated the research he is going to expound. He does so in the first person and by informally narrating his problems surrounding the research, e.g. lack of money or reluctance from the manufacturer. After giving the title of the seminar, the speaker parenthetically delimits the scope of his talk and modestly anticipates the kind of result(s) obtained:

(Seminar 1: 1, pre-introduction) Thank you, Salvador (2) Er (4) to give (.) just a little background er (.) before I came here in January, I (.) was, in contact with Perkin Elmer er, because I knew they were developing this dynamic DSC (.) er and suggested to them they might like to give me a DSC on which I could work (.) and they said no (.) er that, they preferred that I would buy it (.) Er I said I couldn’t do that because I didn’t have any money (.) er but I suggested an alternative (.) which er was (.) through Salvador (.) who contacted er, I think it was Laura (.) in the Autonoma (2) she very kindly said we have a DSC (.) a DSC 7, on which they were prepared to err (.) incorporate the software for the Dynamic DSC (.) and very kindly agreed that I could have, kind of use the equipment there, and Perkin Elmer said Well, Okay (.) then you can have the Dynamic option (.) for, during the time you are here (.)

And this is the background to, how I am able to, have done this piece of work (3) So(.) er (3) well (.) Modulated Differential Scanning Calorimetry (.) What does it tell you? Er(2) I’m not sure I’m going to give you a definite answer(.) at the end of this talk er (.) but I’ll give you amounts of sorts, anyway (2)

Near the end of the seminar, some attempt is made to project the persona of a human colleague scientist who has limitations and who is looking forward to holidays like anybody else:

(Seminar 1: 18, end) Er (3) But there are a few things (.) er a couple of things, in particular (.) that remain to be done I think (.) First of all (.) this is a long-term project (.) to extend the analysis to a multi-parameter model, in a way that the memory effect, distribution and relaxation time are included (2) Er, at present (.) I think that would overload the memory of the computer that I’m using, so I ((Non-Perceptible)) (2) but I think it’s something that would be useful to look at (.) and (.) secondly (.) to extend the experimental, er (.) investigation (.) to include the effects of er, annealing (2) And as there are about two, two weeks left, before holidays start (.) in the meantime, I’m not going to do all that much (3) ((audience laughs)) Okay (.) I’ll stop there

In the pre-introduction in Seminar 2, the speaker implicitly admits feeling tested by his peer colleagues, modestly specifies that his talk is not addressed to experts (probably the covert purpose of this delimitation is to avoid creating too high expectations and to protect himself against criticism), 2 delimits aim and scope (Move 3), and offers his photocopies of published work. One might deduce from this offer that the speaker can lend his materials because, as an expert, he has specialised in and published about the topic. The tone in the pre-introduction is courteous, topic-oriented, and personal.

(Seminar 2: 1, pre-introduction) Okay (.) I’ll be talking today on Backstepping (3) Er (3) I hope the talk is, scientifically precise (2) I’m also being tested today, as I speak in English (.) by the English expert in the front ((points to the researcher))so I hope that’s going to be satisfying ((speaker laughs)) Er (.) What I’ll be talking about today (.) and continuing tmmorrow (.) is on Backstepping (2) Er (.) I’d rather not go perhaps into too much detail (.) ‘cause there are lots of different types of knowledge ((addressing two people in the audience)) you’re both working in the precise area, er (.) you might well be badly interested, but (.) I’ll try to get across the main points, er (.) as I approach the subject (.) Er (2) I’ve brought a lot of material (.) which I’ve given to Enric, as somebody asked once to get some of my notes (.) you’ve got them (.) and also (.) published by Peter P, and various things (.) er, you may also contact me, to get the information (2)Er (.)What Backstepping is (.) er (2) is a method to promote $/ . . . /$

Table 2 Analysis of pre-introductions   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Length of pre-introductions</td><td>Type of metadiscourse</td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 1</td><td>216 words</td><td>Interpersonal narration and 3 interpersonal items + 7 textual items (topic titling and framing)</td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 2</td><td>151 words</td><td>6 interpersonal items (feels tested, addresses audience) mixed with 4 textual items</td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 3</td><td>660 words</td><td>30 long interpersonal items with 41 textual items. (several attempts of Move 3)</td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 4</td><td>108 words</td><td>5 interpersonal items (comment on audience&#x27;s expertise and weather) + 3 textual metadiscursive items to announce topic.</td></tr></table></body></html>

When concluding, speaker 2 is completely impersonal and content-oriented, probably because he was invited to give a two-day seminar. Only textual metadiscourse announcing what he will talk about the following day is used.

(Seminar 2: 16, end) Er (.) well, I’ll stop there (.) Are there any questions, now (.) tomorrow I’ll go on, with how to parameterise a different form of, er, the state transformation (2) Which in a sense it’s, is easier to use, in this context (.) and r, also, we’ll carry on, with this pre-discussion of this more complicated, Recursing (.) where, the ((Non-Perceptible)) this can be backward and forward (.) steps (.) it could be multiple steps (.) but, that will depend on a quicker programme.Table 2 summarises the results of the analysis of the length and type of the metadiscourse found in pre-introductions.

As already said, seminar pre-introductions were also examined in terms of Swales’ CARS model. None of the seminar pre-introductions strictly follows the CARS model, although the seminars analysed certainly turned out to have one or several of the Moves and steps, whether in pre-introductions or in introductions. For example, a significant finding points to the fact that neither Moves 1 nor 2 is used in preintroductions. Move 1, Establishing the territory, is not used in the pre-introduction of seminars maybe because it can be a self-threatening act if you are addressing your speech to peers. Citing the landmarks in the literature or even one’s publications can be felt to be a requirement in order to establish and occupy a niche, but Move 2 (Establishing a niche) is not present in pre-introductions. Move 2 is found in the four introductions, once the research has been announced and the talk itself has begun in an impersonal and objective tone. The most important finding relates to the fact that Move 3 Occupying a niche (Step 1, A/B) is used by the four seminar speakers in the pre-introductions. Half the seminar speakers use Move 3, Step 1A (outline purpose) and point to the expert speakers’ need to delimit the scope and aim of their talk always in a downward trend, i.e. saying their talk is not addressed to experts. A final observation that can be made is that the seminar speakers rarely announce the structure of their speech (Move 3, Step 3). In fact, only Speaker 4 explicitly announces the structure (verbally and with a transparency).

It should be noted here that the pre-introductions that have been identified resemble the ‘listener orientation’ or ritualised section as suggested by Dubois only to a certain extent. As said before, seminars are a somewhat more informal and unofficial event than conference slide talks and this results in two important differences. The first is that Dubois’ ‘listener orientation’ is found in the seminar preintroductions but is practically absent in seminar conclusions (Seminar 3:19-So, that’s all I have to say (4) So, nobody interrupted the talk). A second difference between the ‘listener orientation’ in biology slide talks and pre-introductions in seminars is that the latter tend to be longer and to accept a wider diversity of metadiscursive commentaries (see Table 2), other than the sentence-long listener orientation chunk identified by Dubois in slide talks. Finally, Dubois’ description of the Body section (situation-event-commentary) was not found to exist in any of the four seminars. As said above, the Body section of a seminar is reminiscent of the Method–Results–Discussion sections and is presented as ‘Analysis’. Having said this, it remains to be seen whether such differences are ascribable to disciplinary conventions or to genre effects, since it will be recalled that Dubois’ are biology talks whereas the seminars of this study are all within engineering.

In order to obtain a complete picture, it became necessary to study the introductions as well. Going back and forth, the existence of ‘mock’ moves or false starts, seems to be characteristic not only of pre-introductions but also of introductions. An examination of the introductions shows that they contain the three Moves, that only two speakers follow the order 1-2-3, and that they contain some brief digressions, reminiscent of the pre-introductions. Such asides or digressions are either a first-person narration on the speaker’s problems, or questions/commentary addressed to the audience. Table 3 shows the results obtained from the analysis of the pre-introductions and introductions in terms of the CARS model.

# 4. Discussion

Several outstanding features of the peer seminar depicted may suggest that a niche has been identified and that the peer seminar may constitute another research process genre in the scientific community. Its informal and flexible nature and its prefatory introductions set it apart from genres like the conference presentation, the slide talk, the written RA or the lecture, even though the peer seminar is permeated with some of the characteristics of these genres.

The fact that the peer seminar is a spoken, informal research process genre may account for its flexible and hybrid nature. Seminar speakers seem to feel the urge to preface their talk with some pre-introduction and to devote much time to delimiting and announcing the problem, the scope, and the interest of the topic. The speakers’ knowledge about their audience’s degree of expertise in the specific topic exerts a considerable pressure and seems to motivate and trigger most of the interpersonal commentary in pre-introductions. It is in pre-introductions where speakers typically show their concern for the match or mismatch between the audience’s specific knowledge of the topic and the degree of specificity of their talk. Apart from being a consequence of the real time and face-to-face situation, pre-introductions are also the result of the speakers’ need to convey relevant subject-matter and to do so they have to solve their uneasiness about their relationship with their audience. RA writers are reportedly believed to have to cope with real and imaginary audiences. Seminar speakers, however, are not speaking to an ideal, future, or putative audience as writers are, but to a real audience whose level of knowledge is uncertain to them. Seminar speakers are therefore uncertain about the alignments and roles, which destabilises the relationship. Following Burgess’ (2002: 211) analysis of RA writers, it is hypothesised that ‘‘the maintenance of relationship between participants is always privileged over topic introduction’’; that is, if the relationship and the audience configuration is known, the topic can be introduced early, but if this is not the case, then speakers need to attend to the relationship with their audience and cope with this uneasiness. We can find instances substantiating this claim in every seminar. The most obvious is to be found in Seminar 3, where in a long pre-introduction the speaker inquires about his audience’s level of expertise, and justifies, apologises and comments on the topic of his talk and transparencies. Other instances include the use of some textual metadiscourse in the pre-introductions as a result of the speakers’ need to mention the scope and purpose of their talk (Move 3, Step 1). Some speakers (Seminars 2 and 3) decide that they are speaking to peer nonexperts, which not only relieves pressure but also prevents their talk from falling short of their audience’s expectations. The speaker in seminar 1 uses a far more indirect strategy and specifies that due to problems in the equipment he had to change the purpose and topic of the research. He is therefore protecting his face, and the claims of his research. A final and different example of the speaker’s need to map the audience’s level of expertise can also be found in Seminar 4, where the speaker acknowledges his audience’s expertise. By flattering his audience the speaker is indirectly protecting his face–and his claim.

Table 3 CARS analysis of pre-introductions and introductions   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>CARS moves</td><td></td><td>Summary of content and other. metadiscursive commentary</td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 1</td><td>Pre-Intro.:</td><td>Move 3, Step 1B-</td><td>First-person narration on problems with equipment and manufacturers.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Intro.:</td><td>Move 1, step 2 and 3 Move 3, step 1B</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 2, step 1B</td><td>Equipment broke down, which made him</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 3, step 1A</td><td>re-direct his research</td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 2</td><td>Pre-Intro.:</td><td>Move 3, steps 1A/B-</td><td>First-person narration</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Intro.:</td><td>Move 1, steps 1,2,3.--</td><td>Audience asked about shared knowledge</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 2, step 1A</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 3, step 1B</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 3</td><td>Pre-Intro.:</td><td></td><td>Several acts (volume, speech rate,</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 3, step 1A/B</td><td>apologies, etc)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Intro.:</td><td>Move 1, step 2, 3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 3, step 1B</td><td>Audience addressed</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 2, step 4</td><td>Speaker apologises</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 1, step 2, 3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 3, step 1B</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Seminar 4</td><td>Pre-Intro.:</td><td>Move 3, step 1B</td><td>Flattering audience expertise and joke. about weather</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Intro.:</td><td>Move 1, step 1,2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 2, step 1B</td><td>First-person narration justifying speaker&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 3 step 1B</td><td>interest in the topic.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move 3, step 3</td><td>Visual material (transparency)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Seminars being slightly more informal than slide talks in conferences, seminar speakers can adopt a more personal and casual tone and address their audience to cope with the question mark of audience configuration in terms of expertise. A similar conclusion could be reached regarding the tone shift identified. It is here suggested that the nature of this informal tone reflects the speaker’s reactions to a peer and rival audience before whom he strives to behave and communicate with relevance. Apart from reflecting the speakers’ urge to resolve the relationship with his audience, the tone of such metadiscourse also signals the scientist’s personal response to the pressure of being examined by peers and to his need to publicise his work. A modest and colleague Knower persona appears and uses certain academic facing techniques, like personalising and humanising his speech, creating low expectations, and delimiting the scope of the talk and the degree of expertise involved. In brief, engineering academics giving a seminar seem to be somewhat painstaking communicators because of the pressure of having a peer and rival audience and because of their uneasiness about their relationship with their audience. Their expectations and fears are voiced mainly through the metadiscursive preintroductions. On the whole, speaking engineers seem to be mainly content-oriented and succinct speakers who are more ‘of the telling job’ than of the ‘selling job’ (Yakhontova, 2002: 217).

# 5. Conclusions

The findings of this study suggest that the peer seminar has to be taken into consideration as a genre in the scientific community, even though further work is necessary to delineate the peer seminar in more detail. The seminar has mixed features from the conference presentation, the lecture, and the written RA. It seems to be a hybrid research genre, an ‘‘indefinite and transitional text’’ which could also be named an ‘intergenre’ (Yakhontova, 2002: 230). Similarly, the most obvious implication is that scientists intending to become members of this community should be trained in order to be able to cope with such a spoken genre. Therefore, the need to communicate efficiently in a peer seminar should be catered for in the pedagogy.

# 6. Key to transcription conventions

Short pauses of 1 second are indicated: (.). Longer pauses are also indicated; e.g. (3) means it is a 3-minute pause. $/ . . . /$ indicates that a chunk is missing. Other relevant information is given in double brackets (( )).

# References

Allison, D., & Tauroza, S. (1995). The effect of discourse organisation on lecture comprehension. English for Specific Purposes, 14(2), 157–173.   
Basturkmen, H. (1999). Discourse in MBA seminars: towards a description for pedagogical purposes. English for Specific Purposes, 18(1), 63–80.   
Bazerman, C. (1983). Scientific writing as a social act: a review of the literature of the sociology of science. In P. A. Anderson, R. J. Brockmann, & C. R. Miller (Eds.), New essays in technical and scientific communication: Research, theory, practice (pp. 156–184). New York: Baywood Publ.   
Benson, M. J. (1994). Lecture listening in an ethnographic perspective. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening. Research perspectives (pp. 181–198). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (1995). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication: cognition/ culture/power. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Bourdieu, P., Passeron, J. C., & de Saint martin, M. (1994). Academic discourse. Linguistic misunderstanding and professorial power. Cambridge: Polity Press.   
Brown, G. (1978). Lecturing and explaining. London: Methuen Ltd.   
Brown, G. A., & Bakhtar, M. (Eds.). (1983–). Styles of lecturing Research and faculty perspectives. Loughborough: An ASTD Publication, University of Technology   
Burgess, S. (2002). Packed houses and intimate gatherings: audience and rhetorical structure. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 196–215). London: Longman.   
Chaudron, C. (1988). Second language classrooms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Coulthard, M., & Montgomery, J. (1981). Studies in discourse analysis. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.   
Crismore, A., Markkanen, R., & Steffensen, M. S. (1993). Metadiscourse in persuasive writing. Written Communication, 10(1), 39–71.   
Dubois, B. L. (1980a). Genre and structure in biomedical speeches. Forum Linguisticum, 5(2), 140–168.   
Dubois, B. L. (1980b). The use of slides in biomedical speeches. The ESP Journal, 1(1), 45–50.   
Dubois, B. L. (1981). Nontechnical arguments in biomedical speeches. In Perspectives in biology and medicine. USA: University of Chicago.   
Dubois, B. L. (1984). Paragraph structure of biomedical speeches: preliminary report. Lacus Forum, 323– 333.   
Dubois, B. L. (1985). Popularization at the highest level: poster sessions at biomedical meetings. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 56, 67–84.   
Dubois, B. L. (1987). ‘Something on the order of around forty-four’: Imprecise numerical expressions in biomedical slide talks. Language and Society, 16(4), 527–541.   
Dudley-evans, A., & Johns, T. F. (1981). A team-teaching approach to lecture comprehension for overseas students. In The teaching of listening comprehension. London: The British Council.   
Dudley-evans, A. (1994). Variations in discourse patterns favoured by different disciplines and their pedagogic implication. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening, Research perspectives (pp. 146–158). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Dunkel, P. A., & Davies, J. N. (1994). The effects of rhetorical signalling cues on the recall of English lecture information by speakers of English as a native or second language. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening. Research perspectives (pp. 55–74). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Flowerdew, J. (1992). Definition in science lectures. Applied Linguistics, 13, 202–221.   
Flowerdew, J. (1994). Academic listening. In Research perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Flowerdew, J., & Miller, L. (1995). On the notion of culture in L2 lectures. TESOL Quarterly, 29(2), 345–373.   
Flowerdew, J., & Miller, L. (1996). Lectures in second language: notes towards a cultural grammar. English for Specific Purposes, 15(2), 121–140.   
Gass, S. M., & Madden, C. G. (Eds.). (1985). Input in second language acquisition. Cambridge, Mass: Newbury House Publ.   
Goffman, E. (1981). Forms of talk. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.   
Hansen, Ch. (1994). Topic identification in lecture discourse. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening, Research perspectives (pp. 131–145). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Hartford, B. S., & Bardovi-Hardig, K. (1992). Closing the conversation: evidence from the academic advising session. Discourse Processes, 93–116.   
Huckin, T. N. (1987). Surprise value in scientific discourse. Paper delivered at CCCC Conference, Atlanta, Georgia, March 1987.   
Hyland, K. (1999). Talking to students: metadiscourse in introductory coursebooks. English for Specific Purposes, 18(1), 3–26.   
Murphy, D. F., & Candlin, C. N. (1979). Engineering lecture discourse and listening comprehension. In Practical Papers in English Language Education, 2. Lancaster: Lancaster University.   
Myers, G. (1989). The pragmatics of politeness in scientific articles. Applied Linguistics, 10(1), 1–35.   
Nattinger, J. R., & De Carrico, J. S. (1992). Lexical phrases and language teaching. London: Longman.   
Northcott, J. (2001). Towards an ethnography of the MBA classroom: a consideration of the role of interactive lecturing styles within the context of one MBA programme. English for Specific Purposes, 20(1), 15–37.   
Rounds, P. (1987a). Characterizing successful classroom discourse for NNS teaching assistant training. TESOL Quarterly, 21(4), 643–671.   
Rounds, P. (1987b). Multifunctional personal pronoun use in an educational setting. English for Specific Purposes, 6(1), 13–29.   
Shalom, C. (1993). Established and evolving spoken research process genres: plenary lecture and poster session discussions at academic conferences. English for Specific Purposes, 12, 37–50.   
Strodt-Lopez, B. (1991). Tying it all: asides in university lectures. Applied Linguistics, 12(2), 117–140.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. (1996). Occluded genres in the academy: the case of the submission letter. In E. Ventola, & A. Mauranen (Eds.), Academic writing. Intercultural and textual issues (pp. 45–58). Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishers.   
Thompson, S. (1994). Frameworks and contexts: a genre-based approach to analysing lecture introductions. English for Specific Purposes, 13(2), 171–186.   
Weissberg, B. (1993). The graduate seminar: another research-process genre. English for Specific Purposes, 12(1), 23–35.   
Yakhontova, T. (2002). ‘Selling’ or ‘telling’? The issue of cultural variation in research genres. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 216–232). London: Longman.   
Young, L. (1994). University lectures-macro-structure and micro-features. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening, Research perspectives (pp. 159–176). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Marta Aguilar is a lecturer of English for Science and Technology at the Universitat Politecica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, Spain. Her research interests include academic and disciplinary discourses, writing pedagogy, and the role of virtual environments in learner autonomy. She has recently completed her PhD thesis entitled ‘Metadiscourse in two academic situations. A relevance-theoretic approach’.