# An ecological perspective on content-based instruction

Mark Garner\*, Erik Borg

English Language Centre, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 8ST, Tyne and Wear, England, UK

# Abstract

Content-based instruction (CBI) has been proposed as an effective method of preparing students for study in English-medium universities. Although CBI has won adherents for its pedagogical effectiveness, a theoretical basis for its success has not been fully articulated. There are a variety of frameworks that may be used to provide this theoretical basis. This paper argues that an ecological framework on language learning and use can provide this theoretical underpinning. A content-based English pre-sessional course illustrates the proposed ecological framework. The course, using a textbook for native-English speaking undergraduates [Seitz, J. L., (2002). Global issues: An introduction. (2nd ed.). Oxford & Malden, MA: Blackwell], helps students learn the expectations of university study through extended focussed reading, discussion and writing. In this way, EAP skills are contextualized in an integrated learning process.

$©$ 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Content-based instruction; Language ecology; English for academic purposes

# 1. Introduction

Increasing numbers of students whose first language is not English study in Englishmedium universities worldwide. These students often need preparation before entry to their degree programmes, preparation not simply in language skills but also in the academic practices of their new institutions. Skill-based programmes, in which students study in separate classes of reading, writing, speaking and listening, supplemented perhaps by an extended writing or study skills class, have been a mainstay of many of these preentry programmes. However, skills-based teaching has numerous problems, and many programmes are now turning to content-based instruction (CBI) as a means of preparing students for university study in a new language and context.

In her contribution to a volume on content-based teaching, Ann Johns (1997a) discussed the relationship between ESP and content-based instruction. While she began from the position that “English for specific purposes (ESP) is a superordinate term for all good ESL/EFL teaching, and content-based instruction (CBI) is a central force in this movement” (p. 363), she went on to note that a major difference between CBI and ESP is that “CBI practitioners seem to focus almost exclusively on pedagogy” (p. 366) without the theoretical and research basis that characterises ESP.

This article investigates some of the problems with skills-based teaching, and the strengths of CBI. As Johns (1997a) suggests, there is no fully articulated theoretical framework for CBI, though a growing literature from a variety of perspectives provides insight and support for CBI. Useful frameworks include social constructionism, actor– network theory, academic literacy and language ecology. Language ecology provides particularly a powerful lens through which to view CBI, as it places situatedness, interaction and variability at the core of language theory, and it is this approach that will be developed in this paper.

Context, which is the organising idea of CBI, is foregrounded in language ecology. At the same time, language ecology calls for a deeper understanding of the role of communication in language pedagogy, and particularly for English for academic purposes (EAP). In this paper, we describe an ecological conception of language and suggest how a concern of linguistics with rules has left an unfortunate legacy in EAP. We outline an ecological view of communication and suggest how it can enrich theory and practice in language teaching.

Finally, because context is central, this paper will provide an example of a situated programme of CBI to suggest how theory can be implemented in practice. The course that is the basis for this paper is a pre-entry course, originally designed for students planning to enter postgraduate programmes at a UK university.

Within the broad domain of English for specific purposes, CBI has been advocated for a number of years as the most educationally appropriate approach (Brinton, Snow, & Wesche, 1989; Kern, 2000; Mohan, 1979) for EAP. The proponents of CBI see in it the solution to a number of problems, such as: the lack of authenticity in English teaching materials (MacDonald, 2003; Spector-Cohen, Kirschener, & Wexler, 2001); the segregation of academic skills from their application (Benesch, 1992; Canagarajah, 2002; Dlaska, 2003); the failure to prepare students to enter the academic community of their disciplines (Leki & Carson, 1994, 1997); and the need to cater for the variety of discipline-related discourses and literacies (Baynham, 2000; Jordan, 1997). Recent research into academic literacies has emphasized the ‘cultural and contextual component of writing and reading [and, we would add, speaking and listening] practices’ and their implications for students’ learning (Lea & Street, 1998, p. 158).

Though issues have been highlighted and practices criticised, an integrated theoretical base for CBI has not been articulated. Particular programmes draw upon theoretical insights; for example, genre analysis is extensively used to guide writing instruction. Nonetheless, the principal argument adduced for CBI is typically pragmatic: it seems to work pedagogically. If CBI is to take its place in EAP, not simply as a practical means to achieve educational goals, but as a field for research and well-informed development, we believe that it needs a more global theoretical framework. This paper is a modest attempt to encourage wide-ranging theoretical exploration of EAP in general, and CBI in particular, by proposing an ecological approach to EAP. It calls into question some assumptions about language that underlie much language teaching, including EAP, and offers an alternative model centred on CBI. But first we must explain what we mean by ‘an ecological approach.’

# 2. What is ‘an ecological approach’ to language?

In the narrowest sense, ecology looks at the relationships between biological organisms and their environment. It tries to see the trees and the wood. In a wider context, however, ecology is used to describe phenomena in their context and to understand both the context and the interactions that create that context. It stands in contrast to analytic approaches, which reduce complex systems to simple constituents, governed by mechanistic rules (Hayward, 1995, p. 29).

Roszak (1980) writes of “an awakening awareness of wholes greater than the sum of their parts.” Ecological thinking offers new insights in very diverse disciplines, and transforms our understanding of the nature of language (Garner, 2004). Ecological thought is far from uniform (Hayward, 1995, p. 8; Laferrie\`re & Stoett, 1999, p. 24–25), but despite various and sometimes conflicting interpretations among its proponents, certain elements are common to all or most of its manifestations. They are that ecology is (a) holistic, (b) dynamic and interactive, and (c) situated. These same categories can be applied to the ecosystem of language.

# 2.1. Language is holistic

Language is holistic in that it is concerned with complex wholes and systems, focussing on diversity, interaction, process, and complexity. In contrast to this view of language is the notion that the essence of language is a system of abstract rules and relations. While this view has been around since at least the Middle Ages (Garner, 2002, p. 11–14), it was explicitly articulated by Saussure (1966 [1916]), for whom the underlying system (langue) is the core of language, and hence the subject matter of linguistics; its actual manifestations (parole) are incidentals. Following the Saussurean distinction (perhaps much more rigidly than he intended), scientific linguistics became pre-occupied with rules. However, from an ecological perspective on language, the actual manifestations constitute the language: their characteristics and identities continuously mutually define the system (Hayward, 1995, p. 29). An analytic approach to a complex system can say nothing about how it works, or what its function is; for example, one can get no useful idea of an engine by looking at its component parts unless one understands how they interact. The environment is itself part of the interaction, and not merely a backdrop to the main action.

Language teachers are profoundly aware that, while it is possible to analyse particular skills or aspects of language use, communicative language use engages many skills simultaneously. Like riding a bicycle, communication only happens when you pedal, steer, and travel fast enough to remain stable. The fact that an aspect of language, such as the coherence of an essay, can be isolated and inspected does not mean that a student can produce this, or even grasp the concept apart from the matrix within which it is embedded. The assumption that students can employ such analytic concepts outside of their context is profoundly unecological.

# 2.2. Language is dynamic and interactive

Ecology is dynamic: each part is in a state of flux, and interacts with other elements to create the environment within which they are situated. Education theory has begun to move beyond the assumption that communication consists of transferring messages, a view dubbed by Reddy (1979) as ‘the conduit metaphor’: the notion that messages flow, as it were, through a channel between people. What are broadly described as ‘constructivist’ views underpin much contemporary thinking and practice in teaching all subject areas; these see communication as the collaborative negotiation of meaning between participants in an exchange. Success in such joint construction of messages depends on participants’ mutually agreeing on the validity of their interpretations (Garner, 1995). Unfortunately, communication theory has not yet devised (and may never be able to do so) a simple constructivist model that can compete with the eminently repeatable diagram that is still prevalent in many textbooks and manuals on communication: sender message receiver (representing what we might call a postal version of the conduit metaphor). Nevertheless, this diagram does not encompass the recursive, dialogic nature of language: “To some extent, primacy [in expression] belongs to the response, as the activating principle: it creates the ground for understanding.. Understanding comes to fruition only in the response” (Bakhtin, 1981, p. 282).

# 2.3. Language is situated

From an ecological perspective, language is grounded in the local situation, and an utterance is determined by a complex of factors: the physical setting; the participants and their mutual perceptions, relationship and intentions; other communicative means used simultaneously, and so on. The ecological study of language focuses not on individual elements and abstract rules, but on language as a form of being and behaving in the world. It is appropriate that this understanding of language can be traced back to an ethnographer, who wrote that “Language, and all Linguistic processes derive their power only from the real processes taking place in man’s relation to his surroundings” (Malinowski, 1930, p. 336; capitalisation in original).

Language and its social and cultural environment are “one indivisible totality.not a bounded entity, but a process in real time” (Ingold, 1998, p. 169–170). Social anthropologists have called for a “socially constituted linguistics in which.the communicative functions of language in the constitution of social life are fundamental to its essence” (Bauman & Briggs, 1990, p.79). In the early days of EAP, the majority of syllabi were what Wilkins (1976, p. 2) called “synthetic” and Spector-Cohen et al. (2001), call ‘Type A,’ which are explicitly or (more often) implicitly designed around the teaching of structures and rules. They were informed by the “segregationism” of linguistic theorists (Harris, 1996, p. 6) that often relies on analysis of language isolated from its purposes and uses.

Segregationism involves the three-fold assumption that:

(1) language is defined and generated by rules,   
(2) the rules can be learned in isolation from the social and cultural environment of language use, and   
(3) learned rules can be meaningfully put into practice at a later stage when learners encounter a real communicative context.

In reaction to the relative ineffectiveness of earlier approaches that were not adequately situated, writers on EAP emphasize the need to embed the linguistic material in the activities for which it has evolved: learning and teaching within an academic institution and the wider disciplinary context. This is advocated, for example, by proponents of an academic literacies approach (e.g., Graddol, Maybin, & Stierer, 1994; Lea & Stierer, 2000; Lillis, 1999, 2001), and of teaching language as a situated practice (e.g., Widdowson, 1978, 1998a).

Because of the analytical and segregationist orientation of much linguistic writing, however, there is a tendency in all language teaching to revert from time to time to focussing on rules for constructing and deconstructing uncontextualized strings of language. This is most obvious in the teaching of sentence grammar, which is still the mainstay of many foreign language courses (including English as a foreign language), but it is no less true of teaching discourse rules such as paragraph and essay structure. Despite the concern of EAP with culturally and institutionally situated language, it is always tempting to formulate abstract rules in the attempt to encapsulate a difficult concept for students—not least because students themselves often demand to know the rule.

There is a subtle but very important difference between regarding linguistic rules as constituting the language—an assumption that is fundamental to segregational linguistics and is probably held by most language learners and not a few language teachers—and regarding rules as useful guides to practice. Whilst the latter is the ecologically justifiable view, it does not afford learners the level of apparent certainty and clarity provided by the former. It is tempting, therefore, to replace (or at least supplement) situated language with formulaic paragraphs, model lecture notes, and so on, independently of a real-life communicative purpose, presented in an artificial context, constructed on the basis of what is said to be typical of a discipline or professional practice.

This brings us to the question of communication, which is fundamental to an understanding of language and of language teaching and learning.

# 3. An ecological view of communication

Jordan (1997, p. 1) gives a “rather general, working definition” of EAP as “concerned with those communication skills in English which are required for study purposes in formal education systems.” In a nicely ecological way, this definition explicitly sets the concerns of EAP within the context of communication and, by implication, within a community (the various teaching departments and the formal education system). To reiterate the point made in the earlier sections, CBI strives to avoid equating communicative competence with the teaching of disembodied language skills. Communication, one of the central themes of language ecology, is about far more than language in the narrow sense.

While there is more that can be said about communication beyond language than can possibly be discussed in a single paper, we would like to focus on one aspect: levels of communication. In an ecological view, communication occurs at several levels of complexity simultaneously. It does not consist of discrete messages, but of a series of overlapping and interrelated meanings. The meanings constructed through communication are cumulative. Most approaches to discussing communication operate on one level only, but, although it may be useful to focus on one or another level at various times, this is at best a temporarily justifiable over-simplification. In exploring the relationships between communication and education, we need to take a larger view. Single-level approaches depict the process in terms of a message or a small set of closely connected messages, and the single communicative act, such as an utterance, is presented as the paradigm for communication in general. To give an example relevant to EAP, an essay is a single-level communicative act. The event of which it is a part is the whole process of choosing the topic, discussing possible approaches, reading and discussing the relevant literature, perhaps handing in a draft for the lecturer’s comments prior to rewriting, etc.

In fact, we rarely communicate by means of isolated utterances (or sentences); the finished essay (or the class presentation) does not alone encapsulate the educationally relevant communication in which student and teacher are engaged. What constitutes the message at any stage is partly determined by previous messages involving the same participants, and will in turn partly determine the messages that follow. The process is complex, and involves continuously negotiating meanings on several interrelated levels at once. Three levels of complexity are significant for our discussion:

1. the communicative act   
2. the communicative event   
3. the communicative link

An act comprises either a discrete piece of behaviour by one person, or more usually, a brief exchange by which two participants achieve a single communicative function. Let us illustrate this with some commonplace (but genuine) examples (from Garner, 1995):

1. (Said at the start of the first lecture in a semester) My name is Mary Jones, and I will be lecturing to you in this subject.   
2. (Written on a student’s assignment) There are a number of problems with this essay. Make an appointment to talk to me about it.

Communicative acts are part of a larger context. They are a series of acts that together make up a higher-level, more complex whole: a book, a lecture, a conversation, an exchange of correspondence. What is communicated by example 1, for instance, is only partly comprehended by seeing it as an isolated act. It has additional communicative significance as the opening gambit of the lecture itself. The function of example 2 is best understood in the context of the essay-writing process and the lecturer’s written comments throughout the text. It would be difficult for the student to interpret it, for example, if there were no other comments on the essay.

These higher-level patterns of communicative behaviour are what we refer to as communicative events. (Swales, 1990, p. 58 used the term, communicative event, in a closely related sense in his definition of genres, but did not link it to the levels of communication). Like acts, events have a recognizable form, including a beginning and an end, a discernible function, and a single or connected series of topics. The form, structure, and function of communicative events are largely culturally and historically determined. Although the category is a little indeterminate, and overlaps with the other two levels in places, most events may be fairly accurately described, and in some cases, such as a parliamentary debate and certain rituals, their form may be strictly prescribed. An event is made up of, and provides the context for, a number of acts.

At a greater level of complexity again is the communicative link, a term we borrow from organisational communication theory (Jablin, 1982). This is the relationship between the participants, which usually continues beyond a single event, and, in the case of intimates, may encompass a whole lifetime. The link is in itself a form of communication, which may be simple or complex, close or distant, long lasting, or short, and so on. Some links (such as institutional structures) are defined quite independently of the actual individuals involved; others (such as friendships) are entirely personal. Socially assumed roˆ les, in which interaction is initially defined by but not ultimately limited to institutional structures, fall somewhere between the two. Classroom instruction, with its defined roˆles for teachers and learners, is an example of this type of communicative link. Another example is a discourse community, with its communicative goals, genres to achieve these goals, and experts who maintain the generic identities (Borg, 2003). Nonetheless, it is important to stress that, along with the act and event for which it provides the context, the communicative link is an ecological concept: it is always embedded in, and manifests, a specific communicative interaction.

The link is made up of and in turn is the context for a number, often a great number, of events. One of the functions of communicative links is to allow those involved to engage in events with relatively little effort at making, maintaining, and breaking contacts, and to build on what has gone before. A university unit or subject is such a link, which from a communication point of view is a closely connected series of events—classes, reading, essays, examinations, informal discussions, and so on—with a definable subject-matter and a specifiable series of functions or objectives. Each of the events is, of course, meaningful in its own right, but an event’s full function and significance can be understood only in the context of the communicative link, which encompasses the subject, the dialogue among the students and teacher, and the relationship with the discourse community that frames the discussion. A third example may make this clearer:

3. (Overheard in the corridor at a university) Lecturer: Have you done those problems? Student: What—the ones in chapter 4? Lecturer: Yes.

Student: The ones you set for homework? Lecturer: Yeah, have you done them? Student: No.

Notice how the interpretation of the participants clearly depends on the communicative link between them, at which they both hint (those problems; the ones in chapter 4; you set for homework).

What makes a successful communicative link in an educational context? First of all, the student creates meanings from the many events that make up the link: classes, discussions, exercises, assignments, examinations, etc. Interactions with the teacher, both direct (such as discussions or written comments on assignments) and implicit (such as listening to lectures or reading), result in greater shared understanding or communicative grounding in the subject matter by the student. The student is able to interpret what is being expressed in such a way as to develop an increasingly sophisticated and valid understanding. At the same time, he or she is increasingly a participant in a discourse community. This growing, multilayered relationship provides the motivation for increased language learning. This is what EAP aims to prepare the student for:

English for Academic Purposes refers to language research and instruction that focuses on the specific needs and practices of particular groups in academic contexts. It means grounding instruction in an understanding of the cognitive, social, and linguistic demands of specific academic disciplines. This takes practitioners beyond preparing learners for study in English to developing new kinds of literacy: equipping students with the communicative skills to participate in particular academic and cultural contexts. (Hyland & Hamp-Lyons, 2002, p. 2)

The CBI approach to EAP aims to avoid the problem of centring the communicative link between teacher and student on the language itself. In CBI, the main goal of the programme is to establish a communicative link in a way that is paradigmatic for the target discipline. The communicative link is the developing shared knowledge of a topic, which is created by a series of communicative events that are embodied in communicative acts.

# 4. The purpose-built discipline as an environment for CBI

If CBI is to develop both as a practice and in its research base, it has to be seen in a wider ecological context. Language arises from the communicative and cultural environment in which language use is embedded. The environment of EAP is defined by the institution (in particular the academic department), by the discipline itself, and by the interactions engaged in by the discourse community of the discipline. CBI strives to avoid segregating academic language by treating it as a set of rule-governed structures (whether they be, for example, the syntax of a written sentence or the structure of a typical academic lecture) and instead embedding it in an environment in which it is used to achieve academic purposes rather than simply provide models for them. This goes beyond providing ‘authentic’ texts (MacDonald, 2003; MacDonald, Badger, & White, 2000), genre-based rules (Swales, 1990), discipline-specific vocabulary, and ‘naturalistic’ communicative acts or exchanges, although it may include any or all of these.

Such an environment can be provided by developing an academic communicative link through the EAP curriculum, in which teachers and students engage in their own academic processes and discourse, that is, through content-based instruction. Even within CBI, there are a variety of ways in which to create these communicative links. For example, linked or adjunct programmes, which are jointly delivered by discipline-specific (DS) teachers and EAP specialists, offer great rewards of specificity (see Johns, 1997b, on joint pedagogical endeavours), but because of the increased demands on DS teachers and departments, they can be difficult to arrange.

This can leave an almost insurmountable problem. It is difficult and time-consuming for a teacher to develop the appropriate knowledge and qualifications in another discipline, even to the level of providing appropriate language support to students who have already entered degree programmes. A more significant problem is that she or he will find it difficult to teach across the many, often quite disparate, target disciplines of the students in a typical generalized pre-entry programme that universities have to provide these days.

The difficulty can, nonetheless, be largely surmounted if the EAP programme establishes its own, purpose-built discipline environment. In this environment, staff and students engage in a genuine, academic investigation of issues that, whilst they impinge upon a number of different disciplines and allow students to bring to bear their existing interests, experience, and expertise on the problems at hand, have their own internal coherence and integrity. In our attempt to create such an environment, we were responding to Widdowson’s (1998b, p. 712) call for teachers “to come to terms with the learners reality and somehow create contextual conditions that are appropriate to them and that will enable them to authenticate (the language) as discourse on their own terms.”

This is the theoretical framework within which we developed a new pre-Master’s level programme for international students. Earlier, conventional skills-based EAP courses in the institution had suffered from a number of problems, and proved generally unsatisfactory in preparing students for their future studies. In particular, we found that class time was spent contextualising readings; that graduates of our programmes reported considerable difficulties listening to lectures in their subject areas; that the writing tasks were not responsible to the discourse of a discipline. The programme focussed on communication at the level of the individual act, with occasional recognition of communicative events, such as lectures and projects. The communicative link, which is the key to academic socialization and contextualisation, was virtually entirely overlooked. Reading was separated from writing, and though there was, of course, talk in class, its content was not the focus of the class. There was no accumulation of meaning over the days and weeks of the course. In teaching reading, for example, time was spent contextualising short readings—raising schemata, introducing vocabulary, and focussing on the abstract structure of language. Only finally and where possible (which was not frequently enough), did we engage with the issues raised by the readings. The validity of the author’s claims and the view from which they arose, the arguments put forward to support them, together with intellectual, philosophical, and ethical implications of what was being read, were rarely addressed. In an effort to address the variety of target disciplines of the students, readings were taken from unrelated domains, so there was no accretion of knowledge within the class that could be used as a basis for intellectual criticism.

Similarly, in teaching writing, we felt that the students were not accountable for what they wrote. In this context, it makes sense to say to a student, for example, ‘Your English is pretty good,’ but not to make the academically essential next step and say, ‘but your ideas are muddled and unsupported.’ The teacher’s role was that of language adviser rather than an academic to engage with.

Leki and Carson (1997, p. 41) use the term “text-responsible” to describe writing in which students had to respond “based on content acquired primarily from text.” While students on many EAP courses do not have to engage with the content of a particular source, display understanding of that source and react to it, Leki and Carson show that most writing in disciplinary specific courses is text responsible. Without text responsibility, it is not possible to teach argumentation and critical thinking, which teachers in recipient programmes tell us the students crucially need.

Our students plan to enter a variety of Master’s programmes: mostly business, some computer science, and small numbers in design and other arts-related programmes. Because of the variety of target programmes, we could not appropriately prepare students for one particular programme without disadvantaging students planning on studying other disciplines. In order to make it possible for English language teaching staff to play an academic role, we decided to create our own communicative link, and introduce students to a particular discourse community. The context that we chose was global issues. Covering economic changes, the implications of technological innovation, and the impact of global communication on local culture, this topic provided relevant content for most of our students. We selected a textbook, Global Issues by John Seitz (Seitz, 2002), that had been developed for undergraduate L1 students. As interested observers of world events who had taught in some of the nations from which our students came, we had sufficient expertise to dig deeper into the subject and teach it.

Teaching team members choose topics that are of particular interest to them and through focussed reading, develop their knowledge of the area. The topics covered in Seitz (2002) are not dissimilar to many of the topics covered in EAP materials, such as the environment, energy and food (e.g., food distribution, genetic modification of food sources, etc.). Working with an overarching theme, however, allows teachers to connect one topic to another (population to food, food to environment) and create the intellectual framework to address the issues critically as well as linguistically. The genre characteristics of classroom discourse are informed by discussions with receiving departments, and the educational background of the teachers, several of whom have studied in areas relevant to the general topic. This framework then becomes a crucial element in the communicative links formed in the classroom.

In this way, we formed our own authentic communicative link. We felt that students who master one context of university education could more easily adapt their learning to a new context than students who only engaged with the rules and metacognitive contexts of language learning, such as the organisation of the typical university essay.

# 4.1. Implementing the course

In terms of the actual practice of the course, each week students read a chapter of Seitz (2002), or, in some cases, extended reading about topics such as education and English as a world language that were not covered in Seitz. One of the ELT team members gives a weekly lecture on the topic of the assigned readings. Discussion of the text briefly precedes the lecture and then continues after it. Student-led seminar discussions on supplementary readings further develop understanding of the topic. Seminar readings are chosen for their differing approaches to the weekly topic. This portion of the course totals six hours per week of content teaching and discussion. Two hours more are given to metalinguistic analysis—discussions of genre, lexis, and textual conventions such as referencing and criticality. Using student papers and the assigned readings, we also discuss argumentation and evidence. The course also includes four hours focussed on writing a 3000-word secondary-source paper on a topic chosen from a number related to the weekly themes. (There is an additional four-hour primary research methodology block, in which students plan, undertake, and report on a small research project. This component of the course is not dealt with here.)

From an ecological perspective, academic reading, writing, speaking, listening, argument, and so on, are inseparable parts of the processes of academic literacy. However, it is possible to look at the different language skills to understand their contributions to a holistic approach to preparation for academic study.

Reading is both at the centre of the course and pushed to periphery. It is central because the textbook provides a “roughly tuned input,” to adapt Krashen’s term. It is roughly tuned not only linguistically—that is, in lexis and syntax—but also, and more importantly for our purposes, at the levels of discourse, concept, and culture. Reading is pushed to the periphery in that it is done outside of class; students are expected to come prepared to discuss the content of the assignment. This extended reading of twenty to forty pages a week requires them to develop strategies for fluent reading and a large recognition vocabulary. Schmitt and Carter (2000) and Krashen (1981) both call for narrow reading to improve vocabulary acquisition. While the reading of a textbook (and related supporting readings) is perhaps wider than Schmitt and Carter or Krashen anticipated, it fits the needs of upper-intermediate students who plan to enter postgraduate study, with the substantial reading that entails. The reading also provides meaningful input to which students bring their own background knowledge.

The theme of globalisation and its consequences allows us to link content issues with language and discourse. For example, in Seitz (2002), a section on air pollution manifests academic hedging, and we have been able to help the students not only to recognize what the author is doing, but also to evaluate what it suggests about his point of view and academic neutrality (or otherwise). As another example, EAP textbooks (e.g., Jordan, 1999) usually include a section on various ways of representing and describing numerical data. Seitz’s chapter on population contains 12 tables, graphs or charts, set in the context of his discussion of the role of population in development. In class, students and teacher discuss the benefits and disadvantages of a growing population and relate this to the information that is presented in the charts and graphs. Then we step back from the content and look at what is implied in each of the different ways of presenting numerical data exemplified in the chapter.

The role of spoken language is crucial to developing academic literacy. Grabe (2001) discusses the contribution of talk and discussion to the development of academic literacy. As he says, “dialogue around texts and tasks needs to include critical inquiry and commentary, awareness of both texts and task organization and content, and reflections on text, author, language, process and task” (p. 38). Interaction and dialogue increase the understanding of texts and develop skills such as critical thinking. Additionally, we focus on spoken language because disciplinary subject teachers and former students have told us that lecture listening and seminar participation remained significant problem areas even for students who successfully completed a skills-based approach.

In developing lecture-listening ability, reading functions as the ‘pre-listening’ or the contextualisation that is characteristic of academic subjects. Each week of our course begins with a lecture on the topic of the assigned reading. Students come to the lecture, as most people come to most lectures, with background knowledge of the topic based on their reading. For our students, the prepared reading reduces the cognitive demands of listening to a lecture, that is, the demands of dealing simultaneously with listening in a second language and the introduction of new knowledge. In a post-course interview, one of our students said,

[In this course] they have the lectures.and every lecture focus on one topic, and we do seminar, focus on one topic one week, and we also give presentation according to the topic you taught in the week. And so, so, we have some information, and knowledge about the topic, and, you know, [the course], is quite.push us to write the essay.

As this student suggests, listening and speaking are ineluctably linked, and both contribute toward the preparation for writing. In seminar discussions, which are initially led by the teacher but subsequently are turned over to the students, students look at contrasting secondary articles, often opinion-based, on the theme of the lecture. They discuss the bases for the opinions and evaluate the evidence provided. This engagement with ideas helps in the development of critical thinking.

Atkinson (1997) argues that critical thinking is a culturally bound concept that students can learn only through a process of “cognitive apprenticeship,” in other words, through the sort of academic communicative link that a CBI programme offers. Critical thinking is developed by creating cognitive dissonance, in which students must wrestle with conflicting information, including their own and the teacher’s ideas and values, and produce a synthesis that is personally valid. The communicative link between teacher and student is essential here, in order to develop that sustained contact with knowledge and another knower that may elicit this dissonance. Readings on population and education [(a topic not directly covered in Seitz (2002)], but introduced as important to the theme and relevant for our students) both evoked strong discussions about the topics, which led to a number of papers that critically examined these issues.

Finally, because of its importance to postgraduate students (see Carson, 2001), writing is the focus of both extensive practice and careful meta-analysis. Students are required to write a 3000-word paper on a topic chosen from a list of titles related to the weekly topics of study (as well as a 1500-word primary research paper for the research element of the course). Since the readings that are discussed in seminar are often opinion pieces from newspapers and other publications, they become the basis for genre analysis, contrasting with the coursebook and other academic texts.

In this programme, students develop intertextual relationships simultaneously with an interpretative response. The source text becomes the framework for the students’ writing, situating the vocabulary and language structures in the content knowledge, and engaging them in intellectual and personal interpretation. They are encouraged to inform their discussion and assignments with personal insights. For example, this is a passage from a student paper on education:

Textbooks are essential to teaching literacy in many parts of the world where book hunger or even famine is endemic, where teaching is by rote and memorization of information, not always accurate and seldom up to date. When I studied in my university, one of my classmates, who came from a small village in West China, told me his learning experience. He was the first student to go to university in the history of his village during the recent half century, and the learning materials he used was only his textbooks, which were copied from higher grades students’ by his hand. ‘Besides the guidance of my teachers, textbooks were all of what I had. In the hardest time of my life, they brought me light, hopes and impetus and so on.’ This was what he described what the books meant to him.

Most students appreciate that they are studying an academic subject in a focussed way; the high face validity of the course is one of its attractions. A student described the course as being “different from other language courses. It seems like a university course.” By engaging in interpreting and creating meaning, this approach prepares the students better for the ecology of communication within their target disciplinary departments. This is because it:

† is a situated and changing practice rather than a static “knowledge” or “skill”;   
† involves the language skills, but also includes pragmatic awareness and, in particular, intellectual and moral engagement;   
develops in students an awareness of textual conventions (such as genres), specific disciplinary expectations, and cultural background knowledge (e.g., historical or contextual background) through the process of learning and acculturation;   
† recognises situated approaches to texts, for example, the Anglophone discourse of criticality;   
† builds on the variety of academic and literate practices in the students’ home languages and cultures (adapted from Kern, 2000, p. 16).

# 5. Limitations and conclusion

Content-based teaching using the theme of global issues provides an ecological framework for the preparation of students for academic study, in that it is holistic and reflects the dynamic nature of real-world use. It is situated in a meaningful context.

This framework allows students to engage with texts and spoken language so as to develop their abilities both linguistically and intellectually.

We want to acknowledge the limitations of our approach. It can be difficult to assess the results of any methodology; we are currently undertaking a long-term assessment of the results. However, on an anecdotal level, students and teachers on our programme have responded very well to the demands of a new course, and disciplinary teachers support the approach. CBI was initially instituted for one cohort of postgraduate students; however, after it had run successfully for several semesters, it was extended, using different themes and different teachers, to other courses, both undergraduate and postgraduate.

Overall, we prefer the linked or adjunct model of content-based instruction (Brinton et al., 1989; Johns, 1997b), as more deeply embedded in its relevant context. However, linked CBI is not practicable for groups of students planning on entering a variety of programmes. For such students, theme-based CBI provides an effective alternative.

Teaching CBI puts new demands on teachers; they need to feel comfortable both teaching the theme that has been chosen, and relating the content of that theme to EAPspecific knowledge, such as genre analysis, without the guidance of a textbook.

The final issue that we would like to mention is that our theme of global issues addresses the needs of most of our students, but students who plan to enter programmes that are quite different from ours (such as those reported by Spector-Cohen et al., 2001) benefit from the study of other themes. We have extended the range of purpose-built disciplines for different groups, to include the sociology of international students in contemporary Britain and the philosophical issues raised by current affairs.

# References

Atkinson, D. (1997). A critical approach to critical thinking in TESOL. TESOL Quarterly, 31(1), 71–94.   
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays (C. Emerson, M. Holquist, Trans.). Austin, TX: University of Texas.   
Bauman, R., & Briggs, C. (1990). Poetics and performance as critical perspectives on language and social life. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19, 59–88.   
Baynham, M. (2000). Academic writing in new and emergent discipline areas. In M. R. Lea, & B. Stierer (Eds.), Student writing in higher education: New contexts (pp. 17–31). Buckingham, UK: SRHE and Open University.   
Benesch, S. (1992). Sharing responsibilities: An alternative to the adjunct model. College ESL, 2, 1–10.   
Borg, E. (2003). Key concepts in ELT: Discourse community. ELT Journal, 57, 398–400.   
Brinton, D., Snow, M., & Wesche, M. (1989). Content-based second language instruction. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Multilingual writers and the academic community: Towards a critical relationship. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1(1), 29–44.   
Carson, J. G. (2001). A task analysis of reading and writing in academic contexts. In D. Belcher, & A. Hirvela (Eds.), Linking literacies: Perspectives on L2 reading–writing connections (pp. 48–83). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.   
Dlaska, A. (2003). Language learning in the university: Creating content and community in non-specialist programmes. Teaching in Higher Education, 8(1), 103–116.   
Garner, M. (1995). Communication, education, and the academic skills adviser. In M. Garner, K. Chanock, & R. Clerehan (Eds.), Academic skills : Towards a discipline (pp. 17–29). Melbourne: Victorian Language and Learning Network.   
Garner, M. (2002). Critical English grammar. Makassar: UNM Press.   
Garner, M. (2004). Language: An ecological view. Oxford: Peter Lang.   
Grabe, W. (2001). Reading–writing relations: Theoretical perspectives and instructional practices. In D. Belcher, & A. Hirvela (Eds.), Linking literacies: Perspectives on L2 reading–writing connections (pp. 15–47). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.   
Graddol, D., Maybin, J., & Stierer, B. (Eds.). (1994). Researching language and literacy in social context. Clevedon, Avon, UK: Multilingual Matters/Open University.   
Harris, R. (1996). Signs, language and communication. London: Routledge.   
Hayward, T. (1995). Ecological thought: An introduction. Cambridge: Polity Press.   
Hyland, K., & Hamp-Lyons, L. (2002). EAP: Issues and directions. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1(1), 1–12.   
Ingold, T. (1998). In B. Cartledge, Culture, nature, environment: Steps to an ecology of life. Mind, brain, and the environment. Oxford: Oxford University.   
Jablin, F. (1982). In M. Roloff, & C. Berger, Organizational communication: An assimilation approach. Social cognition and communication. Beverly Hills: SAGE.   
Johns, A. M. (1997a). English for specific purposes and content-based instruction: What is the relationship?. In M. A. Snow, & D. M. Brinton (Eds.), The content-based classroom: Perspectives on integrating language and content (pp. 363–366). White Plains, NY: Addison Wesley Longman.   
Johns, A. M. (1997b). Text, role and context: Developing academic literacies. Cambridge: Cambridge University.   
Jordan, R. (1997). English for Academic Purposes. Cambridge: Cambridge University.   
Jordan, R. (1999). (3rd ed.) Academic writing course: Study skills in English. Harlow, England: Longman.   
Kern, R. (2000). Literacy and language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University.   
Krashen, S. D. (1981). The case for narrow reading. TESOL Newsletter, 15(6), 23.   
Laferrie\`re, E., & Stoett, P. (1999). International relations theory and ecological thought: Towards a synthesis. London: Routledge.   
Lea, M. R., & Stierer, B. (Eds.). (2000). Student writing in higher education: New contexts. Buckingham, UK: Society for Research into Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Lea, M. R., & Street, B. V. (1998). Student writing in higher education: An academic literacies approach. Studies in Higher Education, 23(2), 157–172.   
Leki, I., & Carson, J. G. (1994). Students’ perceptions of EAP writing instruction and writing needs across the disciplines. TESOL Quarterly, 28(1), 81–101.   
Leki, I., & Carson, J. G. (1997). Completely different worlds: EAP and the writing experiences of ESL students in university courses. TESOL Quarterly, 31(1), 39–69.   
Lillis, T. M. (1999). Whose common sense? Essayist literacy and the institutional practice of mystery. In C. Jones, J. Turner, & B. V. Street (Eds.), Student writing in the university: Cultural and epistemological issues (pp. 127–147). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Lillis, T. M. (2001). Student writing: Access, regulation, desire. London and New York: Routledge.   
MacDonald, M. (2003). Authenticity, culture, and language learning. Unpublished paper delivered at IATEFL Conference, Brighton, UK.   
MacDonald, M., Badger, R., & White, G. (2000). The real thing? Authenticity and academic listening. English for specific purposes, 19, 253–267.   
Malinowski, B. (1930). In Supplement to C.K. Ogden, & I. A. Richards, The problem of meaning in primitive languages.3rd ed The meaning of meaning. London: Kegan Paul.   
Mohan, B. A. (1979). Relating language teaching and content teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 13, 171–182.   
Reddy, M. (1979). In M. Ortony (Ed.), The conduit metaphor—a case of frame conflict in our language about language. Metaphor and thought (pp.164–201). Cambridge: Cambridge University   
Roszak, T. (1980). In J. Burr, & M. Goldinger, Mysticism and ecology: The rhapsodic intellect. Philosophy and contemporary issues (pp. 426–437). New York: Macmillan, 426–437.   
Saussure, F. de (1966 [1916]). Course in general linguistics. New York: McGraw Hill.   
Schmitt, N., & Carter, R. (2000). The lexical advantages of narrow reading for second language learners. TESOL Journal, 9(1), 4–9.   
Seitz, J. L. (2002). (2nd ed) Global issues: An introduction. Blackwell: Oxford and Malden, MA.   
Spector-Cohen, E., Kirschner, M., & Wexler, C. (2001). Designing EAP reading courses at the university level. English for Specific Purposes, 20, 367–386.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University.   
Widdowson, H. G. (1978). Teaching language as communication. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Widdowson, H. G. (1998a). Communication and community: The pragmatics of ESP. English for Specific Purposes, 17(1), 3–14.   
Widdowson, H. G. (1998b). Context, community, and authentic language. TESOL Quarterly, 32(4), 705–716.   
Wilkins, D. (1976). Notional syllabuses. Oxford: Open University Press.

Mark Garner has taught languages and applied linguistics and engaged in communication research at universities in Australia and Britain. He is currently Programme Director of Applied Linguistics at Northumbria University. He is the author of Critical English Grammar, and Language: An Ecological View as well as chapters and articles on aspects of language ecology, communication, and education.

Erik Borg has taught English for academic purposes in China, Oman and Britain. He is director of the pre sessional programme for postgraduate students at Northumbria University, as well as teaching on the English Language Centre’s Master’s in Applied Linguistics. He has published on academic writing, literacy, and discourse communities.