Book review

Writing Using Sources for Academic Writing: Theory, Research and Practice, Rosemary Wette, Routledge. ISBN 9780367175924. 164 pp. Paperback: UK 48.78/ US $\$ 66.39$ , Hardback: UK 165.77/ US $\$ 225.60$ , e-book: UK 41.73/ US $\$ 56.79$

Intertextualit can be regarded as a juxtaposition of texts, which implies not only referring to texts wrten by others, but also a process of deconstruction and reconstruction of meaning inthe new text (Bloome & Hong, 2013). Being able to write using sources adequately has become pivotal in academic contexts, as this is not only a key means of asessing learning, but also the main way in which knowledge is constructed and disseminated in the disciplines. In the past five decades, source-based writing in English has gained increasing attention due to the ever-increasing number of second language (L2) and novice (L1 learners who are required to demonstrate proficiency in English to enter, advance and graduate from tertiary education where English is the medium of instruction (EMI). Writing Using Sources for Academic Purposes: Theory, Reearch and Practice, written by Rosemary Wett, provides a thorough review of the state of research and scholarly knowledge in the field.It underscores the evolving perspectives of source-based writing, which has influenced the perceived dificulties of novice writers and has had instructional implications for academic literacy development.

The book's content consists of six chapters, starting with an introduction to the main themes of the book and a description of its organization and intended readership. In this inroduction, source-based writing is presented as the skil of using textual sources not only as cosmetic artefacts, but as resource used to construct strong, convincing argument with a balance between the writers ideas (averral) and the ideas present in the sources (aribution). The suceeding chapters (Chapters 2to 5) are organised by theme, starting from a historical overview of scholarship and research, followed by a description of the processes involved in source-based writing, citation construction and text features inherent to source use. Challenges presented by novice writer are illustrated in each chapter. The concluding chapter presents a general, but well-developed description of disciplinary differences supported by expert opinions of scholars in eight disciplines in New Zealand and Australia. Each chapter concludes with practica source-based tass for classroom use or for autonomous leaning. Although the chapters follow a logical organizationfrom general to specific, they do not need to be read in a linear fashion. For example, as a reader, I started with Chapter 3: Locating, Evaluating, Reading, Summarising and Synthesising Sources, as I am currently researching discourse synthesis processes.

Dr. Wette presents the historical evolution of the source-based writing scholarship in the last 40 years. Strongly influenced by cognitivist approaches in the 1980's, source-based writing instruction had an approach, which emphasised stage-like proceses like brainstorming, drafing and revising. With the advent of EAP and ESP instruction and their focus on students' needs, source-based writing was seen as an act of disciplinary socialization that aimed to acculturate learners into the disciplines following Anglo western conventions and practices. While the book covers a wide range of text-based features and proceses, such as legitimate/ illegitimate source-based use, summarising and synthesising sources, citation purposes, and metadiscourse resources, readers interested in more pecialised topics such as neotition of divere litracy practice issues of power and identit or conflicting belefs and ideologies may need to look elsewhere..

In this book, we can see how traditional views of transressive source text use have shifted from being considered ethical or cultural issues, usually referred to as plagiarism, to be considered a developmental stage in the novice writers journey to become proficient writers. Dr. Wette also argues that traditionall, institutional policies have responded to acts of transgressive intertextuality by warning them about the consequences of plagiarism rather than by providing guidance and advice on how to avoid it. Therefore, the sections on learning tasks and challenges for novice writers come in very handy.

Across the Chapters 2 to 5, the sections on chllenge for novice writers are based on evidence from scholarl reearch and cover a wide range of topics; for example, summary writig challenges, such as language proficiency, ability to comprehend and to recon. ceptualise source content are described in Chapter 3; ailing to convey an authoritative, but modest voice or lack of reader awareness are among the challenges discussed in Chapter 5. The sections with practical source-based tass for classroom use r fr autonomous learning are an asset o the value of the bok. They are very straightforward and easy to follow. An additional advantage isthat they are classifed according to skillel: novice, intermediate and proficient. While the tasks suggested may be useful for many writing instructors and intermediate writers as they cover most aspects of source-based writing, it may be quite hard for some students, especiall novice writers or les seasoned writing istructors to carry on some of the tass autonomously i the absence of guidelines or an answer key for the various exercises and tasks.

The concluding chapter starts with an overview of research on disciplinary ifferences and how these ifferences have an impact on disciplinary citing practices, such as citation frequency and types, use of textual, person and relational markers. The chapter also discuse literacy practices in five disciplines as reported by ten academic saff from universities in New Zealand and Austrlia. The discussion point of this chapter is disciplinary differences as a key element in source-based writing instruction. Additionall, such a small number of academic staffrom different disciplines is not expected to be representative; however, they might have en chosen under specific criteria with the intention to deepen our understanding of ltracy practices in such disciplines. It would have been beneficial to explore opinions of experts in ther countries as well, to have an overview of academic literacy practices in other tertiary contexts.

This book is therefore a very good companion for teachers, students and instructors interested in academic literacy development. Writing Using Sources for Academic Writing not only bridges the gap between theory, and practice, but also underscores the importance of including not only rule-governed, generic aspects of source-based writing but more sophisticated and complex components of intertextuality within the disciplines.

# Reference