Book review

Review of Introducing English for Research Publication Purposes, John Flowerdew, Pejman Habibie. Routledge (2022). 150pp., ISBN: 978-0-367-33058-3 (pbk). \$US44.95, UK34.99

With the expansion of the role of English as a lingua franca in academia world-wide, many multilingual scholars are increasingly facing the pressure of "publishing imperatives' in their career development as a result of their institutions' ambition to strengthen academic competitiveness (Luo & Hyland, 2016, p. 43). Publishing in English has also become a graduation requirement for graduate students in some English-remote contexts (Bruce, 2021; Cargill, Gao, Wang, & O'Connor, 2018). These trends have led to the rise and development of English for Research Publication Purposes (ERPP) as a sub-field within English for Academic Purposes (EAP). This book, co-authored by John Flowerdew and Pejman Habibie, is an informative inroductory volume on ERPP that i likely to be of interest to EAP/ESP/ERPP researchers and practitioners, as well as reviewers and editors.

The book comprises ten chapters that outline the chronology of ERPP emergence and development. Drawing on their research and publishing experience, Flowerdew and Habibie critically review various dimensions ranging from historical background and theoretical and empirical approaches to pedagogical practices. They also comment on contentious ssues and ffr solid advice for uture research and instructional practice. The discussion in each chapter is well supported by extensive evidence from the literature, charting the nexus between the publishing procedure, product, and pedagogy. They take into account multiple roles involved in the publishing procedure, such as scholars, editors, reviewers, practitioners, and address the practical concerns and dilemmas that each role is facing.

The first four chapters of the book provide the background of ERPP emergence. On the basis of a clear defintion of the scope of ERPP in Chapter 1, the two subsequent chapters (Chapters 2 and 3) map out the ideological, socio-economic, and historical contexts in which the impetus for scholarly publication has now ben made even clearer, since it is default requirement for pursuing a sucessul academic carer. The bigger picture presented here covers the rise and development of scientific communication and academic discourse, along with the peer-review mechanism in ERP. The authors also discuss the current asessment of research performance, such as journal impact factors and scholars productivity (e.g, H-index), as these aspects could also affct scholarly publication. Another important field in the foundation of ERPP is perspectives on the English language. Chapter 4 thus provides the paradigms with regard to the use of the English language and their relevance to the ERP field. The authors also discuss acontested ssue relating to linguistic inequality imposed upon writers with English as an additional language (EAL). Thisis central to a problem, since the English language requirement actually creates barriers that impede EAL writers international cholarship and result in additional costs and psychological burden to achieve publication and scholarly collaboration. Preliminary evidence provided in this chapter sugests that accepting AL variations in language use at different level, such as lexcal, syntactic, rhetorical, and organizational, might e aviable option, rather thanrequring standard English for publication. Hwever, we found that one releant area f studies i littl discussed in this chapter or other parts in the book. For many AL cholars, proofreaders, who act as literacy roker or text mediators, play a pivotal role in the editig processto overcome their language gap for publication (Lillis & Curry, 2010; Lu0 & Hyland, 2016). The textual interventions profreaders have made can increase the chance of publishing success and we would therefore have expected to see more content related to this role and the process of text mediation.

The next five chapters constitute the second section of the book and relate to ERP research and teaching practices. The frst chapter in this section (Chapter 5) provides systematic review of three major theoretical orientations in ERPP research; namely, genre theory, social-constructivist theory, and World Systems theory. It also discusses connections between relevant notions in adjacent fields, such as situated learning, identity, and agency. We found the discussion of the link between World Systems theory and ERPP, which echoes the World Englishes (WE) paradigm introduced in the previous chapter,very intriguing. This type of discussion is useful because it raises awarenessofthe socio-political and socio-economic power relationships between Anglophone and EAL scholars, as well as their publication at the macro level (Mu & Zhang, 2018). Based on the thre theories mentioned in Chapter 5, Chapter 6 deals with two empirical approaches dominant in ERPP: genre analysis and naturalistic studies. The authors advocate for giving more attention toscholarly genres such as book reviews, conference presentations, and research grant proposals, rather than just research articles (RA). These two closely related chapters provide extensive crtical reviews of seminal and recent work. They are very useful and would be informative for any empirical studies on texts, authors, and writing proceses in ERPP. The next chapter, Chapter 7, further address the growing tention t rerh into gkeing rctices rlatingoitr, riwer, and revi proesses. Te uthors ssion fthe occludd pratie s very hlul for schlar, eill ovice cholrs, to achiee  ettr undrstndng of publication procedures. However, probably due to the limited amount f research to date, the authors' discusson of empirical evidence is limited when compared to the relatively large body of arguments on editorial bias relating to EAL scholars. In some way, this appears to have interrupted the flow of the authors discussion on ERPP research practices. Also, this section on editorial bias partially overlaps with the EAL linguistic inequality that the authors have already discussed in Chapter 4.

Chapter 8 address the changes in ERPp with the advent of the digital era. With the development of technologies, scholarly publications are now produced and dsseminated mostly in digital format. The authors address the changes in scholarly publication by proposing an analytic model that we consider very feasible. Adapted from Appadurai's (1996) model on global cultural economy, the current version classfies the changes in digital academy into four dimensions: ethnoscape, epistemoscape, genrescape, and pedigoscape. Specificall, ethnoscape concerns the changes in social interactions within and beyond academic communities. pistemoscape addresses the changes in access to knowledge and its management, and dissemination. Genrescape focuses on the emergence of multimodal genres in publication. The last dimension, pedigoscape, deals with the efects of digital technologies on ERP teaching and learning. Given the vital role that digitalization plays in the publishing proces, we expect there willbe more research in the future interpreting scholarly publication as a multimodal practice by using the model proposed here.

We consider Chapter 9, which focuses on the teaching and learning of ERPP, to be the most inriguing and meaningful chapter of the book. It ilustrates major isues concerning ERPP pedagogy including target competence, teaching and learning modes, materials, pedagogical approaches, and teacher education. One of the main lesons to be learned from this chapter is that ERP competence needs to go beyond knowledge about genre, disciplinary discourse, and research strategies that are usuall found in ERPP instruction. The authors point out that the ofen-neglected skillof developing researchers capacity for managing publishing procedures and communicating with gatekeepers needs to be brought to the fore. Another merit of the chapter is the feasibility of methodological approaches (e.g., task- and genre-based pedagogy, corpus-based aproaches, critical-pragmatic approaches). The instructional procedure of each approach is succictly presented, together with sample classroom activities and potentia effects based on empirical evidence. ERPP instructors who are loking for practical suggestions wil find this chapter very useful, as much of what is included is poised to guide their course design and teaching practice. The chapter further points out the lck of ERP teacher education, since instructors are ofte found to have limited training or publishing experience to teach ERPP skill (se e.g., u & Zhang, 2018; hang, 2016) It i a shame that the authors do not offer more thoughts on possile solutions to the predicament, as we believe that readers would expect to learn more about these possible solutions.

The last chapter extends the discussion of ERPP beyond merely summarizing the whole book. The authors highlight that universty policies and intructional practices may benefit ERPP research and teaching, starting from re-understanding the position of ERPP in the universit curriculum. They draw our attention to the peripheral role of ERPP instruction in many disciplines. In their view, ERPP should be granted a more prominent position in postgraduate education and regarded as apivotal area of academic scholarship. On the basis of this understanding, further provision of English language support in various disciplines and allocation of universty administration resources il be meaningful and effctive. While most of the discussin in this book relaes to the concens of AL writers, the need for support of native English-speaker writers is also considered, and the authors rightly point out that the increase in Chinese language scholarly publications should not be overlooked. This is thought-provoking and could be an interesing area for future research.

Despite the omissions or imitations mentioned above, the book is a comprehensive and enlightening inroduction to the field of ERPP.It discusses macro-context and aproaches and proposes suggestions for scholars so that the challenge of publication imperaties will be beter dealt with. The authors' ccount of the current pressure faced by academics around the globe is a good reminder of the importance of ERPP, which will rigger readers' strong interest in reading the book. The various strands of the ERPP field addressed in the book are isightful in theoretical, empirica, and pedagogical acounts, and have the potential to benefit novice and experienced scholars as well as those who are ERPP teachers. Contentious ssues raised in the book such as EAL inequality, editorial bias, and digitalization, among others, inspire further empirical investigation. On the whole, the authors deserve a round of applause for their success in providing an account of the past and the present of ERPP. Theireffort to sugest future directions of ERPP is even more significant. We would certainly recommend the book to ERPP researchers and practitioners in this field, although graduate students pursuing publication will find it equally valuable.

# References

Appadurai, A. (1996). Modernity at large: Cultural dimensions of globalization. University of Minnesota Press.   
Brue, . (2021).  a  t r  e, prir, an nie. o J of gis for c Pe Research and Practice, 1, 23-36.   
Cargll,    218 Pf  oico i Adapting an intensive workshop approach for early-candidature use. English for Specific Purposes, 52, 13-26.   
Lilli, T. M., & Curry, M. J. (2010). Academic writing in a global context: The politics and practies of publishing in English. Routledge.   
Luo, N. & Hland,  (2016). he acs witing or publiction: Eglish tcher as txt medr. Jl f Sond Lge ing 33, 43-5.   
u, C. & g  J. (018. ng i li pif lisng  gsh. Joof l isg 94), 397-418.   
Zang  .16ti ot     s  nin Review of Applied Linguistics, 39(3), 203-232.

Lu a t thisi tnaan AP) such as The Applied Linguistics Review and Sustainability, among other Chinese journals.

Journal of Applied Lingusics and RELC Journal. He was honoured by the TES0L International Association (USA) in 2016 with the award o $5 0 @ 5 0 ^ { \ast }$ , acknowledging $\mathfrak { s o }$ stand d ts he.  a i   y eer th  o - ciation in 2017.

Lu Zhang College of Foreign Languages, Ocean University of China, Tsingtao, China. E-mail address: zhanglu@ouc.edu.cn.

\* Corresponding reviewer. College of Foreign Languages, Northwest Normal University, Lanzhou, China. E-mail address: lj.zhang@auckland.ac.nz (L.J. Zhang).