# Academic literacy and the nonnative speaker graduate student

George Braine1,\*

Department of English, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong

# Abstract

In this paper, I examine the acquisition of academic literacy by nonnative speaker graduate students who choose to study in the English medium. For these students, the concept of academic literacy extends beyond the ability to read and write. I will critically explore our understanding of academic literacy by summarizing the research on this issue, identifying the strengths and weaknesses of the surveys and case studies that have been conducted. I will then point out the areas that need to be examined, and better approaches that could be utilized to enhance our understanding of academic literacy. Having been a nonnative speaker graduate student myself, I will integrate into the paper anecdotes of my experience in gaining academic literacy in order to both enrich the paper and to substantiate my claims. $©$ 2002 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd.

Growing up in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) in the 1960s and 1970s, I had been up to my ears in American culture and politics. My father had bought me a subscription to the Readers’ Digest when I was 12, and I was also reading Free World, a magazine distributed by the United States Information Agency (USIA). I listened to the Voice of America regularly and keenly followed the Vietnam War. American pop and country and western were the most popular types of music on Radio Ceylon. Later, as a novice teacher of English, I began reading the Forum magazine which the USIA sent me, my only exposure to what could be termed professional literature in the teaching of English.

So, when I arrived in the US in the mid-1980s for graduate study in applied linguistics, I thought my long-term acquaintance with America and my maturity had prepared me for life at an American university. I had been married for more than 10 years, had some experience of foreign travel, and was confident of my language and social skills. Because I arrived on campus a week after the fall semester had begun, the only space available on campus was a large room in a coed dormitory, to be shared with five other students, four of whom were undergraduates. One was the president of the university’s gay and lesbian students’ society, with a hectic social life, and the others were fun loving students out to have a good time, especially at the beginning of the academic year. The lights were never switched off in the room, the phone rang around the clock, and visitors dropped-in at all hours of the day and night. The sounds of doors swinging open noisily and banging shut, of running feet and the giggles of young women, pervaded the hallway.

Nothing had prepared me for this. I could not sleep for two weeks. Physically and nervously exhausted, I appealed to an international student advisor, who arranged my move to an off-campus apartment. That allowed me to survive and complete my studies. Some of my classmates were not so lucky. One who had taught English for years in his country was traumatized with embarrassment when he was told that his English proficiency was low and was required to take full-time ESL courses for a whole year before being allowed to take graduate-level courses. Another classmate from Africa, who had learned English as his third language, simply disappeared from the university when he too was asked to take a year of ESL courses. A third classmate, unable to cope with the long parting from her family, saw her studies falter as a result.

Academic literacy has been narrowly defined as ‘‘the ability to read and write the various texts assigned in [university]’’ (Spack, 1997). Spack was writing in the context of a study that described a young Japanese student’s journey through the American undergraduate curriculum. On the other hand, anyone who has attended graduate school, or taught graduate courses, or supervised graduate students is well aware that the acquisition of ‘‘academic literacy’’ that is essential for graduate studies is more than the ability to read and write effectively. As my own experience and that of my classmates described earlier amply indicate, graduate students not only need to build interactive relationships with their teachers, thesis supervisors, and peers, and develop effective research strategies and good writing skills, they also need to adapt smoothly to the linguistic and social milieu of their host environment and to the culture of their academic departments and institutions.

Simply stated, a knowledge of one’s chosen field of study, research skills, and good reading and writing skills form only the foundation for the acquisition of academic literacy. To build upon this foundation, graduate students must adapt quickly to both the academic and social culture of their host environments, and the personalities and demands of their teachers, academic advisors, and classmates. Graduate students need to acquire advanced academic literacy, and this acquisition only comes, whether these students like it or not, along with complex and often confusing baggage.

In this paper, I will first summarize the more relevant research that has been conducted so far into the issues that concern academic literacy and nonnative speaker (NNS) graduate students. After evaluating these studies and pointing out what they reveal, I will indicate the areas that need further study and argue for the need to give voice to current and former NNS graduate students themselves so that they can express first-hand how they acquired academic literacy.

# 1. Research on academic literacy and NNS students

The earliest attempts to determine academic literacy were the surveys of undergraduate academic tasks, a popular form of applied linguistics research for decades (see Bridgeman & Carlson, 1984; Johns, 1981; Kroll, 1979; for instance). Later, Horowitz (1986) and Braine (1989) analyzed course syllabi and writing assignments to obtain a better grasp of undergraduates’ writing needs. Research also focused on teachers’ evaluations of students’ writing and their judgments of the frequency and seriousness of the students’ writing problems (see, for instance, Bridgeman & Carlson, 1984; Johns, 1981; Vann, Meyer, & Lorenz, 1984).

# 1.1. Survey research

At the graduate level, three surveys that have left a lasting impression are those of Canseco and Byrd (1989), Casanave and Hubbard (1992), and Jenkins, Jordan, and Weiland (1993). Canseco and Byrd (1989) conducted the pioneering survey of writing tasks assigned to graduate students, focusing on business administration courses at a university in the US south. They analyzed 55 course syllabi from 48 graduate courses and determined that seven formats (examinations, problems and assignments, projects, papers, case studies, reports, and what they termed ‘‘miscellaneous’’ assignments) were assigned in these courses. Casanave and Hubbard (1992) surveyed teachers at Stanford University on the writing they assigned to doctoral students, on how they evaluated students’ writing, and on their perceptions of the students’ writing problems. Responses were received from 85 teachers in the humanities and social sciences (HSS) and science and technology (ST). Jenkins et al. (1993) cast a wider net, surveying engineering teachers at six US universities that enrolled large numbers of NNS graduate students. Their objectives were to determine the prevailing practices in writing in graduate engineering programs and to explore the attitudes of engineering faculty members about writing skills needed within the graduate programs and beyond. They received 176 usable responses to their questionnaire.

# 1.2. Case studies

As researchers in applied linguistics began to acknowledge that qualitative research would provide more comprehensive data than surveys and textual analysis, case studies became more prevalent in the research on academic literacy. Four of the better known case studies are summarized here.

Belcher (1994) studied two graduate students from China and one from Korea majoring in Chinese literature, applied mathematics, and human nutrition, respectively. The objective of the study, which was conducted at a major US university, was to examine the relationship between these students and their academic advisors and how the students functioned as members of their disciplinary communities. Over a 10-week academic quarter, Belcher met with the students during a 2-h weekly session of a dissertation writing class in which the students were enrolled, read their dissertation installments weekly, and discussed their writing as well the advisors’ responses to the writings with the students. She also met with the advisors in the middle of the term for loosely structured interviews and met them again 1 year after the dissertation writing class had ended.

Schneider and Fujishima (1995) focused on a student from Taiwan who was enrolled at a graduate institution on the West Coast of the US. They examined the development of both spoken and written English of the subject over a period of four semesters, collecting both textual and anecdotal data from the student’s writing samples, journal entries, TOEFL scores, course grades, his English teachers, his subject area teachers, and the student himself. Due to low TOEFL scores, the subject’s admission to a program in international Public Administration had been conditional and he was required to take 16-weeks of full-time English courses before commencing studies in his major.

Dong (1996) studied three Chinese students majoring in biochemistry, genetics, and ecology at a US institution in the south. The objective of her study was to determine how native-speaker advisors initiated non-native speaker students to their respective disciplines through explicit and implicit instructions in knowledge transformation skills—citation norms, citation functions, and dissertation writing formats. During a 6-month period, Dong observed the advisors and the students as the latter wrote the first chapter of their dissertation, collected textual data (such as drafts of the dissertations, published and submitted journal articles, and style manuals), conducted background interviews with the advisors and the students. She observed two writing conferences and two lab meetings between the advisors and the students.

Riazi (1997) used questionnaires, interviews, textual analysis, and process logs to study four Iranian doctoral students in their second year of residency at a Canadian university. His objective was to determine how these students acquired academic literacy appropriate to their chosen disciplines. The study was conducted over 5 months as the subjects, all education majors, prepared for and performed writing tasks assigned in their graduate seminar courses.

Riazi did not attend the seminars nor did he meet with teachers and advisors in the course of the study.

# 1.3. Interviews

Gosden (1996) investigated how Japanese doctoral students wrote research articles in English, handled translations from Japanese to English, and revised their articles in response to external critiques by interviewing 16 doctoral students majoring in physics, chemistry, and cell biology at a Japanese university. At the time of the study, the students were attending an academic writing class taught by Gosden and were writing and revising their first research article in English.

# 2. Evaluation of the earlier research

First, the surveys. Although they provide useful information on certain aspects of advanced academic literacy expected of NNS graduate students, surveys nevertheless have clear shortcomings: they tend to impose preconceived classifications of academic tasks, or to focus only on narrow aspects of the academic milieu (such as writing tasks or teachers’ viewpoints), or to ignore the contexts in which the tasks are assigned and carried out. In fact, Jenkins et al. (1993) explicitly refer to the shortcomings of survey research. Casanave and Hubbard (1992), claiming that surveys alone cannot provide ‘‘all the information about NNS graduate students academic needs and problems’’ (p. 45), recommend the use of in-depth case studies of graduate students and their teachers through the use of interviews, observations, and the analysis of course syllabi.

To a large extent, these shortcomings were overcome in the case studies that followed. The researchers, who as English instructors had direct contact with the student subjects (as in the case of Beicher, 1994, and Schneider & Fujishima, 1995), or shared cultural and linguistic background with the subjects (as in the cases Dong, 1996, and Riazi, 1997), gained valuable insights into the lives of NNS graduate students as they navigated the complex and sometimes frustrating world of the academy. Nevertheless, most case studies focused only on a brief period in a student’s academic life—such as 10-weeks or 5-months—and, except Schneider and Fujishima’s (1995) study, did not obtain data from multiple sources. Academic literacy is generally acquired over an extended period of time in a complex, dynamic manner, and data from multiple sources—graduate teachers, advisors, peers, journal entries, and prescribed and reference texts as well as written assignments—is needed before a complete picture can be drawn.

In addition, as far as academic literacy is concerned, a fundamental shortcoming of most of these studies is their focus on writing tasks alone. Admittedly, this was the stated aim of most studies (Canseco & Byrd, 1989; Casanave & Hubbard, 1992; Dong, 1997; Gosden, 1996; Jenkins, Jordan, & Weiland, 1993; Riazi, 1997). As I have stated previously in this paper, academic literacy is much more than the ability to read and write, and as I argue later, data has to be obtained from multiple sources for a more comprehensive understanding of the process by which academic literacy is acquired.

# 3. What the research reveals

Despite these limitations, these surveys and case studies do provide useful information on NNS graduate students and their academic needs. From Canseco and Byrd (1989), we learn that writing is a major component of graduate business courses, and that it plays a key role in testing. Writing assignments in these courses contained detailed, highly structured instructions, indicating that course instructors carefully controlled the assignments. Nevertheless, students needed to interpret the assignments in order to better understand the instructors’ expectations. Casanave and Hubbard (1992) found that teachers of graduate courses in the humanities, social sciences, science, and technology consider global features of writing (such as the quality of content and the development of ideas) to be more important than local features. Teachers in the humanities and social sciences rated ‘‘appropriateness of vocabulary use’’ as the main problem in the writing of NNS graduate students. Jenkins et al. (1993), who surveyed engineering teachers, found that the teachers usually evaluated their NNS and NS students’ writing by the same standards. Further, surface level errors such as in grammar and vocabulary were evaluated leniently. They also revealed that teachers expected a high standard of writing from their students, and ended up writing about $2 5 \%$ of the material in their students theses.

Belcher (1994) revealed that thesis advisors and advisees may have distinct notions of culture that could be irreconcilable, that some students may be prone to display their self-assumed brilliance as scholars as opposed to fulfilling the instructions of their advisors, and that lengthy written criticisms of students’ writing by advisors may not help the writers. Most importantly, Belcher found that, as far as relationships between advisors and advisees are concerned, dialogic was preferable to hierarchical relationships. A student becomes more receptive to an advisor when the latter assumes a ‘‘coworker and a colearner’’ (p. 32) role.

Schneider and Fujishima (1995), who obtained data from multiple sources in their study of a Taiwanese student, analyzed their data according to three categories: the student’s English proficiency, his ‘‘sociolinguistic competence and motivation for studying’’ (p. 8), and his learning strategies. Schneider and Fujishima found that a student’s inability to enhance his/her proficiency in English could be detrimental to graduate study. Further, a grasp of social graces and social realties, and an integrative motivation, instead of a purely utilitarian or pragmatic one, may be essential for students to succeed at the graduate level. Furthermore, depending on behavioral strategies (such as behaving like a model student, pretending to understand what was going on in class, planning carefully before writing, and taking time to write) would not compensate for a student’s low proficiency in English, inability to regroup and show flexibility when confronted with negative feedback, and inability to use effective learning strategies.

Dong (1996), who studied three Chinese students, noted the importance of a hands-on approach by the advisor on the students’ research and writing, such as in providing careful guidance in the selection of a research topic and help with writing the thesis. This was more effective than ‘‘probing in the dark and learning from mistakes,’’ which students resorted to without adequate guidance from supervisors. Dong discovered few conflicts between the students’ L1 and the acquisition of academic literacy in English, and found the major problematic area for students to be the ‘‘lack of membership and social contact’’ (p. 453) with their chosen academic discourse communities.

Riazi (1997), who studied Iranian students in Canada, concluded that graduate students interpret writing tasks in terms of their personal, educational, and career perspectives. The writers’ attempts to balance their own interpretations with their understanding of audience expectations affected the form, substance, and style of the written product. Learning through writing, the students became better organized and more logical, reasonable, and communicative, better able to conceptualize and understand the topics they were writing on, and able to master new terminology of their disciplines and to apply them in their writing.

Gosden’s (1996) interviews with Japanese doctoral students revealed that none of the students had been formally taught academic writing in English, and, probably as a result, the overwhelming majority of them wrote drafts or outlines of their papers in Japanese before translating them into English. Most students viewed revision as simple editing for surface level errors and did not think of their audience as they wrote. The transfer of information appeared to be vertical, from the students to their Japanese native speaker supervisors only.

To sum up, the research reveals that writing plays a vital role in graduate studies and that teachers of graduate courses generally consider surface-level errors to be less important than global errors in their students’ writing. The research also reveals that a sound relationship between the advisor and advisee is essential to the latter’s success, and that, in the case of NNS graduate students, hands-on help by the supervisor from the conception of a research project to the writing of the thesis is the most effective. In fact, what is needed is a collaborative relationship between the advisor and advisee. Further, in order to succeed in graduate studies, students not only need a high proficiency in English and the ability to use appropriate learning strategies, but also sound social skills. NNS graduate students may need explicit instruction in academic writing, although they appear to become more accomplished writers as they proceed through their course work, research, and thesis writing.

# 4. Where do we go from here?

As a NNS speaker who has traversed the path of a graduate student, what I find lacking in the research are the authentic voices of NNS graduate students. Dong (1996) and Riazi (1997), themselves NNS, no doubt brought their experiences and insights as graduate students to their research. But, bound by the requirements and limitations placed on dissertation writing and writing for publication, they have been unable to refer explicitly to their own experiences while they reported on other NNS graduate students. Nevertheless, NNS scholars in applied linguistics are beginning to find their own voice (the establishment of the Nonnative Speakers of English Caucus in TESOL and the publication in 1999 of my anthology Non-native educators in English language teaching are two examples I can think of) and they need to add their voice to the issues concerning academic literacy. In fact, the chapters by Ulla Connor (1999) and Xiaoming Li (1999) in Non-native educators in English language teaching are two instances where we hear the voice of NNS academics reflecting upon their initiation to the discourse communities of their disciplines. Xiaoming Li’s chapter is particularly relevant because she not only discusses the cross cultural issues of learning to write in English as an older graduate student, but also her relationships with mentors such as Don Murray and Thomas Newkirk. Reflections an multiliterate lives, edited by Diane Belcher and Ulla Connor (2001), also contains some narrations by NNS scholars on how they acquired academic discourse as graduate students in the US.

While these reflections provide much insight into the acquisition of academic discourse, descriptions of relationships with academic advisors, as narrated in the first person, are rare. The research discussed earlier has shown the importance of the advisor–advisee relationship in the acquisition of academic literacy. On most occasions, these relationships may proceed smoothly and productively. However, the large percentage of ‘‘all but dissertation’’ (ABD) students and drop-outs from doctoral studies in the US could at least partially be attributed to relationships that failed. However, for former graduate students, these relationships could be too sensitive or painful to describe or reflect on. On occasion, the power of a single advisor to decide one’s fate could become an emotionally harrowing experience for a student. I am aware of one advisor who delayed signing on a dissertation till his NNS advisee completed his assigned work on a dictionary that the advisor was compiling. In frustration, the student threatened to sue the university and this finally paved the way for his graduation. In my case, of the two advisors who co-chaired my dissertation committee, one took a hands-off approach from the start. It was the generous help of the other advisor that carried me through. In addition to the lack of authentic voices on the acquisition of academic literacy, I find the earlier research wanting in another respect As an academic based in Asia, I am aware of the thousands of NNS graduate students who pursue their Masters and doctoral studies in the English medium at universities in Hong Kong, Singapore, and other Asian countries. The findings of the earlier studies (except for that of Gosden, 1996, which was conducted in Japan) may not be relevant to Asia because, for the most part, they were conducted at North American universities where non-native speaker students are from heterogeneous language backgrounds and are compelled to use English for communication with their teachers, advisors, and peers, and live and conduct research in environments where English is the main language of communication. In contrast, NNS graduate students in Asia must operate in environments where they are able to use their L1 for research and communication with their teachers and peers, and yet must read and write in English. At present, I am not aware of triangulated studies focusing on these students.

Whether conducted in Asia, North America, or elsewhere, research on the acquisition of academic literacy by graduate students must be in the form of case studies. Case studies provide rich information about learners, about the strategies they use to communicate and learn, how their own personalities, attitudes, and goals interact with the learning environment, and the nature of their linguistic growth. Case studies are also descriptive, dynamic, and rely upon naturally occurring data, and are therefore the most appropriate for studying the acquisition of academic literacy. The subject students themselves could provide the most important data, such as their sociocultural and educational backgrounds, previous educational experiences, language learning histories and strategies, and research experience. Data could also be collected through interviews with teachers and thesis advisors, observations of lectures, seminars, and students’ oral presentations, observations of student–teacher interactions during lectures and seminars, observations of interactions between students and thesis supervisors, textual analysis of selected text and reference books used by the students, and the textual analysis of papers and theses written by the students and the feedback given by their supervisors.

Consider the case of graduate students from China enrolled in Hong Kong universities for degrees awarded in English. If we are to study the acquisition of academic literacy by these students, the most appropriate research questions would be as follows: What are the linguistic, educational, and cultural backgrounds of graduate students from China studying in Hong Kong? What are the reading and writing tasks required in graduate programs in Hong Kong? How effectively do these students perform these tasks? What characteristics of the students’ background help or hinder them from adapting to Hong Kong’s academic environment in general and the specific academic departments in particular? The research methodology could consist of interviews with students, interviews with teachers and thesis advisors, analysis of course outlines, writing assignments, and text/reference books, observations of lectures, seminars, and student–teacher/advisor meetings, and the analysis of students’ writing. Only carefully planned studies providing data from multiple sources will give us the information we need for a clearer understanding of how NNS graduate students acquire academic literacy.

# References

Belcher, D. (1994). The apprenticeship approach to advanced academic literacy graduate students and their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 23–34.   
Belcher, D., & Connor, U. (2001). Reflections on multiliterate lives. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Braine, G. (1989). Writing in science and technology: an analysis of assignments from ten undergraduate course. English for Specific Purposes, 8, 3–15.   
Bridgeman, B., & Carlson, S. (1984). Survey of academic writing tasks. Written Communication, 1, 247– 280.   
Canseco, G., & Byrd, P. (1989). Writing required in graduate courses in business administration. TESOL Quarterly, 23, 305–316.   
Casanave, C., & Hubbard, P. (1992). The writing assignments and writing problems of doctoral students: faculty perceptions, pedagogical issues, and needed research. English for Specific Purposes, 11, 33–49.   
Connor, U. (1999). Learning to write academic prose in a second language: a literacy autobiography. In G. Braine (Ed.), Non-native educators in English language teaching (pp. 29–42). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Dong, Y. (1996). Learning how to use citations for knowledge transformation: non-native doctoral students’ dissertation writing in science. Research in the Teaching of English, 30, 428–457.   
Gosden, H. (1996). Verbal reports of Japanese novices’ research writing practices in English. Journal of Second Language Writing, 5, 109–128.   
Horowitz, D. (1986). What professors actually require: academic tasks for the ESL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 20, 445–462.   
Jenkins, S., Jordan, M., & Weiland, P. (1993). The role of writing in graduate engineering education: a survey of faculty beliefs and practices. English for Specific Purposes, 12, 51–67.   
Johns, A. (1981). Necessary English: a faculty survey. TESOL Quarterly, 15, 51–57.   
Kroll, B. (1979). A survey of the writing needs of foreign and American college freshmen. English Language Teaching Journal, 33, 219–227.   
Li, X. (1999). Writing from the vantage point of an insider/outsider. In G. Braine (Ed.), Non-native educators in English language teaching (pp. 43–55). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Riazi, A. (1997). Acquiring disciplinary literacy: a social-cognitive analysis of text production and learning among Iranian graduate students of education. Journal of Second Language Writing, 6, 105–137.   
Schneider, M., & Fujishima, N. (1995). When practice doesn’t make perfect The case of a graduate ESL student. In D. Belcher, & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 3–22). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
Spack, R. (1997). The acquisition of academic literacy in a second language: a longitudinal study. Written Communication, 14, 3–62.   
Vann, R. J., Meyer, D. E., & Lorenz, F. O. (1984). Error gravity: a study of faculty opinion of ESL errors. TESOL Quarterly, 18, 427–440.