# Peer and Cross-Age Tutoring in Math:Outcomes and Their Design Implications

Article  in  Educational Psychology Review $\cdot$ December 2005   
DOI: 10.1007/s10648-005-8137-2

Peer and Cross-age Tutoring: Outcomes and Their Design Implications

Debbie R. Robinson and Janet Schofield1

NOTE: Draft, please do not cite without permission from the authors.

KEY WORDS: Peer tutoring, cross-age tutoring, review, mathematics tutoring

Contact Information:

Janet Schofield, Ph.D. University of Pittsburgh LRDC Building Room 517 3939 O’Hara Street Pittsburgh, PA 15260

# Abstract

This review of the literature on peer and cross-age tutoring emphasizes programs in mathematics and suggests that such programs have positive academic, social, and psychological outcomes for tutees and tutors. In addition, this review explores whether various features of the tutoring programs (e.g., tutor training and the use of rewards) and characteristics of the students (e.g., academic level prior to tutoring, gender composition of tutor-tutee pairs) affect various outcomes. Role theory is used as a theoretical framework to explain some intriguing and surprising findings that emerged (e.g., why tutors show academic gains despite not receiving additional subject matter instruction, why longer and/or more substantial tutoring programs do not appear to foster greater academic gains than shorter programs, why mixed-sex pairs do not consistently reap benefits equal to those of same-sex pairs). Finally, implications of the review for the development of peer and cross-age tutoring programs are discussed.

# Peer and Cross-age Tutoring: Outcomes and Their Design Implications

The practice of students teaching other students has a rich history dating back thousands of years, even to the ancient Greeks (Topping, 1998; Wagner, 1990). It was not until the last several decades, though, that peer-assisted learning gained attention in the scientific literature. During this time, the emphasis shifted from using peer-assisted learning as an economical way to improve the tutee’s learning to seeing it as an approach that has potential benefits for both the tutors and the tutees (see Allen, 1976; Cohen, Kulik, & Kulik, 1982; Devin-Sheehan, Feldman, & Allen, 1976; Foot & Howe, 1998; Rohrbeck, Ginsburg-Block, Fantuzzo, & Miller, 2003). The term peer-assisted learning includes both peer and cross-age tutoring, and is sometimes used to refer to other educational techniques such as cooperative learning teams (Slavin, 1995) as well. The focus of this paper, peer and cross-age tutoring, involves one student having responsibility for assisting another student (or students) in learning material. Peer tutoring involves students at the same grade level. In contrast, cross-age tutoring involves students at different grade levels, with the older student acting as a tutor for the younger student(s).

The literature on the effects of peer and cross-age tutoring on the students involved is quite diverse; it focuses on a range of content areas, on programs that vary markedly in duration, on the impact of different characteristics of tutors and tutees, on the effectiveness of tutoring efforts, and on a variety of outcomes. Whereas some studies focus on the academic outcomes of tutoring programs, others examine psychological outcomes such as changes in self-esteem, selfconcept, and feelings of academic efficacy. Early reviews and meta-analyses of peer and crossage tutoring programs found positive outcomes (e.g., Britz, Dixon, & McLaughlin, 1989; Cohen at al., 1982), and a recent meta analysis of the impact of peer-assisted learning on elementary school students also found support for the usefulness of such learning strategies (Rohrbeck et al., 2003). While the recent meta-analysis of peer-assisted learning showed significant increases in achievement, especially for minority students (Rohrbeck et al., 2003), the fact that it considered many peer-assisted learning strategies as a group makes it impossible to tease apart the effects of tutoring from the effects of other peer-assisted approaches such as small-group and collaborative learning. Thus, this paper will summarize the current state of the scientific literature on the outcomes of tutoring for both tutees and tutors, building on the conclusions from the 1982 and 1989 reviews. After presenting this summary, we then discuss role theory as a parsimonious explanation for a number of peer tutoring findings, including some rather counter-intuitive ones, across a variety of outcomes. We also extend the current literature by discussing a number of implications of this review for practice.

In conducting this review, we paid special attention to studies of peer and cross-age tutoring in math because there is a widespread concern about the implications of the fact that the average mathematics achievement in the United States is lower than in many other countries, including Singapore, the Republic of Korea, Australia, and Canada, to name just a few (OECD, 2002; TIMSS-R, 2001). In fact, in the TIMSS-R study of 38 nations, the United States ranked $1 9 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ in mathematics. These findings have led to widespread calls to improve the performance of U.S. students in this field, because of its crucial importance for the U.S.’s economy in an increasingly global world. Since tutoring programs are a possible mechanism for improving achievement, we pay special attention to studies of peer and cross-age tutoring in mathematics.

We also pay special attention in this review to the impact of involvement in tutoring programs on minority students because the gap in performance between white students and minority students is also a major concern (Berliner, in press; Hedges & Nowell, 1998; Jencks & Phillips, 1998; Kosters & Mast, 2003). Not only is this gap substantial, but there is reason to think that the gap between the performance of majority and minority group students is larger in the U.S. than in other countries. Although there are a fair number of peer and cross-age tutoring studies based on samples that are exclusively or predominantly African American, there are many fewer studies that focus on students from other minority groups, which limits the research base in an important way. However, when the existing literature allows it, we examine tutoring outcomes for members of other minority groups as well.

# Methodological Issues

In order to build upon Cohen et al. (1982) and Britz et al.’s (1989) earlier reviews, we searched the PsycINFO, Sociological Abstracts, and ERIC databases for publications about peer and cross-age tutoring that were not included in those reviews. In this search, we focused on the domain of mathematics, and were especially interested in studies that included minority students. We did not, however, include studies that focused exclusively on students with learning disabilities or behavior problems (see Maher, Maher, & Thurston, 1998), except when such research was helpful in clarifying ambiguous results from other studies. Although our focus was on tutoring in mathematics, we do mention tutoring studies from domains such as spelling, reading, and science when there was a paucity of research on a specific outcome when the studies considered were limited to mathematics, or when such research was helpful in examining the effects of peer tutoring programs for minority students. Neither Cohen et al. or Britz et al’s reviews specifically examined outcomes for minority students. And although Rohrbeck et al’s (2003) very useful meta-analysis concluded that peer-assisted learning strategies were especially beneficial to minority students, as mentioned earlier that study considered a variety of peerassisted learning strategies together, including peer and cross-age tutoring. Some of the other strategies included in their review, such as cooperative learning approaches, are well-established and are known to have positive impacts on minority students (e.g., Slavin, 1995). Thus, although Rohrbeck et al.’s conclusions suggest that tutoring may indeed be beneficial to minority students, their paper does not tease apart the outcomes of tutoring for minority students from the outcomes of other peer-assisted strategies known to be effective.

It is important to note before presenting our conclusions that research on peer and crossage tutoring has employed a wide variety of methodologies with varying degrees of rigor. For example, some studies of the impact of tutoring utilize carefully developed standardized test scores and established psychological measures; others rely on subjective reports from teachers and students. In addition, many studies use experimental or quasi-experimental designs, but some do not. Experimental and quasi-experimental studies typically use random or stratified random assignment to place students into the role of tutor or tutee, but some peer tutoring programs rely on student volunteers, criterion-based selection (i.e., low or high performers), or teacher-chosen tutors and tutees. The studies reported here typically used either randomly assigned experimental and control groups or pre- and post-test designs, both of which are relatively powerful approaches. However, the studies that lack the control of a pure or quasiexperiment and those using non-random assignment to conditions were not completely eliminated from consideration, because some of them provide a wealth of intriguing data. On the occasions when methodological issues raise questions about a study’s conclusion, this issue is mentioned when discussing the outcomes associated with that study.

One other methodological issue should be noted. A number of studies which include students from various racial or ethnic background do not report results separately for students of different backgrounds. Also, they sometimes fail to provide information on the exact proportion of the sample that each group represents saying instead something like, “tutees included white, African American and Hispanic students.” The problem here, of course, is that the outcome for the overall group of tutors or tutees may not occur in every subgroup of tutors or tutees. Thus, conclusions from these studies could be misleading. Generally speaking, however, we do not

think this is a serious problem because, as will be discussed, the studies that do allow one to confidently draw conclusions about the impact of tutoring on African American or Hispanic students are consistent with the results of studies depending on all white or heavily white samples. Nonetheless, it is an issue that should be kept in mind.

Outcomes of Peer and Cross-Age Tutoring

# Academic Achievement

Tutee academic achievement. Cohen et al.’s (1982) meta-analysis of tutoring programs found that almost $87 \%$ of the studies that measured achievement showed better examination performance by students who received tutoring than students who did not receive tutoring. Their meta-analysis included both peer and cross-age programs in primary and secondary grades, in math and reading programs. Consistent with this, Britz et al. (1989) found that only one of the 14 studies of mathematics tutoring they reviewed did not find gains in tutee academic achievement. And most recently in a meta-analysis of peer-assisted learning in elementary schools, Rohrbeck and her colleagues (2003) concluded that students involved with peer assisted learning, which includes but is not limited to tutoring, made larger academic improvements than similar controls across many disciplines, including mathematics.

Relatively recent studies not covered in the above reviews confirm and reinforce their conclusions about the positive academic outcomes of participating in mathematics tutoring programs for tutees. For example, a study of cross-age tutoring with $4 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ and $5 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ grade female tutees (being tutored by $1 1 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ grade tutors) concluded that being tutored significantly increased math performance on the California Achievement Test as compared to a similar control group (Sprinthall & Scott, 1989). Likewise, a peer tutoring study of tenth grade students at-risk for failing math found that receiving tutoring had a significant positive impact on their performance on the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS) mathematics examination as compared to a similar control group (Early, 1998). A cross-age tutoring program between $6 ^ { \mathrm { { t h } } }$ grade minority students at-risk for dropping out of school and ${ 8 } ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ grade tutors demonstrated that tutee math performance improved more than the control group’s math performance on a modified form of the TAAS (White, 2000). And a cross-age tutoring study utilizing paired science techniques with seven and eight-year-old tutees and eight- and nine-year-old tutors found that tutees improved their scientific understanding significantly compared to non-tutored controls (Topping, Peter, Stephen, & Whale, 2004). In sum, then, recent research continues to support the idea that students benefit academically from being tutored by other students. Although the exact nature of the studies varied with regard to whether peer or cross-age tutors were used, as well as with regard to program length and whether or not tutors were trained, their impact on mathematics learned was consistently positive.

Tutor academic achievement. Importantly, many studies have shown that academic achievement also improves for the tutor (e.g., Gartner & Riessman, 1994). Both Cohen et al.’s (1982) meta-analysis and Britz’s et al.’s (1989) review noted academic gains for tutors. However, a much smaller proportion of the studies included in these reviews examined academic outcomes for tutors than academic gains for tutees. Of those studies, though, $8 7 \%$ noted tutor academic improvement in Cohen’s sample, and all six of the studies that examined tutor outcomes in Britz’s analysis noted mathematical gains among tutors. The finding that tutors improve academically have also been supported by more recent research (e.g., Early, 1998; Topping et al., 2004; White, 2000)

An important variable to consider when evaluating tutor academic improvement is the academic achievement of tutors prior to tutoring. Cohen at al. (1982) noted that low-achieving tutors made larger academic gains than average-achieving tutors. Britz et al. (1989) noted that the studies in his review utilized tutors with varying achievement levels, but did not address the issue of whether tutees of both high and low achieving tutors benefit from tutoring. Many tutoring programs utilize only high-performing or average students as tutors (e.g., Early, 1998; Yueh & Alessi, 1988) and such tutors seem to benefit from their tutoring experience. For example, Early (1998) found that average performing students who became peer tutors increased their math performance, even though the program lasted a mere two weeks. Recent studies not included in those reviews support Cohen et al.’s finding, with low-performing, at-risk, and disabled students having all been placed successfully in the role of tutor, with positive outcomes for both tutors and tutees (e.g., Menikoff, 1999; Polirstok & Greer, 1986; White, 2000; Willis, Morris, & Crowder, 1972). For example, a series of studies demonstrated that low-achieving African American, Puerto Rican, and White students placed in the role of tutor exhibited increased reading performance (Greer & Polirstok, 1982; Menikoff, 1999; Polirstok & Greer, 1986). And it is important to note that in these studies low-achieving tutees who had similarly low-achieving tutors showed improved academic performance as a result of the tutoring as well.

Despite the abundance of studies showing that tutoring increases academic achievement, there are a few notable exceptions. In one such exception, Sprinthall and Scott (1989) did not find improvements in algebra achievement for their $1 1 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ grade tutors. Perhaps this is due to the unusually large difference in tutor—tutee age, with the consequent difference in the kinds of math that the tutees and tutors are learning. In that study, $1 1 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ grade tutors tutored $4 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ and $5 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ grade students. However, as evidenced by the strong findings of the meta-analyses and later studies, the lack of tutor academic improvement in this study seems to be the exception to the much more common finding that tutoring does improve tutors’ academic achievement.

Importantly, research suggests that academic gains made by tutors are not limited to the material they teach. For example, as noted briefly but not emphasized by Britz et al. (1989), Sharpley and her colleagues (1983) found that tutors increased their academic performance in the math domain being taught to tutees (i.e., operations), and in other domains of mathematics (e.g., estimation, geometry, fractions, etc.), though tutees did not show similar gains outside of the domain they were taught. It is important to note that tutors often receive instruction in both how to tutor and in the subject matter they teach. But in light of the findings that tutors show academic improvements in areas apart from the specific material they tutor, something other than this extra training and instruction appears to be influencing tutor outcomes. Researchers have yet to tease apart what proportion of the academic gain that tutors evidence stems from the extra instruction they receive and what proportion stems from something else, such as being put in the role of teacher.

# Other School-Related Outcomes

Peer and cross-age tutoring has been shown to have positive school-related outcomes other than increased academic achievement, for both tutees and tutors (Bar-Eli & Raviv, 1982; Fantuzzo, King, & Heller, 1992; Ginsburg-Block & Fantuzzo, 1997; Heller & Fantuzzo, 1993; Nazzal, 2002; Topping et al., 2004). Such positive outcomes include increased on-task time and improved classroom behavior. In addition, students involved in tutoring, as both tutees and tutors, often demonstrate increased retention rates and more positive attitudes about school. Although these outcomes are not the same thing as academic achievement, they are nonetheless important, as students cannot be expected to perform well if they do not attend school and pay attention in class, among other things. And, for example, on-task time is often used as a predictor of academic achievement (Greer & Polirstok, 1982).

Subject matter attitudes and retention for tutees. Cohen et al.’s (1982) meta-analysis of tutoring programs found that only eight studies reported results of tutoring on tutee attitudes toward the subject matter in which they were tutored. Every one of these studies found that tutee attitudes were more positive in classes where all students were tutored than in control classes

without tutoring. However, Britz et al.’s (1989) review found inconsistent results from the five studies in their sample that examined the impact of tutoring on tutors’ attitudes. A more recent study of minority college students tutored in a variety of subjects found that tutees were more likely to stay in school than similar minority students who were not tutored (House & Wohlt, 1991). Likewise, a study of seventh grade urban students, over $80 \%$ of which were minority group members, found that dropout rates were lower for students in classes that were randomly assigned to a collaborative peer tutoring program than for students whose classes were not (Roswal et al., 1995).

Subject matter attitudes, retention/attendance, and time on-task for tutors. The effect of tutoring on other school-related attitudes and behaviors has also been documented for tutors. For example, Cohen et al.’s (1982) meta-analysis found that four out of five studies that examined tutor attitudes found larger increases in positive attitudes toward the subject matter they tutored among tutors in classes where all students were tutored than in control classes without tutoring. Britz et al.’s (1989) review did not address these types of outcomes for tutors.

Since these early reviews, the pattern of positive effects of tutoring on other schoolrelated attitudes and behaviors has continued. In Greer and Polirstok’s (1982; Polirstok & Greer, 1986) studies of cross-age tutoring in reading, low-achieving tutors demonstrated increased reading scores as well as increases in their on-task time in other domains such as math class (see also Ginsburg-Block & Fantuzzo, 1997). And in a college-level mentoring program for minority engineering students, Good and her colleagues (2001) found that tutors (labeled “mentors” in their paper) had higher retention rates than the national retention rate of minority college students. (However, the mentors in Good et al.’s study were all self-selected volunteers who expressed interest in the mentoring program which raises the question of whether tutoring influenced their retention or whether this self-selected sample was different from the average

student to begin with.) In a study comparing a racially and ethnically diverse group of math tutors with non-tutor controls, Nazzal (2002) found that among the ${ 8 } ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ grade at-risk students studied, tutors as a group were absent fewer days during the tutoring program than they were before the tutoring program began. Although Nazzal’s program lasted only one week, this particular finding has important implications. If being a tutor increases school attendance, then tutoring programs may increase tutor academic performance in many domains because students are in school more and thus able to benefit more from the learning opportunities provided there.

Additional school-related outcomes for tutees and tutors. Another benefit of peer and cross-age tutoring is that, in some cases, it not only improves student attitudes toward the tutored subject matter but also toward school in general. For example, in a study comparing tutors with non-tutor controls, Nazzal (2002) found that students who were math tutors had higher perceptions of the importance of school and of their success in school than did the controls. Although such outcomes of tutoring are not studied as frequently as academic achievement, they are potentially important. Many studies using pre- and post-program comparisons report that tutees and tutors alike have increasingly positive attitudes toward tutoring programs over time (e.g., Brush, 1997; Fogarty & Wang, 1982; Hilger, 2000; Ponzio & Peterson, 1999), and end up with more positive attitudes toward school in general than do controls. For example, Fantuzzo and his colleagues (1992; Fantuzzo, Riggio, Connely, & Dimeff, 1989) found that satisfaction in school was higher among students involved in reciprocal peer tutoring than among students who studied alone.

In sum, then, peer and cross-age tutoring appear to have many important, positive schoolrelated outcomes. Tutees and tutors alike show academic improvement. Tutoring has also been shown to increase persistence in school, whether measured by retention rates for college students or absenteeism by primary and secondary schoolchildren. Furthermore, attitudes toward the

subject matter and school in general often improve as a result of peer and cross-age tutoring. And, if these academic effects are not enough, peer and cross-age tutoring have potentially important psychological effects for tutees and tutors.

# Psychological Outcomes for Tutees and Tutors

Tutoring has long been hypothesized to increase such positive psychological outcomes as a sense of belongingness, self-esteem, self-concept, and internal attributions for academic success (e.g., Paolitto, 1976; Strodtbeck, Ronchi, & Hansell, 1976), and for the most part, research supports these expectations (e.g., Cohen et al., 1982; Fantuzzo et al., 1992, Medway & Baron, 1977; Sprinthall & Scott, 1989). One factor associated with being an at-risk student is the sense of not belonging or fitting-in with the school community (Nazzal, 2002). Peer and crossage tutoring has the potential to alleviate this sense of not belonging. Both Nazzal (2002) and Good and her colleagues (2000) found that tutoring peers increased feelings of belonging with regard to both the school and generally and with other students. (They did not examine psychological outcomes for tutees.) This research suggests that increased feelings of attachment, or belongingness, may increase retention rates and success in school, possibly because such feelings provide incentive for students to attend school and the motivation to try to perform well. However, care needs to be taken to develop a sense of community between the tutors and the teachers in the school, otherwise the tutors may develop feelings of rejection from the teachers and the school as a whole (Sawyer, 2001).

The findings regarding the impact of involvement in a tutoring program on the selfesteem and self-concept of tutees and tutors are mixed. No studies have found decreases in these constructs relating to participating in a tutoring program, though a few have found no effect of tutoring for either the tutees or tutors (Bar-Eli & Raviv, 1982; Menikoff, 1999; Sharpley et al., 1983). Other studies, though, have found that being involved in a tutoring program increases the self-concept, self-esteem, social confidence, and academic efficacy of tutees and tutors (Early, 1998; Fantuzzo, Davis, & Ginsburg, 1995; Ginsburg-Block & Fantuzzo, 1998; Heller & Fantuzzo, 1993; Roswal et al., 2003; Sprinthall & Scott, 1989). For example, White’s (2000) study of students at-risk of dropping out of school, which included very large proportion of Hispanic and African American participants, found that academic efficacy increased among math tutees, and Sprinthall and Scott’s (1989) study found similar results, with math tutees exhibiting increased internal attributions for success.

As can be seen, tutoring has the potential to produce very positive academic and psychological outcomes for tutors and tutees. The effect sizes in these studies of the impact of peer tutoring on academic and psychological outcomes tend to be moderate overall (see Cohen et al., 1982 and Rohrbeck et al., 2003). However, the effects are not guaranteed to occur in every tutoring program. Indeed, research suggests that the degree to which tutoring programs are successful is influenced by a number of program characteristics.

# Program Characteristics Related to Program Outcomes

One consistency across all peer and cross-age tutoring programs is the dyadic relationship between tutor and tutee. Aside from this one common thread, as mentioned previously, programs vary in numerous respects (Chapman, 1998; Topping, 2000; Topping & Ehly, 1998) including their duration, the amount of tutor training provided, whether the tutoring is reciprocal, whether material rewards are utilized, and the targeted population (e.g., at-risk students, females, minorities, etc.). Next we turn to discussion of the relation between such program characteristics and tutoring outcomes.

# Amount and Duration of Tutoring Experience

Many studies report program durations that range from two weeks (Early, 1998) to five months (Fantuzzo et al., 1992). Other studies report the number of sessions without specifying the length of time between sessions or the total duration of the program. Studies report as few as five to ten sessions (Ponzio & Peterson, 1999) and as many as 80 sessions (Polirstok & Greer, 1986). The majority of the tutoring programs seem to last from six weeks to one full school semester.

Cohen et al.’s (1982) meta-analysis indicated that longer tutoring programs were not necessarily better for academic outcomes than shorter ones. In fact, their review concluded that although most programs resulted in improved academic performance for both tutees and tutors, longer programs (19-36 weeks) resulted in less academic improvement than shorter programs (less than 4 weeks). Rohrbeck et al.’s (2003) meta-analysis of the impact of various peer-assisted learning strategies examined dosage (duration x sessions per week x hours per session) instead of duration of tutoring. It found no differences in academic outcome due to dosage. Taken together, these two meta-analyses suggest the rather surprising conclusion that longer and/or more substantial tutoring programs do not appear to foster greater academic gains than shorter ones.

Whether the length or dosage of tutoring programs influence psychological outcomes is not clear, as no meta-analysis has been conducted on this issue to date, perhaps due to the relative paucity of research on psychological outcomes of tutoring. Positive psychological outcomes occur among students involved in tutoring programs that last as little as 2 weeks (Early, 1998) and as long as a full semester (Sprinthall & Scott, 1989). However, there are also other studies of tutoring programs similar in duration (e.g., 5 weeks in Sharpley et al., 1983 and 14 weeks in Menikoff, 1999) that did not find similar improvements in psychological outcomes.

Tutoring programs differ in whether they provide tutor training and, if so, how they do that. Not all programs train their tutors (e.g., Medway & Baron, 1977), though most do, in

varying degrees. For example, before tutoring sessions even began, Fogarty and Wang (1982) trained their tutors in three 30-minute sessions. In their first session, tutors were exposed to the material they would be teaching. In the next two sessions, tutors were instructed on tutoring techniques and practiced role-playing a tutor. Unfortunately, many studies do not report the nature of their tutor training, instead simply stating that tutors were trained. In Cohen et al.’s (1982) meta-analysis, a somewhat surprising finding emerged – programs that included tutor training did not consistently produce stronger effects than those that did. In a review of tutoring programs in reading, Reckrut (1994) suggested that the most successful tutoring programs include training on interpersonal skills, management skills, and content skills. Training tutors in interpersonal skills often involves role-playing in order to show tutors how to interact in a positive manner with their tutees. Such role-playing often includes the use of nonverbal reinforcement. Training for management skills often involves teaching tutors how to stay ontask with their tutees, and training for content skills involves making sure tutors are well-versed in the material they will be tutoring. Some programs do indeed train tutors in all such areas (e.g., Sprinthall & Scott, 1989; White, 2000), while others focus only on a subset of these skills (e.g., Fogarty & Wang, 1982; Polirstok & Greer, 1986). In a series of studies, Greer and Polirstok (Greer & Polirstok, 1982; Polirstok & Greer, 1986) followed tutors as they tutored before being trained, while being trained, and after training. They found that tutors improved their reinforcement of tutee behavior and progress as a result of training and that tutees improved more after tutors were trained than they did before tutor training. And Fuchs and her colleagues (1994) examined the effects of training and experience on tutor/tutee interactions. Although they did not include a measure of student learning in this study, they did find that the trained and experienced dyads engaged in more instructionally sound interactions that included a more interactive style of explanation in mathematics operations. They suggested that this style could lead to greater tutee learning. Britz and his colleagues (1989) reviewed whether tutee performance could be differentiated based on tutor training. Because the results were ambiguous, they suggested that more research is needed to establish whether tutor training plays a critical role in the success of mathematics tutoring programs. Studies done since that time have not resolved this issue.

Reciprocal vs. Non-Reciprocal Programs

Another program characteristic of potential importance is whether the tutoring programs are reciprocal. In reciprocal peer tutoring, students change roles so that all students have the opportunity to reap the benefits of being both tutee and tutor. Reciprocal tutoring only occurs in peer tutoring programs, as it would be awkward and often impossible for tutee-tutor roles to change in cross-age tutoring programs. Fantuzzo and his colleagues (Fantuzzo et al., 1992; Fantuzzo et al., 1995; Fantuzzo, Polite, & Grayson, 1990; Ginsburg-Block & Fantuzzo, 1997, 1998; Heller & Fantuzzo, 1993; also Fuchs, Fuchs, Phillips, Hamlett, & Karns, 1995; Greenwood, Delquadri, & Hall, 1989) have researched reciprocal peer tutoring in mathematics over the years, and have consistently found positive outcomes for students. They report increases in academic achievement and social competence, better classroom behavior, more self-control and on-task time, and increases in attendance when compared to control students not involved in reciprocal peer tutoring. As a reminder, these outcomes have also been found with traditional peer- and cross-age tutoring programs, though not quite as consistently. In one of their studies, Heller and Fantuzzo (1993) found that students involved in a reciprocal peer tutoring program increased their mathematics performance more than control groups. However, students in a reciprocal peer tutoring program with parental involvement increased academic performance even more than students in that program without parental involvement. All of the reciprocal peer tutoring studies mentioned above involved the use of reward contingencies for performance,

making it unclear whether the pattern of very consistent positive outcomes is due to the reciprocal nature of the tutoring process or to the utilization of rewards.

Use of Rewards and Control over Rewards

Rewards are a powerful motivator for student performance, especially when students feel like they have some control over their outcomes. For example, Polirstok and Greer (1986) used tokens to increase tutor approval of tutee performance, which in turn helped to increase tutor and tutee academic achievement, compared to multiple baselines without tokens. And Fantuzzo and colleagues (1992) found that the combination of rewards and structured reciprocal peer tutoring produced the highest math performance compared to students who received only rewards or structured tutoring. Many of these studies allowed students to choose their rewards (e.g., pencils inscribed with “I love math,” extra recess time, or class privileges) and to keep track of their own progress. Programs that include both rewards and autonomy (autonomy in choosing rewards and autonomy in monitoring progress) seem to be especially effective in promoting positive tutoring outcomes for tutees and tutors (e.g., Fantuzzo et al., 1995; Fantuzzo et al., 1992; Fantuzzo et al., 1990; Polirstok & Greer, 1986).

# Student and Role Characteristics Related to Tutoring Outcomes

Another important area to examine when looking at the effectiveness of peer and crossage tutoring programs is the characteristics of students in the programs and the roles into which they are placed. In addition to the student academic performance prior to tutoring, which was discussed earlier, other student characteristics that have been studied include the gender composition and racial/ethnic composition of tutoring pairs.

# Gender Composition of Tutee/Tutor Pairs

The gender composition of the tutee/tutor pairing is important because it appears to influence the outcomes of the tutoring experience for both tutees and tutors. Specifically,

Topping and Whiteley (1993) reviewed 15 tutoring programs to examine the effects of gender composition on tutee and tutor reading outcomes. In these studies, the students ranged from 7 to 12 years of age. This review concluded that although tutees working in all kinds of dyads made academic gains, tutees in same-sex pairs demonstrated more academic improvement than those in mixed-sex pairs. Similarly, in her review of college level peer tutoring, Maxwell (1991) found that the tutees in same gender pairs performed better in most disciplines, including math and science, than did mixed-gender pairs. Consistent with these studies, Rohrbeck et al.’s (2003) review of peer assisted learning programs concludes that students who worked in mixed gender groupings gained less academically than those who worked in single-sex ones.

The apparent academic benefit of working in same-sex pairs for tutees does not seem to extend, to the same extent, to tutors. Specifically, Topping and Whiteley (1993) found that although tutors improved academically regardless of whether they tutored same or opposite-sex tutees in reading, female tutors had much greater academic improvement when they tutored males than when they tutored females.

Gender composition is also important for tutee and tutor outcomes other than academic achievement. In a $6 ^ { \mathrm { { t h } } }$ grade peer tutoring study on spelling, Ehly and Bratton (1981) found that same-gender pairs reported liking each other more than mixed-gender pairs. This liking extended to perceptions of competence, with more liked tutors being perceived as more competent, though it was unclear whether there were any real differences in competence among the tutors. Interestingly, perceptions of liking and competence did not influence academic outcomes. Fogarty and Wang (1982) found that mixed-gender pairs had the potential to produce negative attitudes toward tutoring, especially among female tutors paired with male tutees. These effects of gender on tutoring outcomes and the mechanisms underlying them should be explored further.

# Race or Ethnicity of Student Tutees and Tutors

A final student characteristic of interest is the race or ethnicity of the tutors and tutees. The research literature on the impact of peer tutoring includes numerous studies of both white and African American students. This is important since it is possible that race or ethnicity could affect students’ response to tutoring or being tutored by a peer in various ways. Many studies have been conducted in schools with predominantly white student bodies (e.g., Ehly & Bratton, 1981; King, Staffieri, & Adelgais, 1998). However, a substantial number have also been conducted in schools that serve primarily African American and Hispanic students (e.g., Ginsburg-Block & Fantuzzo, 1997; Good et al., 2000; Greer & Polirstok, 1982; Menikoff, 1999; Nazzal, 2002; Polirstok & Greer, 1986; Roswal et al., 1995; White, 2000). To our knowledge, there are almost no studies of peer and cross-age tutoring in which the number of Hispanic students is large enough to allow comparison of the outcomes for Hispanic students with others.

The conclusions presented in this paper regarding the positive impact of peer and crossage tutoring are generally found in studies conducted with African American as well as with white students (e.g., Greer & Polirstok, 1982; Menikoff, 1999; Nazzal, 2002; Polirstok & Greer, 1986; Roswal et al., 1995). For example, Good and colleagues’ (2000) examined the impact of a cross-age tutoring program on African American college students, finding that the tutors demonstrated higher retention rates than non-participants. They also found that tutors experienced both academic and personal growth (they did not examine tutee outcomes). Academic improvement for both tutees and tutors was also found in Menikoff’s (1999) cross-age tutoring study that examined mostly African American students. However, this study did not find any change in the self-concept of tutors or tutees. It is important to keep in mind that these two studies were conducted with college students, which raises some issues of the extent to which the findings would apply to younger and less highly selected populations. However, these findings are nonetheless suggestive that the impact of tutoring may be positive for minority students as well.

One interesting study explicitly compared the outcomes of tutoring programs for students of different backgrounds. House and Wohlt (1991) studied cross-age tutoring in college among minority students, including African Americans, Latinos/Latinas, and Asian Americans. They found that, overall, the minority students who were tutored persisted longer in college than similar non-tutored students. This difference was statistically significant for both the African American and the Hispanic students in their study. It was very small and not statistically significant for the Asian students, perhaps at least partly because their persistence was very high to begin with, making positive change harder to demonstrate. In sum, the research suggests African American students typically benefit from tutoring and being tutored. Much less research is available on outcomes for students from other minority group backgrounds. However, with the exception of House and Wohlt’s (1991) findings regarding its lack of impact on Asian Americans, the work that does exist suggests a positive impact. This is consistent with Rohrbeck and her colleagues’ (2003) meta-analysis of peer-assisted learning strategies in elementary schools which found that studies with more than $50 \%$ ethnic minority students had higher effect sizes for academic outcomes than studies with fewer than $50 \%$ ethnic minority students, although both sets of studies suggested positive outcomes from tutoring. This suggests that peer-assisted learning strategies work especially well for minority students, but that their usefulness is not restricted to minority students. However, there is still no unequivocal answer regarding whether same- or mixed-ethnicity pairings yield better outcomes.

Given that the gender composition of the tutee/tutor pair appears to be important in influencing outcomes, the question arises of whether the racial or ethnic composition of the tutee/tutor pair has predictable consequences. Unfortunately, there is very little data on this issue. In a brief review of Akah (1990) and House and Wohlt’s (1992) studies that examined same- versus mixed- ethnicity pairings, Maxwell (1991) concluded that the ethnic composition of tutee/tutor pairs was not predictive of academic achievement. Interestingly, Akah (1990) reported that only $20 \%$ of the African American tutees reported that tutor ethnicity was important. However, House and Wohlt (1992) found that ethnicity interacted with tutor gender and the amount of time tutees devoted to their tutoring sessions, which in turn influenced academic achievement. They found that Asian American and White students devoted more hours to being tutored if the tutor was female, whereas Latino/Latinas spent more time being tutored by male tutors. African American students did not differ in hours spent being tutored due to tutor gender. Again, the racial or ethnic combination of tutee/tutor pair was not predictive of tutee grades in itself, but the number of hours spent in tutoring did result in higher tutee grades (Maxwell, 1991).

A Role Theory Perspective on Some Surprising Findings Regarding the Outcomes of Tutoring

# Programs

A number of the findings discussed above are rather surprising. Why should tutors show academic improvement in the subject matter they tutor even when they are not given additional instruction in the material? Why do students involved in tutoring programs show improvements in domains other than in the subject matter that is tutored (e.g., attitudes toward school, classroom behavior, on-task time, and in other topics)? Why do shorter programs seem to be as or more effective in improving academic achievement than longer programs? And why aren’t the outcomes for mixed-sex pairs as consistently positive as outcomes for same-sex pairs? The next section of the paper uses ideas suggested by role theory to explain these findings.

Although role theory has been suggested as a way to frame some peer tutoring effects (Allen, 1976; Bierman & Furman, 1981), it has not yet been used as a way to explain some of the more surprising findings of tutoring studies. Role theorists propose that individuals’ behaviors are partially determined by the roles they play (Thomas & Biddle, 1966). According to interactional role theorists, a role is basically a set of behaviors and attitudes that is associated with a particular identity (e.g., teacher, student, parent, policeman, etc.) and that is recognized by society (Turner, 2002). When an individual assumes a role, that individual will be likely to behave in role-consistent ways, to come to hold attitudes consistent with the role, and to develop self-perceptions in line with role expectations.

Allen and Feldman (1973, 1976) suggest that the role of teacher involves competence, prestige, and authority. They further suggest that when a student assumes the role of teacher by becoming a tutor, the student takes on the attributes of that role. The role of tutor mirrors the role of teacher in many ways. For instance, the role of tutor involves such behaviors as conveying new information, answering tutee questions, engaging in active listening, using verbal reinforcements, correcting tutee work, and having more independence and responsibility than do students in general. The role of tutor also implies competence in academic ability, a liking for school and the subject matter being taught, and a faith on the part of school authorities that the tutor has the capability to help other students learn.

Role theory leads to the expectation that a student who takes on the role of a tutor may behave and feel differently as a tutor than he or she behaved prior to assuming that role. This may be especially true for students who were not ideal students, including those who were at-risk prior to involvement in tutoring since, for them, the discrepancy between their earlier identity and the one suggested by the role of tutor is especially great. The idea of students taking on the role of teacher when they become tutors may help explain why students in tutoring programs show

improved attitudes toward school, increased academic performance in the subject they are tutoring, and positive academic “spillover” effects (i.e., improvements in domains other than in the specific subject matter that is tutored).

Consistent with the above, Allen and Feldman (1976) report that tutors rate themselves as being more competent in school after tutoring another child. Also, Bierman and Furman (1981) found that students who were randomly assigned the role of tutor rated themselves as smarter, quicker, and more skillful than did their peers who were randomly assigned to the role of tutee, even though the tutees actually did better than tutors on a test. This suggests that occupying the role of tutor gives rise to feelings of competence.

While the role of teacher/tutor may readily help explain increased feelings of competence in school and more positive attitudes toward school on the part of tutors, how does role theory explain improved academic performance and other commonly found outcomes from tutors such as increased on-task time, improved classroom behavior, and decreased absenteeism? One possible explanation is that in the role of teacher/tutor, the tutor comes to better understand the importance of various behaviors that are part of the student role, such as utilizing certain study strategies, paying attention to the tutor, and participating in learning activities. They may also come to empathize more with teachers, understanding how important it is for students to behave appropriately, having been in a teaching role themselves. Thus, when not in the tutor role, students who have been tutors may move closer to enacting the role of “good” student, because they see how important it is for their tutees to behave similarly in the tutoring sessions. To the extent that the behaviors expected of “good” students such as completing their work and attending to the teacher are typically productive, enacting this role should improve learning. Therefore, tutors, when reverting to the role of student, may approach class with the attitudes and behaviors they want their tutees to demonstrate. Consistent with this idea, Good and her

colleagues (2000) found that tutors reported an increased awareness in their own study habits and strategies as a result of tutoring, which may partially explain the mechanism behind tutors’ increased academic performance.

Another possible explanation for positive changes in the tutors’ behavior is that the tutor becomes aware of being a role model for the tutee (Allen & Feldman, 1976; see also Good et al., 2000; Schunk, 1998). Tutors in cross-age tutoring programs may be especially likely to be looked upon as role models. These tutors are usually a year or two older than their tutees, which may promote the younger students desire to be like them, and the older students’ sense of serving as a model. Tutors may be more likely than teachers to become role models because they are more similar in age and in student status to the tutees. Tutors are fellow students, closer in age, and more likely than teachers to establish friendly (vs. authoritarian) relationships with their tutees (e.g., Ehly & Bratton, 1981), all of which may well promote the tutees’ identification with the tutor. As a role model, the tutor may begin to act in more socially desirable ways, and this may include behaving closer to the role of the “good” student outside of the tutoring sessions. Thus, the tutor might pay more attention in class, behave more appropriately in class, attend class more regularly, and study more than before; in other words, the student may enact the role of a “good” student (e.g., Smead, 1984).

Role theory can also be used to help explain the spillover effects of being tutored. Students may be more likely to behave as “good” students in one-on-one instructional settings compared to larger classroom settings because there is less anonymity and more immediate responsibility placed on the individual student to demonstrate his or her learning. The behaviors encouraged by the tutoring situation may generalize to later enactments of the role of student in the larger classroom. Furthermore, to the extent that the tutoring actually helps tutees to learn more and perform better in class, it mitigates feelings of incompetence or failure that often

contribute to disruptive classroom behavior. It should be noted that sometimes students who receive help from peers may feel deficient, angry, or shamed for needing help (Rosen, Powell, & Schubot, 1977; Schofield, 1980), especially when the helper is not performing a formal role and when the situation may reinforce racial stereotypes regarding academic competence (Schofield, 1980). This effect seems likely to be minimized when tutoring is a formal, accepted learning strategy for the class, or when reciprocal peer tutoring is utilized, enabling the helped to become the helper (cf. Delquadri, Greenwood, Whorton, Carta, & Hall, 1986; Ginsburg-Block & Fantuzzo, 1997; Fantuzzo et al., 1992).

Role theory is also helpful in explaining the surprising finding that shorter programs seem as or more effective in producing academic improvement than longer programs. This is unexpected, as it would seem reasonable to expect that as the amount of tutoring or being tutored increases, so too would positive academic outcomes. That this is not the case implies that there is something important happening in the tutor/tutee dyad over and above the direct teaching and learning of academic material.

Cohen (1986) speculated that, among other things, boredom, mastery of the material, loosening of the tutorial structure, and/or social involvement of tutor with tutee could possibly explain the fact that shorter tutoring programs seem as good or better than longer ones in terms of their outcomes. An alternative explanation suggested by role theory is that the almost immediate increase in academic outcomes in the shorter programs is due to students taking on the role of tutor and tutee, and that the lack of additional gains in the longer programs may be due to the novelty of the new situation wearing off and hence having no additional impact. For example, the mere assumption of the role of tutor, with its significance as a symbol of the school’s positive regard for the tutor, may create more positive attitudes on the part of the tutor that would not increase over time, since after the initial shift to the role of tutor, that new role remains stable.

Also, at the beginning of the tutoring program, both tutors and tutees may devote substantial time and energy to the tutoring sessions and to preparing for the sessions, as they are placed in new, unique, and potentially enjoyable roles. As time goes on, it may be difficult to maintain this heightened level of involvement and structure, or it may be that the pair has learned all it can from that particular combination of students and benefited all it will from assuming new roles. In a study of college students, Rosen, Powell, and Schubot (1977) found that changing from the role of tutee to that of tutor produced greater overall increases in performance and satisfaction with the tutoring program than staying in originally assigned roles (though a move from tutor to tutee was not as satisfying as moving from tutee to tutor). While such reversal of role assignments may be possible in peer-tutoring settings, it is not viable in most cross-age tutoring programs. Instead, either changing of tutor/tutee pairs or using different tutor/tutee pairs for a variety of subject areas may possibly achieve similar outcomes. To the extent that positive academic outcomes are indeed due to a combination of the roles students are put into and the uniqueness of each specific pair’s dynamics, perhaps creating new pairs throughout the tutoring program, or using different pairs in different domains, might help maintain the initial rate of performance increases.

In sum, then, both academic and non-academic effects of tutoring programs are typically positive regardless of the tutoring’s length, and there is no evidence that longer programs produce more gains than shorter ones. This suggests that these effects, whatever their causes, occur at or very near the onset of the tutoring experience. Such findings suggest that something about being in a tutoring situation, other than the learning stemming from the subject matter related interchanges themselves, may account for at least some of these outcomes. It may be that assuming the role of tutor and tutee plays an important part in fostering both academic and nonacademic outcomes of participating in tutoring programs.

Role theory may also be helpful in explaining why the outcomes for mixed-sex pairs are not as positive as outcomes for same-sex pairs. Recall that mixed-sex pairs tend to underperform, regardless of whether the tutor is male or female (e.g., Maxwell, 1991; Topping & Whiteley, 1993). One possible explanation for this is that students are distracted from learning because the mixed-sex dyad makes salient the role of male and female with a variety of consequences that work to students’ disadvantage in the tutoring situation.

First, a mixed-sex pair raises the possibility that students may be distracted from learning by concerns about how fully they are enacting the behaviors expected of them based on their gender roles. Recall that in one study, female tutors in mixed-sex pairs reacted somewhat negatively to tutoring, even going so far as to report that they would prefer working with a different tutee (Fogarty & Wang, 1982). This is consistent with the possibility that students are concerned about enacting their gender roles. Traditional gender roles are not consistent with females occupying roles that imply greater authority and competence than the males in an interaction (e.g., Bem, 1974; Eagly, Wood, & Diekman, 2000). Traditional gender roles are also consistent with males’ discomfort at being placed in the subordinate role of tutee when the role with more status is occupied by a female peer. And although Topping and Whiteley (1993) found the highest gains in female tutors who tutored males, the male tutees in this combination had the lowest gains in reading test scores. Also consistent with the idea that gender roles may negatively influence social processes in mixed-sex tutoring situations is the work of Underwood and her colleagues (Underwood, Underwood, & Wood, 2000). They found that among 9 to 11 year olds, mixed-sex pairs of students discussed material less and were less active on-task during computer-based problem solving than same-sex pairs. Mixed-sex pairs also reported less enjoyment overall than same-sex pairs.

Furthermore, in at least certain combinations of tutee-tutor gender composition and subject matter pairing, there is the possibility that stereotype threat may interfere with the tutees’ learning. Stereotype threat occurs when an individual who is a member of a group that occupies a negatively stereotyped role is reminded of that role and consequently worries about “living up to” the stereotype. The anxiety stemming from this worry then inhibits performance (Spencer, Steele, & Quinn, 1999; see also Steele & Aronson, 1995; Steele, Spencer, & Aronson, 2002) and leads to under performance relative to capabilities. For example, the female role has not traditionally included performing as well as males in math and related domains (Eccles, Jacobs, & Harold, 1990; Fennema & Sherman, 1977; Jacobs & Eccles, 1985; Swim, 1994). When a girl who cares about her academic performance is aware of the stereotype associated with her gender role, she may inadvertently confirm it when taking an assessment of her math ability in a situation in which her gender is salient. Stereotype threat theorists suggest that this occurs because an individual feels pressure that he or she may be judged in a way that will fulfill the stereotype. A large body of research with females ranging from elementary school to college suggests that stereotype threat can inhibit females’ performance in mathematics when gender is made salient in the situation (e.g., Ambady, Shih, Kim, & Pittinsky, 2001; Marx & Roman, 2002). Thus, in an intensive one-on-one tutoring session, girls who are tutored by boys, at least in math, may feel anxious about disproving the stereotype that girls do not perform as well in math as do boys, and consequently their learning may be impaired.

It is important to mention that stereotype threat effects have also been observed among ethnic minorities, including Latinos/Latinas and African Americans in academic settings when race or ethnicity was made salient by actions as minor as having to indicate race/ethnicity on a form. Research has shown that minority students’ performance in math and other domains is often impaired when they are made aware of the negative role expectations for their group.

Indeed, such effects have been found from middle school students to university students (e.g., Blasovich, Spencer, Quinn, & Steele, 2001; Good & Aronson, 2001; Steele & Aronson, 1995; see Steele et al., 2002 for a review). Although most of the tutoring literature has not examined the impact of the racial or ethnic composition of tutoring pairs, research on stereotype threat suggests that in many cases minority students in same-ethnicity pairs may outperform those in mixed-ethnicity pairs, since race and ethnicity are more likely to be salient in mixed dyads than in those in which both individuals are members of the same racial or ethnic group.

Implications of Research Findings Regarding Outcomes for Peer and Cross-Age Tutoring

# Programs

The research discussed in this paper was often not intended to address the specific concerns of those with responsibility for deciding whether to implement peer or cross-age tutoring programs in on-going educational settings or for those whose work involves developing such programs or selecting between various existing approaches to such tutoring. Nonetheless, taken as a whole, this research does have implications likely to be of use in such work. Here we briefly lay out what we believe these implications are. Since the research on which each implication is based has already been discussed in some detail, these discussions will be brief and will frequently refer back to earlier parts of the paper. We focus on implications likely to be of interest to those considering using peer tutoring programs as a way of increasing the achievement of minority, most especially African American, students and/or increasing their interest in subject areas such as math, although many of the implications are similar regardless of the student population of concern or the subject matter of interest. In trying to draw implications from the research, it is often necessary to go beyond what has been definitely demonstrated, especially since, as previously mentioned, this research was often not undertaken with its practical implications in mind. Thus, although we present a variety of implications which seem

reasonable based on the research available, it is important to note that they are intended as ideas to be considered rather than as inflexible guidelines meant to apply to any and all situations. Implication 1: Peer and cross-age tutoring programs are worth strong consideration as mechanisms for improving academic achievement among minority students as well as for increasing their interest in areas such as math.

The preceding review of the research literature suggests that peer and cross-age tutoring very often have positive effects of a moderate size on a wide variety of outcomes that are typically valued by our educational system. They are educational approaches that have been shown to be effective in producing positive academic outcomes for students at a wide variety of ages and from a wide variety of backgrounds. Specifically, they have been shown to help improve academic outcomes for both white and African American students at a variety of ages. Data on other racial/ethnic groups are much more sparse. In addition to improving academic achievement, peer tutoring appears to improve other school relevant attitudes and behaviors for both white and African American students.

Implication 2: Decisions about the selection of peer or cross-age tutors should take into account the fact that serving as a tutor has positive academic outcomes.

Although peer and cross-age tutoring programs were originally understood as mechanisms for improving academic outcomes for tutees, a large body of research suggests that tutors benefit from involvement in tutoring programs as well. This is true in programs in which students stay in the role of tutor for the duration of the program as well as for reciprocal peer tutoring programs in which students switch between being tutored and being the tutor. Thus, if the goal in adopting a peer or cross-age tutoring program is to improve the achievement of a targeted group of students, individuals from that targeted group should be considered for placement in the role of tutor as well as in the role of tutee.

Implication 3: Students whose academic performance is average, and those who are classified as “at risk,” can benefit from serving as tutors, and their tutees benefit as well.

Although one might well assume that those selected to be peer tutors should be the highest achieving students available, there is evidence that average students, as well as those classified as “at risk,” can serve as tutors in a way that produces positive outcomes for their tutees as well as for themselves. Whether using higher achieving students would produce greater gains in tutees is not a question that the research has answered, so it is not self-evident that average or at risk students should be selected as tutors. Nonetheless, given the benefits that appear to flow from being placed in the role of tutor, the possibility of selecting average or “at risk” students as tutors should be carefully considered. The appropriateness of selecting such students as tutors most likely depends to some extent on the characteristics of the students to be tutored. For example, although the research literature does not speak directly to this issue, it is likely to be problematic to select average or at risk tutors to tutor peers who are higher achieving than they are. The studies that have documented the successful use of average or at risk tutors (e.g., positive outcomes for tutees) have been those in which the tutees were similar to the tutors with regard to academic level.

Implication 4: Training of peer tutors, in areas including both subject matter and effective tutoring behaviors, is most likely worthwhile.

As discussed earlier in this paper, the research literature does not unequivocally document that training for peer tutors pays off in terms of increased positive outcomes for them or for their tutees. Nonetheless, not surprisingly, there are indications that training, both regarding the subject matter to be taught and regarding effective tutoring behaviors, is useful. Tutoring training sessions have the potential to serve as settings in which the tutors can receive extra instruction in the subject matter area they will be tutoring in an environment that gives then an

immediate practical reason to learn, which may well increase their attention and motivation compared to the typical classroom situation. Tutor training sessions can also serve to help students see themselves in the role of tutor, which may well also have positive effects as discussed previously. Finally, of course, training may provide them with valuable pedagogical skills. For such reasons, designing and implementing a tutor training program as part of a peer or cross-age tutoring program seems wise. It is also worth considering including specific rewards designed to foster certain kinds of tutor behaviors as part of an on-going training and support mechanism for tutors, as suggested by the Polirstok and Greer (1986) study which found that using tokens to increase tutor approval of tutee performance helped to increase both tutor and tutee academic achievement.

Implication 5: Tutoring programs structured to provide a substantial number of students with relatively short peer and cross-age tutoring may well produce more overall positive outcomes for a given level of investment than those which provide very prolonged and/or intensive tutoring experiences to a smaller numbers of students.

The finding that tutoring programs of short duration (less than 4 weeks) produce as much or more gain as those of long duration (19-36 weeks) suggests that it is important not to assume that the longer a program is the more its participants will benefit. Of course, it is possible that the research is incorrect and those other confounding factors, such as something about the structure of the shorter programs, accounts for this very counter-intuitive finding. It is also true that most measures of gains from tutoring programs have been taken near or at the end of the tutoring program, so it is possible that the gains made in the longer term programs might last longer than those made in the shorter programs. However, the existing research does at least suggest that strong consideration should be given to designing programs that are of somewhat limited duration, since this may be more cost effective than longer programs.

Implication 6: Reciprocal peer tutoring programs should be strongly considered when designing peer tutoring programs.

Research suggests that reciprocal peer tutoring programs in which students switch between the role of tutor and tutee consistently produce good results. The implications of this finding are somewhat clouded by the fact that the reciprocal peer tutoring programs studied also included the use of rewards, which may have contributed to their success. Nonetheless, given that both serving as a tutor and a tutee appear to have benefits, designing a program in which students have both experiences may be a way to maximize positive outcomes. Of course, in cross-age tutoring switching between the role of tutor and tutee is most likely not practical. Also, if a program were designed so that more academically advanced students were selected as peer tutors it seems unlikely that switching roles would work well. However, when tutors and tutees are relatively similar in age and in their level of academic achievement, reciprocal programs seem likely to be one very good option.

Implication 7: The age/grade gap between tutors and tutees in cross-age tutoring programs should be relatively modest if the program is intended to maximize benefits to the tutor as well as the tutee.

Cross-age tutoring programs, which typically involve tutors 2 to 4 years older than tutees, produce consistently positive results for tutors and tutees. One of the few exceptions to this pattern of positive results for both groups was a study in which $1 1 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ grade tutors tutored 4th and 5th grade students (Sprinthall & Scott, 1989), one of the biggest age gaps in the research literature of which we are aware. In this study, although the tutees appeared to benefit from involvement in this tutoring, the tutors did not show the improvement in academic achievement typical in cross-age programs. This suggests caution regarding programs in which the age gap is as much as 6 or 7 years. One can readily see why cross-age tutoring programs with large age

gaps might not be as helpful to the tutors as those with smaller ones. For example, as discussed earlier, when there is a large gap in age between tutor and tutee, the nature of the work they are likely to be doing is so different that tutors may not benefit much academically from teaching such relatively elementary material. Also, it may well be that the role of tutors in such situations may not have as many positive implications as when the gap is small or non-existent, since students may assume that virtually anyone can teach much younger children effectively, thus undermining some of the symbolic importance of the role.

Implication 8: Single-sex tutoring dyads may well be more effective than mixed-sex dyads.

The research suggests that mixed-sex tutoring dyads may not produce results that are as large and as consistently positive as do single-sex dyads, although both kinds of tutoring dyads appear to produce positive outcomes. So, generally speaking, it may be better to use single-sex pairs when possible. In addition to the empirical evidence suggesting this conclusion, there are other reasons to be concerned about mixed-sex tutoring dyads. Specifically, as mentioned previously, students in mixed sex dyads may not work as well together as those in single-sex dyads, and there is at least the possibility that stereotype threat may interfere with the tutees academic performance when the mixed-sex pairing makes gender roles salient and the topic being tutored in one for which there are gender stereotypes suggesting that those of the tutees’ gender may not do well.

There is no systematic research on the outcomes of using mixed or single race/ethnicity dyads in peer tutoring programs. However, by analogy with regard to mixed or single gender dyads, it might be wise to use single race dyads where that can be done readily and without making race salient. This suggestion is supported not only by work on race/ethnicity and stereotype threat, but also by research which suggests that common racial stereotypes and

interaction patterns can disrupt effective interaction in racially-mixed learning settings (Cohen, 1980; Schofield, 1980).

Implication 9: Peer and cross-age tutoring programs should find ways to emphasize the fact that tutees, and especially tutors, are assuming new roles.

As previously discussed, there is reason to think that at least some of the positive outcomes of peer and cross-age tutoring programs for tutees, and especially for tutors, stem from the fact that they have assumed new roles in the classroom. To the extent this is the case, it seems worthwhile to find ways to emphasize this assumption of new roles, especially for the tutors. Possible approaches to this that would involve minimal effort and expense include things like providing tutors with t-shirts emblazoned with the name or symbol of the tutoring program or holding special events to recognize the contributions that tutors have made to the school.

# A Concluding Note

In summary, it appears that peer and cross-age tutoring are potentially very useful approaches to increasing tutors and tutees academic achievement for students from a variety of racial and ethnic backgrounds and with a variety of initial levels of achievement. Furthermore, these approaches also appear to foster numerous other attitudes and behaviors likely to be conducive to academic persistence and success in a variety of domains where concerns about improving student performance are acute. This paper has reviewed the research on these outcomes, as well as on others. In addition, it has examined how characteristics of tutoring programs and of the students involved in them appear to be related to how such programs function. Finally, this paper suggests numerous implications of the research literature that may be of help to those deciding between various potential approaches to peer and cross age tutoring. Although these implications are no more than that, possibilities suggested by existing theory and research, they provide ideas, that when combined with knowledge of particular educational

systems and the populations they serve, that may help to guide choices about this approach to improving students’ achievement and related outcomes.

# References

Akah, R. M. (1990). What black students need from tutoring. Journal of College Student Development, 31: 177.

Allen, V. L. (Ed.). (1976). Children as teachers: Theory and research on tutoring, Acaddemic Press, New York.   
Allen, V. L., & Feldman, R. S. (1973). Learning through tutoring: Low achieving children as tutors. Journal of Experimental Education, 42: 1-5.   
Allen, V. L., & Feldman, R. S. (1976). Studies on the role of tutor. In V. L. Allen (Ed.), Children as teachers: Theory and research on tutoring, Academic Press, New York, pp. 113-129.   
Ambady, N., Shih, M., Kim, A., & Pittinsky, T. L. (2001). Stereotype susceptibility in children: Effects of identity activation on quantitative performance. Psychological Science, 12: 385-390.   
Bar-Eli, N., & Ravia, A. (1982). Underachievers as tutors. Journal of Educational Research, 75: 139-143.   
Bem, S. L. (1974). The measurement of psychological androgyny. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 42: 155-162.   
Berliner, D. C. (in press). The state of American Public Education. To appear in K. Goodman, P. Shannon, & Y. Goodman (Eds.), Saving our schools: The case for public education in America, Oakland, CA: RDR Books, Oakland, CA.   
Bierman, K. L., & Furman, W. (1981). Effects of role and assignment rationale on attitudes formed during peer tutoring. Journal of Educational Psychology, 73: 33-40.   
Blasovich, J., Spencer, S. J., Quinn, D. M., & Steele, C. M. (2001). Stereotype threat and the cardiovascular reactivity of African-Americans. Psychological Science, 12: 225-229.   
Britz, M. W., Dixon, J., & McLaughlin, T. F. (1989). The effects of peer tutoring on mathematics performance: A recent review. B. C. Journal of Special Education, 13: 17-33.   
Brush, T. A. (1997). The effects on student achievement and attitudes when using integrated learning systems with cooperative pairs. Educational Technology Research and Development, 45: 51-64.   
Chapman, E. S. (1998). Key considerations in the design and implementation of effective peerassisted learning programs. In K. Topping & S. Ehly (Eds.), Peer-assisted Learning, Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 67-84.   
Cohen, E. G. (1980). Design and redesign of the desegregated school: Problems of status, power, and conflict. In W. G. Stephan & J. R. Feagin (Eds.), School desegregation: Past, present, and future, Plenum Press, New York, pp. 251-280.   
Cohen, J. (1986). Theoretical considerations of peer tutoring. Psychology in the Schools, 23: 175- 186.   
Cohen, P. A., Kulik, J. A., & Kulik, C. C. (1982). Educational outcomes of tutoring: A metaanalysis of findings. American Educational Research Journal, 19: 237-248.   
Delquadri, J., Greenwood, C. R., Whorton, D., Carta, J. J., & Hall, J. V. (1986). Classwide peer tutoring. Exceptional Children, 52: 535-542.   
Devin-Sheehan, L., Feldman, R. S., & Allen, V. L. (1976). Research on children tutoring children: A critical review. Review of Educational Research, 46: 355-385.   
Early, J. W. (1998). The impact of peer tutoring on self-esteem and Texas Assessment of Academic Skills mathematics performance of tenth grade students. Unpublished Dissertation, Texas A&M University, Commerce.

Eagly, A. H., Wood, W., & Diekman, A. B. (2000). Social role theory of sex differences and similarities: A current appraisal. In T. Eckes & H. M. Trautner (Eds.), The developmental social psychology of gender, Erlbaum. Mahwah, NJ, pp. 123-174.

Eccles, J. S., Jacobs, J. E., & Harold, R. E. (1990). Gender role stereotypes, expectancy effects, and parents’ socialization of gender differences. Journal of Social Issues, 46: 183-201.   
Ehly, S. W., & Bratton, B. (1981). Experimental analysis of some process variables in peer tutorial learning. Psychological Record, 31: 537-541.   
Fantuzzo, J. W., Davis, G. Y., & Ginsburg, M. D. (1995). Effects of parent involvement in isolation or in combination with peer tutoring on student self-concept and mathematics achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87: 272-281.   
Fantuzzo, J. W., King, J. A., & Heller, L. R. (1992). Effects of reciprocal peer tutoring on mathematics and school adjustment: A component analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84: 331-339.   
Fantuzzo, J. W., Polite, K., & Grayson, N. (1990). An evaluation of reciprocal peer tutoring across elementary school settings. Journal of School Psychology, 28: 309-323.   
Fantuzzo, J. W., Riggio, R. E., Connely, S., & Dimeff, L. A. (1989). Effects of reciprocal peer tutoring on academic achievement and psychological adjustment: A component analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81: 173-177.   
Fennema, E. H., & Sherman, J. A. (1977). Sex-related differences in mathematics achievement, spatial visualization, and sociocultural factors. American Educational Research Journal, 14: 51-71.   
Fogarty, J. L., & Wang, M. C. (1982). An investigation of the cross-age peer tutoring process: Some implications for instructional design and motivation. The Elementary School Journal, 82: 451-469.   
Foot, H., & Howe, C. (1998). The psychoeducational basis of peer-assisted learning. In K. Topping & S. Ehly (Eds.), Peer-assisted Learning, Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 27-43.   
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Bentz, J., Phillips, N. B., & Hamlett, C. L. (1994). The nature of student interactions during peer tutoring with and without prior training and experience. American Educational Research Journal, 31: 75-103.   
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Phillips, N., Hamlett, C. L., & Karns, K. (1995). Acquisition and transfer effects of classwide peer-assisted learning strategies on students with various learning histories. School Psychology Review, 24: 604-620.   
Gartner, A., & Reissman, F. (1994). Tutoring helps those who give, those who receive. Educational Leadership, 52, 58-60.   
Ginsburg-Block, M. D., & Fantuzzo, J. W. (1997). Reciprocal peer tutoring: An analysis of “teacher” and “student” interactions as a function of training and experience. School Psychology Quarterly, 12: 134-149.   
Ginsburg-Block, M. D., & Fantuzzo, J. W. (1998). An evaluation of the relative effectiveness of NCTM standards-based interventions for low-achieving urban elementary students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90: 560-569.   
Good, C., & Aronson, J. (2002). The development and consequences of stereotype vulnerability in adolescents. In F. Pajeres & T. Urdan (Eds.), Adolescence and education, Vol. 2: Academic motivation of adolescents, Information Age Publishing, Greenwich, CT.   
Good, J. M., Halpin, G., & Halpin, G. (2000). A promising prospect for minority retention: Students becoming peer mentors. Journal of Negro Education, 69: 375-383.   
Greenwood, C. R., Delquadri, J. C., & Hall, R. V. (1989). Longitudinal effects of classwide peer tutoring. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81: 371-383.   
Greer, R. D., & Polirstok, S. R. (1982). Collateral gains and short-term maintenance in reading and on-task responses by inner-city adolescents as a function of their use of social reinforcement while tutoring. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 15: 123-139.   
Hedges, L. V., & Nowell, A. (1998). Black-white test score convergence since 1965. In C. Jencks & M. Phillips (Eds.), The black-white test score gap, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC, pp. 149-181.   
Heller, L. R., & Fantuzzo, J. W. (1993). Reciprocal peer tutoring and parent partnership: Does parent involvement make a difference? School Psychology Review, 22: 517-534.   
Hilger, L. H. (2000). Cross-age tutoring in reading: Academic and attitudinal effects from highschool tutors and third-grade tutees. Unpublished Dissertation, University of Minnesota.   
House, J. D., & Wohlt, V. (1991). Effect of tutoring on voluntary school withdrawal of academically underprepared minority students. Journal of School Psychology, 29: 135- 142.   
Jacobs, J. E., & Eccles, J. S. (1985). Gender differences in math ability: The impact of media reports on parents. Educational Researcher, 14: 20-25.   
Jencks, C., & Phillips, M. (1998). The black-white test score gap, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC.   
King, A., Staffieri, A., & Adelgais, A. (1998). Mutual peer tutoring: Effects of structuring tutorial interaction to scaffold peer learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90: 134- 152.   
Kosters, M. H., & Mast, B. D. (2003). Closing the education achievement gap: Is Title I working? The AEI Press, Washington, DC.   
Maher, C. A., Maher, B. C., & Thurston, C. J. (1998). Disruptive students as tutors: A systems approach to planning and evaluation of programs. In K. Topping & S. Ehly (Eds.), Peerassisted Learning, Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 145-163.   
Marx, D. M., & Roman, J. S. (2002). Female role models: Protecting women’s math test performance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28: 1183-1193.   
Maxwell, M. (1991). The effects of expectations, sex, and ethnicity on peer tutoring. Journal of Developmental Education, 15: 14-16, 18.   
Medway, F. J., & Baron, R. M. (1977). Locus of control and tutor's instructional style as determinants of cross-age tutoring effectiveness. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 2: 298-310.   
Menikoff, L. (1999). The effects of cross-age tutoring upon the decoding skills, attitudes toward reading, teacher perceptions of reading improvement, and the self-concept of inner-city at-risk students. Unpublished Dissertation, The City University of New York, New York.   
Nazzal, A. (2002). Peer tutoring and at-risk students: An exploratory study. Action in Teacher Training, 24: 68-80.   
Paolitto, D. (1976). The effect of cross-age tutoring on adolescence: An inquiry into theoretical assumptions. Review of Educational Research, 46: 215-237.   
Polirstok, S. R., & Greer, R. D. (1986). A replication of collateral effects and a component analysis of a successful tutoring package for inner-city adolescents. Education and Treatment of Children, 9: 101-121.   
Ponzio, R. C., & Peterson, K. D. (1999). Adolescents as effective instructors of child science: Participant perceptions. Journal of Research and Development in Education, 33: 36-46.   
Reckrut, M. (1994). Peer and cross-age tutoring: The lessons of research. Journal of Reading, 37: 356-362.   
Rohrbeck, C. A., Ginsburg-Block, M. D., Fantuzzo, J. W., & Miller, T. R. (2003). Peer-assisted learning interventions with elementary school students: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95: 240-257.   
Rosen, S., Powell, E. R., & Schubot, D. B. (1977). Peer-tutoring outcomes as influenced by the equity and type of role assignment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 69: 244-252.   
Roswal, G. M., Mims, A. A., Evans, M. D., Smith, B., Young, M., Burch, M., et al., (1995). Effects of collaborative peer tutoring on urban seventh graders. The Journal of Educational Research, 88: 275-279.   
Sawyer, R. D. (2001). Mentoring but not being mentored: Improving student-to-student mentoring programs to attract urban youth to teaching. Urban Education, 36: 39-59.   
Schofield, J. W. (1980). Cooperation as social exchange: Resource gaps and reciprocity in academic work. In S. Sharan, P. Hare, C. D. Webb, & R. Hertz-Lazarowitz (Eds.), Cooperation in education, Bringham Young University Press, Provo, UT, pp. 160-181.   
Schunk, D. H. (1998). Peer modeling. In K. Topping & S. Ehly (Eds.), Peer-assisted Learning, Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 185-202.   
Sharpley, A. M., Irvine, J. W., & Sharpley, C. F. (1983). An examination of the effectiveness of cross-age tutoring program in mathematics for elementary school children. American Educational Research Journal, 20: 103-111.   
Slavin, R. E. (1995). Cooperative learning and intergroup relations. In J. A. Banks & C. A McGee Banks (Eds.), Handbook of research on multicultural education, Macmillan, New York, pp. 628-646.   
Smead, V. S. (1984). Self-fulfilling prophecies in the classroom: Dead end or promising beginning? Alberta Journal of Educational Research, 30: 145-156.   
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. (1999). Stereotype threat and women’s math performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35: 4-28.   
Sprinthall, N. A., & Scott, J. R. (1989). Promoting psychological development, math achievement, and success attribution of female students through deliberate psychological education. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 36: 440-446.   
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Contending with a stereotype: African-American intellectual test performance and stereotype threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69: 797-811.   
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group image: The psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. In M. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Academic Press, New York, pp. 379-440.   
Strodtbeck, F. L., Ronchi, D., & Hansell, S. (1976). Tutoring and psychological growth. In V. L. Allen (Ed.), Children as teachers: Theory and research on tutoring, Academic Press, New York, pp. 199-218.   
Swim, J. K. (1994). Perceived versus meta-analytic effect sizes: An assessment of the accuracy of gender stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66: 21-36.   
Thomas, E. J., & Biddle, B. J. (1966). The nature and history of role theory. In B. J. Biddle & E. J. Thomas (Eds.), Role theory: Concepts and research, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York, pp. 3-20.   
Topping, K. J. (2000). Peer assisted learning: A practical guide for teachers, Brookline Books, Cambridge, MA.   
Topping, K. J. (1998). The effectiveness of peer tutoring in further and higher education: A typology and review of the literature. In S. Goodlad (Ed.), Mentoring and tutoring by students, Kogan Page, London, pp. 49-69.   
Topping, K., & Ehly, S. (1998). Introduction to peer-assisted learning. In K. Topping & S. Ehly (Eds.), Peer-assisted living, Erlbaum. Mahwah, NJ, pp. 1-23.   
Topping, K. J., Peter, C., Stephen, P., & Whale, M. (2004). Cross-age tutoring of science in the primary school: Influence on scientific language and thinking. Educational Psychology, 24: 57-75.   
Topping, K. J., & Whiteley, M. (1993). Sex differences in the effectiveness of peer tutoring. School Psychology International, 14: 57-67.   
Turner, R. H. (2002). Role theory. In J. H. Turner (Ed.), Handbook of sociological theory, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, pp. 233-254.   
Underwood, J., Underwood, G., & Wood, D. (2000). When does gender matter? Interactions during computer-based problem solving. Learning and Instruction, 10: 447-462.   
Wagner, L. (1990). Social and historical perspectives on peer teaching in education. In H. C. Foot, M. J. Morgan, & R. H. Schute (Eds.), Children helping children, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, England.   
White, P. M. (2000). Promoting mathematics achievement, academic efficacy, and cognitive development of at-risk adolescents through deliberate psychological education. Unpublished Dissertation, University of Houston.   
Willis, S. W., Morris, B., & Crowder, J. (1972). A remedial reading technique for disabled students that employs students as behavioral engineers. Psychology in the Schools, 9: 67- 70.   
Yueh, J., & Alessi, S. M. (1988). The effect of reward structure and group ability composition on cooperative computer-assisted instruction. Journal of Computer-Based Instruction, 15: 18-22.

# Author Note

The research reported here was supported by Cooperative Agreement No. EHR-0227016 between National Science Foundation and The University of Wisconsin-Madison.