# From genre awareness to cross-genre awareness: A study in an EFL context

Demet Yayli\*

Department of Foreign Languages Education, Pamukkale University, 20070 Denizli, Turkey

# a b s t r a c t

Keywords:   
Genre-based writing   
Genre awareness   
Cross-genre awareness   
EFL

This study aims to capture both how the participants’ genre awareness becomes embedded in their stances through genre-based writing instruction in an EFL context and also how viable multi-genre portfolio use is in genre-based EFL writing instruction. The qualitative data were gathered from several sources: (1) the participants’ annotations of their writing, (2) interviews, and (3) pre- and post-instruction interviews and open-ended questions. The findings indicate that besides having a genre awareness and recontextualizing their genre awareness in each new writing, some of the participants were observed to use certain generic features belonging to a genre while being engaged in another genre. This bridge-building between genres through transferring their skills of recontextualization refers to cross-genre awareness. Also, the participants’ positive remarks gradually increased through the instruction, which signals the benefits of practicing genres and reflecting on their own performances in annotations.

$©$ 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

The last decade, with the movement from structural approaches to language learning that support cognitive homogeneity of learners and their abstract cognitive or technical abilities in reading and writing toward communicative approaches that draw on how language is used to achieve social purposes in different contexts, genre and genre-based approaches have gained prominence in writing instruction (Hyland, 2003, 2004, 2007; Johns, 1997, 2002; Street, 1995). Proponents of process writing have shifted their interest from the personal meaning-making of the writer to expectations of academic readers and writers’ socialization into the academic community (Raimes, 1991).

In genre-based pedagogies, the importance of context as well as form and a concern with description, analysis and interpretation are stressed. There are three influential genre-based approaches in L2 classroom. Australian genre studies are based on systemic functional linguistics taking its roots from Hallidayan functional linguistics (Halliday, 1994) and sociocultural theories of learning (Vygotsky, 1978), whereas the New Rhetoric view of genre draws on post-modern social and literary theories, especially Bakhtin’s notion of dialogism. English for Specific Purposes (ESP) genre studies, on the other hand, are largely based on Swales’ (1981, 1990, 2004) discoursal work on academic and research English demystifying the use of English in academic contexts.

Classroom applications of genre are centred on various practices that are appropriate for particular times, places, participants and purposes. The concept of genre enables writing teachers to look beyond the content, linguistic forms and processes of writing so that they can assist students in their attempts to communicate with the reader. Writing is not seen as an isolated product existing in a vacuum but as a mediated and dynamic social activity in which writer’s thoughts and intentions are under the influence of the beliefs, values and norms of the audience (Canagarajah, 2002). Basically, genre-based writing instruction emphasizes that features of similar group of texts and the contexts in which they are created or used are in close relationship with each other; therefore, teachers and students must always be mindful of the link between those features and the expectations of the reader in any writing activity. Also in classroom applications, students’ writing consist of multiple writing samples, written over time, representing students’ abilities and progress (Hyland, 2004).

Although text-based genre analyses are commonly pursued, research on how students analyze and produce genres in genre-based writing classes is still underrepresented in the literature (Cheng, 2006). In one of the few studies conducted, Henry and Roseberry (1998) investigated to what extent genre-based instruction and materials improved the learners’ ability to produce effective tokens of the genre. Three measures (a motivation index, a move score and a texture index) were used to evaluate the learners’ improvement in producing a tourist information text. The results of the study indicate that a teaching approach based on rhetorical organization can be successful in ESP/EAP teaching situations. In another study, Pang (2002) compared the film review writing progress of two groups of first-year university students who were speakers of Cantonese at a university in Hong Kong. The scores obtained in a writing-strategy questionnaire and a criterial assessment form indicate that both groups made considerable progress and both approaches yielded almost equal results in the quality of the participants’ writing products and their use of strategies in film review writing. Swales and Lindemann (2002), on the other hand, observed how 11 L2 graduate students and two visiting scholars performed an intertextual exercise in which they incorporated nine abstracts that offered a variety of perspectives into the literature review section of a dissertation proposal in the area of engineering. They argued that the participants’ “observations and perceptions will now, in an effort to develop transfer of learning ., be directed toward their readings in their own disciplines, so that they will be more aware of how and why authors might put a literature review together in a particular way” (p. 117, italics original). In a further study closer to the scope of the present study, Cheng (2007) analyzed three article introductions written by a Chinese-speaking graduate student, Fengchen, in electrical engineering department at a large American university. Cheng collected the data in an English academic writing course he instructed. The analyses revealed that not only was Fengchen able to transfer some previously noticed generic features into his own writing but he was also able to recontextualize his genre awareness.

It is certain that studies that are conducted in EFL countries might yield different but still noteworthy results when compared to those in ESL countries like the USA and Australia. The Communicative Language Teaching and the Process Writing Approach are pervasive in Turkish language learning contexts. Therefore, there is a greater need to introduce genrebased writing instruction to countries like Turkey where students are exposed to the planning-drafting-rewriting-evaluation chain pinpointing the processes underlying the production of written texts (Matsuda, 2003) with little attention paid to context, reader–writer relationship or purpose in their limited involvement in writing. In fact by dealing with such concepts genre-based writing instruction may create a difference in how students respond to genre awareness building. The present study aimed to capture how the participants’ stances evolved throughout the instruction. Since the primary interest was participants’ attitudes and perceptions and how these evolved over time, annotations and interview transcripts formed the main sources of data. Therefore, participants’ actual genre-specific writing samples were not included in the analysis. The studies mentioned above focused on only one type of genre. A study focusing on different genres in which students are asked to keep multi-genre portfolios should yield intriguing results. Therefore, the two research questions below will be addressed in the present study:

(1) How does genre awareness become embedded in the stances of EFL participants through genre-based writing instruction? (2) How viable is multi-genre portfolio use in genre based EFL writing instruction?

# 2. Method

# 2.1. The course and the participants

The participants for the study were the volunteers among 32 first-year students who had already completed their primary and secondary education and passed the university entrance exam to be enrolled in an English Language Teaching (ELT) program in a state university in Turkey. In Turkey, the medium of instruction is Turkish in Turkish educational settings and is English only in English-language-related programs at universities like the one in the present study and in a few Englishmedium universities. The career goals of the students of an ELT program are to work as teachers of English at primary, secondary and tertiary levels. The reasons for the choice of this group of participants were twofold: (1) the convenience sampling method was used and I was the instructor assisting the students in their genre-based writing experiences as has been done in some previous studies (e.g., Cheng, 2007; Henry & Roseberry, 1998; Pang, 2002; Swales & Lindemann, 2002); (2) the pedagogical implication made by Hyland (2007) that “[f]or teacher educators, genre-based pedagogies offer principled ways of assisting both pre- and in-service writing teachers to provide their students with targeted, relevant, and supportive instruction” (p.148) urged me to accommodate genre-based writing instruction for my students who were pre-service teachers of English.

The participants were six volunteering students attending an advanced reading and writing course I instructed. At the beginning of the fall semester, when I asked for some volunteers who would be willing to be interviewed after classes and share their writings, only these six students said that they would allow me to audio-tape the interviews and use their written documents by hiding their real identities. They were similar to their classmates (all pre-service teachers and first-year students) in terms of their proficiency levels as they all had passed the university entrance exam to be educated in an ELT department. Like many of their classmates, all three of them had studied in a university prep class before starting their first-year education at university. During their prep year, their writing instruction background had focused on improving four skills and grammar.

# 2.2. Data collection

The study was conducted during the writing sessions of the course in both semesters that lasted 14 and 15 weeks in the fall and spring semesters. I obtained the qualitative data for the present study from several sources: (1) the participants’ annotations of their writing, (2) interviews and, (3) pre- and post-instruction interviews and open-ended questions. Although the whole class took part in the writing assignments (writing first and second drafts for each genre) and annotation writing, the analyses of the annotations were limited to the ones produced by the six participating students. In the first week, the participants were administered a survey with pre-instruction interviews and open-ended questions looking into their previous writing experiences. The participants, who were among those with a prep year experience at university, mostly recalled and reflected on the writing instruction they had received the previous year. The three participants without a prep year education at university complained that their writing experience at high school did not go further than parallel writing and guided paragraph writing for the given tenses. At the end of the instruction phase, I also provided a similar survey with post-instruction interviews and open-ended questions in order to observe how genre awareness was built through genrebased writing instruction.

Along with the first drafts of each writing assignment, the students were asked to hand in an annotation reflecting on their own writing (Cheng, 2007). After I perused both the first drafts and the annotations, I held interviews with the six participants; which were audio-taped with the consent of the participants. Therefore, the whole class did the writing assignments and annotation writing but the following interviews were held only with the six study participants in order to probe deeply into the reasons behind their choices.

# 2.3. Writing assignments and the procedure

I followed the key elements proposed by Hyland (2007) in the writing activities that were based on the principles of genrebased writing instruction: (1) planning learning, (2) sequencing learning, (3) supporting learning, and (4) assessing learning. These key elements guided me both before and during the instruction.

# 2.3.1. Planning learning

As stated by Hyland (2007), “ [g]enre writing classes are usually planned either around themes . or the genres likely to be encountered in a relevant context, as in ESP learning situations” (p. 154). In the writing course I instructed, first we discussed the students’ writing background that, for the majority, was dominated by process-writing. I informed them about the requirements of this new writing course and introduced them to the concepts of genre and genre-based writing activities. We focused on rhetorical dimensions of genre such as the roles of the writer, reader and purpose in genre production and on generic dimensions such as moves, steps and how words, phrases and sentences help authors achieve their purposes. Later I asked the students about their genre preferences and listed the genres that they wanted to study in the course, following the argument that students should study genres that they will need and/or that will motivate them to learn (Johns et al., 2006). Considering the academic and non-academic needs of pre-service teachers, we agreed on a pool of genres from which we chose e-mail, recipe, CV, letter of complaint and two types of essays (informative essay and argumentative essay) as our focused genres.

# 2.3.2. Sequencing learning

Among a number of different principles informing the sequence of genres proposed by Hyland (2007), I preferred “grading genres by perceived increasing levels of difficulty” (p. 156). The selection of genres from our genre pool ranging from e-mail to essay writing was based on their degrees of difficulty.

# 2.3.3. Supporting learning

In genre-based writing instruction, a particular interest is paid to both peer interaction and teacher support. Since genrebased pedagogies employ the ideas of Russian psychologist Vygotsky and the American educational psychologist Bruner, both interaction with peers to gain shared consciousness, and interaction with more knowledgeable others to acquire borrowed consciousness are emphasized (Hyland, 2007). In order to enhance shared consciousness, I asked the students to work in groups in their genre-analysis of the sample texts before they produced their own texts. As for the borrowed consciousness, I was at their disposal at every stage of their writing, if not in the classroom, via e-mail. To support their learning, I acted as a mediator (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006) of genre knowledge and genre production.

While explaining writing development in the Hallidayan genre approach, Hammond (1992, cited in Burns, 2001) proposed “a wheel model of a teaching–learning cycle having three phases: modelling, joint negotiation of text by learners and teacher, and the independent construction of texts by learners” (Burns, p. 202). Following this model, we chose e-mail as our first genre to have some practice in the rhetorical and textual organization of genres in terms of moves and steps. I aimed at raising the students’ awareness of context, the roles of the reader and the writer, their purposes, constraints and challenges in writing (Canagarajah, 2002). I shared some of my own e-mail notes with the students, who read the copies and in groups distinguished the formal from the informal register. Instead of setting rules of writing, I asked them to identify the moves and steps and describe what the authors were trying to do in these moves and steps and which lexical items enabled them to achieve their communicative purposes. Learning or teaching formulae were avoided and the students were encouraged to formulate their own rules (Henry & Roseberry, 1998; Pang, 2002). I led the class discussion while the groups shared and discussed their analyses one after the other. Next, I asked them to write both formal and informal e-mail notes to make a request from a professor in the formal and from a friend in the informal register. I also asked them to write an annotation, with the emphasis on reflection, discovery and critical thinking, in which they analyzed and explained their own writing. I asked them to explain which moves and steps they included in their first drafts by referring to their group analyses in which they had done a generic move-step analysis. They also explained what lexical features helped them create two e-mail notes in two registers. In other words, they both reflected on and defended their writing. This framework of activities was used in the following assignments as well. I regularly prompted them to make use of the generic features they observed in the sample texts as ‘a set of heuristics’ rather than as ‘a set of rules’ to be obeyed in their own writing (Cheng, 2007).

After the students completed the writing assignment and the annotation, they received my written comments and questions related to the rhetorical organization and lexico-grammatical features in their writing before they wrote their second drafts. With each of the six participating students I held interviews both to get a better picture of their choices and their reasons by probing for more information and to improve the rhetorical and textual organization of their writing. After the interview sessions, the whole class including the participants handed in a second draft to receive my comments on the grammatical accuracy, spelling and document design.

These stages were aimed at enhancing both validity and interest, two basic requirements for designing classroom-based writing activities (White,1994). I aimed at achieving validity through the consistency betweenwhat the students experimented with in class and what they were asked to write (Hyland, 2003). As for the interest level, I observed that the students’ curiosity was especially stimulated in generic move-step analyses in which they tried to explain the reasons for writers’ choices of language structures and rhetorical organization; and also in their annotations in which they explained their efforts to make changes that would produce a text different from the sample texts, and the conventions they felt they needed to comply with.

# 2.3.4. Assessing learning

“An approach to assessment well suited to genre-based writing teaching is the use of portfolios, as these not only represent multiple measures of a student’s writing ability,. but also help students to understand more about the genres they have studied” (Hyland, 2007, p. 162). Multi-genre portfolios offer a platform where students are able to observe similarities and differences among genres (Hamp-Lyons & Condon, 2000). Keeping in mind the relevance of the use of portfolios, I informed the students as to how to be engaged in portfolio keeping. In their multi-genre portfolios, they included sample texts provided for the textual and rhetorical analysis of each genre type, their first drafts, annotations on their first drafts and their second drafts in order. Besides serving as a collection of targeted genre samples and student writing, multi-genre portfolios were observed to help the participants when they needed to recall and refer to the details of some previous assignments in interviews and in some annotation excerpts.

# 2.4. Data analysis

The qualitative data for this study were drawn from several sources: (1) the participants’ annotations on their writing, (2) the interviews related to the participants’ written performances in a particular genre and (3) pre- and post-instruction interviews and open-ended questions. That is, the analysis focused on how the participants analyzed the targeted genre samples and how they deployed moves and steps in their writing. I also examined their explanations on the rhetorical and textual organization of their own texts both in their annotations and in the interviews we held after classes. All these, together with pre- and post-instruction data, enabled me to observe how their genre awareness became embedded in their stances over different phases of instruction. The descriptive study in question had multi-data sources and involved the combination of data collection with analysis; therefore, the research design was the constant comparative method (Bogdan & Biklen, 2003; Glaser, 1978). I read each document in the data sources numerous times and sorted out key patterns which I gathered in different phases of instruction. They became my categories of focus. While searching through the data for regularities and patterns under these categories, I was also open for any possible change, irregularity or the emergence of a new dimension. While writing on the categories I was exploring, I did some more reading of the data to discover all the details about these categories and to choose some excerpts to exemplify them verbatim. Besides, half of the coded-data were cross-checked by a colleague who is interested in qualitative research and no major discrepancies were identified. Pseudonyms were used in the excerpts so as not to reveal the participants’ identities.

# 3. Findings and discussion

3.1. How does genre awareness become embedded in the stances of EFL participants through genre-based writing instruction?

# 3.1.1. Pre-instruction phase

Initial data were drawn from the participants’ responses to pre-instruction open-ended questions and interviews. My purpose was to collect their views on their previous writing experiences and their definitions of good writing instruction before we started genre-based writing activities. Not surprisingly, their responses were mainly set in the premises of process writing as they had been instructed in that way in their preparatory year. For example, Oya said:

The writing we did last year in the prep class was based on forms, rules and templates. If you include a good thesis statement in the introduction and transition words in the body, you get at least 70. At first I received a lot of negative feedback that was hurtful but later on I realized the rule I mentioned and started to get high grades.

Another participant, Fatih, said:

The instructor gave some sample texts with the key phrases underlined so we mostly paid attention to these phrases and got good grades if we included them in our writing. For instance, you have to include “firstly”, “secondly”, “thirdly” if you are describing a process. Although we increased our vocabulary of fixed phrases in writing, it was a form-based type of writing. If I had been the instructor, I would have emphasized the importance of message as well. I mean we never cared about what we were trying to say or what message would make our writing interesting to the reader.

The initial comments of the participants indicate the power of the writing teacher and her expectations from the students. Fatih’s comments on the importance of the reader suggest that contextual awareness building was not part of their prep class writing instruction. Mostly, the students stated that they improved their paragraph and essay organization and vocabulary, but they did not comment on meaning and foregrounded form.

# 3.1.2. Practice phase

The students gained some practice with e-mail writing identifying the writer/reader relationship and purposes. In the annotations following formal and informal e-mail writing, the students explained the relationship they had with their targeted reader, how it influenced their choices of the lexico-grammatical features in their e-mails and how these features helped them pursue their purpose in writing the e-mails. Following Cheng (2007), the purpose behind this practice activity with e-mail writing was “to raise the students’ awareness of the rhetorical dimensions of genre, such as the roles of writer, reader and purpose in genre production and consumption” (p. 291). The students targeted two different readers: a professor and a close friend. Although the purpose, making a request, was the same in both e-mail notes, the lexico-grammatical features varied a lot. The practice phase was followed by interviews with the six participants in order to trace their first impressions about and reactions toward genre-based writing instruction. Their statements all included positive remarks. For example, Fatih and Oya said:

It is the first time I have had fun time in a writing activity. I think it was because this was real writing. I am curious about what is coming next. (Fatih)   
Reading the instructor’s real e-mails was amusing to me. The following activities were also fun and new. I had never heard about move/step analysis or annotation writing before. I liked studying with my friends in a group to find moves and steps in an e-mail. (Oya)

# 3.1.3. Instruction phase

Before and during the practice phase, the students were set straight on the concept of genre, the importance of reader– writer relationship and purpose in writing activities. They were informed that the basic feature turning a collection of communicative events into a genre lies in shared communicative purposes (Swales, 1990, p. 46). After the practice phase, we moved on to recipe writing for which I provided a collection of sample recipes. In their genre analysis, I observed that two of the participants had difficulty in delineating sample texts in generic moves and steps. They needed more support than the others. During the interviews, Aliye and Semiha complained about their challenges with generic move-step analysis:

At first I had contradictions with my group members but after you answered our questions we were able to come up with a more appropriate analysis. (Aliye)   
I wish you had been in our group working with me. I do not feel safe without your guidance and I easily feel confused. Although you repeatedly warn us that there is no one correct analysis, there is a competition among the groups. Therefore we try to produce the best analysis. (Semiha)

It was the first time the students had been instructed in genre-based writing and due to the emphasis on discovery and reflection in this course, they found the task somewhat confusing and called for some continuous mediation. While gaining some shared consciousness in their group interactions, the participants mentioned their incessant need for borrowed consciousness (here we should remember that shared consciousness is gained in the interaction with peers and borrowed consciousness in the interaction with more knowledgeable others). Despite some complaints about the genre analysis in recipes, they also found writing in this genre realistic and highly enjoyable. For example, Feride said:

I did my best to write a different recipe than the ones we read in class and I decided to write one of our family traditions.   
My recipe belongs to my grandmother so it is real.

Another participant, Mahmut, said:

Normally I do not cook but after reading these samples and trying to write my recipe I thought it was not so hard.

In CV writing, the participants were observed to pronounce fewer complaints over the move-step analysis and an increasing awareness toward selecting what to include and to exclude. For example, Feride said:

Actually each analysis and writing started to get easier. At first it was hard for me to include the steps I observed in the samples in my writing because I wanted to make changes but I also felt that I should be loyal to these steps but in time I figured it out how to do that. I did not include the move ‘presenting social skills’ in my CV because it had nothing to do with the job offer I was trying to get.

In the interviews we held after they wrote the first drafts and annotations for the letter of complaint, I observed that the participants more frequently verbalized their search of appropriate lexico-grammatical features depending on the purpose and the context. For example, Oya said:

I started my letter by giving factual information, my address and the receiver’s address, the name of the person I address to make the communication easy to follow. Then in the first move ‘giving background information’, I gave some background information such as when I ordered and received the pair of trousers, its item code and etc. to inform the authorized people. Then in the second move ‘stating the complaint’, I clearly stated what the problem was with the trousers in order to make the problem clear to the reader and to complain about it. In the last move ‘presenting a solution’, I thanked the reader for reading my letter and asked for a solution in a kind way. Although there were such examples in the samples we read, I did not use any threatening expressions as they would do nothing but harm the relationship between my reader and me.

Because of ‘why’ questions I posed at every stage of their tasks, the students explained their rhetorical and textual choices by giving some detailed reasons in their annotations. These prompts made annotation writing the most intriguing, challenging and beneficial activity for them. In an interview, Fatih verbalized this as follows:

My favourite part is annotation writing. Despite the fact that first we write the first draft and then the annotation, while writing the first draft I always think how I will express my choices in the annotation. This forces me to shape my draft more carefully. I mean I make more conscious selection of lexico-grammatical items or of formal language features depending on my purpose to sound logical in my annotation. Especially when I wanted to make a change from the sample texts as you always urged us to do, at several occasions I wrote new things, I mean for some new purposes, but while writing the annotation I could not give feasible reasons to defend them. Annotation writing continuously forced me to go back to the draft and omit some new ideas if it was impossible to defend them.

In essay writing assignments, the students wrote two types: informative and argumentative. The collected reactions on essay writing mainly reflected the participants’ ease with both analysis and writing stages as Aliye put forward:

Essay writing was easy. In the letter of complaint, I needed to say a lot of things in a single sentence or I felt that way but in essays I feel myself freer. As for move-step analysis I think we all have learnt to identify them in new texts by now. If essay had been the first genre we had studied, it would have been very hard for all of us but since essays are long texts, transitions and transitory sentences played a bigger role in bridge-building between the moves and made it easy for us to identify the main purposes.

The only stated difficulty was by Semiha in her group analysis, mostly stemming from the fact that the other students had studied essay writing in the prep class the previous year. With my advice, and her group members’ mindful warnings, the group reached a compromise. Semiha said:

My biggest challenge was that last year we divided informative texts into three parts; introduction, body and conclusion. But genre analysis means focusing on the purposes so I found it a little hard to read essay samples to find the steps under the moves. I could free myself from my previous way of thinking with the help of the instructor and of my group members.

With generic move-step analysis, the students learnt how to delineate the texts into moves and steps by analyzing purposes of writers. Since I prompted them to maintain a discovery-based orientation, the students were engaged in independent and creative analyses. I always reminded them that there would be no correct or perfect analysis to be announced. I responded to their analysis and their genre productions by making additional suggestions to improve the rhetorical and lexico-grammatical realizations of their writing.

# 3.1.4. Post-instruction phase

Final data were gathered from the participants’ responses to post-instruction open-ended questions and interviews. They mostly stated that the instruction was different and difficult to them at first but over time they enjoyed writing assignments in tandem with move-step analysis and annotations as they found them very beneficial, challenging and thought-provoking. For example, Fatih said:

I was not expecting to have a different writing instruction from the previous one. In e-mail writing I realized how different things were going. We were more creative and critically engaged in all stages. The instructor never offered a template to be followed, instead she encouraged us to read the sample texts to identify the major and minor purposes of the writers and how writers achieve them.

Another participant, Aliye, said:

I learnt the importance of reader in writing. The previous year we mostly paid attention to use correct structures but writing was not an activity aiming to communicate with a reader. But the writing we did this year was not so focused on correct writing but appropriate writing.

The stances of the participants underscored creativity, critical thinking and liberty in writing instruction, which stemmed from the nature of genre-based instruction. I regularly reminded them of the benefits of resisting templates and prescriptions (Canagarajah, 2002; Paltridge, 2001); therefore, they had some difficulty at first. As they got more into the task, their concerns and difficulties gradually diminished. Besides, in our interview sessions, some of the participants stated that they started to be engaged in ‘writerly reading’ and ‘readerly writing’ as defined by Cheng (2007) in the other reading activities they did for other courses. They said they approached writing or reading a text with several questions and comments in their minds such as ‘What is the author trying to do here?’, ‘How does he achieve his purpose, with what vocabulary and language structures?’, ‘With this move I am sure the reader will leave his or her doubts about my sincerity aside’, ‘Here I think with the word ‘dear’ I will clearly signal my respect to and distance from my reader’, ‘I never come across the use of colloquial words such as ‘dude’ in academic writing because it would be odd’ and so on. This indicates that awareness raising in the rhetorical and textual features of one specific genre was the first step, and the participants were able to go beyond that. In fact my analysis points to their ability to “become more observant readers of the discoursal conventions” (Swales & Lindemann, 2002, p. 118) and to build an increasing genre awareness with each reading or writing activity they were engaged in outside the writing class as well.

3.2. How viable is multi-genre portfolio use in genre based EFL writing instruction?

The writing instruction deployed in this study required assisting the students to keep multi-genre portfolios rather than limiting their genre production into a single genre. During the analysis, some oral and written stances of the participants reminded me of Selinker and Douglas’s (1989) doubt about the probable transfer of skills from one genre to another and urged me to scrutinize clues of transfer that could indicate cross-genre awareness. The concept of ‘cross-genre awareness’ differs from ‘recontextualization’ as described by Cheng (2007), who sees recontextualization as “learners’ abilities not only to use a certain generic feature in a new writing task, but to use it with a keen awareness of the rhetorical context that facilitates its appropriate use” (p. 303). This was exemplified in Canagarajah’s (2006) analysis of three research articles (RAs) written in two languages (Tamil and English) by the same scholar for three different audiences; RA in Tamil for local publication, RA in English for local publication and RA in English for foreign publication. Canagarajah emphasizes that authors are engaged in some negotiating acts and they vary their styles depending on the rhetorical context. Cross-genre awareness on the other hand points to a transfer of skills of recontextualization across different genres requiring awareness of different purposes, different contexts and different lexico-grammatical features. In spite of all the differences among genres, the participants in this study were observed to convey some features of one genre to another. For example, Mahmut commented:

Writing a letter of complaint was not difficult to me as it was similar to the formal e-mail writing. In our move-step analysis, we went back to our formal e-mails and analyses to get some help.

Another participant, Fatih, said:

E-mail writing changed my whole view of writing since we were introduced to new concepts like purpose, context and audience. That was like a revolution to me. After the practice, I started to do all writings and readings with these new concepts in my mind.

Another participant, Oya, said:

In each genre analysis stage, I learnt some new vocabulary and structures. Then I tried to use them in the following genres as well, if possible. For instance, the structure “I was wandering if you could” we saw in formal e-mail samples did not exist in the letter of complaint samples but I still used it in my letter of complaint because the contexts are similar in those genres and you need to use formal language in both of them.

These excerpts exemplify that the participants had a tendency to establish bridges between genres through transferring their skills of recontextualization. This finding indicates that writers’ awareness in one genre might influence their awareness in another, forming a cross-genre awareness. The similarities in purposes and language structures in the formal e-mail writing and the letter of complaint, for instance, might be said to scaffold Oya’s transfer stemming from her own cross-genre awareness. This awareness might have been facilitated through the use of multi-genre portfolios because they both highlight how texts belonging to different genres are organized differently but they can also “.illustrate how one genre often relates to or interacts with others” (Hyland, 2004, p.178). Despite the fact that the concept of cross-genre awareness was not aimed at when the instruction began, it was observed to emerge during the analysis. Although such examples are scarce in the participants’ stances, their existence points to a possible cross-genre awareness building through genre-based writing instruction supported with multi-genre portfolios even in an EFL context. Therefore, students may go beyond having a genre awareness and recontextualizing their genre awareness and build a cross-genre awareness through which they can transfer some of their skills in one genre to other genres.

# 4. Conclusions and implications

The present study was based on the descriptive analysis of multi-source data. Different genres formed the focus of student writing, and for the purposes of research the analysis was based on the data provided by six volunteering participants among the first-year pre-service teachers attending an ELT program. In essence, the assignments required the participants to observe and practice different rhetorical and lexico-grammatical organizations of different genres. The analysis of genre samples they carried out in groups was a prelude to writing their own texts. In a related vein, their annotations aimed to enhance the students’ reflection and critical thinking so that they were introduced to new concepts such as ‘creative and independent analysis’ and ‘resisting templates’. They were observed to transfer some previously-noticed generic features into their own writing, which is congruent with some previous ESP genre-based writing instruction studies (e.g., Cheng, 2007; Henry & Roseberry, 1998; Pang, 2002). The participants were also observed to make some changes in their writing in order not to sound repetitive or imitating owing to the constant prompts they received. By the term ‘changes’ I mean that they were prompted to force themselves either to use different vocabulary items than the ones used in the samples or not to use some of the previously noticed steps in the generic organization of their papers. The reason for such prompts was to help “.moderate the teacher’s dominant role and tone down what might be seen as over-directive and prescriptive interventions in student writing” (Hyland, 2004, p. 61) and ameliorate the possibility that “.the permanence and materiality of written texts leave writers so vulnerable to critical inspection” (Leki, 2003, p. 104).

Besides transferring the previously noticed features into their own writing and recontextualizing their genre awareness, some of the participants were observed to use certain generic features belonging to a genre while being engaged in another. One of the main goals of genre-based teaching is to raise learners’ awareness of “the specific audience for and purpose of a particular text, and how best to communicate rhetorically in that instance” (Beaufort, 2004, p.140). Drawing on this understanding of genre-based teaching and learning, it could be proposed that when audience expectations, purposes and/or textual features in a particular genre bear resemblance to those of another, a transfer may emerge, that is cross-genre awareness. As depicted in their stances, some participants were able to recontextualize an awareness of rhetorical and textual considerations of one genre in their writing of a text belonging to another genre. This reflects a more sophisticated awareness as it points to a sharper understanding of genres in terms of similarities and differences in audience expectations, purposes and/or textual features among them. This is congruent with the previous studies (Cheng, 2007; Henry & Roseberry, 1998; Pang, 2002; Swales & Lindemann, 2002) pinpointing the success of genre-based teaching as it increases an awareness of generic structure of texts so that learners could learn to produce highly textured texts to achieve their communicative goals. Also, it could be concluded that cross-genre awareness is well operationalized through the deployment of multi-genre portfolios in genre-based writing instruction.

The stances of the participants indicated that their positive remarks were observed to gradually increase throughout the instruction and their statements signalled the benefits of practicing genres and reflecting on their own performances in annotations. The points they raised highlight that they started to question a monolithic and asocial view of writing. Equally important, their writing started to be motivated by rhetorical considerations such as purposes in writing and targeted reader expectations. These should be the main goals of any writing instruction to be adopted in EFL educational settings where there is a handicap experienced by both teachers and students while predicting the targeted reader expectations for a given genre.

Since genres are seen as repeated social actions (Miller, 1984) they may have a specific cultural element and students, especially those in EFL countries, may not be aware of how genres are employed in their own specific contexts. Therefore, there is an enormous need for genre pedagogies where EFL learners will be offered “an explicit understanding of how target texts are structured and why they are written in the ways they are” (Hyland, 2007, p. 151). The awareness-raising potential in genre pedagogies holds significant implications for teachers as well. By analyzing students’ texts, teachers become more aware of how students create meanings and more sensitive to the points where students need support. The belief of the New Rhetoric Approach followers that writing cannot be learnt in the inauthentic context of the classroom limits the empowerment of the already disadvantaged EFL learners. On the other hand, genre knowledge can be viewed as a resource to exploit generic conventions so that learners learn to respond appropriately to the requirements of academic and non-academic practices (Bhatia, 2004; Cheng, 2007; Swales, 1990, 2004; Swales & Lindemann, 2002) without accommodating unnecessarily to the existing modes of practice and values and ideologies of the dominant culture which embodies genres (Benesch, 2001; Canagarajah, 2002). Besides the planning-writing-reviewing chain which focuses learners on the process of writing itself, my view is that EFL learners in Turkey need genre pedagogies as a complement to process pedagogies and as a result of newly growing understanding of literacy (New London Group, 1996). When genre-related teaching is carried out, learners become researchers participating in and observing the actions of language communities and thus raise their awareness of multiple audiences, purposes, rhetorical features and social conventions (Devitt, Bawarshi & Reiff, 2003). Although the demand for genre-based writing instruction for L2 speaking graduate students in the US kindled the emergence of “writing as language use in context” (Matsuda, 2003, p. 22), similar needs and demands are also experienced by L2 speakers in EFL contexts since these speakers also wish to be a part of social contexts in which “.most important non-literary texts ,,, are produced and negotiated” (Johns, 2003, pp. 195–196).

Furthermore, teacher education programs have enormous responsibilities in the sense that they need to analyze pre service teachers’ needs and allow them to understand and challenge valued discourses (Hyland, 2007). If a teacher is aware of how a text is structured and organized in relation to its purpose and reader and could select and/or create appropriate contexts for learning, then s/he will be in a better position to intervene successfully in the writing of his or her students (Hyland, 2007; Zhou, 2009b). As Zhou (op cit) reminds us, teachers could help learners raise their awareness of achievable and unachievable goals and identify the origins of their difficulties. Keeping these caveats in mind, teacher educators preparing pre-service teachers to teach writing in L2 classrooms should be mindful of how to integrate genre-based teaching into their syllabuses. Some writing teachers who have either limited training in discourse or genre analysis or insufficient linguistic knowledge may feel themselves inadequate in genre-based writing instruction (Zhou, 2009a). If some discourse/ genre analysis courses are provided in teacher education programs, pre-service teachers may successfully adopt genre pedagogies in their future teaching careers, which might help genre-based writing instruction achieve some prominence and privilege even in remote EFL countries.

The limitations of the study could be acknowledged as follows: (1) there were only six pre-service teachers as participants, therefore replications of the study with as large and as varied a group of participants as possible are needed in order to probe further into the instances of cross-genre awareness and reach more generalizable findings and (2) the analysis was designed to capture how the participants’ genre awareness became embedded in their stances through the instruction, therefore, this study did not include an analysis of students’ genre-specific writing samples. Further studies with linguistic concerns might include an analysis of students’ writing samples to investigate their linguistic and lexical improvement.

# References

Beaufort, A. (2004). Developmental gains of a history major: a case for building a theory of disciplinary writing expertise. Research in the Teaching of English, 39, 136–185.   
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2004). Worlds of written discourse: A genre-based view. London: Springer.   
Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. K. (2003). Qualitative research for education: An introduction to theory and methods (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.   
Burns, A. (2001). Genre-based approaches to writing and beginning adult ESL learners. In C. Candlin, & N. Mercer (Eds.), English language teaching in its social context: A reader (pp. 200–207). London: Routledge.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Critical academic writing and multilingual students. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (2006). Toward a writing pedagogy of shuttling between languages: learning from multilingual writers. College English, 68(6), 589–604.   
Cheng, A. (2006). Understanding learners and learning in ESP genre-based writing instruction. English for Specific Purposes, 25, 76–89.   
Cheng, A. (2007). Transferring generic features and recontextualizing genre awareness: understanding writing performance in the ESP genre-based literacy framework. English for Specific Purposes, 26, 287–307.   
Devitt, A. J., Bawarshi, A., & Reiff, M. J. (2003). Materiality and genre in the study of discourse communities. College English, 65(5), 541–558.   
Glaser, B. (1978). Theoretical sensitivity: Advances in the methodology of grounded theory. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar $2 ^ { \mathrm { n d } }$ ed.). London: Edward Arnold.   
Hamp-Lyons, L., & Condon, W. (2000). Assessing the portfolio: Principles for practice, theory and research. Cresskill, NJ: Hamption Press.   
Henry, A., & Roseberry, R. L. (1998). An evaluation of a genre-based approach to the teaching of EAP/ESP writing. TESOL Quarterly, 32, 147–156.   
Hyland, K. (2003). Genre-based pedagogies: a social response to process. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 17–29.   
Hyland, K. (2004). Genre and second language writing. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.   
Hyland, K. (2007). Genre pedagogy: language, literacy and L2 writing instruction. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16, 148–164.   
Johns, A. M. (1997). Text, role, and context: Developing academic literacies. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Johns, A. M. (2002). Genre in the classroom: Multiple perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Johns, A. M. (2003). Genre and ESL/EFL composition instruction. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Exploring the dynamics of second language writing (pp. 195–217). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Johns, A. M., Bawarshi, A., Coe, R. M., Hyland, K., Paltridge, B., Reiff, M. J., et al. (2006). Crossing the boundaries of genre studies: commentaries by experts. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15, 234–249.   
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language development. New York: Oxford University Press.   
Leki, I. (2003). Coda: pushing L2 writing research. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 103–104.   
Matsuda, P. K. (2003). Second language writing in the twentieth century: a situated historical perspective. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Exploring the dynamics of second language writing (pp. 15–34). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Miller, C. (1984). Genre as social action. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70, 151–167.   
New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: designing social features. Harvard Educational Review, 66, 60–92.   
Paltridge, B. (2001). Genre and the language learning classroom. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.   
Pang, T. (2002). Textual analysis and contextual awareness building: a comparison of two approaches to teaching genre. In A. M. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom: Multiple perspectives (pp. 145–161). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Raimes, A. (1991). Out of the woods: emerging traditions in the teaching of writing. TESOL Quarterly, 25(3), 407–430.   
Selinker, L., & Douglas, D. (1989). Research methodology in contextually-based second language research. Second Language Research, 5, 93–126.   
Street, B. V. (1995). Social literacies: Critical approaches to literacy in development, ethnography and education. New York: Longman.   
Swales, J. (1981). Aspects of article introductions. Birmingham, UK: The University of Aston, Language Studies Unit.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. (2004). Research genres. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J., & Lindemann, S. (2002). Teaching the literature review to international graduate students. In A. M. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom: Multiple perspectives (pp. 105–119). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Vygotsky, L. (1978). In M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman (Eds.), Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.   
White, E. M. (1994). Teaching and assessing writing: Recent advances in understanding, evaluating, and improving student performance $2 ^ { \mathrm { n d } }$ ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.   
Zhou, A. (2009a). A review of “Genre and genre-based second language writing instruction”. Language Awareness, 18(2), 215–220.   
Zhou, A. (2009b). What adult ESL learners say about improving grammar and vocabulary in their writing for academic purposes. Language Awareness, 18(1), 31–46.

Demet Yayli is an assistant professor in the Department of Foreign Languages Education at Pamukkale University, Turkey. She holds a PhD. in English Language Teaching. She was a visiting scholar at Pennsylvania State University for a year, mentored by Dr. Suresh Canagarajah. Her main research interests are genre analysis, genre-based writing and EFL teacher education.