# Writing assessment and feedback literacy: Where do we stand and where can we go?

# 1. Writing assessment and feedback literacy: Where do we stand ?

Despite a plethora of research on writing asessment and feedback that generates no shortage of advice to writing researchers and teachers, asssing and reonding to writing sill presents a major challenge to many writing teachers. Equall, students fail t fully utilize asesment information and engage with fdback to advance ther learning and writig. Indeed, teachers and students lack of writing assessment literacy and feedack literacy is well documented in the literature (Crusan, Plakans, & Geril, 2016; Lam, 2019; Lee, 2021). By presenting a special ssue on writing assessment and feedback literacy, we highlight the crucial role of teachers and student writers in the roessof wrting aessment and fedack and call for ttention to thir aency in teaching and leaning writing across various contexts.

Research concerning teachers' development and implementation of writing assessment has argued for the need of teacher assesment literacy, an overarching term that describes the lel of knowlege, skill, and understanding of asessment principles and practice" required for teachers (Taylor, 2009, p. 24). This line of inquiry has examined the knowledge base for asssing student perormance (.g., Inbar-Lourie, 2008), teachers' pertions f asessment (eg, Rmesal, 2011) and claroom assesment practies (e.g., McMilln, Myran & orkman, 202), as well a possble ways to enance tcher competencies inassessmet assegreen 2013).

Despite an incresing attention to language teacher asessment literacy,scant empirical research has focused on writig asessment literacy. Writig teacher assessment literacy refers to teachers mastery of knowledge, conceptions, sills, and principles in planning and developing appropriate writing asesment tasks and classroom-based asessment strateies and approaches (Fulcher, 2012 Lam, 2019). Previous research has indicated that most teachers remain underprepared to perform classoom-based asssment (DeLuca & Johnson, 2017), and many teachers ack confidence and theories of asessment in evaluating student writing proficiency (Crusan et al. 2016; Lam, 2019). Therefore, how to enhance teachers' writing asssment literacy and the longitudinal development of their writing assesment sklls merit further investigation. More knowledgeis also needed regarding how teacher education and teacher training can support the development of teacher writig asessment iteracy. In addition, while previous research has mainly focused on teachers assessment literacy, more work is needed to investigate student writing assessment literacy such as peer assessment literacy and self-assessment literacy, especially given their critical roles in facilitating student writing development.

Although the research on assessment litrary has flourished in the past decades, exploration of a related literacy practice, that is feedack itacy, istil in its inanc (Gat, 2022). In a gral ese, feack itercy rers t the undrdings, aacities and dispositions needed to make sense of information and use it to enhance work or larning strategies" (Carles & Boud, 2018, p. 1316). Feedback literacy has profound practical implications for both teachers and students because it facilitates the uptake and learning from feedback. Feedback literacy has recently reeied scholarly attention in the field of writing assessment and education, with a discipline-specific conceptualization (Han & Xu, 2020; Lee, 2017, 2021; Malecka, Boud, & Carless 2022; Sutton, 2012; Yu & Liu, 2021). Lee (2021) proposed a thre-tiered theoretical framework that placed feedback literacy within formative asessment, sociocultural theory, and language teacher competence, as well asa pedagogical framework that demonstrates the desired feedack competencies that L2 writing teachers must acquire in order to become feedback litrate. Yu and Liu (2021) also presented a con. ceptual framework, consisting of knowledge repertoire, individual dispositions, and capabilities for improving students' feedback literacy in academic writing. Their frameworks highlighted the dynamic interactions among feedback-receivers, feedack-givers, and

the technical environment in academic writing.

Despite increased attention to teacher and student writing fedback literacy, we stil have limited knowledge of the specific di mensions f teacher and student feedback literacy in different writing contexts, such as schoo writin, and writing for academic and specific purposes. In addition, how feedback literacy can improve the teaching and learning of writing and how it can be developed in writing classrooms remain largely unknown. Specifically, there is an urgent need to develop relevant measurement instruments and explore alternative qualitative methods to assess teacher and student writing feedback literacy.

To address the aove rearch gs and xtd erch onwriting assmet nd fedack itercy, this spil ise, conssting of 18 articles, builds upon the existing conceptual, theoretical, and empirical work to further our understanding of the roles and competencies of teachers and student writers in the processof writing asessment and feedback The 18 papers, drawn from a variety of writing contexts (e.g., the United States, China, Saudi, and Australia) and informed by various theoretical perspectives and methodological approaches, provide a comprehensive depiction of writing assessment and feedack literacy, as well s its implications for writing teaching and learning in various contexts. In the following section, we provide an analysis of the themes emerged from these articles.

# 2. Introducing the papers in this special issue

The 18 articles (16 empirical studies and 2 conceptual and review papers) published in this special isue fall under five categories with distinct yet interrelated themes: (1) the development and validation of scales on teacher and student writing assessment and feedback literacy; (2) the development of teacher writing assessment and feedback literacy; (3) the development of student writing assesment and fedack literacy; (4) a multidiscilinary dialogue n writing asssment and feedback litracy, and (5) theoretical and conceptual perspectives on writing assessment and feedback literacy.

Theme 1. The development and validation of scales on teacher and student writing assessment and feedback literacy.

The first two articles in this sue report the process of developing and validating two instruments which can be used to measure teacher and student writing assessment and feedback literacy..

Lee, Karaca, and Inan argued for the necessity and importance of developing an instrument to measure teacher feedback literacy in L2 writing contexts. Their tudy includes two phases with phase I identifying a three-factor structure i. Perceived Knowledge, Values, and Perceived Skills of the 34-item feedback literacy scale (FLS) based on data from 223 writing teachers, and phase II verifying the structure of the scale based on a sample of another 208 writing teachers. As the FLS yields psychometrically reliable and valid results, the authors ugested that it could be used to measure the self-reported feedack literacy of L2 writing teachers, which can provide ideas for feedback training in writing teacher education programs.

In the study by Huang, Shu, Dong, and Zhu, the authors constructed and validated a elf-asessment instrument for investigating Chinese university students feedback knowledge repertoire in academic writing contexts. Their study also included two phases: scale construction and scale validation, and they eventually developed a 40-item scale with good psychometric properties for measuring Chinese English-major students feedack knowledge repertoire in EFL academic writing. The final 40-item five-point Likert scale was developed and validated to evaluate students inguistic, genre, disciplinary, assessment, emotion regulation, and argumentative strategies in English academic writing. The authors claimed that this scale could increase students awareness of their mastery of feedback knowledge in EFL academic writing and concluded that teachers may encourage students to self-evaluate their feedback knowledge in these areas on a periodic basis, as well as teach them feedback knowledge in the areas of weakness identified.

Theme 2. Teacher assessment and feedback literacy development.

Three articles fall under the category about teacher asssment and feedback literacy development. The study by Britton utilized the self-study research method to investigate her own feedback practices alongside the implementation of a critical language awarenes (CLA) curriculum. The data of comments provided fr students and students writing samples identified the inconsistencies between the researcher's feedback philosophies and practices, as the feedback overwhelmingly addressed the content rather than the organization of th esay. The study concluded with areflection on the challenges of providing theoretically informed feedack s well as the significance of the research in expanding Lee's (2021) framework for writing teacher feedback literacy.

Wu, Yu, and Luo argued for the research void and significance of developing teacher feedback literacy with technology. By investigating two L2 writing teachers' implementation of a human-computer-automatic writing evaluation (AWE) integral feedack platform and it mpacts onthe development of ther fedback iteracy, this qualitativ study revealed that the teachers aproached the innovation in different ways, such as appropriating tools and interacting with social agents. The influence on teachers' feedback literacy was found positive regarding teachers' feedback thinking, feedback giving, and sharing practices, but not in classroom practice. The implications of these findings with regard to the role f technology in developing tacher fdback literacy are discussed.

The article by Cui, Jin, and Gao investigated EFL teachers' development of English for Research and Publication Purposes (ERPP) feedback literacy through their feedback practices. Drawing upon multiple sources of data, including teachers' written feedback, interviews, screen-recording, think-aloud protocols, and stimulated recall, their multiple-case study identified the improvement of teachers' development of ERPP feedack literacy through their engagement in inra- and iner-disciplinary collaborations, in which they moved beyond surface-level feedback and developed awareness of disciplinary knowledge construction. The study concluded with an emphasis on the benefits of intra- and inter-disciplinary collaborations in developing EFL teachers ERPP feedback literacy.

Theme 3. Student assessment and feedback literacy development.

Six articles in this special issue focus on the development of student writig asessment and feedback literacy in various instructional contexts. The research by Zhang and Mao seeks to advance knowledge about the trajectory of L2 writing students' feedback literacy. The particular focus of their 16-wek longitudinal study is on the change and development of students feedack literacy over one semester in an authentic L2 writing clasroom in China. In their study, the teacher adopted a systematic approach that integrated preparatory activitie, multi-source feedback practices, and post-feedback reinforcement to foster students' understanding and utilzation of feedback opportunities in the classes. indings show that students feedback literacy has improved with regards to eliciting feedback, making judgments, taking actions, appreciating fedback, and managing affect. The study sheds light on the conceptual framework of feedback literacy and provides practical implications for facilitating students' feedback literacy in L2 classrooms.

The research conducted by Zhang, Min, He, Chen, and Ren adopted a longitudinal approach to examining EFL students development of feedback iteracy in the context of an online writing program. The researchers sought to deepen understanding of students' use of and emotional responses to peer fedback. Positive changes in students' cognitive, behavioral, and emotional capacities in resonding to peer edback were identified, desite students varying developmental paces in ther fdack literacy. The pedagogicl implications for facilittig pee fedack litercy and capitlizing on pee fedack in revisin in the ontxt of aademic writing were presented.

The article by Wu and Lei investigated the development trajectory of postgraduates' feedback literacy with the support of dialogues as social scaffolding in the context of academic writing. Building on Yu and Liu's (2021) theoretical framework for developing students' writing literacy, multiple sources of data collcted from two iterations revealed that students adopted a dynamic and continuous view towards feedack with dialogue integrated in the second iteration. The findings suggest that dialogue is conducive to two aspects: (a) the development of students feedback litercy and (b) the management of cognitive conflicts. The study concluded by discussing the pedagogical implications for promoting student feedback iteracy in academic writing with the design of feedback processes.

Built on the premise that students may find it challenging to engage with teacher feedback due to a lack of per support, the investigation reported by Saeeda and Alharbi explored learners collaborative engagement in technology-mediated peer dialogue around teacher feedback on argumentative writing in the Saudi EFL context. Analyses of multiple data, including students peer dialogue, writing drat, teacher's fedback, and follow-up interviews, revealed that tecnology-mediated collaborative dialogue and engagement activities promote learners cognitive, affctive, and behavioral engagement. Specificlly, the benefits of collaborative technology-mediated engagement with feedback were recognizable regarding feedback appreciation, evaluative judgment-making, and negative afect management, despite the dyads' differing levels of collaborative engagement. The implications of these findings for enhancing students' engagement and feedback literacy with technology are discussed.

The case study by Sun, Lan, and Zhang reported the promotive role of translingual practices in one female undergraduate's feedback literacy in an EMI context. Their study found that translingual practices in feedback processes could heighten her appreciation of fdback as a catayst for mprovement and reciprocality, foster her ability to critically ealuate and judge diverse edback, reshape her multilingual-writr identit, and facilitate emotional management. To improve multilingual students feedback literacy, future studies on translingual practices for different genres by student writers in different contexts are suggested.

Zhang-Wu examined the five ESL multilingual writers' feedback literacy development during a literacy narrative unit in an asynchronous online writing course. Through the analyses of five international students' drafts, end-of-unit reflections, and written feedback, this exploratory qualitative study empirically validated and extended Yu et al.s (2022) five-dimension feedback iteracy model. It was found that subcategories within each dimension could be identified from the feedback experiences of the multilingual international students. The study also explored opportunities (diverse linguistic repertoire available) and challenges (unfamiliar course modality) in learners fedback literacy development during the literacy narrative unit. The study concludes by offering pedagogical implications for improving multilingual writers feedback literacy in the online learning context and recommends potential directions for future research.

Theme 4. A multidisciplinary dialogue on writing assessment and feedback literacy.

The articles in this category draw upon multidisciplinary theories and methods in curriculum and pedagogy, applied linguistics, higher education, educational technology, and educational psychology to investigate issues related to asessment and feedack literacy.

Shan, Yang, and Xu conducted a qualitative inquiry into the impact of an integrated French course on teachers' assessment lit eracy and practices in L2 writing. In this context, language knowledge acquisition outweighs writing development in currculum configuration. Despite curricular prioritization requiring L2 teachers to implement reconciled asessment practices for enhancing students' language knowledge and writig skill, teachers perceived importance appears to determine the priorit order of split assessments on language and writing isues in L2 writing. Meanwhile, there were no apparent changes in asessment literacy under the influence of curriculum configuration..

Zhou, Deneen, Tai, and Dawson addressed feedback seeking in higher education and writing assessment, which is an under. explored area of research. Drawing on interviews and focus groups with thirty-seven participants acros three facultie at an Australian university, the reearchers identified challenges in feedback seeking in terms of eistemological,ontological, and practical dimensions. Students utilized various sources and materias to inquire into and/or monitor different writing stages to varying degrees, including writing samples, rubrics, peer works, and written feedback. In closing, the researchers advocated for lower-threshold opportunities to maximize students' engagement with inquiry and monitoring in writing processes.

One exploratory case study by Acar examined the benefits of genre-based pedagogy (GBP) in facilitating L2 writing teachers to enhance their writing assessment and feedback literacy. Diagnostic assessment and student' engagement in the asessment process through genre exploration tass in GBP are found conducive to productive classroom discussions, students self-reflections, and teachers' provision of formative feedback.

In the next article, Beltran-Palanques developed an analytical instrument to assess English-for-Specific-Purposes (ESP) writing multimodality within higher education contexts, whereby lingustic conventions, content and idea, interpersonal meaning, multimodality, and creativit of multimodal texts could be targetedly and comprehensively evaluated. The researcher exemplified how a video game narrative was analyzed through the instrument and discussed the pedagogical implications of asessing multimodal writing and literacy.

Drawing upon theories in educational psychology, Fong, Schallert, Williamson, Lin, Williams, and Kim investigated the influence of students self-kindness and selfjudgment (components of elf-compassion in emotional management) on their perception of feedback constructiveness. Result of 508 US undergraduate students ratings for 56 statement constructiveness revealed self-kindness as a positive predictor, contrary to sef judgment as a negative predictor. Moreover, students with higher self-compassion tended to rate statements as les constructive than the lower elf-compassed counterparts. Implications for utilizing self-ompassion in research on feedback literacy and assessment are discussed..

Theme 5. Theoretical and conceptual perspectives on writing assessment and feedback literacy.

Our special issue ends with two review and conceptual papers which provide the authors' thoughts and reflections on theory and research on writing assessment and feedback literacy.

Boggs and Manchon reviewed studies on feedback literacy to provide advanced insights into the research landscape of L2 written correctie feedback (WCF). The authors underscored L2 writers' learning experiences in both L1 and L2 writing as a potentially researchable topic. They elucidated that L1 writing intructional methods and values of writing within L1 educational cultures or societal conditions could significantly influence learners engagement with L2 writing tasks and associated feedback. The study ended by suggesting future directions for research and teaching practices in L2 writing.

Razavipour highlighted the limitation of knowledge-focused (post)positivist paradigms, which obscured the non-cognitive, embodied, and affective dimensions of aessment practice. Correspondingly, the author conceptualized writing assessment liter acy and feedback practices from the perspective of New Materialist. Covering philosophical materialit of ongoing reality, agency, knowledge, and language, New Materialist theoretically underpinned the conceptualization of writing asessment and feedback practices as an intertwined aggregation of rhetorical, artistic, instutional, cross-lingual, social, and affective elements.

# 3. Writing assessment and feedback literacy: Where can we go?

These five groups of articles present theoretical insights and empirical evidence from diverse populations and disciplinary back. grounds, shedding light on writing teachers' and student' perspectives and experiences with assessment and feedback literacy in various instructional contexts. These artice all have a solid theoretical foundatio for writing asessment and feedack literacy, and they demonstrate how interdisciplinary research can advance the field. The papers used a variety of methodologies, including quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods, to demonstrate the diversity and uniqueness of asessment and feedback literacy in specific sociocultural contexts. Overal the article contribute to the field by providing empirical evidence in response to the existing theoretical and conceptual frameworks, ilustrating how writing asessment and feedback literacy can be developed across diverse populations e.g, L1, L2 and/or multilingual writers, oth in educational and professional writing ettings) and/r over time, and how writing assessment and feedback literacy can impact student writing development.

In the callfor papers, we provided alist of potential areas of interest that could be included in this special isue. While these 18 articles have almost addressed all the research topics and isues, we believe there are some important questions that remain to be investigated in future research irst, there is only one article that particularly examines asessment and feedback literacy in non. English writing contexts in this issue. More endeavors can be made to investigat teacher and student fedback and asessment lit eracy in other non-English writing contexts, such as German, Japanese, and Spanish as a second or foreign language. We also need more theoretical discussions and empirical investigations about multilingual writer asesment and feedback knowledge, skill, and values.

Another area that clearly requires further consideration and research is how writing teacher education and professional training programs can ehance writing teachers asessment and feedack literacy. This i crucial for providing a comprehensive understanding the role of other stakeholders in writig asessment It is also interesting to investgate the collaboration between teacher educators and writing teachers with a view to enhancing teachers' knowledge, skill, competencies, and values of writing assessment and feedack. The specil ssue also call for future studies that furthr examine teachers and students lived experiences in asesment and feedback routines using more qualitative-oriented approaches such as narrative inquiry and ethnographic research.

We hope the special issue, along with our reflections and discussions, will inspire more research into issues about writing assesment and feedback literacy, which willhelp produce a more positive and friendly assesment and feedback culture in writing classrooms.

# 4. Conclusion

Writing assessment and fedback literacy has a potentilly broad appeal in terms of authorship and readership for Asessing Writing the only refereed international journal providing a forum for ideas, research, and practice on writing assessment. Informed by theories and practice on writing assessment and feedback in different disciplines such as L1 and L2 writing, applied linguistics, educational psychology, second language acquisition, and higher education (Cares & Boud, 2018; Ferris, 2011; Hattie & Timperley, 2007; Hyland & Hyland, 2019), these articles, employing diffrent research approaches and methods, can advance the theoretical and empirical discussions of writing assessment and fedback literacy by responding to the crucial issues and problems delineated above. The focus on developing teachers and students writing asessment and feedback literacy in this special isue can also enable writing researchers, teacher educators, teachers, and student writers to explore \*the complexity of the writing construct and its implications for the design of writing assessment programs" (Slomp, 2019, p.16). With enhanced assessment and feedback literacy, stakeholders in writing instruction and asssment could be empowered to challenge the status quo and bring ongoing improvement to existing assessment and feedback designs and practices.

We would like to end this introductory article by expressing our sincere thanks to the eitors f Asessing Writing for the opportunty for us to put together this special issue. We are grateful to al the authors for their contributions, and the reviewers for their valuable feedback.

# References

Carles,  & d 018). T t o  fak   ufk n  go 438) 1315-1325.   
n 43-56.   
Deuca,  . 07     . , ice 22) 121-126.   
Ferris, D. R. (2011). Treatment f error in second language student witing (2nd ed.). Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Pres.   
Fulcher, G. (2012). Assessment literacy for the language classroom. Language Assessment Quarterly, 9(2), 113-132.   
Gravett, K. (2022). Feedback literacies as sociomaterial practice. Critical Studies in Education, 63(2), 261-274.   
Han, 0      e  ck   e Education, 45(5), 680-696. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2019.1689545   
Hasselgren,  (2013) ping the CEFR for the cassrm asst f youg lers writig. dde age Reiew, 69(4), 415-435   
Hattie, J, imprle, H (207. The pwr f fack Rview f tion Rh, 771) 112 tp/i.org/103102/00365430298487   
Hyland, K., & Hyland, F. (2019). Feedback insecond language writing: Contexts and ssues. Cambrige: Cambridge University Press.   
Inbar-Lourie 0. (2008). onstrctig a language asment knowlege ase: fos on language asment corse. Language sting, 25(3), 385-402.   
Lam R 019.   ti  ion ad ptief cr-wing i o o st 81, 78-89.   
Lee, I. (2017). Classroom writing assessment and feedback in L2 school contexts. Singapore: Springer.   
Lee, I. (2021). The development of feedback literacy for writing teachers. TEs0L Quarterly, 55(3), 1048-1059.   
Malka   2     e t  tricul Teaching in Higher Education, 27(7), 908-922.   
cMila, . 002  o    pct. Th  ch 5(4) 203-213.   
Remesal, A (2011). Primary and secondary techers cotion f asmet qualitative stdy. chn nd Tcher Edctio, 272), 472-482.   
Slomp, D. (2019). Complexit, consequence, and frames: quarter entury of rearch in Assesing Writing. ssesing Writig, 42, Article 100424.   
Sn, ..  ,     91) 1./ 10.1080/14703297.2012.647781   
Taylor, L. (2009). Developing assessment literacy. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 29, 21-36.   
Yu, . 01)     n l105./ org/10.1016/j.asw.2021.100525