Book review

# In: (editor: Wette, Rosemary) Teaching and Learning Source-based Writing: Current Perspectives and Future Directions. (2024) Routledge: New York, NY, p. 302; ISBN 9781032252346 (paperback), GBP 38.99.

As a paradigm for integrating sources in a variety of ways (e.g., citation, paraphrasing, quoting) and composing a coherent and cohesive essay, source-basd writing has become highly adopted in acadmic writing assessment due to its heightened uthenticity and predictive validity in mirroring practical academic writig. Despite being "a requisit, threshold ability' for the succes and sustainability of academic writing (Cumming et al., 2016: 47), source-based writing is difficult to learn, teach, and assess. The comprehension and utilization of source materials in written production impart the source-based writing an \*inextricably complex nature" (Plakans & Gebril, 2013, p. 28) and often leads to an arduous larning process. For the approach to teaching source-based writing, current pedagogical support is inclined to prioritize the more explicit and teachable skils (e.g., plagiarism avoidance) and overook other occluded aspect (e., developing an authorial stance) (Sun & Soden, 2022), with this imbalanced teaching focus being adverse to instruct and develop source-based writing skill. Furthermore, the field of source-based writing assessment has witnessed shifted focuses from lerners' final product only to proces writing, but stil features an oversimplified view to regard source-based writing as comprising dismantled parts lfted from source texs (Li et al., 2020), which necesitates a thorough re-examination, taking into account that the assessment information elicited from source-based writing is crucial in informing teaching and critcal for facilitating learning. In light of ths, Teaching and Learning Source-Based Writing: Current Perspectives and Futre Directions, edited by Rosemary Wete, establishes a bridge between asessment, teaching, and learning of source-based writing, with an emphasis on its currn ti Pr  nti (Prt , win kils amet ( ) ei t ) n tical issues (Part V). By doing so, the book furnishes readers with a comprehensive update on the learning, teaching, and assessment of source-based writing, each highly informative section being interrelated and mutually inspired.

Part I addresses the major challenges in teaching and learning source-based writing, offering multiple perspectives from novice undergraduate writers, graduate writers, and teaching staff Chapter 1 reveals the particular challenges of mastering source-use conventions by novice writers that might be caused by their inadequate proficiency, unsophisticated reading skill, and conflicting source-use guidelines. This opening chapter help readers re-conceptualize the developmental process of source-based writing moving away from the prevailing deficit model focused on plagiarism to instead explore the unskilled textual borrowing practices. This shift forms a central theme that threads through the entire book. Chapter 2 contrbutes in the same regard, which investigates how a master's student develops her citing practices through three perios with a bottom-up, data-driven approach, revealing the acquisition of advanced source use a non-linear and incremental process. This chapter not only provides a rich acount of learners progression in source use and rhetorical awarenes of source iting over the courses of an academic year but also highlights the imperative of both formal teaching and informal learning that serve to tackle ongoing writing challenges across dfferent developmental stages of master students. In a similar vein, Chapter 3 investigates the daunting challenges faced by subject lecturers in embedded, discipline-specific provision, by tutors in semi-embedded, discipline-specific provision, by learning advisers in writing centers, and by L2 teachers in EGAP (English for General Academic Purpose) and EsAP (English for Specific Academic Purpose) during their instruction of source based writing. In spite of divers challenges encountered in thes four types of teaching, this chapter offers practical interventions to support multifaceted operation of source-based writing and local practice to asst novice writers navigated the complexities inherent in acquiring source-based writing skills.

Part I delves into recent innovations in classoom instruction for source-based writing, providing fresh pedagogical insights in response to Cumming et al.'s (2016, p. 52) assertion that \*instruction can help students improve their use of sources in their writing" Chapters 4, 6, 7, and 8 showcase specific pedagogical processes, including a multi-clssroom implementation of the College, Career, and Community Writr's Program (C3wP) (Chapter 4), the flipped classoom (Chapter 6), interactive multimedia teaching (Chapter 7), and an instructional scaffolding approach (Chapter 8). The step-by-step pedagogical activities outlined in these chapters are remarkably versatile and can be seamlessly integrated into diverse teaching context, fitig in wel with the cllaboration-oriented learner-centered, and technology-assted trends. Notably, Chapter 5 exhibits a four-stage trajectory (i.., from novice/entry-level writer, post-novice writer, intermediat-level writer, to proficient writer of patchwriting as a transgressive practice, and Chapter 9 presents four dimensions of source use (i.e., concept, sentence, discourse, and process dimensions) for rhetorical purposes. The two chapters delineate detailed pedagogical interventions designed to nurture patchwriting as positive language re-use and the rhetorical functions f textual borrowing, which contribute to necessrily disclosing the teachability of the inherently complex nature of sourcebased writing.

In order to inform pedagogical practices and enhance leaning outcomes, Part II provides an in-depth exploration of the asesment of source-based writing. Chapter 10 centers on plurilingual integrated input-to-output tasks (P20) as a means of asessing the perceptions and practices of six MA students i their integration of content knowledge, responses to specific prompts, and summary writing skill, typically involving reading in English and writing in French. This chapter is of referential value for readers to seek new evidence for holistic asessment of source-based writing to further improve learners' academic biliteracy and transliteracy. To further elucidate that assessment is a critical part of learning, Chapter 11 is dedicated to incorporatig integrated writing asessment into learning-promoting potential, provided with nuanced sections encompassing observation, evaluation (inclusive of teach, peer, and self-asesment), and feedback. This chapter rchly exemplifes assessment for learning (AfL) and learning-oriented assessment (LOA), which sere o underscore the pivotal role of integrated writing asssment tas to strengthen the learning-assesment cycle Stepping into the interdisciplinary assessment of source use, Chapter 12 investigates the correlation between business communication in. structors' evaluation of student writing and text-based features of source use. This chapter displays the evaluative proces of three source-use variables in texts where students chose to disagree with five writing prompts, by business instructors who adhered to a standardized set of criteria. Readers can apply the asessment process directly or adapt the procedure to suit specific disciplinary nuances, allin the context of assessng writig skils requisite for judiciously exploiting source information in disciplinary writing. Supporting the urgent call to develop an overall understanding of source-based writing, Chapter 13 puts forward an asessment framework for cognitive (i.e, organizing, selecting, and connecting) and metacognitive processing (i.., planning, monitoring, and evaluating) in argumentative integrated writing. Provided with detaled approaches in lesson planning, explicit instruction, and self-/ peer assesment, L2 teachers can easily adopt this framework to diagnose their students strengths and areas for improvement in source-based argumentative writing assessment.

Part IV delves into the use of direct and indirect referencing, while Part V addresses the ethical considerations of researching source-based writing. In Chapter 14, a corpus analysis spanning 50 years and encompassing 2.2 million words from leading journals across four disciplines reveals a diachronic change of reporting verbs and stance markers, showing a trend towards impersonality and disciplinary variations in indrect referencing. Similarly, Chapter 15 examines numerous direct-quotig examples drawn from a corpus called Direct Quotation Meta-Data, which systematically classfies direct-quotation and intilly identifies atributes governing rhetorical functions. The two corpus-based studies provide readers with a deep understanding of the multifaceted role of direct and indirect referencing in textual organization and help readers use them more cohesively. Chapter 16 closes the book by rigorously scrutinizin four primary thical iue (i.., retiol riss fac y participants, informed consent pration, moral ends of sourceuse research, and benefits towards multilingual writers). This conclusive chapter serves as a valuable resource for researchers and mentors alike, offering insights to navigate ethical quandaries and formulated recommendations to take precautions against the controversy and resolve ethical dilemmas entwined within the context of source-based writing.

To conclude, this volume is a valuable read with a variety of merit. Noteworthy among these is the book's fresh understanding, which conceives source-based writing as an ongoing developmental endeavor and brings together learning, teaching, and asessment to propel the trajectory toward the acquisition of asophisticated repertoire of source-based writig skils. The innovative premise of this volume lies in a paradigmatic shift from the deficit model, exemplified by its departure from a narrow focus on misuse and patchwriting as language errors, to one that embraces perceived shortcomings as integral components and indispensablestages withn intricate developmental trajectories. Another impressie feature of the book rests in its nuanced and step-by-step procedures designed to conduct the learning, teaching, and assessment of source-based writing. The volume employs graphical, tabular, and bullet-point formats to showcase instructional activities and assessment principle, rendering the content effortlessly navigable, and therey effectively minimizing barriers (eg, professonal restrictions, linguistic burdens, and cognitive load) to seamless engagement. Furthermore, the abundant resources are readily accessible through appendices appended after respective chapters or via provided website addresses, thereby reader can be immersed in the immediate and active application of the teaching-learning processes and assessment activities. A further merit of this volume i its astute examination of the contemporary trends involving individualdifferences variables nercltural isue, and techloical facors in source-asd writing. For example, the book encompasss learners psychology such as a lack of elfefficacy and sense of ownership, weak motivation, and a negative perception of their source-use skil. Moreover, the volume probes the intersecions of technology-assted teaching and problematic source use within the context of cultural and intercultural differences. The book may serve as a springboard for future research into diverse aspects of source-based writing such as emotional dimensions (e.g., enjoyment, anxiety, ideal self, growth mindset, feedack literacy, asessment literacy) and technology use (e.g., digital reading, automated writing evaluation systems).

Despite its merit, this book is not without limitations. Firstl, i overlooks newly developed source-based writing tasks, notably the story continuation writing task. In this undertaking, participants are tasked with an incomplete English story and are required to continue the tory in two paragraphs, with the beginning sentence of each paragraph already provided. This task has been integrated into China's universt entrance examination and has gained prominence in its eficacy in facilitating Asesment for Learning (AfL). Consequently, the inclusion of continuation writing into this volume may contribute significantly to the exploration of emerging innovative trends i source-based writing. Secondly, the book neglects to explore the impact of ChatGPT. Integrating Al-based tols particularly delving into how learners utilize ChatGPT to mitigate the risk of plagiarism, how teachers collaborate with ChatGPT to recalibrate clssoom instruction, and how assessors evaluate the diffrences between texts produced by ChatGPT and human writers could highly enrich the self-learning, instructional, and evaluatie aspects of source-based writing. Lastly, the book disregards certan perspectives, notably the systemic functional linguistics (SFL) approach, which views the meaning-making processas contingent upon the appropriate use of linguistic choices tailored for specific gnres or registers. This perspective aligns with the nature of source-based writing, emphasizing selection, connection, and synthesi of key ideas and source expressions acrosource materials to compose a coherent and cohesive discourse. Incorporating such perspectives would help fully unveil the inherent complexity of source-based writing.

That said, this research-intensive, pedagogy-centered, and assessment-enriched volume is a thought-provoking and pragmatic resource for ecatrs, grduate students, superviors, rechers, and curriculm deelopers. Its endavors inite reders to excavate the much fertile soil as yet untilled field of learning, teaching, and aessing source-based writing. With his book, readers would e motivated to embark on a journey of intellctual inquir, probing the deeper understanding and unearthing largely underexplored insights within the intricate black boxes inherent in source-based writing.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Zhan Jianling: Writing - review & editing. Zhou Chuyi: Writing - review & editing.

# Acknowledgements

This paper is supported by a grant from the National Social Science Fund of China (Grant No.: 21Byy048).

# References

i 06  r  o      s 23, 47-58.   
Li, .     inwtn  A c   t t rimob jectives. Asia Pacific Education Review, 21, 379-391. (3), 217-230.   
Sun, Q., & Soden, B. (2022). The representation of source use in academic writing textbooks. ELT Journal, 76(4), 497-507.

Jia h   f    c integrated writing.

Chuyi ho is h ddat at the co of  aa f na- rsiy. r rrh ints de ond ang wting nd cond language acquisition.

Jianling Zhana\*,1, Chuyi Zhoub a Faculty of English Language and Culture, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, 2 Baiyun Avenue, Baiyun District, Guangzhou 510420, China b School of Foreign Languages, Sun Yat-sen University, No. 135, Xingang Xi Road, Guangzhou 510275, China