# The rhetorical organization of discussions sections of qualitative research articles in Applied Linguistics and the use of meta-discourse markers

Nasrin Ash'ari, Elyas Barabadi\*, Majid Elahi Shirvan

Applied Linguistics, University of Bojnord, Iran

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords: Rhetorical organization Meta-discourse markers Discussion section Qualitative research article

Handling Editor: Dr Hilary Nesi

This study examined the rhetorical organization and the distribution of meta-discourse markers in a corpus of 20 qualitative research articles in the Applied Linguistics field. The findings of the study indicated that the seven-move structure proposed by prior research in quantitative datasets is also true in our qualitative dataset. Concerning steps, however, this study indicated that there are two new steps in the Comment on the Results move and also two new steps in the Deduction from the Research move, compared with the quantitative data of prior research. It was also found that both the distribution and frequency of meta-discourse markers indicate significant differences in comparison with quantitative research articles. Given these findings, we can say that although the schematic structure proposed for the Discussion sections of quantitative research articles is applicable to the qualitative corpus, it is also important not to ignore subtle nuances in the two research paradigms. Drawing academic writers' attention to these rhetorical and linguistic nuances arising from research paradigm differences can carry practical pedagogical implications. The findings of this study can raise novice writers' awareness with respect to academic writing rhetoric and the functions of meta-discourse markers in qualitative research in Applied Linguistics.

# 1. Introduction

Having distinctive communicative efects, the research article (hence, RA) is considered a very specialized and distinctive genre (Lee & Swales, 2006; Samraj, 2016) which can be studied through the lens of rhetorical structures (Cheng & Unsworth, 2016; Cotos et al., 2017; Dudley-Evans, 1994; Hyland, 2008) and linguistic features (Biber et al., 2004). Following the seminal work of Swales (1990) on rhetorical organization and lexicogrammatical features, a large body of research has examined the rhetorical structures and linguisti features of different sections of RAs, including Abstract (Lores, 2004), Introductions (Briones, 2012), Literature Reviews (Khoo et al., 2011), Discussions (Al-Shujairi et al., 2020), and Conclusions (Bunton, 2005). Even though master's theses and PhD dissertations belong to the same genre family, ther rhtorical structures have aso ben extensively examined (see Basturkmen, 2009; Dudey-Evans, 1994; Lee & Casal, 2014; Peng & Zheng, 2021) on account of differing requirements, purposes, and norms associated with each specific genre. In addition to this generic distinctiveness, isciplinary variations in terms of rhetorical structures and lin guistic features have been acknowledged for RAs. For example, Yang and Allison (2003) argued that RA writers in Applied Linguisics

are faced with rhetorical choices unique to this discipline.

This unique style of writing serves communicative functions and purposes associated with specific discourse communities (Bruce 2008; Hyland, 2007). The RA is no doubt the most prominent genre of the academy whose principal purpose is to make and disseminate disciplinary knowledge (Hyland, 2009 Peacock, 2002). Rcently, primary importance has been attached to the Discussion section of RAs since the most fundamental challenge for academic writers lies in how they can employ their persuasive academic writing skill in order to justify the novelty and validity of their clams (Amnuai, 2017; nnesey, 2010; Jllifar et al., 2012; Pojanapunya & Todd, 2011). The implied message here isthat this line of research can be very informative edagogically. This is especially true given the rapid growth of academic writing both by native writers and particularly non-native writers who may not be well-equipped by the communicative moves necessary for making a powerful argument (Annesley, 2010; Peacock, 2002.

The communicative moves or the schematic structure of the Discussion section of Applied Linguistics RAs have been investigated either in a broad dataset containing several disciplines such as Physics, Biology, and Applied Linguistics (see Peacock, 2002), or i a specific corpus of Applied Linguistics articles (Liu & Buckingham, 2018; Yang & Allison, 2003). Drawing on Dudley-Evans (1994) model, Peacock (2002) examined the rhetorical structures of RAs from various disciplines, including Aplied Linguistics and provided a revised version of Dudley-Evans' framework as follows: Information Move, Statement of Result, Finding, Unexpected Outcome, Reference to Previous Research, Explanation, Clam, Limitatin, and Recommendation. Yang and Alison (2003) also provided another framework for the schematic tructure of the Discussion section (see Table 1). More recently, Liu and Buckingham (2018) drew on this framework and found all the moves originally proposed by Yang and Allison (2003) except Summarizing the Study.

When investigating the schematic tructure of the Discussion section of RAs, Jalilifar et al. (2012) and Liu and Buckingham (2018) also incorporated the analysis of various meta-discourse markers serving the communicative purpose of individual moves. This simultaneous investigation of both rhetorical organization and meta-discourse markers is warrnted since both devices are utilized by academic writers in order to achieve their primary purpose of creating powerful persuasive discourse. As Hyland (2005a) points out, meta-discourse reers to elf-rflective linguistic materials empoyed by the writer to signal his/her atitude towards the texts audience and the content.

However, previous research investigating the rhetorical structure and meta-discourse markers in the Discusson sections of RAs either in the Applied inguistics discipline r ther disciplinary fields has focused exclusively on quantitative RAs (Jallifar et al, 2012; Liu & Buckingham, 2018; Peacock, 2002; Yang & Allison, 2003). Qualitative RAs do not appear to have captured theatention of this kind of rhetorical and meta-discourse-based research in general and in the field of Applied Linguistics in particular. Published information with regard to rhetorical and meta-discoursal variations between quantitative and qualitative RAs in Applied Linguistics appears to be very rare. Liu and Buckingham (2018) explicitly stated that future research is needed to focus on a qualitative corpus since their dataset consisted of solely ".. published experimental studies employing a data-driven, quantitative approach, and [did] not include qualitative studies (p. 107).

Given the fact that qualitative research has achieved a dominant position in Applied Linguisics, researchers need to carefully investigate how qualitative research writers in Applied Linguistics construct the Discussion section and their argumentation within it from a rhetorical perspective. At this point i should be noted that the features traditionall associated with qualitative and quan. titative methods (i.e. the use of predominantly numbers or words) overlap to a great extent (Allwood, 2012), meaning that we do not expect to observe dramatic differences between qualitatie and quantitative writing in terms of rhetorical organization and the use of meta-discourse markers. Yet, given the interpretative nature of qualitative research (Denzin & Lincoln, 1998), it is also reasonable to expect the existence of some rhetorical and meta-discoursal nuances.

The importance of the Discussion section lies in the fact that the writer shifts the focus of his/her attention from the inside of the study (e.g., Reults) to its wider ignficance (wales, 1990).This is oly achieved through ystematic and careful armenttion nthis section Infact,talking about the sinficanc of the resuts, comparing the reults with previous findings, deling with the theoretical contributions of the findings, and explaining why the results turned out to be as they are, constitute the major stes that need to be taken by Applied Linguistics researchers o construct a coherent Discussion and argumentation (Bitchener & Basturkmen, 2006), and this definitely varie as a function of being quantitative or qualitative research. Put another way, although many researchers have investigated the rhetorical organization and meta-discourse features in diffrent disciplines within the genre of the RA, it is just possible that some differences regarding move, steps, and their frequencies may arise depending on the research paradigm used in each discipline (Basturkmen, 2012; Gray 2013; Lewin et al., 2001).

Table 1 Move structures of Discussion sections proposed by Yang and Allison (2003).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Moves</td><td>Steps</td></tr><tr><td>M1-Background Information</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M2-Reporting Results</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M3-Summarizing Results</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M4-Commenting on Results</td><td>S1 - Interpreting Results</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>s2 - Comparing Results with Literature</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S3 - Accounting for Results</td></tr><tr><td>M5-Summarizing the Study</td><td>S4 - Evaluating Results</td></tr><tr><td>M6-Evaluating the Study</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S1 - Indicating the Limitations</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>s2 - Indicating the Significance/Advantage</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S3 - Evaluating Methodology</td></tr><tr><td>M7-Deductions from the Research</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S1-Making Suggestions</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S2 - Recommending Further Research</td></tr></table></body></html>

Accordingly, the present study i a attempt tofill these gaps by investigating the moves and stes of the iscussion section and also the specific contribution of diffrent meta-discourse markers to each individual move in a qualitative corpus of Applied Linguistics. Specifically, the following research questions will be dealt with in the present study:

RQ 1. To what extent is Yang and Allison's (2003) schematic structure of the Discussion section applicable in a qualitative corpus of Applied Linguistics articles?   
RQ 2. What are the frequencies of moves, move sequences, opening and closing moves, and obligatory and optional moves in this qualitative dataset?   
RQ 3. What are the distributions of various meta-discourse markers (Hyland, 2005a) across diffrent moves in this qualitative dataset?

# 2. Method

In this paper, the rhetorical organization and meta-discourse fatures of the Discussion sections of 20 Applied Linguisics RAs were examined. To achieve the first aim, we followed Liu and Buckingham's (2018)study by adopting a two-level analysi of our qualitative corpus: Firt, drawing on Yang and llison's (2003) classfication of Moves and Steps as guidance on the overal rhetorical organization of our corpus, we tried to identify the moves and steps within the corpus while being cognizant of the possible existence of unique moves and stes since changes in research paradigms (e.g. being qualitative or quantitative) even within the same discipline may result in quite diferent rhetorical choices by professional writers (Cotos et al., 2017; Gray 2013). Having identified the moves and steps, we examined the use of meta-discourse markers within each move by using Hyland's (2005a) list of English meta-discourse items. A detailed report of the methods section is presented below:

# 2.1. Corpus and data collection

The dataset of the current study consisted of the Discussion sections of 20 qualitative RAs in the field of Applied Linguistic. These articles were taken from four high-impact intenationally peer-reviewed journals which were selected based on thir publication date and research design (qualitative vs. quantitative). The selected journals were Applie inguistics, The Moden Language Journal, System, and TEsoL Quarterly, which are among the most prestigious journals in the field of Applied Linguistics, with high impact factors. In order to make the corpus, five articles were taken from each journal in the period from 2017 to 2020. An independent Discussion section was the first requirement for choosing the articles but in the end, we had to use five articles with the title of Discussion and Conclusion because we could not find qualitative artices having a separate Discussion section. ll the RAs contained the following organization: Introduction, Method, Results/Findings, Discussion, and Conclusion. Articles that satisied this criterion were then evaluated todetermine if they were qualitative or quantitative. Qualitative resrch reers to those papers that use qualittive methods of data ollction such as interviews, focus group interviews, reflective writing, and ethnography of communication as wellas using qualitative data analysis like grounded theory, qualitative content analysis, or ethnographic methods (Dornyei, 2007). Finally, 20 qualitative Applie Linguistics RAs were collcted and made up our homogeneous dataset consisting of 20,470 tokens. Appendix 1 provides the full list of four journals and 20 examined RAs.

Table 2 Metadiscourse marker classification model in Hyland (2005a).   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Interactive metadiscourse</td></tr><tr><td>Macro-category</td><td>Subcategory</td></tr><tr><td>Transitions</td><td>Addition</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Frame markers</td><td>Comparison</td></tr><tr><td>Consequence</td></tr><tr><td>Sequencing</td></tr><tr><td>Label stages</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Endophoric markers</td><td>Announcing goals</td></tr><tr><td>Topic shift</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>Code glosses</td><td>Reformulation</td></tr><tr><td>Evidentials</td><td>Exemplification</td></tr><tr><td>Interactional metadiscourse</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Hedges</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td>Attribute</td></tr><tr><td>Reliability</td></tr><tr><td>Writer-oriented Reader-oriented</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Boosters</td><td>Emphatics</td></tr><tr><td>Amplifying adverbs</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Attitude markers</td><td>Attitude verbs</td></tr><tr><td>Sentence adverbs</td></tr><tr><td>Adjectives</td></tr><tr><td>Self-mentions</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Engagement markers</td><td>Readers Pronouns</td></tr><tr><td>Interjections</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td>Questions</td></tr><tr><td>Directives: Imperatives</td></tr><tr><td>Directives: Obligation modals</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 2.2. Data analysis

Following previous suggestions made by Liu and Buckingham (2018) who examined the moves and steps of the Discussion section of quantitive RAs, we read the whole qualitative articles selected in this study in order to ensure a comprehensive apprehension of the communicatie functions realized in the different moves and steps of the Discussion sections. Then, we started the meticulous analysis and identification of moves and stes in the corpus. However, i should be noted that we did not try to use prior cassfications as fixed entties to be followed in our ataset. That is, we tried t remain flxible so as not to miss probable variations in th new corpus. Specificall, we amed a specifying th opening and closing moves, obligatory moves as well as move seuece, and heir frequencies by annotating the texts manually. The initial analysis of the corpus indicated that some segments of the texts represented two or even more moves or stes, posing a particular challenge for us regarding lack of neat and clear-cut clasification that is expected from the analysis of quantitative texts. However, we tried to clasify those ambiguous segments based on their dominant function, using some textual and inguistic clues such as discourse markers and also the overall contextual information. We highlighted texs using different colors to specify each move. Having identified the moves and steps, we undertook the identification of various meta-discourse markers used to introduce those moves and steps. In analyzing the corpus, we used Hyland's (2005a) Interpersonal meta-discourse model (see Table 2). Preparing several Word documents, we copied the texts related to each move and made seven files since we found seven moves in our dataset. Antconc (v.4.2.0, Anthony, 2023) which is a corpus analysis oolkit showing search results in a KwIc (keyword in context) format was used. This allowed us to investigate how words were frequently used in a corpus of texts. Because possible meta-discoursal items \*can serve either a propositional or metadiscoursal function" (Hyland, 2004, p. 136), every example was manually analyzed in the context to ensure that i peformed as a meta-discourse marker. Having identified the frequencies of allthe meta-discourse markers, we used the Log Likelihood test to investigate whether there were any significant differences between meta-discourse markers used in quantitative (Liu & Buckingham, 2018) and qualitative RAs in the field of Applied Lingustics.

# 2.3. Reliability

In order to ensure the reliability of the moves and steps classfication, we employed three measures. Initilly, the first author randomly selected $5 0 \%$ of the dataset (10 articles) and re-analyzed this smaller sub-sample of dataset three weeks after she had analyzed the whole corpus. The intra-rater reliability was $8 6 \%$ . Subsequently, the second author of the paper re-analyzed the entire corpus. The inter-rater reliability score was $8 2 \%$ , resulting in subsequent joint discussions between the first author and the second author in order to resolve the discrepancies. In cases where we did not reach an agrement, in the third stage, we referred the con. trasting points to the third author in order to make the final decisions. Our major contrasting points had to do with steps within the Commenting on the Results move which semed very confusing at times. This challenge was also acknowledged by previous research on the rhetorical structure of diffrent sections of the RA (see Basturkmen, 2012). The same procedure was also taken in order to identify various meta-discourse markers that were utilized to actualize particular moves and steps. In this case, the intra-rater and inter-rater reliabilities were between $8 5 \%$ , and $8 1 \%$ respectively.

# 3. Results

# 3.1. The overall comparison of our findings with those of the quantitative dataset

Regarding the first research question dealing with the classfication of moves and steps, the following moves appeared in our corpus: M1-Background Information, M2-Reporting Results, M3-Summarizing Results, M4-Commenting on Results, M5-Summarizing the Study, M6-Evaluating the Study, and M7-Deductions from the Research. This facet of results confirms Yang and Alison's (2003) taxonomy in terms of the number of moves. Regarding the steps, however, some differences were found: first, two additional steps were identified in the Comment on the Reults move of the Discussion section, namely Exemplification, and Clarification, and two stes were identified in move 7, Deduction from the Research, namely Claim and Conclusion. In addition, some steps and moves appeared very rarely when compared with the quantitative dataset of previous research (se Table 5). Another unique finding of this qualitative dataset was that the order and the number of moves and steps in this dataset were flexible in the sense that the readers of qualitative RAs can easily detect cyclical patterns. For instance, it was not uncommon to see M3 (Summarizing the Study) in the opening part of the Discussion as well as in the middle and at the end of the Discussion. M1 (Background Information) also appeared in different positions in the iscussion section. The most prominent example fflexbility reers to M2 (Reporting the Result) which appeared very frequently in almost any position in the iscussion section with an unpredictable sequence of other moves following i or preceding it Yet, in order to show a clear schematic model of dfferent moves and steps for the readers, we have prepared Table 3 in terms of the most common presentation of moves and stes and also in an attempt to uxtapose our findings with those of Yang and Allison's (203) framework.

Another aspect of our findings was related to the schematic organizational features of the qualitative dataset with respect to move order and move frequency. As can be observed in Table 4, the frequency of different moves varies considerably with regard to their positions as the opening move at the beginning of the Discussion section or as the closing move at the end of the Discussion section.

The dominant moves appearing as the opening move of the Discussion section in our dataset were M5 (Summarizing the Study) with a frequency of 8, accounting for $4 0 \%$ and M1 (Background Information) appearing five times equal to $2 5 \%$ . The next most frequent moves with which the qualitative authors itroduced their Discussion sections were M2 (Reporting Results) with a frequency of four, accounting for $2 0 \%$ , and M4 (Commenting on Results) (three times, $1 5 \%$ . Interestingly, only one step of the Commenting on Results move, that is, Comparing Results with Literature appeared in the opening move. As Table 4 displays, only these four moves appeared in the opening position of the Discussion section. As for the closing moves, three moves flled this position. In order of frequency these were: M7 (Deductions from the Research), which appeared 13 times accounting for $6 5 \%$ of the closing part; M4 (Commenting on the Results), which appeared four times accounting for $2 0 \%$ of the closing part, and M3 (Summarizing the Results), which appeared 3 times accounting for $1 5 \%$ of the closing part.

The next phase of the results which is concerned with the second research question was related to the frequency and percentage of each specific move and step. Table 5 shows the frequency and total pecentage of individual moves, and the steps used to realize those moves, as well as the average percentage of the moves and steps in each article.

As can be observed in Table 5, the most rcurrent move was M4 (Commenting on Results) with a totalocurrence of 209 times in the entire corpus, amounting to $5 0 . 9 7 \%$ of all the moves. The average appearance of this move per article was 10.45. In other words, this move appeared on 10.45 occasions in every Discussion section. Overall six different steps were used by authors to realize this move; in the order of their frequency in the dataset these were S1 (Interpreting the Results), s2 (Comparing the Results with Literature), 5 (Clarification),6 Exemplification), 3(Acounting for the Rsults), and S4 (Evaluating the Results). The most frequent step in this move was S1 (Interpreting the Results), which occurred 85 times, constituting $4 0 . 6 6 \%$ of all the steps within this move. On average, ths step was used 4.25 times in each articl. The nex frequent step was s5 (larification) with a total occurrence f 41 times comprising $1 9 . 6 1 \%$ On average, this step occurred 2.05 times per single article. The other steps within this move were S2 (Comparing the Results with Literature: 32: $1 5 . 3 1 \%$ ), S6 (Exemplification, N, 27: $1 2 . 9 1 \%$ , S3 (Accounting for the Results, N: 13, $6 . 2 2 \%$ , and S4 (Evaluating the Results, N: 11, $5 . 2 6 \%$ . It should be noted that two new steps were found in our corpus: S5 (Clarification) and S6 (Exemplification). The former refers to the various examples or samples from the qualitative data such as interview excerpts, quo. tations, and artifacts that the writer used in order to iustrate the findings. On the other hand, 5 (larification) reers to the writer's attempt to shed light on one or two particular aspects of the findings in detail in order to clarify them.

The next most recurrent move was M2 (Reporting Results), which occurred 99 times, accounting for $2 4 . 1 4 \%$ of all the moves in the dataset. On average, this move appeared on 4.95 ocasions in each singl Discusson section. The other frequent move was M7 (Deductions from the Research) which occurred 56 times, accounting for $1 3 . 6 5 \%$ of the total moves in this study. It occurred 2.8 times on average in each Discussion section. The most dominant step within this move was the Conclusion step, which occurred 26 times, accounting for $4 6 . 4 2 \%$ of all the instances of Deductions from the Research. M1 (Background Information) was the next most repeated move, occurring 22 times and accounting for $5 . 3 6 ~ \%$ of all the moves in the dataset. On average, this move appeared 1.1 times per article. M6 (Evaluating the Study), M5 (Summarizing the Study), and M3 (Summarizing the Results) appeared 12 times $( 2 . 9 2 \% )$ , 8 times $( 1 . 9 5 \% )$ , and 4 times $( 0 . 9 7 \% )$ respectively.

Table 3 Move structures of the discussion sections of qualitative RAs.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Moves</td><td>Steps</td></tr><tr><td>M1-Background Information</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M2-Reporting Results</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M3-Summarizing Results</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M4-Commenting on Results</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S1 - Interpreting Results</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S2 - Comparing Results with Literature</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S3 - Accounting for Results</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S4 - Evaluating Results</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> S5 - Clarification</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S6 - Exemplification</td></tr><tr><td>M5-Summarizing the Study M6-Evaluating the Study</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S1 - Indicating the Limitations</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S2 - Indicating the Significance/Advantage</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> S3 - Evaluating Methodology</td></tr><tr><td>M7-Deductions from the Research</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S1-Making Suggestions</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S2 - Recommending Further Research</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> S3 - Drawing Pedagogic Implications</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S4 - Claim</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S5 - Conclusion</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Opening and closing moves.\*   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Opening moves</td><td>Closing moves</td></tr><tr><td>M1-Background Information</td><td>5 (25%)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>M2-Reporting Results</td><td>4 (20%)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>M3-Summarizing Results</td><td>0</td><td>3 (15%)</td></tr><tr><td>M4-Commenting on Results</td><td></td><td>4 (20%)</td></tr><tr><td>Step: Comparing Results with Literature</td><td>3 (15%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M5-Summarizing the Study</td><td>8 (40%)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>M6-Evaluating the Study</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>M7-Deductions from the Research</td><td>0</td><td>13 (65%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

The total number of RAs was 20.

Table 5 Distribution of Moves (M) and Steps(S).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Moves</td><td>Steps</td><td>Total</td><td> Percentagea</td><td>Average Freq. per section</td></tr><tr><td> M1-Background Information</td><td></td><td>22</td><td>5.36%</td><td>1.1</td></tr><tr><td>M2-Reporting Results</td><td></td><td>99</td><td>24.14%</td><td>4.95</td></tr><tr><td> M3-Summarizing Results</td><td></td><td>4</td><td>0.97%</td><td>0.2</td></tr><tr><td>M4-Commenting on Results</td><td></td><td>209</td><td>50.97%</td><td>10.45</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S1 - Interpreting Results</td><td>85</td><td></td><td>4.25</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S2 - Comparing Results with Literature</td><td>32</td><td></td><td>1.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S3 - Accounting for Results</td><td>13</td><td></td><td>0.65</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> S4 - Evaluating Results</td><td>11</td><td></td><td>0.55</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> S5 - Clarification</td><td>41</td><td></td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> S6 - Exemplification</td><td>27</td><td></td><td>1.35</td></tr><tr><td> M5-Summarizing the Study</td><td></td><td>8.</td><td>1.95%</td><td>0.4</td></tr><tr><td> M6-Evaluating the Study</td><td></td><td>12</td><td>2.92%</td><td>0.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S1 - Indicating the Limitations</td><td>2</td><td></td><td>0.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S2 - Indicating the Significance/Advantage 5</td><td>0.25</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td> 3 - Evaluating Methodology</td><td>5</td><td></td><td>0.25</td></tr><tr><td>M7-Deductions from the Research</td><td></td><td>56</td><td>13.65%</td><td>2.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S1-Making Suggestions</td><td>8</td><td></td><td>0.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> S2 - Recommending Further Research</td><td>8</td><td></td><td>0.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> S3 - Drawing Pedagogic Implications</td><td>6</td><td></td><td>0.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S4 - Claim</td><td>8</td><td></td><td>0.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> S5 - Conclusion</td><td>26</td><td></td><td>1.3.</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>410</td><td>100%</td><td>20.5</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Percentages have been rounded to one decimal point.

Another aspect of the second reearch question was whether these moves and their onstituent steps were obligatory or optional. A suggested earlier in the report f the results, we can see substantial variations across the 20 RAs with regard to the distribution of various moves and steps. Table 6 shows that only M2 (Reporting the Results) and M4 (Commenting on the Results) were obligatory since they were used in al the 20 RA Discussions in our corpus. Further, as can be seen in Table6, three steps, namely Interpreting the Results (M4:s1), Comparing the Results with Literature (M4:S2), and Clarification (M4:6) were obligatory since they were used in all 20 RAs.

As can be observed in Table 7, there was only one move-sequence in which M2 (Reporting Results) was followed by M4 (Com menting on Results. Aside from this sequence, no recurrent patten of moves was found in the dataset, sugesting the flexibilit of the discourse in qualitative RAs. Since there were six different stes within move 4, we decided to identif which specific step of this move follows move 2, hence comprising a move sequence. As can be sen in Table 8, the most frequent step in this move sequence (i.e., move 2 followed by move 4) was Interpreting the Results, occurring 44 times $( 5 3 . 6 5 \% )$ in this sequence.

Table 6 Distribution of moves and steps across all Discussion sections.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Moves</td><td>M1</td><td></td><td>M2</td><td></td><td>M3</td><td></td><td>M4</td><td></td><td>M5</td><td></td><td>M6</td><td></td><td> M7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Freq.</td><td>12</td><td></td><td>20</td><td></td><td>4</td><td></td><td>20</td><td></td><td>7</td><td></td><td>6</td><td></td><td>18</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Steps</td><td>M4:S1</td><td>M4:S2</td><td>M4:S3</td><td>M4:S4</td><td>M4:S5</td><td>M4:S6</td><td>M6:S1</td><td>M6:S2</td><td>M6:S3</td><td>M7:S1</td><td>M7:S2</td><td>M7:S3</td><td>M7:S4</td><td>M7:S5</td></tr><tr><td>Freq.</td><td>20</td><td>20</td><td>9</td><td>7</td><td>20</td><td>10</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>5</td><td>8</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>8</td><td>15</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 Move sequence frequency and Move-step sequence frequencies.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>sequences</td><td>Freq.</td><td>m Percentage of step occurrence with M2</td></tr><tr><td>Sequences</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move2-Move4</td><td>82 (82.82%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M2-M4:S1</td><td>44</td><td>53.65%</td></tr><tr><td>M2-M4:S2</td><td>9</td><td>10.97%</td></tr><tr><td>M2-M4:S3</td><td>6</td><td>7.31%</td></tr><tr><td>M2-M4:S4</td><td>3</td><td>3.65%</td></tr><tr><td>M2-M4:S5</td><td>8</td><td>9.75%</td></tr><tr><td>M2-M4:S6</td><td>12</td><td>14.63%</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Percentages have been rounded to one decimal point.

# 3.2. Meta-discourse findings

# 3.2.1. Overall results

The entire corpus consisted of 1486 meta-discourse markers with interactive markers constituting $7 2 . 5 \%$ (N: 1077) of all the markers and interactional markers constituting $2 7 . 5 \%$ (N: 409). As indicated in the Log values in Table 8, there is a statistically significant difference between the quantitative dataset in Liu and Buckingham's (2018) study and the qualitatie dataset inthe current study in terms of overall frequencies of meta-discourse markers and also in terms of interactive markers.

Tables 9 and 10 display the types of interactive and interactional markers used in each move respectively. Almost all moves contained meta-discourse markers except M1 (Background Information) and M5 (Summarizing the Study) which did not have hedges and boosters respectively. Further, M5 (Summarizing the Study), M3 (Summarizing Results), and M6 (Evaluating the Study) did not contain frame markers, code gosses, and endophoric markers. On average, 2.62 interactive markers (see Table 9) and 0.99 interactional markers seeTable 10) were employed in each move. Regarding the distrbution of the two main categories of meta-discourse markers, the main differences were related to the more extensive use of interactive markers in move 1 (4.68) and move 3 (7.5) compared with interactional markers in these two moves (1.5 and 1 respectively). Move 2 (N: 231) and Move 4 (N: 569) had the highest number of interactive markers in terms of overall frequency.

# 3.2.2. Interactive markers

As displayed in Table 9, interactive markers were employed 2.62 times per move. The highest frequencies of interactive markers relative to the number of moves appeared in move 1 (4.68) and move 3 (7.5), but if the overallpercentage f interactive markers in the corpus is considered, M4 (Commenting on the Results) contained $5 3 \%$ of all the interactive markers, and M2 (Reporting the Results) contained $2 2 \%$ of all the interactive markers. The other moves used interactive markers much less frequently, with an overall average of 2.16 times per move. Thus, in this sample, the qualitative RA authors made extensive use of interactive markers when they were required to provide background information and summarize the results.

As seen in Table 9, Transition markers were the most frequent markers across all moves, appearing 563 times $( 5 2 . 3 \% )$ . These markers occurred more frequently in moves 4 $( 4 9 . 2 \% )$ , 2 $( 1 1 . 7 ~ \% )$ ,7 $( 1 0 . 7 \% )$ , and 1 $( 1 0 . 5 \% )$ . Aside from Transition markers, Evidential markers were the next most frequent in the sample, constituting $3 2 . 2 \%$ of all interactive markers. Code glosses were the next. most frequent markers in our sample, constituting $7 \%$ of all the interactive markers. These markers were employed more frequently in move 4 (40 times equal to $5 3 . 4 \%$ . With slightly lower frequency, Frame markers comprised $6 \%$ of all the interactive markers, and finally, Endophoric markers had the lowest frequency of interactive markers in this corpus, appearing 29 times (i.e., $2 . 7 \%$ ) in the dataset.

# 3.2.3. Interactional markers

As can be observed in Table 10, interactional markers were employed 0.99 times per move. The highest frequencies of interactional markers relative to the number of moves appeared in moves 6(1.83) and 1 (1.5), but if the overall percentage of interactional markers in the corpus is considered, M4 (Commenting on the Results) contained $5 1 \%$ of all the interactional markers, and M2 (Reporting the Results) contained $2 2 \%$ of all the interactive markers. The other moves used interactional markers much less frequently, with an overall average of one per move. Thus, in this sample, the qualitative RA authors made extensive use of interactional markers when they aimed to Evaluate the Study (M6) and in order to provide Background Information (M1).

Table 8 The Log Likelihood values of the frequencies of meta-discourse markers.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Markers</td><td>Overall Sample Size</td><td> Meta-discourse markers</td><td>Interactive markers</td><td>Interactional markers</td></tr><tr><td>Qualitative Sample (the current study)</td><td>20,470 (20 RA)</td><td>1486</td><td>1077</td><td>409</td></tr><tr><td>Quantitative Sample (Liu &amp; Buckingham, 2018)</td><td>35,956 (20 RA)</td><td>1491</td><td>797</td><td>694</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>LL*: +230.32</td><td>LL: +346.48</td><td>LL: +0.31</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>BIC*: 219.38</td><td>BIC: 335.54</td><td>BIC: 10</td></tr></table></body></html>

\*L: Io-likelihod: although thi i aways a positie number the plus or mnus) sign shows the overuse or udrusef orpus 1 compared to corpus 2. LL value more than 15.13 means $\mathsf { p } < 0 . 0 0 0 1$ \*BIC: ${ > } 1 0$ : very strong evidence against HO.

Table 9 Distribution of interactive markers across each move.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"> Moves move (Total 410)</td><td colspan="4">No. of Interactive markers.</td><td colspan="3">Total No. per move Average No. per move</td></tr><tr><td>Transitions</td><td>Frame markers</td><td>Endophoric markers</td><td>Code glosses</td><td colspan="3">Evidentials</td></tr><tr><td>Move1</td><td>59</td><td>11</td><td>7</td><td>13</td><td></td><td>103</td><td>.68</td></tr><tr><td>(22)</td><td>(10.5%)</td><td>(17.2%)</td><td>(24.2%)</td><td>(17.4%)</td><td>13 (3.8%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move2</td><td>126</td><td>15</td><td>8</td><td>13</td><td>69</td><td>231</td><td>2.33</td></tr><tr><td>(99)</td><td>(11.7%)</td><td>(23.5%)</td><td>(27.6%)</td><td>(17.4%)</td><td>(20%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move3</td><td>18</td><td>6</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>6</td><td>30</td><td>7.5</td></tr><tr><td>(4)</td><td>(3.2%)</td><td>(9.4%)</td><td>(0%)</td><td>(0%)</td><td>(1.8%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move4</td><td>277</td><td>27.</td><td>9</td><td>40</td><td>216</td><td>569</td><td>2.72</td></tr><tr><td>(209)</td><td>(49.2%)</td><td>(42.2%)</td><td>(31%)</td><td>(53.4%)</td><td>(62.42%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move5</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>3.</td><td>0</td><td>3.</td><td>11</td><td>1.37</td></tr><tr><td>(8)</td><td>(0.9%)</td><td>(0%)</td><td>(10.4%)</td><td>(0%)</td><td>(0.9%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move6</td><td>18</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>20</td><td>42</td><td>3.5</td></tr><tr><td>(12)</td><td>(2.2%)</td><td>(1.6%)</td><td>(0%)</td><td>(4%)</td><td>(5.8%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move7</td><td>60</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>6</td><td>19</td><td>91</td><td>1.62</td></tr><tr><td>(56)</td><td>(10.7%)</td><td>(6.3%)</td><td>(6.9%)</td><td>(8%)</td><td>(5.5%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>563</td><td>64</td><td>29</td><td>75</td><td>346</td><td>1077</td><td>2.62</td></tr><tr><td>(410)</td><td>(52.3%)c</td><td>(6%)</td><td>(2.7%)</td><td>(7%)</td><td>(32.2%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 10 Distribution of interactional markers across each move.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Moves move (Total 410)</td><td colspan="5">No. of Interactive markers</td><td rowspan="2">Total No. per move</td><td rowspan="2">Average No. per move</td></tr><tr><td>Hedges</td><td>Boosters</td><td>Attitude markers</td><td>Self- mentions</td><td>Engagement markers</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move1</td><td>0</td><td>9</td><td>7 (21.3%)</td><td>8 (12.7%)</td><td>9 (8%)</td><td>33</td><td>1.5</td></tr><tr><td>(22)</td><td>(0%) 28</td><td>(13.3%) 16.</td><td>8</td><td>12.</td><td>25.</td><td>89</td><td>0.89</td></tr><tr><td>Move2 (99)</td><td>(21.3%)</td><td>(23.6%)</td><td>(24.3%)</td><td>(19%)</td><td>(22.2%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move3</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(4)</td><td>(1.6%)</td><td>(0%)</td><td>(3%)</td><td>(0%)</td><td>(0.9%)</td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Move4</td><td>76</td><td>37</td><td>12.</td><td>26</td><td>58</td><td>209</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(209)</td><td>(57.6%)</td><td>(54.5%)</td><td>(36.4%)</td><td>(41.3%)</td><td>(51.4%)</td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Move5</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>5</td><td>10</td><td>1.25</td></tr><tr><td>(8)</td><td>(0.8%)</td><td>(0%)</td><td>(3%)</td><td>(4.8%)</td><td>(4.5%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move6</td><td>7</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>5</td><td>6</td><td>22</td><td>1.83</td></tr><tr><td>(12)</td><td>(5.3%)</td><td>(3%)</td><td>(6%)</td><td>(8%)</td><td>(5.3%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move7</td><td>18</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>9</td><td>9</td><td>42</td><td>0.75</td></tr><tr><td>(56)</td><td>(13.7%)</td><td>(5.9%)</td><td>(6%)</td><td>(14.3%)</td><td>(8%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>132</td><td>68.</td><td>33.</td><td>63</td><td>113</td><td>409</td><td>0.99</td></tr><tr><td>(410)</td><td>(32.3%)c</td><td>(16.7%)</td><td>(8%)</td><td>(15.5%)</td><td>(27.7%)</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

On average, Hedges were the most frequent markers across all moves, appearing 132 times $( 3 2 . 3 \% )$ . These markers occurred more frequently in move 4 $( 5 7 . 6 \% )$ , move 2 $( 2 1 . 3 \% )$ , move 7 $( 1 3 . 7 \% )$ , and move 6 $( 5 . 3 \% )$ . Aside from Hedges, Engagement markers were the next most frequent in the sample, constituting $2 7 . 7 \%$ of all interactional markers. Boosters were the next most frequent markers in our sample, constituting $1 6 . 7 \%$ of all the interactional markers. These markers were employed more frequently in move 4 (37 times equal to $5 4 . 5 \%$ . With slightly lower frequency, Self-mentions comprised $1 5 . 5 \%$ of entire interactional markers, and finally, Attitude markers had the lowest frequency of interactional markers in this corpus, appearing 33 times (i.e., $8 \%$ in the dataset (see Table 10).

# 4. Discussion

Drawing on previous research investigating the rhetorical structure of various sections of RAs (Al-Shujairi et al., 2020; Cheng & Unsworth, 2016; Cotos et al., 2017; Liu & Buckingham, 2018), this study amed to identify the rhetorical structure of the Discussion section of qualitative RAs in the Applied Linguistics discipline. As mentioned in the results section, there were seven moves in the Discussion section of qualitative RAs, namely Background Information, Reporting the Results, Summarizing the Results, Commenting on the Results, Summarizing the Study, Evaluating the Study, and Deductions from the Research. The appearance of these moves inthis qualitative dataset in line with previous taxonomies and cateorization of moves and steps in quantitative datsets (see Amuai, 2019; Liu & Buckingham, 2018; Yang & Allison, 2003) suggesting that the two types of RAs to a large extent overlap (Allwood, 2012). However, when the details are taken into account, several major differences merge: First, conrary to Lu and Buckingham (2018) and Basturkmen (2009) who proposed the conflation of step 1 (Interpreting the Results) and step 3(Accounting for the Result) of move 4, we adhere to the conventional categorization of Yang and Allison's (2003) framework and keep these two steps separate. The reason for keeping thisdistinction i that at as in this qualitative corpus, these tw stes fulfl two spcific unctions that sem ulike each other. Specificall, while Interpreting the Results aims at providing a reasonable explanation for some results, Accounting for the Results aims at justifying (usuall, not aways)  nw finding tha i not in keing with previous rearch by liting the resons behind this finding, as the following example illustrates:

Example 1. The participants in this study shared a conception of the separation of in-class and out-of-class learning during their study in China (Move 2: Reporting the Results). Inthis respect, our findings diffe from those of Lai (2015) and Lai et al. (2015), in which students did make connections between in-class and out-of-class learning and viewed them as being complementary to each other (Move 4: Commenting on the Results, Step: Compare with the Literature). The reason for this difference could be that the students in our study concetualized this relationship retrospectively from the viewpoint of ther ntial experiences of studying abroad (Move 4: Step 3: Accounting for the Results) (Kashiwa & Benson, 2018).

As can be oseved in this example, itlly, the writer reorts the reults. Immediately, ater presenting the new finding, the writer makes a comparison with previous research and states that her finding is not consistent with those of previous researchers. Then, she tries to provide a logical justification for this inconsistent result. Interpretig, however, performs a rather different function by providing a general explanation for some results as illustrated in Example 2 below:

Example2. When such influences on the leaners reached a critical threshold, the resulting motivational coordination led to a single parameter (i., teachers shaping the learners paths of development as they progressed (Move 2: Rporting the Results). These results point to the significance of the classroom environment and the teacher as the creator of the learning environment (Move 4, Step 1: Interpreting the Results) (Papi & Hiver, 2020).

As shown in this example, at frt the writer presents the results of the study and then this finding is positioned within a broader context that makes it more tangiblefor the readers. In addition to these two apparently overlapping steps, two new frequent steps were identified in move 4 (Commenting on the Results), namely Clarification and Exemplification.

Example 3. The study revealed interesting adaptive interactions between the value truth, control, and environmental factors as the learners drew on coordinative structures at diffrent stages of the L2 development process (Move 2). These enabled the learners to accommodate greater developmental variability, which was ilustrated by interactions exerting a more prominent impact on them at times and waning at others (Move 4, Step: Interpreting). Whereas the initial engagement in the L2 learning process was inluenced by learners' value-related desire to met the expectations of other significant individuals, the motivation to maintain engagement in the learning proces was more a function of their control-related motives icluding their learning experience and interest in situational factors uch as the learning materials and activities and more importantly their teachers. (Move 4, Ste 5: Clarification) (Papi & Hier, 2020).

As Example 3 suggests, the purpose of the Interpretation seems to provide some simple and general explanation for the developmental nature of L2 learners' motivation in the course of language learning, while the next step, Clarification, aims at providing exact details of the nature f this variability of L2 motivation acros time. In other words, these two steps, Interpretation and Clarification, are two sides of the same coin, trying to shed light on the results of the study. They, in fact, complement each other.

The other new step found in the present corpus is Exemplification. This appeared in $6 0 \%$ of the Discussions analyzed in this study. As the name of this step reveals, its main purpose is to ease the readers' understanding of the findings by providing some tangible examples taken from the qualitative data. These can be excerpts from interviews, examples of classroom behavior, artifact, or some evidence based on observation and reflective writing. Example 4 illustrates this step and its function:

Example 4. But beyond the binary between Syria and the United States, they (Omar and Maria. The two participants in this study) also inserted the lack of stability that characterized their lives in Turkey i contrast to the stbility that existed for them in the United States (Move 2). As such, they adopted the narrative of "genuine refugees" who were forced to relocate in order toecape violence and as such should have alegitimate lace in the rceiving country (Move 4, Step: Interpreting the Results). The integration of the mages of the bomb-striking airplane and the photos of the family home pre- and postwar consolidated such positioning (Move 4, Step 6: Exemplification) (Karam et al., 2021).

In this excerpt, after reporting the results in the first move (e.g., lack of stability in Syria and enjoying stability in the UsA), the writer tries to explain this finding by saying that the two participants in this study adopted the narrative of genuine refugees (., Interpreting the previous result). Then, in order to prove their point, the writer uses some tangible example from the cllected data, that is, artifactual instances such as photos. In fact, the purpose is to present a more persuasive discourse using what Kazoleas (1993) calls \*emotional and colorful examples" (p. 40. The existence of these two new steps in the current study confirms the proposition put forward by some corpus-based inguists (Cotos et al., 2017; Gray 2013) who mentioned that, besides rhetorical differences, there are also linguistic differences between RAs in terms of research paradigms and discipline.

As noted earlier, the dominant moves appearing as the opening moves in this qualitative data set were Summarizing the Study and Background Information ( $4 0 \%$ and $2 5 \%$ respectively). Summarizing the Study move was absent in the quantitative corpus of Liu and Buckingham (2018), whereas this move was found eight times at the beginning of eight artices in our dataset, suggesting that qualitative research is more researcher-oriented (Dornyei, 2007), thus requiring writers to provide a clarifying summary of their research. t sems that qualitative writers fel th e to inform thr readership of their dat collection, data analysi, and aso their findings which stem largely from their subjective understanding as a summary at the beginning of the Discussion section.

With regard to the Background Information move, although this move is one of the frequently occurring moves $( 2 5 \% )$ at the beginning of the Discussion sections of qualitative RAs it is much more frequent in quantitative RAs. Acording to Liu and Buckingham (2018), the Background Information move was the most dominant, occupying $6 0 \%$ of the opening move in the Discussion section of quantitative RAs. The frequent use of this move by quantitative RAs can be thought of as an attempt to contextualize the unfolding Discussion by linking the variables of interest to hypotheses derived from theories (Cleland, 2015; Tuli, 2010).

The most frequent move in the closing section of the Discussion section in our dataset was move 7 (Deduction from the Research) confirming previous findings regarding quantitative research methods (Yang & Alio, 2003). However, the most frequent step within this move in our dataset is what we call Conclusion' since the writers in this secion of their Discussion tried to decide about something after considering all aspects of their results and previous moves and steps in their Discussion (see example 5 below):

Example 5. .. A main conclusion of this study is to confirm the importance of investigating out-of-cass learning in its relation to classroom learning and the totality of the learning environment (Move 7, Step 5: Conclusion) (Kashiwa & Benson, 2018)

Prior research (Liu & Buckingham, 2018; Yang & Allison, 2003) investigating the rhetorical structure of the Discussion sections of RAs only identified three main steps within this move: Making Suggestions, Recommending further Research, and Drawing on Pedagogical Implications. As llustrated in Example 5, the authors might simply reach a conclusion after considering all the evidence presented in the Results and Discussion section. The following example can help shed more light on this point:

Example 6. The narrow definition of language as represented in spech and writig with a name tag such as English and Polish and reducible to a set of abstract codes is problematic theoreticall and inadequate for understanding it role in human social interaction. Language is more than a tool for communication, but a way of expressing meaning in multiple forms (poetic, linguistic, gestural, musical, etc.) (Kramsch, pc) it should not be separated from other sensory, modal, and semiotic resources in sense- and meaning. making. Learning a language means learning to orchestrate, as the participants in the karate club do, multilingual, multisensory, multimodal, and multi-semiotic resources to make meaning and make sense in our everyday lives, and it is an integral part of the integrated learning of language and culture (Zhu et al., 2020).

As seen in this example, afer considering allthe results and tangible examples of the use of English along with other semiotic gestures and icons in the karate club, the author closes the Discussion section by presenting a rather long Conclusion. However, it should be noted that this Conclusion step indirectly incorporates the other elements of move 7.

Another step appearing in move 7 is Claim, somehow serving the same function as that of Conclusion but with a minor variability; while Conclusion is positioned and contextualized mainly in the results and findings of the study, Claim can be argued just to mirror the author's personal opinion which may or may not be confirmed by the results of the study. Instead, the author makes a claim that i not necessarily validated by his/her own findings as shown in Example 7 below:

Example 7. The findings from my study provide insight into the importance of the visual spaces in which the mothers learn from their children, yet the societal, education, and medical discourses underpinning the language learning choices cut these shared experiences short (Move 7: Step 5: Conclusion). Whenever I have met mothers and children (from this intervention program) fter they graduate and are mainstreamed into publi hearing schools, I have noticed that the use of signs drastically decreases (Move 7: Step 4: Claim) (Johnson, 2020).

This example vividly clarifies the fine distinction between these two steps. While the first step (Conclusion) in this excerpt tries to present a general conclusion that i situated within the findings of the study, the last statement by the author is personal opinion that is not substantilly supported by th reults of the study. To conclude, the author reers to the finding i., The findings from my stuy provide insight ..), whereas to Clam, the author uses justa first-person personal pronoun by drawing on his previous non-academic experiences. In sum, these two steps are quite expected in the Discussion section since the authors are expected to transform their results and findings into what Cheng and Unsworth (2016, p. 44) cll a "potential knowledge claim'" when they want to writ up the Discussion section. Regarding the most frequent and also obligatory moves, the results of this study indicated that Reporting the Results and Commenting on the Results were the most frequent and also the only obligatory moves in the Discussion sections of qualitative RAs.

As expected, this finding is consistent with those of previous research (Amnuai, 2019; Liu & Buckingham, 2018; Yang & Allison, 2003) in which these two moves were both obligatory and also the most frequent ones in quantitative RAs. As Amnuai (2019) points out, \*move 2 and move 4 are substantial rhetorical moves in the RA Discussion sections' (p. 392). Once again, this similarity between these two types of datasets sugests that although there are some variations regarding the presentation of arguments in the Discussion sections of quantitative and qualitative reearch artice, the overall purpose of this section of the R serves a single function (wales, 1990, and accordingly some moves and steps are expected to appear and function in the same way. As mentioned in the results section, move 7, Deduction from the Research, was also very frequent, appearing in 18 articles $( 9 0 \% )$ in the current dataset, suggesting that this move is obligatory in qualitive RAs, similar to findings of prior research in which this move was dominant (see Amnuai. 2019; Basturkmen, 2012). However, contrary to findings from previous studies of quantitative research articles, in which Step 2 (Recommending further Research) was dominant in move 7, in our corpus, the most frequent steps within this move were Conclusion and Claim, together accounting for $6 0 . 7 \%$ of all the steps within this move. The predominant use of Deduction from the Research, especially steps related to the Conclusion and Claim, in the qualitative dataset may be attributed to the crucial importance ttached to providing a thick and rich description by the author in the qualitative research paradigm. In fact, the researcher needs to advance his/her arguments and possily justify his/her conclusions and laims so as to reflect oth the central tendencies and variations, as wel as counterexamples in her/his enormously rich data (Mackey & Gass 2005). Similar to Liu and Buckingham's (2018) findings, the results of the current study also indicated that the move sequence of Reporting the Results and Commenting on the Results was the most frequent one in qualitative RAs. As mentioned earlier, when these two moves are the most frequent and the only obligatory moves, their sequence, that is one followed by the other, is also quite expected In fact, theappearance of these two moves (Reporting the Results and Commenting on the Results) in asequence indicates the primary function of the Discussion section, which i to present findings in the first stage followed by explanations and justifications of those findings (Dudley-Evans, 1994; Jalilifar et al., 2012; Peacock, 2002). Further, it was found that Interpreting the Results was the most frequent step used in this move sequence. This is not consistent with Liu and Buckingham's (2018) findings in which Comparing Results with Literature (M4: s2) was the most dominant step in this move sequence. This discrepancy can also be justified by referring to the distinct nature of qualitative and quantitative research paradigms since the main purpose of the former paradigm is to contextualize the findings within a rich background that supports a particular thery or hypothesis, while the lattr paradgm is exploratory in nature, and hence lesreliant on extant literature (Ary et al., 2019).

Regarding the third research question, it was found that the overall number of meta-discourse markers and also the overall number of interactive markers were significantly more frequent in the qualitative corpus of the current study than in Liu and Buckingham's (2018) quantitative corpus. The more widespread use of interactive markers in the current corpus may be due to the iterative and emergent nature of qualitative research (Dornyei, 2007) in which certain moves and steps are used in a very flexible and cyclical manner. The flexible schematic structure of qualitative research is likely to predispose the researcher to make extensive use of interactive markers. The distribution of meta-discourse markers in different moves provides us with some insightul deas about the formulation of various moves in the qualitative RAs. As the primary purpose of interactive markers i to frame the argument in a way that readers can recover the writer's main goals and interpretations (Hyland, 2005b), they are extensively used in Background Information and Summarizing the Results when the average use is taken into account. These markers were also very frequent in Commenting on Results and Reporting the results. The frequent use of interactive markers in these moves is expected since the main purpose of these moves is to present facts and information (Dafouz-Mine, 2008), thus contributing to the structure, cohesion, and coherence of iscourse (Liu & Buckingham, 2018). In contrast, interactional markers appeared more frequently in Evaluating the Study move which is argumentative in nature. That is, one of the main purposes of this move is to explicitly build a relationship with the reader by evaluating the methodology, and pointing out the potential contributions of the study as wel as the limitations of the study (Yang & Allison, 203). This facet of our results regarding the overall istribution of meta-discourse markers acrossall the moves supports prior research (Lee & Casal, 2014; Liu & Buckingham, 2018) whose findings indicated that using interactional markers is more frequent in moves that serve argumentative purposes. On the other hand, the use of interactive markers is more frequent in moves whose aim is to contextualize the findings of the study by presenting a lot of background information. To summarize this part of the discussio, the findings of the present study lend support t Hyland's (1998) argument hat meta-discourse bears a cloe rlationship to its rhetorical context.

Regarding the specific sub-categories of meta-discourse markers, transitions, and hedges were the most frequent interactive and interactional markers respectively. This inding i exactly in line with those of quantitative studies which reported that logical markers and hedges were the most frequent markers (Khedri et al, 2013; Liu & Buckingham, 2018). As transition markers ike additionall, besides, however, and although are used by writers to expres relations between main clause (Hyland, 2005a), the considerable use of this meta-discourse device shows that qualitative RA authors, like their quantitative counterparts, are concerned with helping their readers better comprehend the content. That is, both quantitative and qualitative RA writers in Applied Linguistics seem to be reader-oriented (Liu & Buckingham, 2018). The similar pattern of markers used in both qualitative and quantitative studies lends support to prior researchers argument that the use of meta-discourse markers is a matter of disciplinary orientation (Barabadi et al., 2021; Basturkmen, 2012). In other words, since our qualitative sample and the quantitative samples used in the prior research were taken from the Applied Linguistics discipline, iti not a surprise if the overall frequency of meta-discourse markers shows a similar pattern in the two research paradigms. However, when it comes to the distribution of markers, especially interactional markers, the results of the currnt study indicated that in the qualitative dataset, there i almost an even disribution of all sub-categories within interactional markers, while in prior research on the quantitative sample, only one sub-category, that is Hedges, was predominant, constituting $8 6 \%$ of all the interactional or interpersonal markers (Liu & Buckingham, 2018). In our dataset, hedges constituted only $3 2 . 3 \%$ of interactional markers, and engagement markers also had a considerable frequency $( 2 7 . 7 \% )$ . One possible explanation for this discrepancy in our view might berelated to the predominant rol of Self-mention and Engagement markers in the corpus of the present study, constituting $4 3 . 2 \%$ of all the interactional markers. These two types of markers adopted from Hyland (2005a, 2005b) together are grouped as Commentary markers based on Dafouz-Milne's (2008) clasification which was utilized by Liu and Buckingham (2018) Commentary markers whose main purpose is to establish and maintain rapport with the readers by engaging them in the discourse, constituted only $0 . 5 \%$ of interpersonal (or interactional) markers in the quantitative dataset of Liu and Buckingham (2018). The argument here i that qualitative writers sem to have several competing priorities when doing persuasion: firs, they try to open up a shared discursive space in their iscussions by judicious use of hedges that enable their readersto enter into the dialogue; secondly, they make extensive use of Self-mention markers and Engagement markers $( 4 3 . 2 \% )$ as another persuasive strategy to "... meet readers' expectations of inclusion and disciplinary solidarity (Hyland, 2005b, p. 182). In sum, qualitative writers seem to be concerned with both hedging their claims and establishing solidarity with their readers, and for this reason, we can see a more equal distribution of interactional markers compared with the skewed use of hedges in the quantitative corpus.

# 5. Conclusion

The current study aimed to examine the schematic structure and linguistic features of the Discussion sections of acorpus of 20 RA in the field of Applie Linguistics. The results of the study indicated that the schematic structure proposed by Yang and Allison (2003) regarding various moves and steps is to a large extent applicable in our qualitative corpus, suggesting that his section of RAs has tight rhetorical constraints (Liu & Buckingham, 2018). Notwithstanding these similarite, the analysis of this qualitative dataset indicated that there were several new steps in realizing some moves. For example, Exemplification and Clarification were two new steps within the Commenting on the Results move. There were also some significant diffrences between the qualitative and quantitative RAs regarding the frequency and distribution of meta-discourse markers. Pedagogicaly, the results of our study can be informative since academic writers, particularly novice L2 academic writers, can gain a deeper understanding of genre conventions in qualitative RAs. Further, course designers and academic writing instructors, especially those involved in qualitative research, can prepare specific writing materials by drawing novice writers' atention to the specific schematic structure and formulation of meta-discourse markers across different moves.

Although the findings of our study provide some useful insights into the linguistic features and rhetorical structure of the Discussion sections of qualitative RAs, thesize limitation of our corpus which consists of only 20 RAs in the Applied Linguistics field does not allow us to generalize the findings to qualitative RAs in other disciplinary areas. Other researchers interested in genre analysis can replicate this study in other disciplines such as sociology and psychology so that a more comprehensive picture of the Discussion section is achieved. Another limitation related to our corpus is the inclusion of only the Discusson section. Further research is needed to incorporate different sections of qualitative articles in a single study using a larger corpus.

Appendix 1. The titles of journals and articles used in the corpus

Applied Linguistics

Anthonissen, C. (2020). Autobiographical narrative of traumatic experience: Disruption and resilience in South African Truth Commission testimonies. Applied Linguistics, 41(3), 370-388. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amaa010   
De Fina, A., Paternostro, G., & Amoruso, M. (2020). Learning how to tell, learning how to ask: Reciprocity and storytelling as a community process. Applied Linguistics, 41(3), 352-369. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amz070   
Johnson, J. T. (2020). Participation in a global hearing culture: Hearing mothers' translations of their childrens' deafworlds. Applied Linguistics, 41(1), 84-108. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amz022   
Laskey, B., & Stirling, L. (2020). Positioning selves in narrative acounts of military trauma. Applied Linguisics, 41(3), 389-407. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amaa019   
Zhu, H., Li, W., & Jankowic-Pytel, D. (2019). Whose karate? Language and cultural learning in a multilingual karate club in London. Applied Linguistics, 41(1), 1-33. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amz014

# System

ChengChiang Chen, J., & Kent, S. (2020). Task engagement, leaner motivation and avatar identitie of strugging English language learners in the 3D virtual world. System, 88, 102168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2019.102168   
Liu, Y., & Lu, X. (2020). Chinese FL learners misconceptions of noun countability and article use. System, 90, 10222. htps:/doi. org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102222   
Mann, S., Crichton, R., & Edmett A. (2020). Evaluating the role of video in supporting reflection beyond INsET. System, 90, 102195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2019.102195   
Sato, R. (2020). Gestures in EFL classroom: Their relations with complexity, accuracy, and fluency in EFL teachers L2 utterances. System, 89, 102215. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102215   
Wen, X., & Piao, M. (2020). Motivational profiles and learning experience across Chinese language proficiency levels. System, 90, 102216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102216

The Modern Language Journal

Burri, M., Chen, H., & Baker, A. (2017). Joint development of teacher cognition and identity through learning to teach L2 pro nunciation. The Modern Language Journal, 101(1), 128-142. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12388   
Creese, A., & Blackledge, A. (2019). Translanguaging and public service encounters: Language learning in the library. The Moden Language Journal, 103(4), 800-814. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12601   
Inceoglu, S. (2019). Individual diferences in L2 speech perception: The role of phonological memory and lipreading ability. The Modern Language Journal, 103(4), 782-799. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12591   
Papi, M., & Hiver, P. (2020). Language learning motivation as a complex dynamic system: A global perspective of truth, control, and value. The Modern Language Journal, 104(1), 209-232. https:/doi.org/10.1111/modl.12624   
Sauer, L, & Ellis R. (2019). The social lives of adolescent study abroad learners and their L2 development. The Modern Language Journal, 103(4), 739-762. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12589

TESOL Quarterly

Kashiwa, M., & Benson, P. (2018). A road and a forest: Conceptions of in-classand out-of-class learning in the transition to study abroad. TEs0L Quarterly, 52(4), 725-747. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.409   
Kim, H. R., & Bowles, M. (2019). How deeply do second language learners process written corrective feeback? Insights gained from think-alouds. TEs0L Quarterly, 53(4), 913-938. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.522   
Wagner, C. J. (2019). Connections between reading identities and social status in early childhood. TES0L Quarterly, 53(4) 1060-1082. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.529

# References

articles. Pertanika Journal of Social Science and Humanities, 28(3), 2043-2061.   
Allwoo, 012tio  ive  tiv   i ic.  i,45, 1417-429. /. org/10.1007/s11135-011-9455-8 org/10.1016/j.kjss.2017.10.007   
muai, . 019.  r  d stc ion n  eas ublisd  to d hai-baed journals. SAGE Open, 9(1). https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244018822384   
Anesley, . 2010) he  ci r ci m. i t, 51), 1671-674. /./.13/ich2010.15358   
Anthony, L. (2023). Antconc (Version 4.2.4) [Computer software] https://www.laurenceanthony.net/software/antconc.   
Ary, D., Jacobs, L. C., Irvine, C. K. S., & Walker, D. (2019). Introduction to research in education. Cengage Learning.   
aadi, r  1 d     ue Processes, 58(9), 787-803. https://doi.org/10.1080/0163853x.2021.1920782   
sk      , 8(4), 241-251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2009.07.001   
s     r Purposes, 11(2), 134-144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2011.10.004 10.1093/applin/25.3.371 Purposes, 5(1), 4-18.   
Brione,  012.  aisf ph hc tionuish nh sit f mas. P  , 9, 675   
Bruce, I. (2o08). Academic writing and genre. Bloomsbury Publishing.   
utn, . 2005.  of Ph  hr. J o gis fr Ac , 43) 20724. /./0101/ j005.03.004   
Cheg   p      f Academic Purposes, 24, 43-57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.09.001   
Clelad .015.  Jd  J ),  m ios m rinh  f en qualitative and quantitative research (pp. 3-14). Wiley-Blackwell.   
Cots  f .,  . 017 e/t  r s ci trn rir n it. s for ic e, 46, 90106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.01.001   
Dafouz-Mi08 c   a n mrr  t in d  f sti study of newspaper discourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 40(1), 95-113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pragma.2007.10.003   
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1998). Strategies of qualitative inquiry. Sage.   
Dornyei, z. (2007). Research methods in applied linguisics: Quantativ, qualitative, and mixed methodologie. Oxford Universit Press. pedagogical implications (pp. 146-159). Cambridge University Press.   
Gray, B. (2013). More than disciplin: Uncovering multidimensional patterns of variation i academic rearch artices. Corpora, 8(2), 153-181.   
Hland  (99. i    pc f ac mr  f Pmic, 304 375. /./0.101/0378-216 (98)00009-5   
Hyland, K. (2004). Genre and second language. University of Michigan Press.   
Hyland, K. (2005a). Metadiscourse: Exploring interaction in writing (Continuum).   
Hyland, K (2005b). Stance ad engagment: A modl f intercton in acadmic discore. Discose Stdie, 7(2), 173-192. htp://do.org/10.1177 1461445605050365   
Hyland, K (2007. g y  wi ini.  of   in 63), 148-164. /./0.1016/. jslw.2007.07.005   
Hyland, K. (2008). Genre and academic writing in th disciplines. Language Teching 41(4), 543-562. htps://doi.org/10.1017/026144808005235   
Hyland, K. (2009). Academic discourse: English in a global context (Continuum).   
Jallia   t t  ii Journal of Asia TEFL, 9(1), 1-29.   
Joson, . 0    g   m oftr che.  c, 1, 84108. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amz022   
aram . Jy,  ir, (2021).ite  L: ti f  d y.  , 5(2) 510-535. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.3001   
shwaon 018  d  t: tn  s a f  h ti  l, 54, 725-747.   
azles  1if  et  qti  ti f e . Quarterly, 41(1), 40-50. https://doi.org/10.1080/01463379309369866   
Khedri,  e.  .. 2013. n epf itive mre mrkr i a r e a i wie. Discourse Studies, 15(3), 319-331. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461445613480588   
ho, ..  1t.  21./. org/10.1108/14684521111128032   
Le, J J al  (14  n  chsti s is htis  ierng System, 46, 39-54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2014.07.009   
Le .   -  stig  e Specific Purposes, 25(1), 56-75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2005.02.010   
Lewin, B., Fine, J., & Young, L. (2001). Expository discourse: A genre-based approach to social science research texts (Continuum)   
Lit  sti a    i for Academic Purposes, 34, 97-109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.04.002   
Lores . (004).  A atrs: m itet thctioish for ifi  3, 80-302. hp/g/0.106/. esp.2003.06.001   
Mackey, A., & Gass, S. M. (2005). Second language research: Methodology and design. Lawrence Erlbaum Asociates Publishers.   
api,  er, . 2020 g  mion s aompl  stg etive f tth, ol, l hd nge Journal, 104(1), 209-232. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12624   
Peock,  00.ti    i r  304 997.//.01/0346-1007   
eg, J 1)ei   c t   nish GE Open, 11(2), Article 215824402110088. https://doi.org/10.1177/21582440211008870   
anapuy 1f i  t in   st   o  ti conference: Doing research in applied linguistics.   
amraj 016r       2. org/10.1016/j.esp.2015.12.003   
Swales, J. (1990). General analysis: English in academic and research setings. Cambridge University Press. perspectives. Ethiopian Journal of Education and Sciences, 6(1), 97-108. https://doi.org/10.4314/ejesc.v6i1.65384 org/10.1016/s0889-4906(02)00026-1   
hu, H ,  -   1 283