# Problems of writing the doctoral dissertation discussion section: Advisors' and their doctoral students' perspectives from natural and applied sciences and social sciences

Shih-Chieh Chiena,\*, Wei-Yan Li b

a Center for General Education, National Taipei University of Business, Taiwan b Academic Writing Education Center, National Taiwan University, Taiwan

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Doctoral dissertation   
Writing problems   
Discussion section   
EFL   
Advisor-student perceptions

As more and more literature shows, EFL doctoral students often encounter problems when writing the discussion section. The majority of past research on advisors' or students' perceptions centered on students' problems when writing the dissertation on the whole. However, the problems of the discussion section were seldom addressed. Based on interviews with nine advisorstudent pairs from natural and applied sciences and social sciences in Taiwan, this study explored the problems encountered by students in writing the doctoral dissertation discussion section. The results showed that (1) compared with their advisors, students' overall understanding of the purposes of writing the discussion section was inadequate; (2) there was to some extent a gap between advisors and their students in terms of understanding students' problems in writing the discussion section; (3) both advisors and students within/between each group (i.e., natural and applied sciences/social sciences) gave different explanations regarding students' writing problems; and (4) the understanding of genre was enacted differently across disciplines. The implications are discussed.

# 1. Introduction

Writing problems faced by graduate EFL students have been the topic of ongoing research in the past few decades. Much attention has been paid to exploring problems in research papers through move/text analysis (e.g., Amnuai, 2019; Anderson et al., 2020; Basturkmen, 2012; Chang, 2016; Ga0 & Pramoolsook, 2021; Geng & Wharton, 2016; Kanoksilaatham, 2005; Komba, 2016; Kwan & Chan, 2014; Liu & Buckingham, 2018; Saricaoglu et al., 2021; wales & Feak, 2012) and students' and/or teachers perceptions of the problems in terms of writig a disertation in English in general (e.g., Casanave & Hubbard, 1995; Cooley & Lewkowicz, 1997; Dong, 1998; Peng, 2018; Yeh, 2010). Yet, with the exception of itchener and Basturkmen's (2006) study, there is clearly a lack of research on exploring the degre to which these problems continue to challenge for graduate EFL students writing a dissertation in English, particularl from both advisors and their doctoral students perspectives in writing the discussion section. As Swale himself oserves, the discsso tinis  particar ffict to write (wle  Fek, 2012) In his sction, witrs make cams ardng h reults make contribution to existing knowledge in their disciplines. According to Geng and Wharton (2016), the discusson secion is a place where an author is asked to examine his/her individual reearch evaluatively, namely, to put what he/she has achieved in the context of other related research in the same field. Thisis a crucial move to verify the importance and the contributio of this preent doctoral research. Lu and Buckingha (2018), though fousing on the discussion f rearch articles in particular, shared  similar view toward the discussion section. The importance of discussion section, as they stated, could be \*in construing and reinforcing the principal line(s) of argument pursued and in establishing the importance of the research findings' (p. 97)

Although Bitchener and Basturkmen's (2006) pioneer study explored advisors' and their doctoral student' perspectives, the students were in particular heterogeneous coming from diffrent origins with different specialties. The present study aims to ill this gap and extend our current understanding of problems of writing the doctora dissertation discussion section from advisors' and their doctoral students' perspectives in the fields of natural and applied sciences and social cience in the context of Taiwan It i noted that in the present study, the discussion section is identified by reference to heading and sub-heading labels (e.g., Discussion). Hybrid headings (e.g., Results and Discussion, Discussion and Conclusion, or Discussion and Summary) were excluded due to consideration of possible effects on the communicative functions of these varied sections (Lin & Evans, 2012).

1.1. Possible differences between discussion in research articles and discussion in dissertations

Before we move ont scssing the ossible iferences between discussion in reearch articles anddscssion in disertations, itis imperative to understand the role of communicative functions that the discussion section plays in research writing. The connection between communicative functions and move analysis has been highlighted in a fair number of studies on the structure of discussion section since the original paper by Hopkins and Dudley-Evans (1988), followed by several papers such as Dudley-Evans (1994), Posteguillo (1999), Peacock (2002), Yang and Allison (2003), Kanoksilapatham (2005), Parkinson (2011), Bastrkmen (2012), Kwan and Chan (2014), Liu and Buckingham (2018), Amnuai (2019), and Gao and Pramoolsook (2021). To date, different studies have covered the isussion section in several fields, such as applied linguisics, biochemistry, biology, ucation, and physic. These studes have highlighted the potential optional nature of the moves and variations in different disciplines.

Drawing on various move analyses of RAs from a variety of disciplines, Swales and Feak (2012) propose a basic schematic structure in the discussion section that acounts for writing in disserations and published research artice. Overall in the disertation discussion section, there are three major moves, including Move 1: Background, Move 2: Summarizing and reporting key results, and Move 3: Commenting on the key results. Move 2 and Move 3 are obligatory acros diffrent disciplines, whereas Move 1 tends to be optional, reealing disciplinary difference. The basic purpose of Move 1 is at frs to contextualize the study and thereafter Move 2 and Move 3 to consolidate the research space.

Although Swales and Feak (2012)provided a basic framework for patterns of descriptive categories in the discussion section in both dissertations and reearch articles, move analys of the section in previous studies suggest that the section perform various unctions. One obvious one is that in the discusion section, writers in particular \*make new knowledge claims" (Basturkmen, 2009, p. 243) during commenting on key results to construct their own voice in the field. As suggested by Koutsantoni (2006), the discussion section is where writers make new knowledge claims, aiming to persuade the academic community to accept the trustworthines of their claims in their disciplines.

The second one is that in the discussion section these purposes highlighted above are tacit to student writer due to the need to compare their own findings with previous relevant studies. This communicative function is realized through whether the findings lend support to previous findings (Basturkmen, 2009).

The third one is that in addition to comparing their own findings with the previous studies, writers need to explain findings of the study. This communicative function is achieved through different ways, such as providing explanations based on their own observation, giving altenative explanations for the same results, referring to previous itrature being used in explanations for results, and making evaluations of an explanation (Basturkmen, 2009).

It needs to be noted that the functions listed above were identified in research articles. Basturkmen (2009) in her study found that one of the major difference between published reeach articles and disrtations is that the former more often provide other possible explanations. This is due to the reson that published writers generally are able to explain from novel angles and enhance the value of their work by widening the scope of their studies in order to appeal to more readers.

It should also be noted that the discussion section in published research articles cannot not be viewed as a standard for evaluating doctoral dissertations. Dissertation writing, unlike published research articles, does not entirely compris \*the discursive practices of the discipline (Samraj, 2008, p. 11). Morover, different from published reearch articles written mainly for the academic community in a wide scope, dissertations are targeted for advisors and examiners.

In sum, past studies revealed the distinction between discussion in research articles and discussion in disertations in terms of the scope of the studies in order to appeal to readers, the discursive practices of the discipline and diferent target audience. Previous studies also showed potential effect of disciplinary variations to fulfll \*specific ommunicative functions or purposes in individual discourse communities" and disseminate knowledge in the discussions section (Liu & Buckingham, 2018, p. 97). As there are potential effects f disciplinary variatios and when compared with experienced published writers, student writer could lack an understanding of the importance of communicative purposes when writing the iscussion section, how advisors and their doctoral students perceive in such section in different disciplines thus merits further study.

# 1.2. Lack of research of discussion in dissertation

As indicated earlier, there are possible differences discussion in research articles and discussion in dissertations, and most importantly, there is a lack of research on exploring writing the doctoral dissertation discussion section from advisors' and their doctoral studets prsetives depite the move analyf rearch articles and rttions. t i thefr worth nestgtin ter perceptions and concomitant problems due to pedagogical value. Despite the insights of Shen et al's (2019) study on doctoral students' experience in writing the discussion section from students perspectives, nonetheles, it remains unknown about advisors responses and understandings. To the best knowledge of the authors, the only documented literature concerning both advisors' and their doctoral students' perspectives in the discussion section is Bitchener and Basturkmen's (2006) study.

Their study suggested that during the proces of writing the doctoral dissertation discussion section, students or their advisors might come acrossvarious problems. Surprisingly, the problems could be widely diverse, and the percetions from both ends (doctoral students and advisors) could as well be very different. Clearly ilustrated, Bitchener and Basturkmen (2006) conducted interviews with four supervisor-student pairs that explored the problems faced when writing discussion in the results section (DRS). The research was conducted in two universities in New Zealand, with four supervisors along with their supervised students in different felds of study, including Applied Linguisics, Business, and Art and Design. The students were from China, Korea, and Eastern Europe. The interviews were conducted individually, and were held at the end of the supervisory proces when students had already received feedback from their supervisors. The interviews with the supervisor consisted of two parts, one focusing on supervisor's description of their former experience when supervising ESL thesis and the DRS, and the other on their perceptions of the DRS of the participating students.

To conclude itchener and Basturkmen's study, both students and supervisors thought that L students had little understanding of the functions and content parameters of the DRS in thesis and the supervisors actually had a more in-depth understanding of the students problems and applied their understanding of DRS to their reading/evaluation of DRS in students' writing. Also the students and the supervisors had littl perception in common of students difficulties experienced in writig the DRs. The supervisors tended to see the students problems on alarger scale, whereas the students usuall clamed that it was their poor English proficiency that was to blame.

It should be noted that even though there were some past studies seeking to examine advisors' and student' perceptions, they explored problems of dissertation as a whole rather than focused on the discussion section. Specificall, the they showed advisors' and students perceptions of the kinds of generic problems that EFL students had, such as global versus local writing problems and the role of vocabulary (Casanave & Hubbard, 1995), rhetorical and linguistic conventions (Cooley & Lewkowicz, 1997), the influence of language and cultural diversities on dissrtation writing (Dong, 1998), trouble in writing an evaluative literature review and estalishing a feasible conceptual framework (Peng, 2018), genre conventions (Shen et al., 2019), and selecting a topic, reviewing the literature, and exhibiting a rather laid-back atitude towards the language problem (Yeh, 2010). Nevertheles, there is insufficient research specifically focusing on the problems that they might have in writing the discussion section,especially on perspectives from both natural and applied sciences and social sciences. It should also be noted that some past studies showed problems perceived by advisors (Casanave & Hubard, 1995) or students (Cooley & Lewkowicz 1997; Peng, 2018; Shen et al., 2019; Yeh, 2010). However, scarcity of research is also found in examining whether there is a mutual understanding of the problems between advisor and student.

To help students to be equipped with a good start in doctoral programs i is crucial to understand how doctoral students' and their advisors view the discussion section in dissertation writig. Specificlly, the purpose of the current study is to explore not only advisors' and doctoral students perspectives on problems encountered especially in the discussion section, but als if heir perceptions have any differences and similaritie betwen natural and applied sciences and social sciences. t will contribute to research on writing the doctoral diseration in the discussin secion not only for isciplinary differences for specific purposes but also for commonalities for general purposes across natural and applied sciences and social sciences. Two research questions are addressed in the present study:

1. What are advisors' and students perceptions of the purposes of writing the doctoral dissertation discussion section in the disc. plines between natural and applied sciences and social sciences?   
2. What are advisors and students pereptions of the problems of doctoral students in writing the discussion section in the diciplines between natural and applied sciences and social sciences?

# 2. Research method

The method adopted to answer the research questions included individual in-depth semi-structured interviews with both students and their advisors. The interviews were used to explore how the participants conceptualize the purposes of the discussion section and the problems of students in writing this section. Nine pairs of interviews were conducted at universities in Taiwan. Nine advisors (five from natural and applied sciences, and four from social sciences) and each of their doctoral students participated in thestudy. In other words, ive pairs were from disciplines of natural and applied sciences (Advisors: A1-A5, Doctoral Students: D1-D5; Pairs 1-5), while another four pairs (Advisors: A6-A9, Doctoral Students: D6-D9; Pairs 6-9) were from social sciences. Each pair consisted of an interview with a dissertation advisor and an interview with a supervised doctoral student. The length of each interview ranged from one to $^ { 2 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ Since each advisor and student were from different universties, the locations of the interviews varied. Allparticipants involved in the study remained anonymous, and would only be referred to by their codes.

Table 1 Background information of natural and applied science advisors.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Advisors</td><td>Profession/Area</td><td>Students supervised for the past two years</td><td>Students presently supervised</td></tr><tr><td>A1</td><td>Professor, Industrial Engineering and Management</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>A2</td><td> Professor, Materials Science and Engineering</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>A3</td><td>Professor, Molecular Biology</td><td>3</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>A4</td><td>Professor, Life Science</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>A5</td><td> Professor, Applied Sciences</td><td>3</td><td>2</td></tr></table></body></html>

Tables 1 and 2 summarize the background information of the participants from natural and applied sciences, Pair 1 to Pair 5. Advisors information is shown in Table 1, including their professions and areas. All five advisors were professors in Taipei area, Taiwan. A1 and A2 were professors in diffrent fields of engineering, Industrial Engineering and Management, and Materias Science and Engineering, respectively. A3 and A5 worked inthe Institute of Molecular Biology and Research Center for Applied Sciences. It is noted that applied cience i practical aplication of science In the broad sense it uses the scientific method and knowledge to obtain results in order to achieve practical aims, such as engineering and medicie (Bunge, 196). A4 is a professor in Life Science. Regarding the number of octora students supervised by these participants, A1 had the highest number ofall for supervising ix doctoral students for the past two years. The average number of doctoral students that participants had supervised for the past two years, or has stil supervised presently, was two to three doctoral students.

Similar to Table 1, Table 2 provides a background information on doctoral students. Allof them attended their graduate instutions in Taipei. Regarding their academic achievement, D1, D2, and D3 had allattended two conferences. The number of journal atices published by these five doctoral students varied, ranging from 1 to 8. Only D3 had published a book chapter.

Tables 3 and 4 summarize the background information of the participants from social sciences, Pair 6 to Pair 9. Among the in. terviewees, A8 considered his domain to be social science but close to natural science and technology. Advisors information is shown in Table 3, including their professions and areas. A6 was a professor in English teaching. A7 and A9 were both professors in Linguistics. A8 was a professor in Information and Learning Technology. Regarding the number of doctoral students supervised by these participants, A8 had the highest number of al for supervising six doctoral students for the past two years. The average number of doctoral students that participants had supervised for the past two years, or has sill upervised presently, was two to five doctoral students.

Table 4 provides a general background of doctoral students, including their year and especially their academic achievements. Regarding their academic achievements, D9 attended 10 conferences. D6 atended 9 conferences. D8 attended only one conference. The number of journal articles published by these four doctoral students varied, ranging from 0 to 5. No interviewee published book chapters.

# 3. Data collection

Doctoral students were invited to participate in the present study. For those who accepted, the researcher then would invite their advisors to participate inthis study. The interviews were held when the students were writing up their dssertations. In other words, the students already submitted drafts of their discussion section and had feedback from their avisors. The interviewees i. avisor and student) could bring copies of the students' discussion section to the interviews to refer to.

Open-ended explanatory questions were used for advisors (Appendix 1) and students (Appendix 2). Specificall, the interviews with the advisors were based on a two-part interview phase. First, the advisors were asked to talk about their experiences of super vising doctoral dissertation discussion section, including the number f supervised students, what a discussion section should include and the problems they found in students' discussion section. Advisors were asked about specific writing problems, such as under. standing the purposes of the discussion section, choosing and structuring content, writing in an appropriate academic style, establishing a good flow of ideas, achieving unit and coherence, and showing appropriat grammar and word use. In addition, the advisors were asked to comment on the discussion section of th students participating in thestudy. Interviews with the students including their writing background and specific writing problems were based on a modified version of the interview prompt for advisors, so that their perceptions could be compared to those of their advisors. Advisors and student were also given a ist during the interview and asked whether they agreed with each item (see Tables 5-12). They were welcome to add any other item if they wished. The interviews were audio-recorded (with advisors' and students' consent) and fully transcribed.

# 3.1. Data analysis

Interview data were analyzed and interpreted in an attempt to understand problems in writing doctoral dissertation discussion sections from advisors' and their doctoral students perspectives. The data were analyzed using grounded theory for qualitative data analysis (Strauss & Corbin, 1990). The aim of data analysis was to generate categories based on research questions, grounded in the data. More specificall, the data analysis was a trial-and-error and continuing process From the data collected, the major points were first identified and marked with different code, such as insufficient Englis proficiency,difficult to decide what results should be included or excluded, ucrtain about the tone, unawareof the demand of the discussion section, unable to diffrentiat the discussion section from thereults secton, unable to relate the results to the inustry, and unableto disussin loical order. Thee codes helped to determine what issues that the students encountered when they were writing discussion sections.

Table 2 Background information of natural and applied science doctoral students.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Doctoral students</td><td>Area/Year</td><td>Number of attended conferences</td><td>Number of published journal. articles</td><td>Number of published book chapters</td></tr><tr><td>D1</td><td>Industrial Engineering and Management, 3rd year</td><td>2</td><td>8</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>D2</td><td>Materials Science and Engineering, 5th year</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>D3</td><td> Molecular and Cell Biology, 6th year</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>D4</td><td>Life Science, 9th year</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>D5</td><td>Electronic Engineering, 5th year</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>0</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Background information of social science advisors.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Advisors</td><td> Profession/Area</td><td>Students supervised for the past two years</td><td>Students presently supervised</td></tr><tr><td>A6</td><td>Professor, English Teaching</td><td>3</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>A7</td><td>Professor, Linguistics</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td> A8</td><td>Professor, Information and Learning Technology</td><td>5</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>A9</td><td>Professor, Linguistics</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Background information of social science doctoral students.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Doctoral students</td><td>Area/Year</td><td>Number of attended conferences</td><td>Number of published journal articles</td><td>Number of published book. chapters</td></tr><tr><td>D6</td><td>English Teaching, 7th year.</td><td>11</td><td>1</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td> D7</td><td>Linguistics, 6th year</td><td>19</td><td>5</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td> D8</td><td>Information and Learning Technology, 5th year</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>D9</td><td>Linguistics, 4th year</td><td>10</td><td>2</td><td>0</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 Purposes of writing the discussion section as perceived by natural and applied science advisors.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>A1</td><td>A2</td><td>A3</td><td>A4</td><td>A5</td></tr><tr><td>To further explain/clarify/summarize the results</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>To demonstrate the research contribution</td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>To compare/make links between results and literature review</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>To provide possible answers for research questions</td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>To evaluate the novelty and the breakthrough of the present research</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 Purposes of writing the discussion section as perceived by natural and applied science doctoral students.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>D1</td><td>D2</td><td>D3</td><td>D4</td><td>D5</td></tr><tr><td>To summarize research results, present unanswered questions and limitations, and provide future directions</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>To demonstrate the research contribution</td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>To see if the research hypothesis is applicable in the practical field</td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>To reassert the purpose of present study and highlight the findings To compare/make links between the results and literature</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 Purposes of writing the discussion section as perceived by social science advisors.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>A6</td><td>A7</td><td>A8</td><td>A9</td></tr><tr><td>To further explain/clarify/summarize the results</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>To compare/make links between results and literature review</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>To provide possible answers for research questions</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>To demonstrate the research contribution</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>To evaluate the novelty and the breakthrough of the present research</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 8 Purposes of writing the discussion section as perceived by social science doctoral students.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>D6</td><td></td><td>D8</td><td>D9</td></tr><tr><td>To summarize research results</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td> To compare/make links between results and literature review</td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>To demonstrate the research contribution</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>To see if the research result is able to solve the problem in the real world or academic community</td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>To present unanswered questions and limitations, and provide future directions</td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 9 Problems encountered during writing as perceived by natural and applied science advisors.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>A1</td><td>A2</td><td>A3</td><td>A4</td><td>A5</td></tr><tr><td>Unable to further explain/discuss/elaborate the research results</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Insufficient English proficiency</td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Specific domain-related questions</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Lack of structure and more prone to casual discussion/disjuncture</td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Unable to further state the research contribution</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Unable to differentiate the discussion section from the results section</td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Unable to display the breakthrough and novelty of the present research</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Uncertain about the tone.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 10 Problems encountered during writing as perceived by natural and applied science students.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>D1</td><td>D2</td><td>D3</td><td>D4</td><td>D5</td></tr><tr><td> Insufficient English proficiency</td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Uncertain about the tone</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Unaware of the demand of the discussion section</td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Unable to further explain/discuss/elaborate the research results</td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Unable to differentiate the discussion section from the results section</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Difficult to decide what results should be included or excluded</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 11 Problems encountered during writing as perceived by social science advisors.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>A6</td><td>A7</td><td>A8</td><td>A9</td></tr><tr><td> Unable to narrow down the topic logically</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Lack of connection between the results and the claims; disjuncture</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Unable to further explain/discuss/elaborate the research results</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Insufficient English proficiency</td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Lack of structure and more prone to casual discussion</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Troubled by APA format</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Unable to display the breakthrough and novelty of the present research</td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Unaware of reader-centered principle</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Unable to further state the research contribution</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 12 Problems encountered during writing as perceived by social science students.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>D6</td><td>D7</td><td>D8</td><td>D9</td></tr><tr><td>Difficult to decide what results should be included or excluded.</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Insufficient English proficiency</td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Unable to follow recent academic trends</td><td></td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Uncertain about the tone</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Unable to relate the results to the industry.</td><td></td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Unable to differentiate the discussion section from the results section</td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Unable to discuss in logical order.</td><td>+</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

To make the study credible, researchers conducted a coding consistency check. To illustrate, each coder did his/her coding respectively. The transcriptions of each advisors and student's data were first read and reread, and categorized based on the emerging themes and analyzed line by line with each researcher's remarks. The initial codes related to advisors' and students perceptions ofthe purposes and problems of writing doctoral disertation discussion sections emerged. The researchers later then came together and discussed the possile codes. Diffring codes and categories were explained and justfied in order to be revised and refined for better categorization. The stopping point was finalized when there was no emerging category anymore. Afer that, comparisons were made among all the categorized data. Noteworthy similarities and differences, and recurrent themes were highlighted.

# 4. Results

4.1. Q1. What are advisors' and students perceptions of the purposes of writing doctoral disertation discussion sections?

Table 5 shows that every advisor from natural and applied sciences had his own idea on what the purpose of discussion section should be, and all of them regarded discussion section as having more than wo purposes. total of five purposes were addressed by the advisors; among them, the purpose of adicussion section to further explan/clarify/summarize the results toped th lit, stat y all five advisors. The demonstration of the research contribution came next, with the endorsement of four advisors. The purpose of comparing or making links between results and literature review was indicated by three advisors. The purpose f providing possible answers for research questions, and also evaluating the novelty and the breakthrough of the present research in a discussion section were both indicated by two advisors. It i important to note that, during the interviews, the advisors tended to see these purposes as tightly connected to one another. For instance, A2 considered \*the discusson section to be a part that not just explained and clarified the results, but also compared the findings with previous literature."

Table 6 shows doctoral students' perceptions of the purpose of writing a discussion section. Some of the purposes in Table 6 coincide with those in Table5, whers others are diffrent. The most given urposesofa disussion section were indicated by all of the doctoral students, which were to summarize research results, present unanswered questions and limitations, and provide future directions. The purpose of demonstrating one's research contribution was pointed by three doctoral students. For example, D1 considered \*"making the contribution to be the most fundamental purpose in a discussion section, since in the area of Industrial Engineering and Management, the research question i designed to answer the problems encountered in the practical field; otherwise, the study would only be the theoretical presentation." With that in mind, findings should echo the field's actual needs and answer the potential problems, so as to achieve the study's contribution.

Table 7 shows the purposes which must be included in the discussion section for advisors from social sciences, such as further elaborating the results, comparing the results with literature, providing possible answers for the research questions, demonstrating he research contribution, and evaluating the novelty and the breakthrough of the present research. All advisors from social sciences stated that the purposes of the discussion section are to further eplain/clrify/summarize the rults, to compare/make links between results and literature review, and to provide possble answers for reearch questions. It is noted that interesigly allof the five purposes in Table 7 were the same as those in Table5, though some of the purposes given by advisors from natural and applie ciences and social sciences were with different priorities.

Table 8 shows that allstudents from social sciences stated that the purpose of the discussion section is to provide a summary of research results. Thre students indicatd that its purpose i to compare and make lins between reults and literatre review. The rest of the other purposes are to demonstrate the reearch contribution, to se if the research resul i able tosolve the problem in the real world or academic community, and to present unanswered questions and limitations, and provide future directions.

Finall, comparison was made between natural and aplied science group and social science group regarding the purposes of a discussion section. As the results suggested, advisors' and students' perspectives were similar within each group (i.e., natural and applied ciences/social sciences) when considering the purpose of a iscussion section. Also there seemed to be no sharp inconsistency within a teacher-student pair. All advisor-doctoral student pairs considered further explanation of the results to be crucial for writing the discussion section. In addition, there were much alike between advisors from the two groups, in that each gave five similar purposes of a discussion section, despite with different priorities. However, three purposes overlapped, namely, (1) to summarize research results, (2) to compare/make links between resuls and literature review, and (3) to demonstrate the research contribution. Two purposes were only indicated by students from natural and applied sciences, which were to se if the research hypothesis is applicable in the practical field, and to reassert the purpose of present study and to highlight the findings. On the other hand, only doctoral students from social sciences proposed that the purpose of a discussion section should include the demonstration of whether the research result is able to solve the problem in the real world or academic community.

4.2. Q2. What are advisors' and students' perceptions of the problems of doctoral students in writing the discussion section?

Table 9 lists problems encountered during doctoral students' writing as perceived by advisors from natural and applied sciences. There were total eight problems addresed. Some were general problems encountered in academic writing; some were specifically related to the domain based n advisors different rearch spcialties. l five advisors regarded doctoral students inabilit to further explain the results as the major problem. For instance, A2 explicitly explained that being a graduate student, sometimes he or she could not look deeper into the connection between the results and the analytic process' He continued with an example that it was difficult for astudent to decide which result would be primary or econdary. Excet A2, four advisors considered students insufficient English proficiency to be one of the problems. Such English insufficiency included students inability to corrctly use grammar, vocabulary, tenses, and collocations. Some other problems were indicated by three advisors, such as students lack of structure and logic in their writing, students inabilit to further state the research contribution, and specific domain-related questions. I i noted here that specific domain-related questions are primarily centered on the concern of the insuficient understanding of domain knowledge. For example, A2 found that his student had a problem to link between current findings and previous literature due to the student's unfamiliarity with the domain. He said "sometimes my student misinterpreted when he tried to compare and contrast the current findings with previous literature in the discussion section. This was because he was unfamiliar with the domain to some extent."

Table 10 shows doctoral students perceptions of problems encountered during writing. Firt, allstudents from natural and applied sciences considered insufficient English proficiency to be a major problem in their writing. One of the representative examples comes from D4. He had problems with relative clauses, and especially the choice of words. In his discipline of life science, words must be chosen carefull. Although they might be translated into the ame Chinese, they were till use in a different context. \*For instance, words like retain, maintain, and keep might be the same in Chinese." D4 said, \*yet in the context the right choice would be retain." There were respectively two doctoral students who were uncertain about the use of the tone, and unaware of the demand of the discussion ection as a gere. When it cameothe tone f an author, for example, D1 would evily cite preious litrature to prove his claim in order to avoid challenge or question from others. D3 also was confused about the tone, and she had been trying to reach a balance between being assrtive and circuitous, and \*how to maximize advantages of the research within the limitation." As for understanding the discussion section as a genre, D1 confessed that \*at irst [he] did not know the purpose of a discussion section," which he believed to be resulted from his lack of reading literature. D4 also had a dificulty understanding the discusion section, regardig it asling theus. s h onfesd ust retth t inthe ssi tin  rrctmef, and understood that the discussion section is to connect the findings to the previous literature and to produce a logical argument. The reason for the inability to write a good discussion section might resul from the insufficient knowledge about data. Lastl, other problems encountered by doctoral students varied.

Table 11 lists the problems perceived by advisors from social sciences. All four advisors noticed that doctoral students lacked the ability to narrow down their topics of research. For example, A6 stated that \*[D6's] dvantage was that he had rich ideas. He was very creative. He kept absorbing new information. However, this was also his disadvantage. He tended to writ too much so that he had difficultie narrowing down his topic. A7 also found D7 \*was ambitious to include many thing in his reseach. But i resulted in doing his research on a small part of what he wanted to do. The lack of connection between the results and the claims, or disjuncture (rupture to the flow of discussion) was related to the irst problem. It is noted that the problems of unable to narrow down the topic logically and disjuncture were not limited to the discussion section only. They might occur in other ections as well. isjuncture is the idea that the writers thought makes a large jump or sudden movement without flowing smoothly from one sentence to another or from one paragraph to another. For instance, A6 found that D6's disjuncture was related to being \*not good at using cohesive device." A7 considered that D7 had the problem of disjuncture because "he assumed that the readers realized so he chose not to write. To amend this problem, D7 "should assume the readers were naive and did not know his topic well enough," A7 suggested. A8 contended that the disjuncture resulted from students insuficent English ability. I would ask my students to write in Chinese first to ensure if there is anything missing." A8 elaborated. The rest of the other problems varied.

Table 12 shows that the problems perceived by the doctoral students from social sciences seemed more varied than those perceived by advisors. Allstudents spelled out that it is dificult to decide what results should be included or excluded. For example, D6 considered the discussion section was the part that he "spent most time on polishing, because he \*wanted to discus everything" with large datasets in his ongitudinal qualitative study. D9 would sometimes focus on the unimportant parts, or on the minor parts of a study. oncerning insfficient English proficienc (especill grammar and coherence), 6 admtted that hisavisors did help polish his writing aility a lot" D9 indicated that because English was not his mother tongue, so he "couldn't use the languageas he pleased" About academic trends, D7 felt the discussion section should \*not only discuss within the paper, but also connect with the academic sphere and real world' that denotes the importance of trying to integrate what has been found with what has been discussed in the literature or show implications for the real world, which is an important move to show the contribution of one's own findings both within and outside the academia. Presumably related to the domain (information and learning technology), D8 also contended how to commercialize the research should be included in the discussion section." Other problems varied for each doctoral student.

Finall, comparison was made between natural and applied science group and social science group regarding the problems encountered when writing the discussion section. Both advisors and students within/between each group (i., natural and applied sciences/social sciences) gave diffrent explanations regarding students' writing problems. Advisors and doctoral students in both groups gave quite diffrent responses although some of them overlapped, such as unable to elaborate the results further, insuffient English proficiency, unable to differentiate the discussion section from the results section, and uncertain about the tone.

Overall, from natural and applied science advisors' perspective, al of them considered students' inability to further explain/ discuss/elaborate the results to be the problem. Some problems were especill pointed out by advisors from natural and applied sciences, such as domain-related questions students inability to differentiate the discussion section from the results section, and students' uncertainty about the tone. On the contrary, from social science advisors' perspective, all of them considered students inability to narrow down the topic logically and connectbetween the results and the claims. Three other problems were emphasized. such as students inability tonarrow down the topic logically, students trouble with APA format, and students unawareness of the reader-centered principle.

Situation was much alike in the students end, in which some problems indicated by students overlapped, and some were inde pendently singled out by the particular group. All students from natural and applied sciences admitted insufficient English proficiency to be the problem, whileall students from social sciences stated the difficulty to decide what results should be included or excluded to be the problem. Students from natural and applied sciences particularly indicated problems such as being unaware of the demand of the discussion section, and the inabilit to further explaindsuss/elaborate the rearch results. As for students from social sciences, they raised three ther problems, incuding the nability to follow reent academic trends, inability to relate the reults to the industry, and inability to discuss in logical order. Such diffrences existing between the two groups of participants can be interpreted that students from natural and applied sciences need to learn genre and argumentation in the discussion section. They might be versed in terminologies in their specialtie, but lack training in English writing for academic purposes. On the other hand, students from social sciences nedto be aware f trade-ffs in content election. It is opefll the reults can be disused and stuctured ogcally toflow current trends in society and carry implications to promote wellbeing. It is noted that both groups tended have problems with argumentation but the problems varied. The natural and applied sciences group had problems with explaining/elaborating findings, which is not surprising because most natural and applie sciences students may have been trained in doing calculations and applying formulas. The social sciences group tended to have problems developing their arguments logically.

# 5. Similarities and differences in the perspectives between advisor and student

This section illustrates three advisors' perspectives of the major problems of their students and then compares with statements made by their tudents, showing what the students perceived as their major problems. Three major representative problems below were pointed out by all advisors from either natural and applied sciences or social sciences.

# 5.1. Unable to further explain/discuss/elaborate the research results

A2 indicated that the major problem of D2's writing would be \*the incomplete explanation' which resulted from the student's tendency of "unable loking deeper into the results and relating them closely to the analytical process." A2 pointed out the lack of genre knowledge to be one of the reasons for writing problems. D2 was "unable to organize, compare, and explain the differences among different results. He just repeated the results section in the discussion section, A2 stated. A2 further commented that D2 \*failed to realize that the discussion section, compared with ther sections, was deigned to present core isues of his disertation. When the student encountered problem like this I would advise him to compare his results to the previous literature, or to widely review the literature to see how researchers produce and organize their discussion section."'

In response to the problem of writing the discussion section, D2 admitted that he did not explain the results profoundly enough. D2 regarded that he had tunnel vision to some degre. He was inclined to write his study without making links t the holistic arguments of existing literature. He did not think about \*how the result relates and connects to other researchers' findings and figure out implications."

# 5.1.1. Unable to narrow down the focus of discussion logically

As noted earlier, D6 was unable to narrow down the focus of discussion because she tended to put too much new information. To further understand from both advisor's and student's perspectives, A6 commented that D6 tended to have pies in the sky" before making the evidence data explanation) solid enough. Her idea was creative and she liked to absorb new information' but \*she had non-linear thinking. A6 stated that D6's writing tended to be digressive. Her non-linear thinking would \*make readers confused," even though D6 said she tried to be reader-oriented. A6 also commented that D6 was unable to use transitional device well so that her writing could barely support her broad ideas, which tended to end up being digressive.

On the other hand, D6 mentioned that her digressive style was influenced by Chinese writing. She stated that her advisor would lead her back to the line of discussion. Her thoughts were not clearly spelld out as she had problems in connecting different ideas and did not use transition signals appropriately. She also indicated that previously he tended to put every idea into one sentence. Awareof this, she would then separate relative clauses into different sentences.

# 5.2. Lack of connection between the results and the claims

A9 regarded that D9 had the tendency to rely his writing a lot on his interpretations. He did not adequately show the connections between the results and his claims. For example, A9 stated that D9 \*put too much emphasis on his own interpretations, sometimes inserting his own thoughts into the data."

In the interview, D9 pointed out that although i i important to make connections with the previous literature, it i necessary for him to expres his ownviewpoints about the results. or instance, he mentioned that in the dicussion section he tried touse thoughts and results."

# 6. Discussion

# 6.1. Problems in writing at sentence and paragraph levels

In terms of problems in writing at sentenceand paragraph levels, this study echoed with Casanave and Hubbard's (1995), Geng and Wharton's (2016), and Peng's (2018) findings, and especially highly resonated with Bitchener and Basturkmen's (2006) research. To illustrt, Casanave and Hubbard's (1995) and Peng's (2018) studies revealed common problems in L2 learners academic writing. Comparing native- and nonnative-English speaking students (Ns/NNS), Casanave and Hubbard (1995) found that NNS students clearly had more problems on "correctnes of punctuation/spelling, acuracy of grammar, ppropriateness of gammar, and approriateness of vocabulary' (p. 38). They also had problems with word and sentence level features. Peng (2018), on the other hand, revealed that doctoral students papers were often flooded with \*grammatical mistakes and nonstandard language phenomenon' (p. 100). Such results echoed with the present study. When being asked about thir problems encountered in academic writing, allof the doctoral students mentioned one or more reasons related to English proficiency, including grammar errors and uncertainty about the use of tenses, voices, word choices, and collocations.

The present study also shared the similarity with Geng and Wharton's (2016) study. They affirmed that the doctoral disertation discusson section is challenging in that the identity as a student presenting him/herself for examination" and the identity as an expert demonstrating his/her credentials for membership of a disciplinary elite' comes \*into conflict most acutely (p. 80). In the present study, when having the in-depth interview with the avisors and aking their opinions on the purpose of a discussion, seven out of nine regarded it as a place to demonstrate one's research contribution. It was also found that that some participants would use the subject, "we," to merge themselves into the laboratories they belong to.

Concerning the tone that an author deploys to make the strength of claim, Chang's (2016) research on Mandarin-speaking doctoral students indicates that their language use is apt to be polarized and les tentative. In other words, the students tend to use assertive claims. In line with the previous finding, the present study revealed that A7 found D7 sometimes made assertions straightorwardly before firmly elaborating his data. A9 also commented that most students ofen deduced directly or strongly, sometimes without sufficient literature reviews to enhance authorit and validity. The result is aso in consonance with Kwan and Chan's (2014) finding, suggesting that students tend to asert their interpretations of finding intuitively without considering the validity of their claims nor referring to the literature for support, which may in tun denote their nadequate contrl of source use in literature and falure to link their findingsto the literare in theissertation disussion section. Based on the finding in the preent study, it could also beinferred that advisors do read their doctoral students' work with similar expectations of reading articles.

Bitchener and Basturkmen's (2006) research resonated highly with the present research in the way that they both shared asimilar research design: both contained in-depth interviews with pairs of supervisor-doctoral students, with research focus on the doctoral dissertation discussion section despit students coming from different origins with different specialties. They suggested that the supervisors \*had a higher level of awareness" compared to the students (p. 13): they tended to see the student's problems from a more macro perspective, wheras the students usuall clamed that it was their poor English proficiency such as inability to hedge, limited abilit to make generalizations, and syntactic and lexical weakness (p. 10-11). In the present study, it was fairly obvious that the advisors had a higher awareness of doctoral students' problems.

# 6.2. Problems in understanding the requirements of dissertation genre/organization

The requirements of dissertation genre/organization might be influenced by different academic communities. For example, in Spanish doctoral education, the absence of the dicussion chapter is common (Hewit & Felices Lago, 2010). Deng (2012)aso found that in the iscussion section, the consciousness f genre is also related to the academic community the doctoral students belong to. From the reviews above, the academic community in Taiwan mostly fllowed the patten of IMRD. In this study, although D6 mixed the results section with the discussion section, he disussed right afte every ingl rult. A6 considered readers sill could recognize the result and discussion searately. verall, tudents might repeat themselves in the discussion section, but this awareness revealed that in the academic community in Taiwan, discussion section is considered necessary.

6.3. Problems in writing doctoral dissertation discussion sections as perceived by the students and their advisors

Sharing several commonalities with the previous findings, what i new about the present study, however, is that ifferent from the previous studies (e.g., Chou, 2011; Huang, 2010), instead of attributing the inefficiency of writing to cultural factors of obeying the teacher as a virtue which may cause the inefficiency during the discussion between boses and students, the present study showed that participants in natural and applied sciences attributed insufficiency of English writing to the lack of training in Taiwan, while participants in social sciences tended to have difficulties in deciding what results should be included or excluded.

To illustrate, al students from natural and applied sciences acknowledged insufficient English proficiency to be the problem whereas allstudents from social sciences encountered the difficulty to decide what resuls should be included or excluded tobe the problem. tudents from natral and applied ciences especill statd problems such as being unaware of the demand of the discussion section, and the inability to further explain/discuss/laborate the reearch results. Specificly, the unawarnessof the demand of the discussion section can be exemplified by the thought that the results must be fully discussed, acording to the demand of scientific domain and the need to elaborate the mechanism working behind the process and bring it into discussion. Moreover, the inabilit to further explain the results as the major problem is explicated that being graduate students, sometimes they could not ook deer into the connection between the results and the analytic process and the problem for them to decide which result would be primary or secondary.

On the other hand, students from social sciences raised thre other problems, including the importance to follow recent academic trends, inability torlate the results to the industry, and inability to discuss in logical order and problems with the structure. The sue about the acamic trends in the dsussion section is raised by the ned to not only dsuss nside the paper, but aoconnect with and be meaningful to the academic sphere and real world. As for inability to relate the reults to the industry, due to the nature of ifferent disciplines, unlike natural and applied ciences tightly related to the industry and directly apply the research findings in the industry, social science are concerned with the human society and the relationships among people (Jaffe 2014). Although the wish to apply the findings in the industry is spelled out it may not be surprising that it isdifficult for students to apply their findings in the industry. Finall, concerning inability to discuss in logical order and problems with the structure, it can be largely attributed to the influence of Chinese writing style and non-linear thinking.

It is noted that regarding connection between the type of research being reported and students' representations of their stated problems, students from the natural and applied sciences vs. social sciences expressed differences deciding what to include in thir discussion sections. As shown in the intrview data, i i likely that a doctral stde working with a large (qualitative) set of data from a longitudinal study would likely have geater difficulty deciding what to include than a natural and applied sciences student working with very different types of quantitative data from experiments in a controlled/laboratory environment.

Finally, when compared with students from natural and applied sciences, their advisors tended to be more concerned about stu. dents problems at the macro level, while students tended to be more concerned about their problems at the micro level. For example, as revealed in the interview data, all advisors considered students inabilit to further explain/discuss/elaborate the results to be a problem such as content and meaning, whereas allstudents considered their insufficient English proficiency to be a problem, such as vocabulary and grammar. In light of this, i could be iferred that the students were inclined to view their problem more at the sentence level, while the advisors view it more in terms of constructing clear meaning at the paragraph level and understanding about discussion section as a genre. On the other hand, when compared with students from social sciences, there is also a mismatch betwen advisors and students. Their advisors tended to be more concerned about students' problems of narrowing down their topics of research and making connection between the results and the claims, while students tended to be more concerned about their problems of deciding what results should be included or excluded. Overal, although students and advisors in these two groups approached from different angles, it can be seen that in each group students and advisors to some extent had roughly similar percetions. For example, i th field of natural and applied sciences, the student raised the problem of being unaware of the demand of the discussion section according to the demand of scientific domain, whereas the advisor indicated domain-related questions. Similarly, in the field of social scinces, the student raised the problem with the logical order and structure, whereas the advisor indicated the importance of narrowing down the topic logically.

# 7. Conclusion

In conclusion, to summarize al the findings, there was to some degree a consistency between both advisors and doctoral students perceptions about problems students ecountered when writing the discussion section, and reasons fr causing them. The options were mentioned by both ends, yet with different focuses and concerns. For instance, when it comes to the urpose of a discussion secion, all advisors and doctoral students believed to elaborate the results further to be the major purpose; yet, students aded that the showing of unanswered questions and limitations, and the provision of future directions were also important. When it came to the problems encountered during their writig, advisors from natural and applied sciences were consistent, mostly stating that it was students inability to further elaborate the results, while thoe from social ciences indicating that octoral students acked the abilit tonarrow down their topic of research and make connection between the results and the claims. On the other hand, students from natural and applied sciences tended to consider that i was their insufficient Englis proficiency that led to their writing problems, whereas those from social sciences tended to regard that it was particularly dificult for them to decide what results should be included or excluded. Overall, advisors tended to have more awareness of writing problems than their supervised students did.

In addition, comparison was made betwen natural and applied science group and social science group regarding the purposes of a discussion section. As the results suggested, advisors' and students' perspectives were similar within each group (i.e., natural and applied sciences/social sciences) when considering the purpose of adiscussion sectio. Also there seemed to be no sharp inconsistency within a teacher-student pair. All advisor-doctoral student pairs considered further explanation of the results to be crucial for writing the discussion section. In addition, there were much alike between advisors from the two groups, in that each gave five similar purposes of a discussion section, despite with different priorities. However, three urposes overlapped, namely, (1) to summarize research results, present unanswered questions and limitations, and provide future directions, (2) to compare/make links between the results and literature review, and (3) to demonstrate the research contribution. Two purposes were only indicated by students from natural and applied sciences, which were to s if the rearchhyothesis isapplicable in the practic fild, and t ressert the purpose of present study and to highlight the indings. On the other hand, only doctoral students from social science proposed that the purpose of a discussion section should include the demonstration of whether the research result is able to solve the problem in the real world or academic community.

Finall, comparison was made between natural and applied science group and social science group regarding the problems encountered during writing the discussion section. Both advisors and students within/between each group (i.e, natural and applied sciences/social sciences) gave diffrent explanations regarding students' writing problems. Advisors and doctoral students in both groups gave quite diffrent responses although some of them overlapped, such as unable to elaborate the results further, insuffient English proficiency, unable to differentiate the discussion section from the results section, and uncertain about the tone.

Overall, from natural and applied science advisors' perspective, al of them considered students' inability to further explain/ discuss/elaborate the results to be the problem. Some problems were especiall pointed out by advisors from natural and applied sciences, such as domain-related questions and students inabilit to diffrentiate the discussion section from the reults section and students' uncertainty about the tone. On the contrary, from social science group, three other problems were emphasized, such as students inability to narrow down the topic ogicall, students trouble with APA format, and students' unawareness of the reader. centered principle.

Situation was much alike in the students'end, in which some problems indicated by students overlapped, and some were inde. pendently singled out by the particular group. All students from natural and applied sciences admitted insufficient English proficiency to be the problem, whileall students from social sciences stated the ifficulty to decide what results should be included or excluded to be the problem. Students from natural and applied sciences particularly indicated problems such as being unaware of the demand of the discussion section, and the inabilit to further explain/scuss/elaborate the rearch results. As for students from social sciences, they raised thre other problems, including the importance to follow recent academic trends, inabilit to relate the results to the industry, and inability to discuss in logical order and problems with the structure.

Findings of this study contribute to the existing understanding of the topic about not only the importance of mutual understanding of the problems in writing the discussion section between advisors and doctoral students but also the potential similarities and dif ferences in terms of writing the discussion section between natural and applied sciences and social sciences. In light of this the information obtained from this study is beneficial to advisors as well as students in different disciplines.

This paper closes with pedagogical implications for the findings. On the one hand, because different problems in writing the discussion section do exist, advisors should be aware of these potential problems and help students to write the discussion section appropriately. For example, advisors can create guidelines in detal beforehand to help students, by identifying the required academic criteria and by describing various availabl formats and issues such as purposes and problems that students may face when writing the discussion section.

On the other hand, students are encouraged to clearly meet the required academic criteria and expected format of the doctoral dissertation early in the doctoral program to failitate the writing proces. Thus, the first step to learn for students is to recognize that there are differences in how genre and text logic re constructed. The structure and format of students doctoral disertations should e informed by the practices in the specific discipline and the students' academic and professional goals. Guidance from advisors and institutional writing support, such as delivering instruction in writing the discussion section, providingcourses specificall designed for English writing for academic purposes, and inaugurating English writing centers to offer academic writing service for students can help them to understand when they have met their dissertation writing goals.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Shih-Chieh Chien: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing. Wei-Yan Li: Data curation, Validation, Writing.

# Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and the editor for their insightul comments and helpful suggestions. The study was funded and regulated by the Ministry of Science and Technology (Taiwan) (MOsT 107-2410-H-141-004).

# Appendix 1

Interview prompt for advisor.   
At the beginning, would you please talk about how many supervised doctoral students you had in the past few year Then I would like you to talk about your students' discussion section:   
Did you find any problems in these students' discussion section?   
Were these problems prevalent in your doctoral students' discussion section?   
What do you perceive as the purposes of writing the discussion section?   
Besides problems in students' discussion section, I would like to ask you about students' specific writing problems: Did you find that students have problems in:   
Understanding the purposes of the discussion section?   
Choosing and structuring content?.   
Writing in an appropriate academic style?   
Establishing a flow of ideas?   
Achieving unity?   
Achieving coherence?   
Using transition signals?   
Grammar use?   
Word use?   
What do think the major causes of the above problems?   
Lastly, I would like to ask you about one of your supervised students.   
What do you think about the student's dissertation discussion section?   
What do you think about the student's major problems in the dissertation discussion section?   
Would you please give me some instances of the problems in the student's dissertation discussion section?

# Appendix 2

Interview prompt for student

At the beginning, would you please talk about your dissertation? What are the major problems of your discusson section? Could you give me some examples about your problems? What do you perceive as the purposes of writing the discussion section?

Besides problems in the discussion section, I would like to ask you about specific writing problems:

Do you think that you have problems in: Understanding the purposes of the discussion section? Choosing and structuring content?

Writing in an appropriate academic style?   
Establishing a flow of ideas?   
Achieving unity?   
Achieving coherence?   
Using transition signals?   
Grammar use?   
Word use?   
What do think the major causes of the above problems?   
Lastly, in your viewpoint, what constitutes a good dissertation discussion section?

# References

Amuai, . 019). h i  th si ctiof nn  .  f Sc, 40), 89394   
Anderon  der,  dr . 0).An ef oi m.  f Esh for c  45 press).   
Bask.     n  f 8, 241-251.   
sk Purposes, 11, 134-144. Purposes, 5, 4-18.   
uge, 1  . ht Springer.   
Canave  d 195. w    , dd research. English for Specific Purposes, 11, 33-49.   
Chang, P. (2016) L doctoral students conction f athoria stance in aadmic rarch witig n exporatry study. RELC Jounal, 472), 175-192.   
Chou, L. (2011). An investigation of Tawanese doctoral students academic writing at a U.S. universty. Higher Education Studies, 1(2), 47-60. postgraduate students. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse (pp. 113-140). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Dg L t Chinese Journal of Applied Linguistics, 35(3), 301-323.   
Dng  18tit      . Specific Purposes, 17, 369-390.   
Dudley-an . (194.e asis:  ap  asis r P. Md .),  i wien x is (. 198. Routledge.   
a, . t and Thai researchers. Journal of Teaching English for Specific and Academic Purposes, 9(4), 725-739.   
s Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 22, 80-91.   
Heit,    t Europea de Lenguas Para Fines Especificos/Journal of the European Association of Languages for Specific Purposes, 19, 119-140.   
Hkins    t   h , 1322   
Hng ..   h i 9, 33-44.   
Kanoksilapatham, B. (2005). Rhetorical structure of biochemistry research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 24, 269-292.   
ma .. 16). w t ti  t  hihr  . l J Research Studies in Education, 5(3), 71-80.   
tai6.    at   e English for Academic Purposes, 5(1), 19-36.   
an, ... 014 t t  d it    chf a functional-semantic citation typology for pedagogical purposes. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 14, 29-47.   
Lin, L, Evans, . 2012). Structal pans in mpirical rrch artices: A cros-iscipliny study. nglish for pcific Pose, 31, 150-160.   
Li  t for Academic Purposes, 34, 97-109.   
Parkinson, J. (2011. The discussion ection as arment: The language used to prove knowledge clams. Eglish or pecific Puposes, 30, 164-175.   
Peacock, M. (2002). Communicative moves in the discussion section of research articles. System, 30, 479-497. (1), 93-103.   
Posteguill, S. (1999). The schematic structure of computer science research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 18, 139-160.   
Samaj  08.e aisf ters  a c   fs o ntin. of gish r c e, 1, 5567   
Sri       l  oe/e realization. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 53 (in press). Purposes, 40, 74-86.   
Straus, A. L, & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative reearch: Grounded theory procedures and tecniques. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   
Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2012). Academic writing for graduate students (3rd ed.). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Yang, ., & lison, . (2003). r artices i applied inistic: ving from uts o osions. gish for fic e, 22, 365-385.   
Yeh, C. C. (2010. e gate tdets ptives o  writin in nglis:  ce sud in wan. l of Ac ge ad n, 4(1) A1-A12.

Shi-Chih h  n th  io  o sit f s.  h int d wig t contrastive/intercultural rhetoric, and composition pedagogical guides for writing teachers.

e-an  t .  tig and English language education from cultural and intercultural perspectives.