# Authorial voice in source-based and opinion-based argumentative writing: Patterns of voice across task types and proficiency levels

Hyung-Jo Yoona,\*, Mahmoud Abdi Tabari b

a California State University, Northridge, USA b The University of Nevada, Reno, USA

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Handling Editor: Guangwei Hu

Keywords: Argumentative writing Source-based writing Academic writing Authorial voice Metadiscourse

This study examined first-year university students' use of textual voice markers in two argumentative writing tasks. Previous findings of authorial voice have shown unclear relationships between voice elements and writing proficiency, making us question the pedagogical value of voice for L2 writers. However, it should be noted that the majority of studies on this topic have used timed opinion-based argumentative tasks which may not be the most relevant task type for academic writers, as they are often expected to build source-based argumentation. To fill this gap, we collected 110 opinion-based and source-based essays from 55 students and quantified a wide range of stance and engagement elements that appeared in the essays. Results showed a higher frequency of use of textual voices in opinion-based than in source-based writing, but there was no meaningful association between voice and writing proficiency in both tasks. However, different patterns were exhibited when we examined section-specific voice elements. In the source-based essays, more proficient writers used more varied types of hedges in the synthesis section but fewer boosters and reader pronouns in the introduction. With these quantitative results of authorial voice, we discuss our findings in the light of first-year writing instructional needs and writing assessment.

# 1. Introduction

It has been widely agred that argumentative writing is of great importance in academic contexts, astudents are often expected to demonstrate their ability to buildeffective arguments in a number of generic and discipline-specific writing tasks (Lee & Deakin, 2016). Therefore, argumentative writing has been the most prevalent genre in universt-level educational seting, and standardized English tests (e.g., TOEFL and IELTS) include argumentative tasks in their writing section (Mei, 2006; Plakans & Gebril, 2017). Argumentative writing involves the writers use of causal reasoning and persuasion of readers through valid evidence. As Johns (2017) argues, "efective argumentation is situated, requiring a significantly thorough understanding of the audience, of how to construct an authorial presence within the text, f aceptable text structure, and of appropriat use of print and visual language' (p. 80). This view of argumentation may indicate that English for academic purposes (EAP) writing instruction aimed at facilitating students' abilit to construct persuasive arguments should ental the construction of writer presence and audience rcognition as it intructional targets.

Authorial voice is a concept closely linked to the authorial presence in academic writing. While it i difficult to define voice due to its elusive nature, Hyland (2008) suggests that the writer is responsible for ffective interactions wit readers using a proper voce and that \*every ccessul aadmic text diplays the witer's awarnessf oth is readers and its consequences" (p. 6). Sice the avent of Hyland's (2008) interactional model of voice that consists of stance and engagement, scholars have extensively explored interactional features of academic writing with a focus on textual voice markers. Specificall, drawing on this framework, they have employed quantitative approaches to identifying pattens of authorial voice in argumentative writig. One such line of research has examined the association between authorial voice and essay qualit (e.g, Yoon, 2017; Zhao, 2017), but it has offered mixed findings of how an explicit writer-reader interaction contributes to argumentative writing qualit. Diffrent roles of authorial voice here might be attributed to varying concepts of argumentation in second language (L2) writing. In this regard, Hirvela (2017) indicated that the definition of argumentative writing has been fuzzy among L2 writing scholars and that they have not reached an agreement on what components should be included for successful argumentation. It has also been noted that writers use their understanding of section-specific rhetorical functions of a genre when building their resece in the text (Kawase, 2015). Thus, writers may be aware of distinct functions f different sections (e.g., stating a topic and offering background information in the introduction section, sum marizing main points in the conclusion section), and in fulfling these functions, they may present section-specifi authorial voice patterns. Given this, in the present study, we aim to examine unique patterns of authorial voice marker use in argumentative writing, focusing on the difference between source-based and opinion-based argumentative esays the efects of writing proficiency on the use of voice markers, and the contribution of voice markers to writing quality.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Argumentative writing

Argumentative writing is a cornerstone of first-year writing (Fyw) courses focusing on critical thinking and analytical writing skills. Further, the ability to write argumentative essays is an essential ability that students in different disciplines should gain to become successul t universit (Hirvela & Belcher, 2021). In this regad, Mei (2006) mainains that the arumentative essay is one of the most common forms of the curriculum genre that undergraduate students write (p. 330). Argumentative writing has gained a special ground in many FYW programs due to its unique rhetorical and linguistic features, and it has been featured as a genre for assesment acrossall disciplines (Nesi & Gardner, 2012). Hence, teachers often focus on the practice of agumentative writing to increase students' linguistic and rhetorical competencies and develop their rhetorical flexibility by having them explore different audiences and contexts (Gomez-Laich et al., 2019; Qin & Uccelli, 2020).

From students perspective, argumentative writing i perceived as one of the most chllenging types of writing, especiall for those with limited linguistic and rhetorical knowledge or les experience with the building blocks of argumentation (Abdi Tabari, 2017; Hirvela, 2013). Whilestrictly adhering torequirements for thestructure of their argumentative writing, students mostly dedicate their attention to what they intend to write (i., formulation and generation of ideas) and how they expressthir ideas by drawing on linguistic reource (., traslation f id int linuistic form) and rsoning kill (Kogg, 2008). menttie writing sems to be cognitively demanding for inexperienced students because it requires them to draw on their intelectual resources and self-regulation kills to solve an intellectually complex problem (Ferreti an, 2016). Furthermore, agumentative writing is viewed as a problem-solving procesoperating within an information processing system, which is often restricted by writers attentional capacities and linguistic resources such that novice writer often have dificultie in managing these restictions due to their limited abilities for goal setting, planning, and monitoring (Abdi Tabari, 2021).

In addition to limited atentional capacities and linguistc resources, time allowance is another important isue that often leads to changes in L2 learners argumentative writing (Abdi Tabari, 2022). In this regard, Kellogg (1996) points out that timed writing can constrain the central executive component of working memory and impede smooth writing behavior such that learners, especially those with limited writing proficiency, might be pushed to prioritize formulation over execution and monitoring. In other words, he claims that the alotted time for writing task performance probably results in changes in writers atentional processig and linguistic encoding, especially when they writ in thir 2. A review of L writing literature shows that few studies have investigated the role of time in universty-level L2 students' argumentative writing. In a diagnostic English language assessment context, Elder et al. (2009) compared 30 test takers' writing scores between long ( $5 5 \mathrm { m i n } )$ and short $( 3 0 \mathrm { m i n } )$ time conditions and found that participants yielded higher scores on writing fluency, content, and form, as well as the average total score. However, these differences in their writing performance were not found tobe tatistically significant, thus leding theauthors to the contention that decreasing the time allocated to argumentative writing tasks cannot be interpreted as a les valid indicator of test takers' academic writing. In a classroom-based study, Shin (2011) examined the impact of time allowance on 39 Korean university students' English compositions by comparing their performance on two types of writing assignments: (1) an in-class timed essay produced within $3 0 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ and (2) a final paper produced with a 5-week time allowance. The results of this study realed that out-of-clas papers yielded beter quality performance in terms of content, language use, and mechanics than timed opinion-based essays.

Furthermore, comprehending and selecting ideas from outside sources based on pre-assgned goals and integrating them into texts to support central claims are essential for argumentative writing. This is considered an important activity widely used in various academic writing genres and employed in most FYW courses in the U.S. (Council of Writing Program Administrators., 2014). According to Cumming et al. (2016), the use of main ideas in source texts to support a specific viewpoint through summarizing and synthesizing s cogniely comple skill to le bausethy require critical nd and iteray skills Likewise, th rerchers have reported that most irt-year L2 students have dificulty interpreting source texts and incorporating them into their writing to produce research-based argumentation for a target audience due to their limited proficiency (Kwon et al., 2018; Plakans & Gebril) 2013). More importantly, many first-year L2 students are often challenged with the task of developing their own voice as a writer in source-based argumentative texts (Hirvela & Du, 2013). However, Fowler (2019) suggests that L2 students can establish their own voice as a writer if they lean the individual components of writing and develop the components with which they arealready familiar. Likewise, Gentry (2010) states that, with an understanding of the value of citical thinking and analysis, students can foster meta cognitive skils that contribute to recognizing their own voice because they determine how original their ideas are for the subject matter. Gentry (2010) also adds that \*oice is found within these moments where the students are able to articulate differences between what they understand and believe and what the author does' (p. 13). In spit of these suggestions, it should be acknowledged that an author's voicei stil under-reearched, and researchers nd to uncover the underlying role of this construct in source-based argumentative writing.

# 3. Interactional voice in argumentation

Studies on L2 writers use of voice markers have been conducted with a focus on the contribution of authoria voice to essay quality (e.g., Helms-Park & Stapleton, 2003; Yoon, 2017; Zha0, 2017),effects of learner factors on voice use (e.g., Bax et al., 2019; Lee & Deakin, 2016; Zhao, 2019), and disciplinary variation (e.g., Bruce, 2016; Yoon & Romer, 2020). In exploring the role of voice in writing, researchers have used a voice scoring rubric to examine how voice scores relate to essay quality scores. Voice strength approximated by voice rubrics has generally involved the assertiveness of claims, clarity of ideas, and writer presence (Helms-Park & Stapleton, 2003; Zhao, 2013, 2017). For example, using an analytic voice rubric, Helms-Park and Stapleton (2003) examined the relationship between voice strength and writing quality for novice ESL essays (the majority of the participants speaking Chinese as their L1). Their result showed a limited relationship between overall voice strength and writing quality $( r = . 1 3 )$ . On the other hand, Zhao (2017) examined the essays elicite from TOEFL iBT independent wring prompts and offered a reult of stronger links between voice and essay quality. Zhao used both holisic and analytic voice rubrics to examine how voice scores predict writing quality and showed that voice strength, regardless of the type of rubric, is a significant predictor of essay quality $1 4 \%$ of the variance in essay scores explained by holistic voice scores; $2 5 \%$ by analytic scores). Yoon (2017) used a holistic voice rubric adapted from the rubric introduced in Zhao (2013) and explored argumentative essays written by intermediate Greek-speaking EFL learners. Similar to the result of Helms-Park and Stapleton, he found a limited contribution of voice strength to essay quality $( r = 0 . 1 6 )$ . These mixed findings might be attributed to varied learner backgrounds i.., L1, learning context, and proficiency) and rater views of what constitutes 2 writing proficiency (i.e., limited attention paid by raters to authorial voice in L2 essay scoring).

Additionally, several studies have examined the association between L2 proficiency and authorial voice to discuss developmental patterns of voice construction and the pedagogical value of L2 writer voice (Bax et al., 2019; Lee & Deakin, 2016). Yoon (2021) examined the argumentative essays written by EFL learners with Chinese, Japanese, and Korean L1 backgrounds (proficiency levels from CEFR A2 to ${ \bf B } 1 + { \bf \Phi }$ J.' Results showed that, while the learners' use of voice markers differed significantly across L1 backgrounds (e. g, higher use of hedges and self-mentions by Japanese speakers; higher use of reader pronouns by Chinese speakers), there was ittle difference across L2 proficiency levels. ee and Deakin (2016) made a comparison between high-graded and low-graded ESL essays in terms of thir inclusion of interactional markers. The result of thstudy indicated that the two groups were comparable with regard to booster, attitude markers, and self-mentions. One voice category with a significant difference was hedges; the high-graded essays contained significantly more hedges than the low-graded ones. Bax et al. (2019) alo examined theoccurrences f interactional voice markers in the esays written by L2 learners at different proficiency levels. Differen fromYoon (2021) and Lee and Deakin (2016), Bax et a. attended to both tokens (total number of occurrences) and types (number of different items) of textual voice marker. s a result they found that lower-level essays tended to contain more voice markers than higher-level essays, but despite the fewer markers used, the higher-level essays were characterized by an increased variet of markers compared to those written by lower-level learners. This pattern of more types but fewer tokens by more capable writers was commonly shown from the use of hedges, boosters, and attitude markers.

These mixed findings of the relationship between voice marker use and L2 proficiency may point to the need to approximate proficiency in a more valid and detailed way. It means that the writer's abilit toconstruct authorial voice should be associated with their writing ability rather than general 2 abilit, and that writing proficiency needs to be obtained using external evidence that goes beyond essay qualit. To addressthis gap, we decided to examine  writing proficiency and essy quality as separate variables, with a focus on their association with voice use. The unique results of Bax et al. (2019) also motivated us to employ both type and token measures of authorial voice markers. The notion of interactional voice use i this paper is restricted to the quantity (types and tokens) of textal vce marker i., hege oster aitd markr, self-mentio, nd ed ronun); this stdy hs te  wth eral voice trength or qualitative analyses of voice use in context. Additionall, we note that previous voice studies have mostly used timed opinion-based argumentative writing as their target task; participants were required to complete a writing task under time constraints in clssrom or testing settings. In academic settings, however, undergraduate students are generally asked to writ an argumentative essay on a topic with relevant sources. Given the limited exploration of first-year multilingual students use of voice in source-based writing, the present study targets source-based argumentatie esays that consist of the three sections of inroduction, synthesis, and conclusio, as well as opinion-based argumentative essays for comparison. This study is guided by the following research questions.

1. How do firt-year multilingual students use interactional voice markers in source-based and opinion-based argumentative essays?   
2. How does first-year multilingual students' use of interactional voice markers relate to their L2 writing proficiency?   
3. To what extent do interactional voice markers contribute to the overall quality of source-based argumentative writing?

# 4. Methods

# 4.1. Participants

A sample of 55 English language students at the undergraduate level (28 males; 2 females) enrolled in 15-week FYW courses at a U.S. university participated in this study. These single-semester courses were taught by the same instructor who followed a task-based syllabus (Nunan, 2001). The FYw classes met twice a week for $1 . 5 \mathrm { h }$ a day. The age of the participants ranged from 18 to 19 years old $( M = 1 8 . 3 6$ $S D = 0 . 4 8$ ) and the length of their stay in English-speaking countries ranged from 6 months to two years $M = 1 0 . 3 6$ $s D =$ 5.6). Furthermore, the number of writing courses they previously took fell between 2 and 7 courses $M = 4$ $S D = 1 . 1 6 $ . The participants also came from a variety of L1 backgrounds. The majority of participants spoke Chinese $( n = 1 1$ ) and Spanish $( n = 8 )$ ) while the remaining 36 participants had Arabic $( n = 5 )$ , Portuguese $( n = 5 )$ , Dutch $( n = 4 )$ , Japanese $( n = 4 )$ , Korean $( n = 4 )$ , Persian $( n = 3 )$ Russian $( n = 3 )$ , French $( n = 2 )$ , Indian $( n = 2 )$ , Polish $( n = 2 )$ , Burmese $( n = 1 )$ , and Vietnamese $( n = 1 )$ ) language backgrounds. With regard to their overall L2 proficiency, the participants indicated that thir iBT scores ranged from 81 to 90, which is equivalent to the B2 level on the CEFR scale. All participants completed both writing tasks (110 essays in total).

# 4.2. Materials

In this study, two types of written argumentative tasks were used: source-based and opinion-based tasks. Although they were potentially dfferent in terms of genre (opinion-based vs. source-based arguments), these two academic writing tass fllowed closely similar designs, demands (i.e., construct a thesis-driven argument and defend it), and evaluations (Rhetorical Analysis, Rhetorical Organization, Evidence, Style/Mechanics, and Documentation/Accuracy) and lent themselves to the writing curriculum and course theme (i.e., Language, Society, and Culture). Further, the writing tasks required the participants to draw on their understanding of argumentative discourse, the controversial topic, their expected audience, and critical evaluation criteriato produce aruments. Timed opinion-based argumentatiesays were written in response to the asgned topic during class time while the use of dictionaries or other external resources (e.g, the internet) during writing was not allowed. However, source-based argumentatie esays were written based on participants' topic of interet closely related o the course theme at home. In addition to geral writig sills and reasoning practices neded for both types of writing tasks, source-based essay writing tass required the analysis and synthesis of several sources Where the robustnes of the arguments was evaluated based on the quality of the essay and the content used. In other words, source. based argumentative esays required L2 writers to have two kinds of content-specific practices: argumentation and source use practices.

The Authorial Voice Analyzer (AVA) was employed to compute the occurrences of lexico-grammatical expressions related to Hyland's (2008) voice categories. The voice catgories targeted in this resrch include hedges, boosters, titde markers, el-mention and reader pronouns that can be counted reliably through an automated system. Hedge, booster, and attitude marker lists were compiled based on the existing lists and research findings (see Yoon, 2017 for a detailed explanation). The ist of hedges in AVA includes 164 expressions, and that of booster contains 174. The list of atitude marker contains 640 expresions related to emotions or attitudes. Additionally, self-mention items are first-erson singular pronouns (, my, me, mine), and reader pronoun items include first-person plural and second-person pronouns (we, our, us, ours; you, your, yors). Built with regular expressions, many items included in AVA were designed to capture their occurrences with linguistic variability. For example, a hedge expression \*(from|in) $( \boldsymbol { \mathrm { m y } } | \boldsymbol { \mathrm { o u r } } ) \backslash s$ ${ \setminus } \boldsymbol { w } ^ { * } { \setminus } \boldsymbol { s } ?$ perspective" can capture various forms of from my perspective that include, but are not limited to, from our perspective, from my own perspectie, and in our personal view. The AVA items with regular expressions removed are availabl in the online supplementary material.

For the categories of hedges, boosters and attitude markers, AVA computes both token (total number ofoccurrences in a text) and type values (occurrences of unique items in atext), and this study includes both as target measure to identify the contribution of the varied use of voice markers in writing. The measures computed by AVA are normalized frequency values (occurrences per 1000 words) that are minimally afected by text length. In checking the reliability of AVA, Yoon and Romer (2020) hand-coded the frequencies of hedges and boosters in 20 randomly chosen texts, and the hand-coded and AVA scores had high Pearson's correlation coefficients of 0.921 and 0.892 on hedges and boosters.

# 4.3. Procedures

Upon receiving the International Review Board approval, the second researcher contacted the FYW course instructor and asked for his cooperation. The objectives and procedures of the study were communicated to the course instructor before visiting two FYW classes tocollect the data. The instructor greed to cooperate and use writing tass as in-class activitie. Students were also informed that they would have the right t voluntaril participate in the study. Furthermore, they were assured of the anonymous nature of this study and the confidentialit of their information. All students signed the consent forms and agreed to participate in the study, and data collection started in Week 10. It is worth noting that before collecting the data, participants were taught Toulmin's Model of Argu. mentation and different components of academic argumentation such as Analysis, Synthesis, and Contribution such that they were familiar with the fundamentals of academic arguments and knew how to make a claim, provide evidence and consider different viewpoints. More importantly, participants learned both types of domain-related practice (Ferrtti & Fan, 2016), that is reasoning practices and source use practices before Week 10.

To collect opinion-based argumentatiesays, allthe participants in two intact classes were given the same prompt corresponding to the course theme and asked to write their esas within the regular classrom time. The minimum number of words for the opinion. based argumentative esays was 400 words to make our analyses more meaningful and reliable. Once they were inished, they were asked to submit their esays via the course site. With a one-week interval, al the participants were asked to choose their topic of interest in line with the cours theme and get the intructor's approval for both their topic and the sources over individual conferenes, analyze necesary and relevant information, construct thesis-driven arument, and defend their argument using reearch and sources found in the University's library. More specificall, they had to show their osition on the academic controversial isue, persuade ther readers to concede their point of view, defend their position with arguments well-supported with evidence, and use at least three sources (preferably primary sources). For this source-based argumentative writing tak, participants were allowed to work on their essays over four weeks. They were asked to produce at least 200 words including references and submit their essays through the course sit. The qualit of the essays was asessed by the course instructor based on the five categories of the rubric reported in Connor-Linton and Polio (2014): content, organization, vocabulary, language use, and mechanics. The ul score of each category was 4 points (20 points in total). Then, the essays were segmented, coded, and analyzed by the researchers based on the compiled lists of authorial voice markers.

# 4.4. Analysis

Our research questions involved the comparison betwen opinion-based and source-based writing and the effect of L2 writing proficiency on the number of voice markers in the two writing tass. Additionall, the study explored the role of voice in source-based writing in greater depth by analyzing the use of voice markers in each of the sections of source-based writing, as well as the contribution of overall and section-specific voice useto source-based writing quality. We computed paired t-tests to compare the use of voice markers between opinion-based and source-based argumentative writing. The t-test result was interpreted using the significance level with the Bonferroni correction $( p < . 0 5 / \mathrm { o r } 0 . 0 0 6 2 5 )$ and Cohen's $d$ for effect sizes ( $\dot { \boldsymbol { d } } = 0 . 4 0$ , 0.70, and 1.00 as cutoff values for small, medium, and large effects; Plonsky & Oswald, 2014).

For the second research question, the relationship between L2 writing proficiency and voice use was analyzed using Pearson's correlations. The participants' scores on the in-house writing tet were used as a measure approximating their L2 writing proficiency. This test consisted of two sections: Grammar Structure (30 selected-response items) and Written Expression (which involves writing a single essay on a given topic). The scores of the participants for the Written Expression section ranged from 7 to 9 $M = 7 . 8 2$ $s D =$ 0.72). For the third research question about the contribution of voice to source-based writing quality, Pearson's correlations were first employed. Then, the measures found to correlate significantly with source-based writing quality were used for multiple regression analyses. The scores of the source-based essays ranged from 16 to 20 $\mathbf { \mathit { M } } = 1 7 . 8 0$ $S D = 1 . 1 9 $ ). Table 1 presents the length information of the opinion-based and source-based essays, as well as that f the three sections of source-based writing: introductio, synthesis, and conclusion. Descriptive results of elf-mention and reader pronouns indicated the substantial positie skewness of their distributions. Thus, following Larson-Hall's (2016) suggestion, we transformed their values using a logarithmic function (i.e., log10 $( \Chi + 1 )$ for X as a value) before conducting inferential statistics.

Table 1 Description of the student essays.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td> Mean length</td><td>SD</td><td>Minimum</td><td>Maximum</td></tr><tr><td>Opinion-based writing (n = 55)</td><td>422.51</td><td>102.54</td><td>321</td><td>769</td></tr><tr><td>Source-based writing (n = 55)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>2037.44</td><td>332.64</td><td>1004</td><td>2618</td></tr><tr><td> Introduction</td><td>317.67</td><td>104.97</td><td>135</td><td>567</td></tr><tr><td>Synthesis</td><td>1418.55</td><td>332.75</td><td>520</td><td>2075</td></tr><tr><td>Conclusion</td><td>306.69</td><td>116.98</td><td>78</td><td>545</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 5. Results

Table 2 presents the result of the voice marker occurrences in opinion-based and source-based argumentative writing. The use of attitude marker did not iffer btweenthe wo tass, but the other mesures showd ststclly significant difference. Spall, opinion-based argumentative esays tended to contain more voice markers than source-based writing, and the difference was stronger for the type measures (i.e., hedge token: $d = 0 . 4 3$ ; hedge type: $d = 0 . 9 0$ ; booster token: $d = 0 . 4 4$ : booster type: $d = 1 . 0 3 { \mathrm { \Omega } }$ . The largest difference between the two tasks was found in the occurrences of self-mention ( $\zeta d = 1 . 7 0 \AA$ , followed by those of booster type and hedge type. This result may indicate that learners tend to express a stronger authorial voice when building opinion-based arguments than source-based ones.

The second research question involved the link between L2 writing proficiency and authorial voice in both writing tasks. In addressing this question, Pearson's correlations were computed between L2 writing proficiency and voice frequency measures. As shown in Table 3, the highest correlation was found for hedge type in source-based writing $( r = 0 . 2 5 )$ , but none of the correlation cofficients were statistically significant (see Table 3). This result may indicate that L2 larners' writing proficiency does not necessarily lead to changes in the frequency of textual voice marker in both writing tasks, possibly ading evidence for the limited role of L2 writing proficiency for the quantity or varied use of textual voice markers.

Given clear distinctions between the sections of source-based writing, we additionally computed corrlations between L2 writing proficiency and the occurrences of voice markers in each of the sections. introduction ynthesis and conclusion. The result showed that unlike the correlations based on the entir essays, 2 leaners a different leves of writing proficiency used some voice markers notably differently within each ection (ee Table 4). More proficient 2 writers tended to use fewer boster markers (both token and type) and reader pronouns than les proficient counterparts i the introduction section. In the synthesis section, L2 writers with higher proficiency showed more varied use of hedge expressions. The conclusion section written by higher proficiency writers included fewer elf mentions. These results might point to the fact that L2 writing development involves having greater awareness of varying rle ofvoice markers in different writing sections and acquiring the ability to build a section-specific authorial voice.

Finall, with the aim of building a regression model best predicting the quality of source-based writing, we conducted correlations between voice measures and writing quality. Authorial voice measures for this analysis included the values for the entire essa i., measure names ending in entire), introduction section (inro), synthesis section (synthesis), and conclusion section (conclusion) of source-based writing. As a result, seven voice measures were found to correlate significantly with source-based writing quality (i., hedge token entire, boster token intro, reader intro, hedge token synthesis, hedge type synthesis, booster token contribution, and booster type contriution). Before computing aregression, we checked for multicolnearity and removed the measures that were highly collinear $( r > 0 . 7 )$ except for one measure with the highest correlation with writing quality. Hedge token entire and hedge token synthesis were strongly correlated $\left( r = 0 . 9 4 \right)$ I, and booster token contribution and booster type contribution were strongly correlated $( r$ $= 0 . 8 7 $ . As a result, hedge token entire and booster token contribution were excluded from the regression analysis correlations with writing quality: hedge token entire $r = 0 . 2 9$ ; hedge token synthesis $r = 0 . 3 4$ ; booster token contribution $r = - 0 . 2 7$ ; and booster type contribution $r = - 0 . 3 4 )$

The measures placed as predictors for the first regression analysis were booster token intro, reader intro, hedge token synthesis hedge type synthesis, booster type contribution (Model A1). We used the backward method beginning withall the predictors and then removing a predictor that dos not make astatisticall sigficant contribution to the model, hich was ffered as more preferable than the forward method (Field, 2018). The probability value of 0.05 was used as a removal criterion. After building Model A1 with the five predictors, we examined two other regression models. AIC was used for model selection (the lower AIC, the beter), and, as a result Model A3 was selected as the best model accounting for $3 1 . 4 \%$ of the total variance. The predictors of Model A3 include hedge type synthesis, reader pronoun introduction, and booster token introduction (see Table 5). In other words, source-based argumentative essays tended to gain higher quality scores with more varied hedging expressions in the synthesisection and fewer reader pronouns and boosters in the introduction.

Table 2 Differences in interactional voice between opinion-based and source-based writing.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Measures</td><td>Opinion-based</td><td> Source-based</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mean (SD)</td><td>Mean (SD)</td><td></td><td>p</td><td>d</td></tr><tr><td>Hedge Token</td><td>17.51 (9.80)</td><td>12.80 (5.06)</td><td>3.19</td><td>.002*</td><td>0.43</td></tr><tr><td>Hedge Type</td><td>10.77 (4.31)</td><td>6.28 (1.80)</td><td>6.67</td><td>&lt;.001*</td><td>0.90</td></tr><tr><td>Booster Token</td><td>20.83 (9.51)</td><td>16.07 (5.90)</td><td>3.30</td><td>.002*</td><td>0.44</td></tr><tr><td>Booster Type</td><td>15.33 (6.23)</td><td>8.68 (2.72)</td><td>7.64</td><td>&lt;.001*</td><td>1.03</td></tr><tr><td>Attitude Token</td><td>10.87 (5.84)</td><td>12.77 (4.85)</td><td>1.84</td><td>.071</td><td>0.25</td></tr><tr><td>Attitude Type</td><td>9.05 (5.11)</td><td>7.74 (2.17)</td><td>1.71</td><td>.093</td><td>0.23</td></tr><tr><td>Self-mention (log)</td><td>0.98 (0.46)</td><td>0.06 (0.28)</td><td>12.63</td><td>&lt;.001*</td><td>1.70</td></tr><tr><td> Reader (log)</td><td>0.75 (0.55)</td><td>0.41 (0.47)</td><td>3.21</td><td>.002*</td><td>0.43</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. \* significant with the Bonferroni correction; $\mathbf { l o g = }$ logarithmically transformed.

Table 3 Correlations of interactional voice used in opinion-based and source-based writing with L2 writing proficiency.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Opinion-based Writing</td><td>Source-based Writing</td></tr><tr><td>Hedge Token</td><td>.055</td><td>.159</td></tr><tr><td>Hedge Type</td><td>.061</td><td>.250</td></tr><tr><td>Booster Token</td><td>.224</td><td>.090</td></tr><tr><td>Booster Type</td><td>.142</td><td>.106</td></tr><tr><td>Attitude Token</td><td>.069</td><td>.093</td></tr><tr><td>Attitude Type</td><td>.081</td><td>.095</td></tr><tr><td>Self-mention (log)</td><td>.043</td><td>.111</td></tr><tr><td> Reader (log)</td><td>.010</td><td>.021</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $^ { \ast } p < . 0 5$ $\log =$ logarithmically transformed.

Table 4 Correlations of interactional voice used in source-based writing sections with L2 writing proficiency.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Source-based: Introduction</td><td>Source-based: Synthesis</td><td>Source-based: Conclusion</td></tr><tr><td>Hedge Token</td><td>.077</td><td>.205</td><td>.016</td></tr><tr><td>Hedge Type</td><td>.017</td><td>.306*</td><td>.011</td></tr><tr><td>Booster Token</td><td>.318*</td><td>.008</td><td>.101</td></tr><tr><td>Booster Type</td><td>.286*</td><td>.001</td><td>.192</td></tr><tr><td>Attitude Token</td><td>.012</td><td>.078</td><td>.056</td></tr><tr><td>Attitude Type</td><td>.050</td><td>.063</td><td>.035</td></tr><tr><td>Self-mention (log)</td><td>.205</td><td>-.086</td><td>-.322*</td></tr><tr><td>Reader (log)</td><td>.361*</td><td>.036</td><td>.114</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $^ { * } p < . 0 5$ $1 0 { \bf { g } } = { \bf { \bar { \tau } } }$ logarithmically transformed.

Table 5 Multiple regression analyses predicting source-based writing quality from interactional voice.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Model A1</td><td>Model A2</td><td>Model A3</td></tr><tr><td>Hedge Type: Synthesis</td><td>1.80~</td><td>2.22*</td><td>4.04***</td></tr><tr><td>Reader (log): Introduction</td><td>2.72**</td><td>2.88**</td><td>2.84**</td></tr><tr><td>Booster Token: Introduction</td><td>-1.68~</td><td>2.67*</td><td>2.74**</td></tr><tr><td>Hedge Token: Synthesis</td><td>1.54</td><td>1.28</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Booster Type: Conclusion</td><td>-1.33</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>R2</td><td>0.395</td><td>0.373</td><td>0.352</td></tr><tr><td>Adjusted R2</td><td>0.333</td><td>0.323</td><td>0.314</td></tr><tr><td>AIC</td><td>160.82</td><td>160.77</td><td>160.54</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $\sim p < . 1$ $^ { * } p < . 0 5$ $^ { \ast \ast } p < . 0 1$ $^ { \ast \ast \ast } p < . 0 0 1$ $\mathbf { l o g = }$ logarithmically transformed.

This result indicates that the effectivenes of the rhetorical functions of the introductory section (ie, showing the reader what the essay is about could be afected by the occurrences of boosters and reader pronouns as the inclusion of many boosters and reader pronouns could make the section loo informal and weakly substantiated. Thus, learner writers need to be encouraged to introduce new concepts and propositions concisely for an effctive introductory section. For the synthesis section of an essay, writers are expected to support their main arguments with in-text citations, and in doing so, they use various types of hedging expressions. It seems that the gater use f hedg inthis section dos not indicat the writer's lack fonfidenc in what s ared, but it shos the writer's ability to build balanced and convincing arguments with a wide range of authorial voice repertoires.

# 6. Discussion

Our analyses of authorial voice markers in opinion-based and source-based writing have revealed interesting patterns of variation across the wo arumenttie as, as well as ifferet roles f gneral and ction-speific voice in source-baed writing Spall, the opinion-based essays tended to contain more self-mentions and reader pronouns than the source-based essays. The greatest dif ference was found for the occurrences of self-mentions, arising from the very limited occurrences of first-person pronouns in thir source-based essays. Source-based essays written by novice multilingual students have been characterized by the accetance of source information with limited comment or evaluation (McCulloch, 2012; Petric, 2007). While this finding may reflect their lack of con. fidence about expressing their own perspectives on source information (Wete, 2017), it can altenatively be viewed as their under. standing of the varying rhetorical nees of iferent arumentative geres. That is, based on their learning experience of different task types, students might have learned that they need to expres their personal thoughts more explicitl in opinion-based writing and that they use external sources related to their main arguments with fewer self-mentions in source-based writing.

Similarly, the result also showed more varied use of hedges and boosters in the timed opinion-based esays than the source-based essays. This may indicate that L2 writers at this level have already acquired the ability to use varied types of hedges and booster expressions, even when composing an esay under time constraints. In this regard, it has been argued that higher or lower instances of stance markrs acrossdiffeent wting tass may be the writersrhtrical statgies fr effetive ask fulfilment wase, 2015. One of the possibleexplanations for this result s that firt-ear multilingual students have experienced multiple academic writing tass and built their own understanding of how they should be constructed. The participants in this study might be aware that hedges and booster are useful resources for the clear resentation of their opinions but that they need to be used modestly when citing sources. As a result, they made rhetorical decisions of using fewer varied stance items when they were asked to produce a source-based essay. Another posbilit is that, from a cognitive perspective, the orchestrated use of stance expressions for comple rhetorical situations would impose heavy cognitive demands on L2 writers, and source-based writing tasks necesstate greater cognitive resources than opinion-based writing tasks, as they require the writer to choose which sources to include, paraphrase and summarize them, and integrate them into a text coherently (Wett, 2010). Such differences in task-specific cognitie demands might have led L2 writers to pay lessattention to voice construction in source-based writing because authoria voice markers do not play major roles in building propositions.

We then examined how L2 writing proficiency relates to the use of voice markers in the writing tasks and found that none of the correlation coefficients between voice and writing proficiency was statistically significant (ee Table 3). The majority of previous studies on this topic have used timed opinion-based argumentative essays and offered mixed findings. Specifically, Bax et al. (2019) found that more proficient L2 writers used a reduced number of voice markers but an increased variety in theiressays, while Lee and Deakin (2016) and Yoon (2021) showed a limited proficiency effect on textual oice use. Although our finding might have arisen from the narrow range of scores approximating L2 writing proficiency,it supports the findings of Lee and Deakin (2016) and Yoon (2021), and it additionally suggests that our understanding of a limited proficiency-voice connection may not be limited to timed opinion-based argumentative tasks, as the similar results were obtained from both opinion-based and source-based writing. However, we revealed adifferent patten of the relationship between writig proficiency and authorial voice when section-specific use f voice markers were explored. Motivated by Kawase (2015) argument that \*writers' rhetorical srategies [are] adopted in response to the nature of the section of the target genre' (p. 123), we performed section-specific analyses on the source-based essays and found that writers with greater proficiency used fewer boosters and reader pronouns i the introduction section and fewer self-mentions in the conclusion. It wasao found that the synthesis section written by more proficient writers was characterized by the increased variet of hedges. That is, unlike the limited association found from general voice construction, there were some strategies for building section-specific authorial voices employed by proficient writers.

Previous research has indicated that writers are allowed to describe gaps in the field using hedges in the introduction, and such introductory paragraphs can be developed with self-mentions (Harwood, 2005; Myers, 1989). However, theextensive use of evaluative attitude markers may cause unintended threatening efets in the nroduction, as i isa high-visbility" section (anagarajah, 2002, p. 179). Similarly, it would be considered unacceptable for non-expert writers to evaluate previous research explicitly with boosters in the introduction, and more capable writers in this study might have been aware of the need to build introductory paragraphs with reduced certainty and confidence. Additionally, the student writers with higher proficiency used sources in the synthesis with caution through hedging expressions. Higher instances of hedges in the synthesis and lower instances of boosters in the introduction might serve as effective strategies for non-expert writers, given their limited experience and disciplinary knowledge. These findings may point to the importance of building the ability of FYW students to use authorial voice markers variedly acrossections. We then built multiple regression models that predic source-based writing quality using general and section-specific voice markers. The model best predicting writing quality included hedge type (in the synthesis) and reader pronouns and booster tokens (in the introduction) as predictors. This regresson result confirms the pedagogical value of authorial voice in source-based writing (Lee & Deakin, 2016) and also indicates that persuasive authorial voice is not constructed with the greater quantity of voice markers, but with the diverse and even lower instances of them depending on the context (Bax et al., 2019).

# 7. Conclusion

This study provided an explanatory analysis of textual voice markers in opinion-based and source-based argumentative writing to unfold some unique patterns of authorial voiceconstruction. We found that first-year students tend to produce more interactional voice markers in thir timed opinion-based argumentative essays than source-based ones such that the former included more elf-mentions, boosters, and hedges compared to the atter. We also revealed that the level of L2 writing proficiency made lile difference in the quantity of voice markers in both opinion-based and source-based argumentative essays. This limited interaction between writing proficiency and voice element use might help better inform teachers about the role of voice which seems to be context-dependent meaning that they should consider the characterisics of writing tasks, implementation conditions under which students perform tasks, genre, and intended audience. inall, our results disclosing diffrent patterns of voice features in each specific section of the source-basd writing provide vidence for the asocition btwen students ability to utili oice feare pecially in the synthesis section) and their writing proficiency level. This association can be bolstered by employing a developmental approach in writing teaching and aessment such that students are equipped with appropriatevoicing strategies compatible with their writing proficiency level in a simple (e.g., the use of first-person pronouns) to complex (e.g., giving subjective reflections) sequence and taught how to properly use them whilecomposing different sections of a source-based argumentative essay. In other words, teachers should focus on the sociolinguistic and communicative aspects of argumentative writing and draw L2 students' atention to specific voice-related features in addition to the linguistc apect of argumentative writing which has traditionally been considered and asessed. In this way, a more valid assessment of L2 writing competence can be established. Indeed, we can ensure the validit of the assessment of actual writing competence if we consider different aspects or parameters of argumentative writing.

These findings offer insight into how authorial voice categories should be targeted in the FYW instruction. For example, previous studies have found that L2 writer tend to make unnecesaril strong claims with more boosters and reduced hedges, when compared with native-speaking counterparts (Hyland & Milton, 1997; Yoon, 2021), and the finding of this study showed that an increased use of boosters is one of the characteristics of less proficient L2 writers. This pattern of authorial voice use might need to be discussed explicitly to allow them to build a more acceptable voice and eventually to compose higher-graded source-based essays. Also, FYW teachers need to help ther students build a clear understanding that argumentative writing is not one monolithic genre and that they are expected to employ different strategies for opinion- and source-based argumentative esays. Particularly, source-ased writing may bring about additional chllenges for novice writers because they need to understand sources and use legitimate citation skills to combine the sources into their own text (Howard, 2000; Pecorari, 2006. While these difficulties can be addressed by teaching discourse-level skillsuch as paraphrasig, summarizing, and integrating citations, writers would stil experience difficulties because they are expected to communicate their authorial stance and identity when using sources (Hirvela & Hirvela & Belcher, 2021; Hyland, 2002). Teachers, therefore, need to instruct their students to understand the concept of authorial voice and how it can be constructed through lexico-grammatical voice expressions, and the teaching of voice markers should be focused on how they are used differently for various functional needs. For example, the varied use of hedges can contribute significantl to discourse building in the synthess section, as it indicates the writers willngnes to accept other options and describe source information in a les assertive, more respectful manner. On the other hand, while useful for conveying confidence in a proposition, boosters would limit the possibility of alternative views, so the extensive use of boosters should be avoided in source-based writing, particularl in the introduction section.

There are limitations to acknowledge in this study. First, al the argumentative essays we examined were composed by first-year multilingual students. This admittedy reduces the generalizaility of our findings to broader academic contexts. Also, while this study adopted a valid design to offet potential confounding variables, it examined the opinion-based and source-based argumentative essays that focused on potentiall different topics in spite of their close relevance to the course theme and the classroom curriculum. Methodologically speaking, the choice of ifferent topics can serve as a moderating variable, possbly affecting overall voice salience and use of individual voice elements (hao, 2019). Hence, future reearch needs to control for the possble ffect of the topic. Finally, this study made no attempt to examine students' L1s considering a wide range of their L1 backgrounds. Given that participants L1 backgrounds were different, it i rasonable o aume that their Ls might have affected voice construction in L2 argumentative texts. In this regard, Zhao (2019) claimed that, L2 writers with more years of formal English instruction and from an Indo-European L1 background tend to write a bit more confidently, and with a relatively stronger sense of individuality and audience awareness, when compared to those with a non-Indo-European L1 background (p. 122). Thus, more rigorous investigations into the effct of L2 stu. dents personal background such as their L1 or cultural background on their textual voice construction are warrnted. In spite of these limitations, the current study brings  unique view to the role of interactional voice in argumentative tasks, with a specific focus on the association betwen textual voice use and L2 writing proficiency and on the contribution of voice elements to the overall qualit of source-based writing. Its indings offr important suggestions that L2 writing research should be conducted with awareness of the different needs of agumentative tass and their sections and that EAP instructors should teach authorial voice with a focus on varied use across writing contexts.

# Author statement

Hyung-Jo Yoon: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft.   
Mahmoud Abdi Tabari: Resources, Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j jeap.2023.101228.

# References

Abdi Tabari, M. (2017). Investigating the effects of planning time on the complexity of L2 argumentative writing. TESL-EJ, 21(1), 1-24.   
Abd  t Second Language Writing, 52, Article 100814..   
Abi ai,ith    f k tio.  f eond Language Writing, 55, Article 100871.   
Bax, ., Nkhara, , & Wlr, . 2019. hig  wirs us of meare markerst inte and ad . Sst 83, 79-95   
Bruce . (2016). onstructing critil stance in universt essays in English liteature and sciology. English for Specific Puposes, 42, 13-25.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Critical academic writing and multilingual students. The University of Michigan Press.   
Coor-ino, J., & lio C. (2014). mparin retives on  witing: Miple alyf a on corus. Jol of nd age iting 2, 1-9. Language Policy Programme.   
g    r  o      f s  e, 23, 47-58.   
Eder ., h    009 t    t, , 5160   
Ferrti R Fa 2016.titng  a .) o f n h(2nd . 301-315) Guilford Press.   
Field, A. (2018). Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics (5th ed.). London: SAGE.   
Fower, 01.we  ie i  n th  q tin] University of South Carolina.   
e York: City University of. and Education, 51, 20-30.   
d, 00.  ae t.h      i ie si   g Applied Linguistics, 26, 343-375.   
Hems-Park R, & ton, . (003). Qtiong the mprtace f idvdalid voce in undt 2 ative witing: An empiril st with pedagogical implications. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 245-265.   
Hea13gh   ti i  i i.)wi experiences, academic issues, and teacher education (pp. 67-86). Routledge.   
Hirvela, A. (2017). Argumentation & second language writing: Are we missng the boat? Journal of Second Language Writing 36, 69-74.   
Hirvela, , & Ber, .2021). mtiv wing i  ond g Ptive n rh  g.Th Unrit f Mhn Pre.   
Hrvela A D 03)h  g d ws  w e  ig  e Jof sh for Academic Purposes, 12(2), 87-98.   
Howard, R. M. (2000). Sextuality, textuality: The cultural work of plagiarism. College English, 62, 473-491.   
Hyland, K. (2002). Authority and invisibility: Authorial identity in academic writing. Journal of Pragmatics, 34, 1091-1112.   
Hyland, K. (2008). Disciplinary voices: Interactions in research writing. English Text Construction, 1, 5-22.   
Hyland, K, & Milton, J. (1997). Qualification and certainty in 1 and L2 students' writing. Joundl of Second Language Writing 6, 183-205.   
Johns, A. M. (2017). Augmenting argumentation in second language writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 36, 79-80.   
Kawase, T. (2015).Metdscourse i the inrodctions of PhD thes and rearch artice. Joundl of English for Ademic Puoses, 29, 114124.   
Kelog,  (19   i    .     res  e, nd applications (pp. 57-71). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.   
Kellgg, R. T. (2008). Training writing skills: A cognitive developmental perspective. Jounal of Writing Research, 1(1), 1-26.   
n  t  . 018k h irst w   w  n . English for Academic Purposes, 34, 86-96.   
Larson-Hall J. (2016). A guide to doing statisics in second language research using SPss and R. New York, NY: Routledge.   
Le, J J 16   tie essays. Journal of Second Language Writing, 33, 21-34.   
Mcuc 0.i  ih  i59   
Mei, W. S. (2006). Creating a contrastive rhetorical stance. RELC Journal, 37, 329-353.   
Myers, G. (1989). The pragmatics of politeness in scientific articles. Applied Linguistics, 10, 1-35.   
Nesi, H., & Gardner, S. (2012). Genres across the disciplines: Student writing in higher education. Cambridge University Press.   
Nunan, D. (2001). Second language teaching and learning. Beijing: Foreign Language Teaching and Research Press.   
Pecorari, D. (2006). Visible and occluded citation features in postgraduate second language writig. English for Specific. Purposes, 25, 429.   
Petric, B. (2007). Rhetorical functions of citations in high- and low-rated masters these. Jounal of ngis for Academic Puposes, 6, 238-253.   
an    n2 217-230.   
Plakans, L, & Gebril, A. (2017). An assessment perspective on argumentation in writing. Jounal of Second Language Writing, 36, 85-86.   
Plonsky, L, & Oswald, F. L. (2014). How big is "big"? Interpreting effect sizes in L2 research. Language Learning, 64, 878-912.   
Qn, .  sti     n  .n 45, 146.   
Shin S. (2011. Th efect of tie loction on Krn oe stdets peomancef drate and timd eys. Engsh tchng 6, 163-17.   
Wette, R. (2010). aating student nng in a univerity-lel EAP unit on writing using soures. Jounal of Seond anguag writing 19, 158-177.   
Wett,  (017. u tw n Writing, 37, 46-58.   
Yoon, H. (2017). Textual voice elements and voice strength in EFL argumentative writing. Assessing Writing, 32, 72-84.   
Yon,2)   i  d 34, 705-725.   
Yoon, H, & Rmer, .2020). Quanyingdcipliny voe: An atomad rchintrctional dcore n su stdt wtig. riten Communication, 37, 208-244.   
Zhao, C. G.013). ng trial e sth in 2 anative writing The dment and valdion f an alytic rbric. ge tin 30, 201-230.   
Zhao, C. G. (2017). Voice in timed L2 argumentative essay writing. Assessing Writing, 31, 73-83.   
Zhao, C. G. (2019). Writer background and voice construction in L2 writing. Jounal of English for Academic Purposes, 37, 117-126.   
Coun of in P strr. 2014.   fo frs-r omi ster, nf tin  s http://wpacouncil.org/positions/outcomes.html.