# Linguistic landscapes in language and teacher education multilingual teaching and learning inside and beyond the classroom

edited by Sílvia Melo-Pfeifer, (2023). Singapore: Springer. XIX $^ +$ 314 pp., Softcover ISBN 978-3-031-22869-8. Hardcover ISBN 978-3-031-22866-7. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-22867-4

# Tania Rahman

To cite this article: Tania Rahman (2024) Linguistic landscapes in language and teacher education multilingual teaching and learning inside and beyond the classroom, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:9, 1303-1307, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2024.2394859

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2024.2394859

# BOOK REVIEW

Linguistic landscapes in language and teacher education multilingual teaching and learning inside and beyond the classroom, edited by Sílvia Melo-Pfeifer, (2023). Singapore: Springer. $\times 1 \times + 3 1 4 1$ pp., Softcover ISBN 978-3-031-22869-8. Hardcover ISBN 978-3-031- 22866-7. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-22867-4

# ABSTRACT

In this review of Sílvia Melo-Pfeifer’s edited book ‘Linguistic Landscapes in Language and Teacher Education Multilingual Teaching and Learning Inside and Beyond the Classroom’ published in 2023, I examine how the volume advances the concept of Linguistic Landscape (LL) as a pedagogical and research tool, both as a method and a ‘theorethical’ (Melo-Pfeifer and Chick 2020) framework, for achieving aims related to research on ‘societal and individual multilingualism in education settings and beyond’ (Lourenço and Melo-Pfeifer 2023: 321). By ‘theorethical’ in this volume, Lourenço and Melo-Pfeifer (2023) mean the theoretical and ethical underpinnings of the interconnectedness of translanguaging and LL in language and teacher education research to develop a more comprehensive view. In this book, the authors employ a ‘transversal’ (Lourenço and Melo-Pfeifer 2023: 321) perspective on LL to move toward a reinvention of multilingual, multimodal and multisensorial pedagogies. Not only does this volume contribute to the extension of the large body of research on the juncture of LL, translanguaging, and multiliteracies, but also offers innovative and insightful implications that can benefit researchers and practitioners in bi-/multilingual language classrooms. I start this review by describing the aims of the volume, followed by a brief discussion of its overall structure and the main content of each chapter, ending with my engagement with the book.

# KEYWORDS

Linguistic Landscape;   
Translanguaging;   
Theorethical approach;   
Repertoires; Multiliteracies;   
Critical Pedagogy

In today’s digitized and globalized era, multilingualism and multiliteracies are quite common features of the $2 1 ^ { \mathsf { s t } }$ century classrooms like other public domains of language use around the globe (King 2018: 14; see also Crystal 2006; Lo Bianco 2000; Cope and Kalantzis 2000). Hence, over the years, linguistic landscape in the study of language in the public space has appeared as a potent tool for researching, teaching and learning languages in schools. Emerging from the examination of hierarchical inequalities in public display of languages in domains other than education, linguistic landscape has been considered a powerful instrument to raise awareness about inequalities and social justice in relation to languages and language speakers among teachers and learners in classrooms. In such examinations, besides linguistic repertoires, learners’ semiotic, sensorial and multimodal experiences are also significant for meaning making. As a continuation of this trend of studies on the multidimensional nature of meaning making in language and language education, originating from the collaborative contributions of authors from five European universities in the LoCALL (Local Linguistic Landscapes for Global Language Education in the School Context) project, the volume aims at exploring linguistic landscape (LL) in educational and teacher training contexts. This book is based on the dual foci of the ‘ongoing expansion of studies about LLs in educational settings, while at the same time narrowing its scope to the field of language and teacher education’ (Melo-Pfeifer 2023: 1–2). Drawing on research on LL evolving from logocentric and glottocentric studies in sociolinguistics on language in the public space with its hegemonic implications to the multidisciplinary investigations on the application of the concept in developing multilingual, multimodal and multisensorial literacies in language and language teacher education, the book presents a ‘transversal’ or holistic approach in the study of LL both as a tool and method in language pedagogy and teacher education related research. The book has 15 chapters excluding the Introduction and Conclusion which ‘contain enriching and captivating ideas on the possibilities of applying linguistic landscape research or materials in the context of learning about languages, and on its use in teacher training’ (Gorter 2023: x). The chapters cover accounts of linguistic landscapes in the works of researchers from twelve countries in five continents to promote multilingual education, ranging from primary to tertiary levels and also to teacher education programs (Melo-Pfeifer 2023: 8).

The book is divided in four parts based on their analytical and contextual foci. In the first part, entitled ‘The Exploration of Linguistic Landscapes in the Classroom’, 4 chapters cover studies that center upon how linguistic landscaping is used to implement multilingual pedagogies with young and adolescent learners at the primary and middle school levels. In this part, the chapters are based on accounts of engaging young learners to discover and reflect upon linguistic inequalities existing in their surroundings, such as their home and school (in chapter 1) as well as their school and local town (chapter 3). The methodologies adopted for data collection in the studies reported in these chapters are variegated; some employed quantitative and qualitative methods (chapter 1), whereas some gained insights from more experiential (chapter 2) and ethnographic ones (chapters 2 and 4). Monica López and Melinda Dooly in their chapter ‘Languages around us: (in)visibility matters’, show young learners’ (aged 10–11 years) engagement with linguistic inequalities through their discoveries of ‘visible but not seen’ languages in their homes and communities at a primary school in Catalonia, Spain. Mayo Oyama, Danièle Moore and Daniel Roy Pearce show in their chapter, ‘Walking linguistic landscapes as ways to experience plurality. A visual ethnography into plurilingualism with elementary school children in Japan’, how creative multilingual pedagogies can be developed based on the learners’ experiential and reflective documentation of diversity in their local LL. Based on experiential social scientific inquiry, the learners aged 8–10 years in this study engaged in a series of crossdisciplinary activities involving multilingual writing practices, art and disciplinary learning collaboratively initiated by the children and the researchers and their visits. The chapter depends on analysis of multimodal data sources ranging from child-and-researcher initiated visual documentation and reflective journals, digital photographs, teachers and researchers’ field notes to video recordings of children’s interactions. Sonia Cadi, Latisha Mary, Maria Siemushyna and Andrea Young, show in their chapter ‘Empowering pupils and raising critical language awareness through a collaborative multidisciplinary project’, how children aged 12–13 years enrolled at a lower secondary school class in the east of France got involved as major participants, made decisions with their teachers from a range of subjects such as French, sport, geography, maths, English, Latin in a collaborative and multidisciplinary project and gained knowledge about language(s) in their school and local town. In ‘Thinking allowed: Linguistic landscapes-based projects for higher-order thinking skills’, Klaudia Kruszynska and Melinda Dooly show through ethnographic data how 27 middle school students engage with explorations of their own linguistic ecology by questioning existing notions of language and reflecting on linguistic hierarchies and prestige in their surroundings during the implementation of a LL project in Catalonia. The chapter reports data gathered from a video recording of an English as a Foreign Language lesson in the LL project and the teacher’s observations completed after the lessons.

The second part of the book called ‘Linguistic landscapes in multilingual learning and teaching environments’ comprises three chapters. In these chapters, in their examination of the use of LL as pedagogical resources connecting “indoor” and “outdoor” language learning environments’, the authors address issues such as global citizenship, post-colonialism, and gamification and ‘explore analogue and virtual multilingualism in their ‘visuality’ and materiality’. Based on qualitative data and a taxonomy for deductive content analysis derived from major global citizenship education literature, Mónica Lourenço, Joana Duarte, Francisco P. Silva and Bruna Batista in their chapter ‘Is there a place for global citizenship education in the exploration of linguistic landscapes? An analysis of educational practices in five European countries’, address the potential of LL contributing to global citizenship education in the activities designed and implemented by the teachers in the different partner cities of the LoCALL project. Perpétua Gonçalves and Manuel Guissemo, in ‘Linguistic landscape of Maputo: A space for a didactic exploration of multilingualism’, examine the linguistic and socio-cultural dimensions in the multilingual LL of Maputo, the capital city of Mozambique. In this study, the authors show the potential of gaining knowledge about the symbolic value of the languages in Maputo’s LL through collection of photos of the LL in urban scenarios as pedagogical resources for language teaching and teacher education. In ‘The LoCALL app: a mobile tool to promote learning from and about linguistic lanscapes’, Margarida M. Marques, Mónica Lourenço, Lúcia Pombo, Alexandra das Neves, Dionísia Laranjeito and Filomena Martins show how an app can connect learners’ multilingual experiences with their learning pathways at school. After describing the app and the interface of game creation, the authors examine the potential of the app for a class of students aged 11–13 years of lower secondary level to explore collaboratively the local LL on the streets of Aveiro in Portugal. The authors also analyze interviews with teachers who report multifarious benefits of using LLs in their class activities, stating that learners become more aware of languages around them, develop critical thinking abilities, and gain more curricular and noncurricular knowledge from such activities.

Centering on pre-service teacher education, the third part of the book, ‘Teachers and students’ voices on linguistic landscapes’, addresses the benefits of using LLs as a resource for learning in general and in teacher education programs. Joana Duarte, Sibrecht Veenstra and Nelly van Dijk in their chapter ‘Mediation of language attitudes through linguistic landscapes in minority language education’ show the potential for integrating LL in Frisian language education to address representation of minority/majority languages and tensions among adolescents in urban Fryslân in the Netherlands. The authors, employing a multiple case-study design, explore how secondary school students aged 15–17 years in two schools engaged in inquiry-based research, examined the LL in their school surroundings and came up with language policy recommendations for their regional government. Lisa Marie Brinkmann and Sílvia Melo-Pfeifer in their chapter ‘Teachers and students’ perspectives on the use of linguistic landscapes as pedagogic resources for enhancing language awareness: a focus on the development of cognitive and affective dimensions’, compare what two teachers and their students of French in German secondary schools think about the use of LLs as resources for language education after the teachers integrate LL modules. This study underscores how the teachers and learners agree and disagree upon ‘the pedagogical potential of a sociolinguistic object in formal language education settings, both for students and teachers, in urban and non-urban areas, for the development of their language awareness’ (Melopfeifer, Introduction: 11). In the chapter by Ana Isabel Andrade, Filomena Martins, Susana Pinto and Ana Raquel Simões ‘Educational Possibilities of Linguistic Landscapes Exploration in a Context of Pre-service Teacher Education’, based on the belief that teacher education programs need to be sensitive to the presence/absence of linguistic and cultural diversity in educational contexts, by analysing the trainee teachers’ written reflections, the authors highlight the potential of LLs as pedagogical context as well as resource for pre-service teacher education. In the final chapter of this part, ‘The co-construction of the concept ‘linguistic landscape’ by language educators in an online course’, Maria Helena Araújo e Sá, Raquel Carinhas, Sílvia Melo-Pfeifer and Ana Raquel Simões investigate teachers’ and trainers’ perceptions about the use of LLs in language education in a one week long online teacher training event. The authors examine how the participants collaborate and co-construct the meaning of ‘linguistic landscape’ by dialogically expanding or reducing the scope of the concept to customize it for pedagogical uses in multilingual discussions around specific literature using the social e-reader Perusall.

The fourth part of the book, ‘Expanding linguistic landscapes in education’, presents emergent LL approaches such as sensescapes, the materiality of multilingualism, geolinguistic LL, and virtual LL. Josh Prada, in his chapter ‘Sensescapes and what it means for language education’, advocates for understanding LLs from a multisensorial perspective. By presenting two proyectos, he propounds for integration of a sense-making viewpoint in LL studies in language education, that can be understood both cognitively and sensorially. In ‘Theory and pedagogical perspectives on the use of material culture in the classroom: experiences in multilingual contexts of Israel and Russian Federation’, based on the conceptualization of the material culture of multilingualism and experiential data from Israel and the Russian Federation, Larissa Aronin, Daria Bylieva and Victoria Lobatyuk highlight the value of material culture to recognize the merits of ‘superdiversity’ in education, particularly, in additional language classroom. Alice Chik, in her chapter ‘The visibility of languages—connecting schools to communities’, advocates a geolinguistics approach to the use of census and online public access information to represent the new heterogeneous urban multilingualism and to debunk the concept of ‘ethnoburbs’ or homogeneous speech communities. In conclusion, the author recommends for using a critical geolinguistic approach to make the school-community LL connection. In her examination of multilingual practices on social media in ‘Virtual linguistic landscapes from below: A hashtag analysis of the European Day of Languages’, Sarah McMonagle seeks to identify the multilingual nature of Tweets about the European Day of Languages (EDL), held annually by the Council of Europe to emphasize, celebrate and promote linguistic diversity in Europe as well as the value of language learning. Using a coding scheme for hashtag analysis, the chapter is based on the quantitative and qualitative analysis of a corpus of tweets, compiled from the official EDL hashtag.

In the concluding chapter ‘Conclusion: Linguistic Landscapes in Education—Where do we go now?’, the authors Mónica Lourenço and Sílvia Melo-Pfeifer sum up the main contribution of the present volume to LL studies discussing LL as a ‘theorethical’ approach incorporating both a theoretical and an ethical lens for promoting translanguaging and multilingual education. They advocate for a holistic and integrated understanding of LL tapping into individuals’ multimodal, multisensorial, and multilingual repertoires and extension of these conceptualizations further. The book highlights the value of interdisciplinarity in research and pedagogy and advocates for integrating LLs in language education and teacher education in a dynamic way.

I found the book quite intriguing since it revolutionizes bi-multilingual education and research in the post-millennial contemporary world and adds a dynamic perspective in bi-multilingual pedagogical research. Considering bi-multilingual education and research through a ‘theorethical’ perspective (a term combining the two terms ‘theory’ and ‘ethical’ coined by Melo-Pfeifer and Chick in their article published in 2020) in the book attracted me most into reading the volume in one go, not just once, but a second and a third time. The volume contains breathtaking chapters which are creative and full of invaluable insights on the use of linguistic landscapes as a pedagogical as well as research tool. I was awestruck by a number of studies elaborating extraordinary ideas of using linguistic landscapes to teach and research bi-multilingual education, neatly woven inside the respective chapters. Among the wonderfully and succinctly detailed chapters, however, I would recall the chapter authored by Josh Prada, ‘Sensescapes and what it means for language education’, in this regard to cite just one example among the amazing works included in the volume. This chapter is a perfect example of a scholarly contribution replete with revolutionary theoretical insights into taking the concept of linguistic landscapes further and has the full merit for delivering the ethical purpose of the advocacy for global citizenship and social justice through bi-multilingual education, which the volume advocates for. The multidimensional nature of theorizing the concept of ‘sensescaping’, implementing the cross-disciplinary theory into practice by teaching language learners and novice teachers and grounding the analysis on an ethnographic research, Prada reveals the multilayered intentions of his work in the chapter like a Russian doll. And the layers of intent of the chapter is not merely restricted to the theorizing and its applications to language and language teacher education; we can sense a revolutionary pedagogical philosophy that surpasses the purviews of mere pedagogy and reaches the level of a meaningful philosophy of life in which it teaches how our overall world view needs to be expanded beyond the conventional boundaries. To Prada, sensescaping is:

a phenomenological perspective that privileges how individuals interact with the LL (with an emphasis on the non-linguistic dimensions that frame it) through their own means, utilizing their own resources and repertoires, which change and flow, and which inform (and are informed by) individual historical formations and sociocognitive affordances. (2023: 251)

And such a life changing view is necessary in today’s materialistic world to realize the merits of linguistic landscapes to value multilingualism in every sphere of life including education. Josh Prada’s chapter is just one of the several other awe-inspiring chapters in the volume which is a must read for any researcher, learner, teacher-practitioner, or policymaker, interested and involved in bi-multilingual education and research.

# References

Cope, B., and M. Kalantzis, eds. 2000. Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and the design of social futures. South Yarra: Macmillan.   
Crystal, D. 2006. How Language Works. New York: The Overlook Press.   
Gorter, D. 2023. “Foreword: Linguistic Landscapes as a Useful Pedagogical Tool.” In Linguistic Landscapes in Language and Teacher Education Multilingual Teaching and Learning Inside and Beyond the Classroom, edited by S. MeloPfeifer, v–xiii. Singapore: Springer.   
King, L. 2018. “The Impact of Multilingualism on Global Education and Language Learning.” In Cambridge Assessment Group (Eds.), Cambridge Assessment English Perspectives. Cambridge, UK: CUP.   
Lo Bianco, J. 2000. “Multiliteracies and multilingualism.” In Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and the design of social futures, edited by B. Cope and M. Kalantzis, 92–105. South Yarra: Macmillan.   
Lourenço, M., and M. Melo-Pfeifer. 2023. “Conclusion: Linguistic Landscapes in Education—Where Do We Go Now?” In Linguistic Landscapes in Language and Teacher Education Multilingual Teaching and Learning Inside and Beyond the Classroom, edited by S. Melo-Pfeifer, 321–333. Singapore: Springer.   
Melo-Pfeifer, S. 2023. “Introduction: Linguistic Landscapes in Language (Teacher) Education: Multilingual Teaching and Learning Inside and Beyond the Classroom.” In Linguistic Landscapes in Language and Teacher Education Multilingual Teaching and Learning Inside and Beyond the Classroom, edited by S. Melo-Pfeifer, 1–17. Singapore: Springer.   
Melo-Pfeifer, S., and A. Chik. 2020. “Multimodal Linguistic Biographies of Prospective Foreign Language Teachers in Germany: Reconstructing Beliefs about Languages and Multilingual Language Learning in Initial Teacher Education.” International Journal of Multilingualism 19 (4): 499–522. https://doi.org/10.1080/14790718.2020.1753748   
Prada, J. 2023. “Sensescapes and What it Means for Language Education.” In Linguistic Landscapes in Language and Teacher Education Multilingual Teaching and Learning Inside and Beyond the Classroom, edited by S. Melo-Pfeifer, 243–258. Singapore: Springer.