Book review

The Use of Technology in English Medium Education, Jack K.H. Pun, Samantha Curle, Dogan Yuksel (Eds.). Springer, Cham (2022). 2213-6967, VII+213

The outbreak of CoviD-19 has intensified the spread of online teaching and learning, giving rise to diverse challenges. Against the backdrop, a myriad of research has emerged to document the challenges (e.g., Gao & Zhang, 2020) and solutions related to online teaching and learning in a wide range of educational contexts. The book, The Use of Technology in English Medium Education, edited by Pun, Curle & Yuksel (2022), i a timely contribution to this line f research. With variety of research methods, this book explores the perceptions and perspectives of teachers and learners engaged in online taching and learning acrossvarious EMI ontexts. The book not only outlines the challenges teachers and learners face but also explores the creative approaches and solutions they employ to address these challenges. Notably, it covers a broad spectrum of topics involved in virtual ESP/EAP/EMI clasrooms, many of which aligned with the inherent concerns of EAP.

Beginning with an introductory chapter by the editors, the book consists of 13 chapters based on research in the fields of educational and applied linguistics. In the introductory chapter, Pun, Curle and Yuksel provide. a concise synopsis of this book in terms of research topic, background, aims, and significance and subsequent chapters involved. Several chapters focus on a specific key topic, including online asessment and feedback (Chapter and Chapter 6), teacher-student and peer interaction (Chapter 4, Chapter 11 and Chapter 13), and peer collaboration (Chapter 13). Two chapters examine new concepts specific to online teaching and learning (Chapter 7 and Chapter 12). The remaining chapters touch on participants' overall experiences in technology-mediated ESP/EAP/EMI courses and teacher education courses.

Assessment and feedback both exert powerful influences on students learning in higher education (Baartman & Quinlan, 2023) Chapter 2 and Chapter 6 investigate these two issues respectively. Chapter 2 examines third-year medical students' perspectives of online asessment methods in an EMI course at a Belgian University. The results reveal students diverse and even contradictory responses and attitudes on online formatie aessments. They indicate the tremendous challenges that students encounter in online assesment, highlightig the importance f redefining and reconsidering online language asessment methods in EMI courses. Chapter 6 explorestudents experiences and perceptions of teacher fedback and teachers practices of giving feedback in two English courses at a universty in Hong Kong. It subsequently examines the strengths and weaknesses of two digital feedback platforms, TurnltIn Feedback Studio and Google Classroom. The chapter finall introduces an upgraded platform designed by the authors, aiming to standardize and personalize online feedback giving and receiving.

The use of technology in teaching and learning may increase interaction and collaboration (Choy & Quek, 2016), which is a key topic discused in the book. For example, Chapter 4 examines two experienced ESP lecturers' perceptions of managing interaction through zOOM. The participants believe that zOOM effectively prompt teacher-student interaction. In adition, they underscore the chllenges the face in effctively contlling interction in alaroom inn unstabl intt connections, difficulties n monitoring student engagement and insufficient management of student converations. To addres these challenges, the participants use divere interactive strateies, such as alocating time to questioning, intoducing relaxing actvities playing music before the class and designing polling for content revie. Chapter 11 explores four postraduate students views ofthe diffrence btween face-to-face and online teaching and learning in EMI classoom interaction, willngness o communicate and classroom enjoyment. The chapter reveals that online teaching and learning promotes more teacher-student interaction while reducing per interaction. It also discovers an increased wllingness tocommunicate in teacher-student interaction, but a decreased willingnes in peer interaction. Additioall, students hold mixed views of lassroom enjoyment. Chapter 13 investigates three pairs of Chinese EFL undergraduates' interactional patterns and mediating factors in video-conferenced collaborative writing tass viazoom. The reults show that students displa three distinct interactional patterns: authoritative/responsive, authoritative/participants, and collaboratie patterns. Students collabora tion is mediated by their perceived self- and peer-role, gaps between each other, mutual familiarity and video-based communication mode.

Two chapters introduce new concepts and usher in inovative thinking in online teaching and learning. In Chapter 7, the term the digital divide' is elucidated, fllowed by an exploration of is paradoxical relationship with inclusive education. The chapter further examines the background, use and contribution of educational television for foreign language instruction in Turkey. It concludes with recommendations for implementing educational television, aiming to change the current situation and support inclusive education in Turkey. Chapter 12 critically examines the notion of e-pedagogies, highlighting the large similarities in face-to-face and online in struction. By examining the reflctions of secondary schoo English Language teacher in Singapore, it unravels the true meaning of epedagogies, noting the shared pedagogical principles in both traditional and digital environments. This chapter underscores the importance of understanding the materialit in teaching practices and considering the interaction scenario mediated by technologies.

The other five chapters focus on participants' overall experiences when teaching and learning online. Chapter 3 delves into 32 Chinese undergraduates' challenges when lening an ESP course online and their use of resilience strateies. I shows students' social. psychological and academic challenges and their resiience in resolving technical issues, engaging in classroom interaction and managing emotions. This chapter concludes with recommendations to furtherassist students in addressing challenges,enhancing resilience and fostering future online learning. Chapter 5 investigates nine EAP teachers' experiences of using a blended-learning model, HyFlex. It unveils their negative perceptions of the HyFlex mode, highlighting their uncertainty and unpreparedness when using HyFlex. The chapter pinpoints the high necessty for teachers to improve digital competency and preparedness to use tools. It concludes with suggestions to improve student engagement and achievement when using HyFlex. Chapter 8 details two teacher educators expriences of online Enlish languag teacher ducation t discovers the challnges they face, inluding ow effctiveness of online lessons, difficulty in building and maintaining rapport, and low-level student atendance and engagement. To tackle the challenges, the participants employ various strategies, such as reorienting teaching sessions, contrasting teaching modes, and modeling group and pair discussion, strategies and other good practices online. This chapter finally summarizes the lessons the participants learn and provides suggestions for online teacher education. From the perspective of Activity Theory, Chapter 9 investigates the writing processes of two L2 secondary school writers in Hong Kong during a series of computer-assisted writing workshops. It unveils how the participants interact with mediation artefacts, including a system providing ideas to ass argumentative writing, L1 and L2, and workshop rules, and with other elements of the triadic model like writing rules and instructors. In contrast, they seldom interact with the elements of community and division of labor. Additionall, the participants' interaction with these artefacts and elements are driven by their needs, perceptions, and motives. Based on Bronfenbrenners Ecosystem Model, Chapter 10 unpacks two language teachers reactions, relearning and reflections as to online teaching at a university in Hong Kong. From the micro-, meso- and exo-system perspectives, the study reveals the challenges the participants face and thir ways to copy with new and online teaching situations, perceptions of university managers handling of the situation, and concerns for own abilities to online teaching.

The book has several strengths that make it worth reading and reviewing. One of its significant strengths is the clear structure among the majority of chapters. Each chapter reviews extant literature on a relevant issue, explores participants' experiences in technology-mediated courses with English medium instruction, and offers suggestions for further improvement. Such a consistent structure makes it easy to select chapters interested to read. Moreover, the book is characterized by diverse individual perspectives and thorough coverage of topics within EMI contexts. It incorporates the perceptions and perspectives of secondary and higher education teachers and learners from Asia and Europe. The challenges and strategies perceived by these individuals willoffer valuable insights into the implementation and enhancement of teaching and learning content and language online. inall, the book is valuable for its direct observations of practices in virtual classrooms, along with it creative approaches and practical suggestions to foster improvements. These observations, approaches and suggestions are especially beneficial for teachers in developing curriculum and managing clasroom activitie for effctive technology-mediated instuction. They can also serve as guidance for learners on improving self-study and achieving beter learning outcomes. As a whole, this book will asist teachers and learners in acquiring a profound and comprehensive understanding of technology in various EMI ontexts. In particular, a substantial portion of its chapters is situated in virtual EAP classooms and is therefore a useful tol for EAP teachers and learners to get acquainted with challenges and get equipped with knowledge and strategies for online teaching and learning.

Despite these trengths, it's crucial to note that the majority of its chapter ppear to fature mall sample size. It would be deal to involve a more extensive and diverse sample in some of these studies to enhance the generalizability of their research findings. Hopefully, the next edition wil include a signficant adition of such studies to further broden the cope and depth of topics related to online teaching and learning in various EMI contexts.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Weihong Chen: Writing - original draft Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Lawrence Jun Zhang: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

# Declaration of completing interest

There is no conflict of interests in this study.

# References

Chy .0 a blended course. Australasian Joumal of Educational Technology, 32(4), 106-124. https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.2500   
Ga,       i     19 Frontiers in Psychology, 11(49653), 1-14. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.549653

ehog    Ph  h t,  h  r tf F  st. r reeah interests include EFL students' digital reading, translanguaging and second language writing.

ed is    at        - W     , Youg  )  .  i r-in-hf f ier.  d  t ) 2016 with the award of $\scriptstyle 5 0$ at $5 0 ^ { \circ }$ , which acknowledged $\scriptstyle 5 0$ Outstanding Leaders around the world in the field of TEsoL". In the Stanford University Rankings 2022; 2023, he was listed in the top $2 \%$ of Scientists in the World in the disciplinary areas of Linguistics/Applied Linguistics/Educational Linguistics.

Weihong Chen, Lawrence Jun Zhang. School of Foreign Languages, Quanzhou Normal University, China Faculty of Education and Social Work, University of Auckland, New Zealand

Corresponding author. Faculty of Education and Social Work, University of Auckland, Auckland, 1023, New Zealand. E-mail addresses: bellaweihongchen@outlook.com (W. Chen), lj.zhang@auckland.ac.nz (L.J. Zhang).