The online version of this article can be found at: http://das.sagepub.com/content/20/2/223

# Additional services and information for Discourse & Society can be found at:

Email Alerts: http://das.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://das.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://das.sagepub.com/content/20/2/223.refs.html >> Version of Record - Mar 11, 2009 What is This?

# ‘Diversity’ as enacted in US immigration politics and law: a corpus-based approach

TAMMY GALES U N I V E R S I T Y O F C A L I F O R N I A , DAV I S , U S A

A B ST R A C T As a national institution, the law is held to be above prejudice and bias (Gibbons, 1994). However, in recent years, as public awareness of ‘homeland security’ has been heightened and borders have been tightened, the laws regarding immigration have come under close scrutiny. This article explores the language of immigration laws that target the notion of ‘diversity’ and the political contexts in which those laws were created. More specifically, it addresses the following questions: Is there prejudice or bias in US immigration laws? If so, from where do those negative ideologies arise? And, finally, what does ‘diversity’ actually mean in the context of US immigration? This analysis, which utilizes the tools of corpus and appraisal analysis, shows how contradictory positions surrounding the ideology of diversity exist within seemingly positive political discourses and demonstrates how those underlying judgements about diversity interact with and shape the very language of the laws that ensue.

K E Y W O R D S : appraisal analysis, corpus analysis, discourse analysis, diversity, immigration, law, politics, SFL

# Introduction

Today, as in the past, the United States is replete with diversity in all of its multiethnic, multilinguistic, and multicultural instantiations. Of the variety of sources that make up diversity in the USA, immigration is one of the most prominent (Schuck, 2003). According to the 2000 Census, the USA has 33 million foreignborn residents, with an additional 1 million immigrants arriving each year (Schuck, 2003). Of these, an average of 400,000 enter on legal permanent resident visas, which are issued according to guidelines that follow a system that was largely set in place in 1965 with the passage of the Immigration Act (US Department of State, 2007). This immigration legislation was a response to the increasing power of the civil rights movement, from which emerged an awareness of diversity – as opposed to assimilation – as an ideology of modernity.

Previous immigration legislation placed both quantitative and qualitative quotas on those seeking legal entrance into the USA, ensuring that during two-thirds of its history, the USA excluded a large majority of people from being able to immigrate or claim citizenship due to their race, nationality, gender (Schuck, 2003), or profession (Blommaert and Verschueren, 1998). Under this system, a xenophobic reaction to ‘Otherness,’ a category that included the uneducated and the poor (Bauman and Briggs, 2003), as well as ‘the vagrants, malefactors, and paupers’ (see Aleinikoff and Martin, 1991: 44), served to differentiate those who were deemed unworthy of immigrating to the USA from the powerful elite who had created the original immigration laws. With the passage of the Immigration Act in 1965, however, ideologies centered on the assimilation of and discrimination against ‘the Other’ were deemed ‘utterly unworthy of our traditions and our ideals’ (Kennedy, 1964/1997: 124).

Over the next 25 years, in an effort to balance diversity and equality in the American population, Congress sought to redress the racial bias in the immigration system by giving preference to family members of US citizens under a new family-sponsored category and to individuals with highly sought-after skills under the employment-based category (United States Code, 2004). In 1990, a new amendment created an additional category of immigration aimed at restoring ethnic and linguistic diversity. The newly created Diversity Visa reserved 55,000 visas out of approximately 400,000 for the ‘random’ selection and admission of individuals from low-admission countries (Gales, in press); this system is still a part of the current US code.

Many scholars and practicing professionals in law and politics claim that the Diversity Visa’s support of diversity is debatable (e.g., Aleinikoff and Martin, 1991; Schuck, 2003). The history surrounding the law is replete with its own discourses of discrimination and elitism (Gales, in press), and, indeed, as much current research on immigration demonstrates (e.g., Lakoff and Ferguson, 2006; Santa Ana, 1999, 2002), the notion of diversity in immigration is often buried under anti-immigration metaphor and sentiment, which is dispersed through the channels of mass media. The media’s continued dissemination of antiimmigration ideology has resulted in immigration as a holistic concept (i.e., illegal and legal immigration) being seen as problematic (Lakoff and Ferguson, 2006). When examining the notion of diversity in legal immigration in congressional reports, presidential addresses, and federal legislation, however, diversity, for the most part, appears to be presented in a positive light. Juxtaposing negative public sentiment with positive political and legal language raises the question: from where, then, does the negative ideology arise? My analysis, based on a Systemic Functional Linguistic approach (Halliday, 1978, 1985/1994), shows how contradictory positions surrounding the ideology of diversity exist within these seemingly positive political discourses and demonstrates how those underlying evaluations and judgements about diversity interact with and shape the very language of the laws that ensue.

# Genre

This article examines texts drawn from two broad genres: political language and legal language. I follow Martin and Rose (2003) in defining genres as types of texts that function in a predictable manner and are enacted in different social contexts. Furthermore, a genre ‘both unifies and stratifies language’ so that commonly shared linguistic and ideological features that unify texts within a genre also serve to stratify and exclude those that lack those features (Bakhtin, 1981: 288). In this sense, while political and legal language are separate genres with separate stylistic features, they are intimately connected in that they are both institutionalized varieties of language that, as a result of one enacting the other, serve much the same purpose in society (Bayley, 2004).

Within these two formalized, institutional macro-genres (Martin, 1997) are two collective sub-genres. The first is what Bayley (2004) calls parliamentary talk, which is composed of the elemental genres of, for example, political party language, full-session congressional debates, and committee hearings. These elemental genres within parliamentary talk represent the most institutionalized, formal varieties of political language (Bayley, 2004), while at the same time they possess a large amount of ‘semantic freewheeling’ in which politicians use semantically empty language to persuade and coerce their opponents to side with their position on an issue (Bourdieu, 1991).

The second sub-genre is more generically referred to as the language of law and is made up of such elemental genres as lawyer–client discourse, judicial discourse, and legislative legal language (Bayley, 2004). Legal language, as an institutional cornerstone that has the power to solidify and disseminate ideology (Bourdieu, 1991), is very formulaic and structured and is as highly ‘grammaticalized’ as any register of language can be (Martin and Rose, 2003: 201), but even within this broad genre, differences in optional elements, such as a short title and preamble, are found (Gibbons, 1994). In fact, each text type within these two larger genres has a generic structure framework, which postulates that within each genre is a set of obligatory and potential structural elements. These potential elements are important in that they serve as a resource for making meaning, which is instantiated differently in different social contexts (Gibbons, 1994; Hasan, 2003). While the study of the structure of political language has recently received far more attention (e.g., Fairclough, 2000; Gibbons, 1994; Miller, 2004), an investigation into the intersection of meaning-making potential in the genres of political and legal language is a relatively untouched field (Bayley, 2004). Further, when one overlays the various discourses seen as discussing or ‘debating diversity,’ a genre of public discourse in its own right (Blommaert and Verschueren, 1998), a completely new line of inquiry emerges that offers a bridge between the institutionalized rhetoric of politics and law and the ideologies of diversity that are transmitted through it. Therefore, in order to analyze the connection between the two macro-genres of congressional and legal language, as they both contribute to the meaning-making process of diversity, the corpus consists of texts from both genres.

# Theoretical framework

In order to understand diversity within the socio-historical context of our political and legal systems, it seems natural to begin with the most recently revised or created legislation as this specifies how diversity is officially represented and maintained in society. However, set against the historical backdrop of policies, amendments, and interpretations, it becomes clear that even over short periods of time, the law is not a static entity. It is fluid and ever-evolving, set at each stage within its own specific socio-historical context. The dialogic interplay of perceived social need and legislation continues as legislation is read, interpreted, and enacted – a cycle with endless iterations as in Mukarˇovský’ s classic model of semiotics. In approaching the legal process from ideology to application, we see a fully functional model embedded in the network of society, and ‘a truly functional model must also be a dialectical model’ (Gandelman, 1988: 266, quoting Mukarˇovský). And as the true meaning of a text lies not in the finished product that ‘holds still,’ but in the dialectic process of creation (Fabian, $1 9 9 0 ) \mathrm { - n o }$ one static text can be taken without referencing the fluidity of its history, social context, or accompanying discourses. Therefore, Halliday’s (1978) descriptive model of Systemic Functional Linguistics (1985/1994; hereafter, SFL) was chosen as the theoretical basis for this analysis for its perspective on language as a fluid social semiotic that allows legal language to be seen as fully functional dialogic language. It is from that perspective that legal and political language can be seen as co-constructing diversity as an ideology.

# SFL

Broadly speaking, SFL is a theory that views language as social practice, with its two fundamental tenets – that it is systemic and functional – encoded in three interconnected strata – grammar, discourse, and social context. Language is systemic in that grammar is seen as based on the notion of choice, represented by a seemingly endless set of options realized through discourse and set into a social context. Language is functional in that the social purposes for which it is utilized are reflected through the discourse in the internal grammatical structure of a language. Meaning as a part of the larger human experience is created through these two interwoven aspects of language. At the level of social context, SFL identifies three general functions for which we use language: ‘to enact our social relationships,’ ‘to represent our experiences to each other,’ and ‘to organize our enactments and representations as meaningful text’ (Martin and Rose, 2003: 6). These three functions are designated as the interpersonal, ideational, and textual metafunctions, respectively. My analysis focuses mainly on the interpersonal metafunction and the tools of Appraisal Analysis.

# APPRAISAL SYSTEMS

Appraisal (Martin and Rose, 2003) is a socially situated linguistic resource that construes interpersonal meanings of power and solidarity. It comprises three interwoven domains: attitude, engagement, and graduation. Attitude relates to the linguistic expression of emotional reactions, judgements of behaviors, and evaluations of things. Engagement deals with the linguistic ways in which speakers or writers position themselves towards the attitudinal value position being proposed in discourse and to the value position of their potential audience. This dialogic system (see, e.g., Bakhtin, 1981) allows authors to create alignment and solidarity with their audience by using language that expands the discourse to include other voices and opinions or, if the opposite effect is desired, to create distance from their audience by using language that contracts or closes the discourse, giving the speaker’s position more weight and finality. Finally, graduation refers to the linguistic means through which feelings are amplified or mitigated. Sources of graduation, including quantification, repetition, and intensification, have the effect of turning up or down the volume of an utterance. Each of these systems play into everyday conversation and text, but the notions of judgement, alignment, solidarity, and repetition are especially important when examining formalized political speeches, given with the purpose of creating solidarity within Congress and persuading the audience to align with the speaker’s stance, in order to solidify the political ideologies hidden in their agenda into law.

# Analysis

Discourse analysis examines the interplay of ‘language use, cognition, and interaction in their sociocultural contexts’ (Van Dijk, 1997: 32) and maintains an almost ‘exclusive focus on actually or naturally occurring talk and text’ (Van Dijk, 1997: 29). Large corpora, which support the study of authentic language (de Beaugrande, 1997), aid the analyst in looking for general prosodic patterns of language use, as well as complex ‘association patterns’ (Biber et al., 1998: 5). Therefore, my analysis begins with a corpus-based approach, focusing on global findings surrounding the notion of diversity, and then it moves to a detailed appraisal analysis of three text samples from within the corpus. Finally, the resulting analyses are examined against the background of the most recently ratified bills supporting Comprehensive Immigration Reform – S.2611 and H.R.4437 – from the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, in order to discern, if formally ratified by the President, how these new policies will shape the future of diversity in the USA.

# CORPUS-BASED APPROACH

My corpus of 225,000 words comprised texts taken from public US governmental records of legislative hearings, congressional sessions, committee reports, presidential speeches, drafts of proposed bills, and accepted legislation during 2005–2006. And while this corpus is not large enough to make a definitive statement about diversity as an ideology applicable to all its instantiations (Biber et al., 1998), the sample is adequately representative of the genres under investigation to offer a kind of ‘metonymic value’ (Miller, 2004) for the way diversity is construed today within congressional and legislative discourse.

Using MonoConc Pro for concordancing software, I performed a global search for diversity and its other parts of speech. Out of the 225,000 words, diversity was found a total of 402 times (with two instances of false matches). In other words, diversity had a frequency rate of 1.79 per 1000 words (as opposed to the British National Corpus in which diversity had a frequency rate of .014 per 1000 words. Not surprisingly, my corpus, which focused on diversity, had a higher rate of frequency).

The next step was to search for semantic prosodies, or linguistic features which cross clausal boundaries within a text (Louw, 1993; Stubbs, 2001), by performing a basic collocation frequency count. Since the early 1990s, it has been well documented that semantic or ‘discourse’ prosodies ‘express speaker attitude’ and are therefore a valuable resource when trying to uncover underlying ideologies present within discourse (Stubbs, 2001: 65). In the case of my corpus, one main pattern quickly emerged – a semantic prosody of negation. Discounting instances of function words such as ‘of, the, to,’ as well as semantically neutral content words such as ‘program, visa, immigrant,’ words containing implicit and explicit negation such as ‘not, so-called,’ and three derivatives of ‘discriminate’ were found to occur frequently within a range of $+ / - 2$ of diversity. Further searching resulted in instances of ‘nothing to diversify,’ ‘impossible to diversify,’ ‘so-called diversity,’ and ‘against diversity.’ Broadening that search to a range of $+ / - 5$ , in order to account for the high collocation rate of the previously mentioned neutral words, resulted in 94 instances of directly related negation, which included words (and their morphological variants) and their respective frequencies of: not (37), eliminate (11), no (9), abuse (7), discriminate (6), issues (6), offset (3), so-called (3), against (4), leave (3), less (2), nothing (2), and never (1). According to Hasan (2003), language itself has the potential to be used in ways that ‘re-write’ large portions of its own semantics. And, as language itself is not teleological, this potential is ideologically neutral. The process of re-semanticization becomes ideological in the ‘use’ of language, where it is ‘actualized in the living of life.’ This process, according to Bernstein (1990), is always ideological in that ‘both the production and reception of discourse are performed by socially positioned subjects’ (Hasan, 2003: 447). Therefore, the prosodic use of negation with diversity signals both a negative ideological stance in the social attitude towards diversity and the potential for a semantically implicit underwriting to the core meaning of diversity in the genres of politics and law.

As frequency information can present a biased perspective (Biber et al., 1998), I also looked for words with positive meanings within the same search parameters. In the initial collocation search of $+ / { - 2 , \mathrm { ~ I ~ } }$ did find four explicitly positive content words with the following frequencies: winners (8), trends (5), increase (5), and useful (4), offering 22 instances of potentially positive collocation. However, when looking at each of the larger contexts, as was done with the negative words, residual negative connotations were still found. For example, ‘winners’ collocated with ‘police records’ (2), ‘rejected’ (1), ‘fee levied on’ (1), and ‘surcharge imposed on’ (1). It was also found once in quotes to imply the opposite meaning, i.e. losers. ‘Trends,’ which typically has a positive stance, collocated through conjunction with ‘issues’ in three out of the five instances, giving it a more problematized meaning (Lakoff and Ferguson, 2006). ‘Useful’ was foregrounded in each instance by ‘anti-fraud investigations,’ and ‘increase’ followed ‘not’ in three out of the five instances as in ‘. . . will not increase diversity.’ Therefore, 16 out of the 22 initial instances of positive content words were collocated with negation, leaving a total of six actual positive collocations. Broadening the search to $+ / - 5$ yielded similar results in the overlapping patterns of negation.

While this analysis is relatively broad, the sampling selection is representative enough to show a negative attachment to the ideological use of diversity as related to immigration in these two genres. To view this claim more closely, the tools of appraisal analysis can be applied.

# APPRAISAL ANALYSIS

As the system of appraisal is best utilized when analyzing whole texts (Martin, 1997), I selected three complete texts from the congressional discourse genre to analyze. From the legislative genre, the two bills that were ratified by Congress are then examined against the resulting analyses with the intent of viewing diversity across genres as it is debated, drafted, and finally enacted.

# Congressional debate about diversity

To set the ideological tone regarding diversity in immigration, I have included a short excerpt from President Bush’s public address to the nation about comprehensive immigration reform that aired on national television a week before the first two congressional speeches below were made.

We must honor the great American tradition of the melting pot, which has made us one nation out of many peoples. The success of our country depends upon helping newcomers assimilate into our society, and embrace our common identity as Americans. Americans are bound together by our shared ideals, an appreciation of our history, respect for the flag we fly, and an ability to speak and write the English language. English is also the key to unlocking the opportunity of America. English allows newcomers to go from picking crops to opening a grocery, from cleaning offices to running offices, from a life of low-paying jobs to a diploma, a career, and a home of their own. When immigrants assimilate and advance in our society, they realize their dreams, they renew our spirit, and they add to the unity of America.

(Bush, 2006 – National Address, 15 May)

Keeping this excerpt in mind as a background to publicly promoted governmental opinion of diversity – or rather, assimilation – in immigration, the following analysis is better framed.

The first two short texts were analyzed using the resources of engagement and graduation in order to attempt to uncover each speaker’s underlying agendas and stances towards diversity. Both texts are official transcripts of previously prepared, formalized speeches given by senators during the meeting of the 109th Congress on 24 May 2006. Text 1 (following) was presented by Senator Cantwell (2006) from Washington in favor of amending the Diversity Visa Program to reserve 70 percent of those visas for immigrants with doctoral degrees in the fields of math and science, and Text 2 (below) was presented by Senator Kennedy (2006) from Massachusetts in response to Senator Cantwell’s proposal.

# Text 1

Mr. President, this amendment addresses the diversity lottery program. This is not the asylum program. This amendment is not the H-1B program. This is not the broad immigration program. This is the only program that was added to immigration legislation to try to get diversity from a number of countries that weren’t sending immigrants to the United States. This amendment simply says, for those immigrants coming from those countries, let’s try to get 70 percent of them to be of the education degrees – technology, math, science – that we need in the United States. That is a benefit to us because those are occupations and expertise which we need. It is also a benefit to those countries as these individuals gain expertise that can later be used in their countries.

I urge my colleagues to support this ‘best and brightest’ amendment but still leave diversity for these countries and diversity for those who are nonskilled as well.

# Text 2

Mr. President, in the time that the Senator from Washington has been in the Senate, I have never differed with her except on this one occasion I do.

We have 860,000 individuals who come here. They primarily come here from Asia or from South America. We have a diversity program to permit in 42,000 of the 8 million from around the world who apply for this program who otherwise would never have the opportunity to come here. We have increased the high-tech people by three times in this legislation – three times. All we are saying is America: diverse America, melting pot America. If these individuals come here, they have to have a high school diploma, they have to meet the security requirements, and they can’t be a burden on the State. That is just one feature of a very important immigration bill, but it has been an aspect and commitment of our Nation – diversity – since the history of this country. Let me point out the opposition: the Chamber of Commerce, National Association of Manufacturers, Business Roundtable, et cetera.

When looking closely at these texts, the underlying value position each speaker wishes to promote becomes clear. In Text 1, Senator Cantwell aligns herself with her amendment – that of requiring 70 percent of all diversity visa immigrants to hold a higher-level degree of education. She makes her alignment explicitly clear in her foregrounded use of ‘this amendment,’ which is found three times as seen in lines 1, 3, and 7 in Table 1 below, and the accompanying pronominal use of ‘this,’ also found three times in lines 2, 4, and 5.

Furthermore, she makes it clear that her position is the only one to consider, as she uses mostly contracting forms throughout her argument as seen in Table 1 lines 1–5, 7, and 9–10. Her use of contracting forms such as ‘this is not’ in line 2, ‘this amendment is not’ in line 3, and ‘that is a benefit’ in line 9 serve to assert her proposition as the only legitimate one in the argument by leaving no room for disagreement. The only three places she transitions into expansion, which opens the door to other perspectives, are when she commands her audience to agree with her in line 11 with ‘I urge my colleagues to support this . . .’, thereby acknowledging that some of her listeners might still hold other positions; where she switches from the contracting use of ‘this amendment simply says’ in line 7 to ‘let’s try to get’ in line 8, which serves first, to acknowledge the inclusion of herself in the goal of her amendment and second, to show that she is still open to the idea of diversity as a positive goal for immigration but that her amendment will ‘simply’ restrict it to 30 percent; and interestingly, where she entertains the possibility that this diversity program might not actually be doing what it claims to do – that of creating more diversity within the US population – by stating the diversity visa program is ‘the only program to try to get’ diversity in line 6. Because this is one of the core debates surrounding this issue, she plants the seed of doubt in her listeners’ minds that this program is not working towards its goal, and therefore, it is time to commit to her agenda – one which does not abolish the ideologically positive goal of diversity, but ‘simply’ restricts it.

TA B L E 1. Tokens of contraction and expansion in Text 1   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Engagement tokens</td><td>Contract! expand</td></tr><tr><td>1. Mr President, this amendment addresses</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td>2. This (amendment) is not</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td>3. This amendment is not</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td>4. This (amendment) is not</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td>5. This (amendment) is</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td>6. (the only program) to try to get (diversity)</td><td>expand</td></tr><tr><td>7. This amendment simply says</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td>8. (This amendment simple says) let&#x27;s try to get (70 percent)</td><td>expand</td></tr><tr><td>9. That (70 percent of them to be of the education degrees) is a benefit</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>It (70 percent of them to be of the education degrees) is also a benefit</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td>10. 11. I urge my colleagues</td><td>contract expand</td></tr></table></body></html>

She further clarifies her point with her repetition of ‘not’ when talking about other immigration programs as seen in lines 12–14 in Table 2 and the use of ‘only’ in ‘the only program to try to get diversity’ in line 15, all of which use force to downplay the previously mentioned and existing programs that do not focus on diversity in favor of her modified amendment.

Furthermore, she explicitly claims that her amendment will leave diversity for ‘these countries,’ the referent for which is ‘a number of countries that weren’t sending immigrants to the United States,’ and for ‘those who are nonskilled as well.’ By planting doubt as to the success of the existing program in bringing diversity into the USA, by listing the countries that should be diversified as those other than the USA, and by negatively tying together the ‘nonskilled’ in Table 2, line 23 with the notion of diversity, Cantwell makes her stance irrefutably clear – that diversity in its present failing state isn’t necessary for the USA. Her repeated use of connotatively positive, lexically intensified words, such as ‘expertise’ in lines 18 and 21 and ‘benefit’ in lines 17 and 20 towards the end of her speech, serves to forcefully re-emphasize the point that her generous program will leave the positive notion of diversity for other countries, while bringing these implicitly good attributes of the ‘best and brightest’ laborers that ‘we need’ to the USA.

In Text 2, Senator Kennedy takes a contrasting stance to that of Senator Cantwell when he claims that he has ‘never differed with her except on this one occasion . . .’. Then, in a manner similar to that of Cantwell, Kennedy makes his claim as if it were the only option possible by his frequent use of contracting declarations, as seen below in Table 3, lines 24–8 and 31–5.

However, because both senators cannot possibly be correct in their contradictory stances, Kennedy employs repetition as a form of graduation in how many times Congress has already increased the allowable number of highly skilled people – ‘We have increased the high-tech people by three times in this legislation – three times’ – which is offered to show that he sees the value of Cantwell’s proposal and is showing solidarity with her ideas, but that they have already been considered, and therefore, do not need to be considered again.

TA B L E 2. Tokens of graduation in Text 1   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Graduation tokens.</td><td>Up/down scale</td></tr><tr><td>12. not</td><td>down</td></tr><tr><td>13. not</td><td>down</td></tr><tr><td>14. not</td><td>down</td></tr><tr><td>15. only</td><td>down</td></tr><tr><td>16. simply</td><td>down</td></tr><tr><td>17. benefit</td><td>up</td></tr><tr><td>18. expertise</td><td>up</td></tr><tr><td>19. also</td><td>up</td></tr><tr><td>20. benefit</td><td>up</td></tr><tr><td>21. expertise</td><td>up</td></tr><tr><td>22. best and brightest&#x27;</td><td>up</td></tr><tr><td>23. non-skilled</td><td>down</td></tr></table></body></html>

TA B L E 3. Tokens of contraction and expansion in Text 2   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Engagement tokens</td><td>Contract/expand</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>24. Mr President ... I have never differed with her except on this one contract occasion I do.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>25. We have (860,000 individuals)</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>26. They (individuals) primarily come here</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>27. We have (a diversity program).</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>28. We have (increased high-tech people)</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>29. All we are saying is</td><td>expand</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>30. If these individuals come here</td><td>expand</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>31. They (individuals) have to have.</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>32. They (individuals) have to meet</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>33. They (individuals) can&#x27;t be a burden</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>34. That (one feature) is</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>35. ... but it (diversity) has been</td><td>contract</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>36. Let me point out.</td><td>expand</td></tr></table></body></html>

Also similar to Cantwell’s speech, Kennedy transitions into utterances of expansion three times as seen in lines 29, 30, and 36 in Table 3 – each of these is used to soften the hard position previously taken by Cantwell. By opening his utterances to expansion, Kennedy allows members of Congress to be a part of his side of the debate – that of recognizing the importance of diversity in American history. With his passionate plea of ‘All we are saying is . . .’ in line 29, he attempts to awaken the emotions of Congress as he includes them in his usage of ‘we,’ while showing that ’diversity’ is as natural a collocate with ‘America’ as the familiar ‘melting pot’ is (a discussion which is taken up shortly). This forceful plea comes full circle in his final repetition and dramatic alienation of the word ‘diversity’ after ‘our Nation’ that serves to remind his listeners that America is diversity, thereby reaffirming his stance with the audience. The next time he expands with ‘if these individuals come here’ in line 30, he suggests the possibility that these immigrants might not come here, which leaves the door open to debate whether we even need to worry about this issue of highly skilled immigrants. Finally, he also expands in his subtly poignant conclusion in line 36 when he commands the attention of Congress to recognize that there are voices from the community in opposition to his stance: ‘the Chamber of Commerce, National Association of Manufacturers,’ etc. While this voluntary mention of an opposing side could offer more power and authority to his opponent’s perspective, in this case, his understated closing serves another purpose – that of aligning the supposedly liberal Cantwell with organizations that possess a firm conservative slant. With this one rhetorical remark, Kennedy suggests to democratic Congress members, who might otherwise be tempted to align with Cantwell and her usually liberal ideologies, that on this topic, she is betraying traditional party values, which ultimately serves to strengthen Kennedy’s argument.

Beginning with Kennedy’s introductory statement countering Cantwell and concluding by implicating her in more conservative motives, he explicitly sets himself up as an opponent of her proposition. However, through this short speech, there are two specific ways in which he implicitly undermines his declared stance: by using more lexically neutral language to support his case and by using the discourse of the opposition when referring to diversity.

First, the lack of lexically intensified language becomes clear when comparing the lexical choice of Kennedy to that of Cantwell. When Cantwell nears her conclusion, she uses repetition and positive force, as seen in lines 17–22 in Table 2, to reiterate the fact that her bill will bring ‘expertise’ from the ‘best and brightest,’ which will be a ‘benefit’ to our country as well as to those sending them. Her use of positively infused vocabulary intensifies her point and adds strength to her argument. In comparison, at the conclusion of Kennedy’s speech, he chooses more lexically neutral terms to describe diversity such as a ‘feature of ’ the ‘very important immigration bill’ and an ‘aspect and commitment of ’ our nation. And while ‘very important’ puts diversity in a positive light, it is the only concluding phrase to possess any lexical intensity as seen in Table 4, line 44; therefore, it does not have the same level of semantic force as used by Cantwell, ultimately giving Kennedy’s argument less overall force and intensity.

TA B L E 4. Tokens of graduation in Text 2   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Graduation tokens</td><td>Up/down scale</td></tr><tr><td>37. never</td><td>down</td></tr><tr><td>38. never</td><td>down</td></tr><tr><td>39. three times</td><td>up</td></tr><tr><td>40. three times</td><td>up</td></tr><tr><td>41. all</td><td>up</td></tr><tr><td>42. can&#x27;t</td><td>down</td></tr><tr><td>43. just</td><td>down</td></tr><tr><td>44. very important</td><td>up</td></tr></table></body></html>

Second, what seems to be a more powerful force undermining Kennedy’s speech is his intertwining of ‘diverse America’ and ‘melting pot America.’ When referring to President Bush’s national address on immigration reform, the ideology of assimilation was foregrounded over that of diversification. The tone, then, set one week before the Senators gave their speeches in Congress, was one in which the ideology of the melting pot was publicly reiterated as one of assimilation, not diversification. Therefore, through the conflicting connotations behind this small but powerful pairing, Kennedy gave more power to Cantwell’s proposal by acknowledging the discourse of the opposition and linking the ideologies of diversity and assimilation.

In the end, Kennedy’s contradictory discourses and Cantwell’s use of contracting forms, expansion, and lexically charged vocabulary swayed enough members of Congress to pass bill S.2611 with a vote of 56 to 42. As seen in the portion of the bill below, the way in which section 508 was ultimately endorsed in Congress reflects Cantwell’s underlying position on diversity. Because of her influential discourse, part (e) of this bill, which was negotiated before the 110th Congress as an amendment to supersede the previous diversity visa program in section 203(c) of the US Code, renames the program to emphasize the addition of ‘Immigrants with Advanced Degrees’ and relegates diversity immigrants to 33 percent of the 55,000 annual visas as follows:

(e) Worldwide Level of Diversity Immigrants and Immigrants With Advanced Degrees: (1) Diversity Immigrants: The worldwide level of diversity immigrants described in section 203(c)(1) is equal to 18,333 for each fiscal year. (2) Immigrants With Advanced Degrees: The worldwide level of immigrants with advanced degrees described in section 203(c)(2) is equal to 36,667 for each fiscal year.

Immigrants in the advanced degree category, who are now segregated from the diversity category, are defined in the bill as: ‘Qualified immigrants who hold a master’s or doctorate degree in the life sciences, the physical sciences, mathematics, technology, or engineering from an accredited university in the United States, or an equivalent foreign degree . . .’. In her speech, Cantwell clearly segregated those with ‘degrees’ and ‘expertise’ from the ‘nonskilled,’ who were left in the category of diversity. This demarcation within the bill exactly mirrors her specified segregation. Furthermore, Cantwell specifically noted that these immigrants with education degrees in technology, math, and science would be a benefit to ‘the occupations and expertise which we need’ in the USA. According to part F(2)(B) of section 508, the Secretary of State along with the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Labor will be allowed to determine what skills are most anticipated to be of service to the economic security of the USA. By relegating this decision to these cabinet members who oversee US security, economy, and employment, economic gain and growth are foregrounded. The parallel ideological structures found in Cantwell’s discourse and the actual language of the Senate-ratified bill demonstrate the intimate flow of ideologies between the genres of congressional discourse and legal language.

# Congressional hearing about diversity

The third text was taken from a collection of formal speeches regarding the Diversity Visa Program presented to the Sub-Committee on Immigration, Border Security, and Claims during the 109th Congress. The portion of the text included here is a transcript of the testimony of Mark Krikorian (2005), Executive Director of the Center for Immigration Studies in Washington, DC.

SFL posits that ‘the secret of the activation of a linguistic meaning-wording conjunction is best sought in the context of culture’ (Hasan, 2003: 434). As mentioned in the corpus analysis, the frequent collocation of diversity with negative words seems to be activating an implicit meaning-wording conjunction for the socially situated ideologies surrounding diversity. Taking Krikorian’s speech as a representative sample of cultural embodiment, the way in which meaning is lexicogrammatically created becomes clear. Throughout his speech, Krikorian directly references diversity seven times, each of which seems to agree with the positive connotation awarded to diversity during the Civil Rights Era. Using the tools of appreciation to look at the value of diversity as an object and judgement to look at the normality of diversity in reference to the immigration population, the tokens all appear valuable and normal as seen in Table 5, lines 45–51.

However, in each of these instances, Krikorian foregrounds the positive attitudes with negative evaluations as can be seen in the wider context of the following text excerpt.

# Text 3

Despite its name, the diversity lottery has done nothing to diversify the immigrant flow. Mr. Morrison conceded that it is impossible for it to diversify the immigration flow. And yet that is the clear rationale for many people’s support of it. It can never be expected to diversify the flow . . . In fact, if you look at the existing immigrant population, the very time that the lottery has been operating, the existing immigrant population has been getting steadily less diverse.

Only a 30-, 40-, 50-fold increase in admissions under this program would make even a dent in the diversity of the immigration flow. And if national origins quotas are what this is about, we should just embrace them and stop pretending that we are trying to diversify the flow and institute open national origins quotas …

When analyzing attitudinal tokens such as these, it is helpful to differentiate grammatical negation (e.g., not happy) from morphological negation (e.g., unhappy) and to add those tokens to a textual analysis (Martin and White, 2005), which are seen in Table 6, lines 52–8.

The point is that when looking at each of these tokens associated with diversity, the use of grammatical negation as opposed to morphological negation allows the positively infused connotation of diversity to remain, which permits the speaker to maintain the necessary appearance of public support for diversity as a positive ideology (Bourdieu, 1991), while at the same time creating an overwhelmingly negative evaluation of diversity as an ideology. In this way, Krikorian is using the inherent evaluation of grammatical negation to begin the process of ‘re-writing’ or ‘hijacking’ of the long-established semantics associated with diversity as a positive ideology (Hasan, 2003: 438).

TA B L E 5. Tokens of attitude in Text 3   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Attitude token</td><td></td><td>Judgement Appreciation appraised</td><td>Person/thing being</td></tr><tr><td>45. the diversity</td><td></td><td>+ val</td><td>lottery</td></tr><tr><td>46. to diversify (the immigration flow)</td><td></td><td>+ val</td><td>visa lottery</td></tr><tr><td>47. to diversify (the immigration flow)</td><td></td><td>+ val</td><td>visa lottery</td></tr><tr><td>48. to diversify (the flow)</td><td></td><td>+ val</td><td>visa lottery</td></tr><tr><td>49. diverse</td><td>+ norm</td><td></td><td>immigrant population</td></tr><tr><td>50. the diversity of</td><td></td><td>+ val</td><td>immigration flow</td></tr><tr><td>51. to diversify</td><td></td><td>+ val</td><td>the flow</td></tr></table></body></html>

TA B L E 6. Tokens of attitude with grammatical negation in Text 3   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Attitude token</td><td>Judgement</td><td>Appreciation being appraised.</td><td>Person/thing</td></tr><tr><td>52. (despite its name) the diversity.</td><td></td><td>(neg) + val</td><td>lottery</td></tr><tr><td>53. (has done nothing) to diversify (the immigration flow)</td><td></td><td>(neg) + val  visa lottery</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>54. (impossible) to diversify</td><td></td><td>(neg) + val</td><td>visa lottery</td></tr><tr><td>(the immigration flow) 55. (never be expected) to diversify</td><td></td><td>(neg) + val</td><td>visa lottery</td></tr><tr><td>(the flow) 56. (getting less) diverse</td><td>(neg)</td><td></td><td>immigrant population</td></tr><tr><td>57. (make even a dent in)</td><td>+ norm</td><td>(neg) + val</td><td> immigration flow</td></tr><tr><td>the diversity of 58. (stop... trying) to diversify.</td><td></td><td>(neg) + val</td><td>the flow</td></tr></table></body></html>

Also semantically interesting is that the two instances of false matches mentioned in the corpus search above originated in this text. Keeping the pattern of negation $+$ value and negation $^ +$ normality in mind, both false matches were instances of ‘diversion’ that demonstrated how the present system for admitting immigrants is a ‘diversion’ for the state department and a ‘diversion’ of time and resources from the people who are trying to catch terrorists. As the word shares its root with diversity and is lexically infused with negativity, the effect it has on the text is one that can be viewed through the resources of graduation as intensifying the connotations already associated with the ideology of diversity in Krikorian’s text. Following Kachru (1986), Hasan found that in political discourse, this process or re-semanticization ‘only respects boundaries set by power and control on wealth’ and does not occur ‘through a slow process of change but through an intensity of use within a short period of time by those who can enforce their will’ (2003: 438). Hasan’s distinct mention of economic factors serves to remind us of how historically interconnected the ideology of diversity and political and economic factors have been in this country (Gales, in press), and Krikorian’s further mention of immigration as a ‘diversion’ of time and resources intensifies the connection to economic factors. By affixing negative connotations to the very core of diversity, the importance of the economy is again placed over that of diversity, relegating diversity to a place of low value in the eyes of those who hold the power over the economic health and wealth of the USA.

Finally, Krikorian’s speech demonstrates how the devaluation of diversity through the intense use of negation can become translated into the very language of federal legislation. Like the Senate, the House of Representatives ratified their own bill that focused on comprehensive immigration reform – H.R.4437: the Border Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal Immigration Control Act. However, unlike S.2611, which still allowed diversity to be represented by 33 percent of the visas, H.R.4437 completely eliminated diversity from all categories of immigration policy. Instead, section 1102, which is entitled ‘Elimination of Diversity Immigrant Program,’ reallocates the 55,000 visas previously reserved for diversity to family-based immigrants (INA, section 203a) and those of benefit to our economy (INA, section 203b). These representative attitudes towards diversity point towards a new definition of how politicians and law-makers will define and enact diversity in America – America, a land focused on assimilation and wealth.

# Conclusion

As these findings demonstrate, the implications for diversity in the USA are grim. Ultimately, the 110th Congress, while carrying on an intense debate over the two bills that had previously been passed in their respective governmental branches, rejected what would have been the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2007. However, the debate is far from over. In the coming years, the debate will continue and the fate of diversity within immigration, in whatever form it takes, will be drafted, ratified, and ultimately enacted as the new federal immigration law.

These analyses proved that congressional discourse does play an intimate role in shaping legal language. Both the implicit and explicit ideologies present in congressional discourse work towards the creation of laws, which are then legitimized, enforced, and disseminated through society. Furthermore, as can be seen both historically (Gales, in press) and in the analyzed samples of discourse, economic factors overshadow those of diversity, a theme which was taken up again on 7 March 2007, when Bill Gates, Chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, addressed a joint session of Congress with his perspective on the state of the US economy. In this speech, he stated that ‘our economic future is in peril’ and his main question to Congress, which resonates with the underlying ideologies of current immigration policy, was: ‘How do we create an immigration system that supports the innovation that drives American growth, economic opportunity, and prosperity?’ (Gates, 2007) – a question perfectly echoed in the previous discourses that demonstrate the strong teleological undercurrent in US immigration policy that is driven by the national economy.

The USA is a country that has been built by immigrants. Taking today’s present ideologies about immigration into consideration, though, it can be seen that the majority of immigrants – legal and illegal – are not being treated fairly in the present system. And while the actual Diversity Visa may not be doing its proper job in allowing as much diversity as its name professes, diversity, in all senses of the word, will be severely restricted or cut altogether if Congress is allowed to semantically re-write the meaning of diversity all in the name of national security, safety, and economy. If allowed to continue, the passage of these negative ideologies into Bourdieu’s ‘divine’ legal word, which has the ultimate power of bringing ‘into existence that which it utters’ (1991: 42), will only continue the vicious cycle of anti-immigration metaphor, sentiment, and policies of assimilation as opposed to those of diversification.

# R E F E R E N C E S

Aleinikoff, T.A. and Martin, D.A. (1991) Immigration: Process and Policy, 2nd edn. St Paul, MN: West Publishing Company.   
Bakhtin, M.M. (1981) ‘Discourse in the Novel’, in M. Holquist (ed.) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays by M.M. Bakhtin, pp. 259–422. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.   
Bauman, R. and Briggs, C.L. (2003) Voices of Modernity: Language Ideologies and the Politics of Inequality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Bayley, P. (2004) ‘Introduction: The Whys and Wherefores of Analysing Parliamentary Discourse’, in P. Bayley (ed.) Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Parliamentary Discourse, pp. 1–44. Philadelphia, PA: Benjamins.   
Bernstein, B. (1990) ‘Class, Modalities, and Reproduction’, in The Structuring of Pedagogic Discourse, Vol. 4: Class, Codes, and Control. London: Routledge.   
Biber, D., Conrad, S. and Reppen, R. (1998) Corpus Linguistics: Investigating Language Structure and Use. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Blommaert, J. and Verschueren, J. (1998) Debating Diversity: Analysing the Discourse of Tolerance. New York: Routledge.   
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.   
Bush, G.W. (2006) ‘Address to the Nation on Comprehensive Immigration Reform’, The White House. Available at: http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2006/05/20 060515–8.html (retrieved 1 February 2007).   
Cantwell, M. (2006) ‘Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2006’, Congressional Record. Available at: http://www.c-spanarchives.org/congress/?q $=$ node/77531&id $\underline { { \underline { { \mathbf { \Pi } } } } }$ 7460516 (retrieved 1 December 2006).   
de Beaugrande, R. (1997) ‘The Story of Discourse Analysis’, in T. van Dijk (ed.) Discourse as Structure and Process, pp. 35–62. London: Sage.   
Fabian, J. (1990) Power and Performance: Ethnographic Explorations through Proverbial Wisdom and Theater in Shaba, Zaire. Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin Press.   
Fairclough, N. (2000) New Labour, New Language? London: Routledge.   
Gales, T. (in press) ‘The Language Barrier between Immigration and Citizenship in the US: Linguistic Discrimination at Work, at School, and at Home’, in G. Extra, M. Spotti and P. van Avermaet (eds) Language Testing, Migration and Citizenship: Cross-National Perspectives. London: Continuum.   
Gandelman, C. (1988) ‘The Dialectic Functioning of Mukarˇovský’s Semiotic Model’, in Y. Tobin (ed.) The Prague School and its Legacy in Linguistics, Literature, Semiotics, Folklore, and the Arts, pp. 265–73. Philadelphia, PA: Benjamins.   
Gates, B. (2007) ‘US Senate Committee Hearing on Strengthening American Competitiveness’. Available at: http://www.microsoft.com/Presspass/exec/billg/speeches/2007/ 03–07Senate.mspx (retrieved 8 March 2007).   
Gibbons, J. (1994) ‘Language and Disadvantage before the Law’, in J. Gibbons (ed.) Language and the Law, pp. 195–8. New York: Longman.   
Halliday, M.A.K. (1978) Language as a Social Semiotic: The Social Interpretation of Language and Meaning. London: Edward Arnold.   
Halliday, M.A.K. (1985/1994) An Introduction to Functional Grammar. London: Edward Arnold.   
Hasan, R. (2003) ‘Globalization, Literacy, and Ideology’, World Englishes 22(4): 433–48.   
Kachru, B. (1986) ‘The Power and Politics of English’, World Englishes 5(2): 121–40.   
Kennedy, E. (2006) ‘Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2006’, Congressional Record. Available at: http://www.c-spanarchives.org/congress/?q $=$ node/77531&id $\underline { { \underline { { \mathbf { \Pi } } } } }$ 7460520 (retrieved 1 December 2006).   
Kennedy, J.F. (1964/1997) ‘A Nation of Immigrants’, in N. Capaldi (ed.) Immigration: Debating the Issues, pp. 124–8. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.   
Krikorian, M. (2005) ‘Testimony of Mark Krikorian’, Diversity Visa Program Hearing before the Subcommittee on Immigration, Border Security, and Claims, 109th Congress. Available at: http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/judiciary/hju21780.000/ hju21780_0f.htm (retrieved 1 December 2006).   
Lakoff, G. and Ferguson, S. (2006) ‘The Framing of Immigration’, Rockridge Institute. Available at: http://www.rockridgeinstitute.org/research/rockridge/immigration/ view? searchterm $\underline { { \underline { { \mathbf { \Pi } } } } }$ immigration (retrieved 30 November 2006).   
Louw, B. (1993) ‘Irony in the Text or Insincerity in the Writer? The Diagnostic Potential of Semantic Prosodies’, in M. Baker, G. Francis and E. Tognini-Bonelli (eds) Text and Technology: In Honour of John Sinclair, pp. 157–76. Philadelphia, PA: Benjamins.   
Martin, J.R. (1997) ‘Analysing Genre: Functional Parameters’, in F. Christie and J.R. Martin (eds) Genre and Institutions, pp. 3–39. London: Continuum.   
Martin, J.R. and Rose, D. (2003) Working with Discourse: Meaning Beyond the Clause. New York: Continuum.   
Martin, J.R. and White, P.R.R. (2005) The Language of Evaluation: Appraisal in English. New York: Palgrave.   
Miller, D.R. (2004) ‘“Truth, Justice, and the American Way”: The Appraisal System of Judgement in the US House Debate on the Impeachment of the President, 1998’, in P. Bayley (ed.) Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Parliamentary Discourse, pp. 271–300. Philadelphia, PA: Benjamins.   
Santa Ana, O. (1999) ‘“Like an Animal I was Treated”: Anti-Immigrant Metaphor in US Public Discourse’, Discourse & Society 10(2): 191–224.   
Santa Ana, O. (2002) Brown Tide Rising: Metaphors of Latinos in Contemporary American Public Discourse. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.   
Schuck, P. (2003) Diversity in America: Keeping Government at a Safe Distance. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.   
Stubbs, M. (2001) Words and Phrases: Corpus Studies of Lexical Semantics. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.   
United States Code (2004) ‘Worldwide Level of Immigration (Sec. 1151)’. Available at: http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname $: =$ browse_usc&docid $\underline { { \underline { { \mathbf { \Pi } } } } }$ Cite:+8USC1151 (retrieved 14 December 2006).   
US Department of State (2007) ‘Diversity Visa Lottery 2007 (DV-2007) Results’. Available at: http://travel.state.gov/visa/immigrants/types/types_1317.html (retrieved 4 January 2007).   
Van Dijk, T. (1997) ‘The Study of Discourse’, in T. van Dijk (ed.) Discourse as Structure and Process, pp. 1–34. London: Sage.

TA M MY G A L E S is a PhD candidate in the Linguistics Graduate Group at the University of California, Davis. She has a background in lexicography and corpus development and analysis. She has also taught English, German, and English as a Second Language at the secondary and college levels at multiple locations around the USA and in Greece. Her current research interests integrate corpus analysis and appraisal analysis to address topics of language and the law as they pertain to diversity in the United States, and forensic linguistic questions concerning the nature of threatening communications in contemporary American society. A D D R E S S : University of California at Davis, Linguistics Department, Sproul Hall, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA. [email: tgales@ucdavis.edu]