Book review

Multimodal Composing in K-16 ESL and EFL Education, Dong-shin Shin, Tony Cimasko, Youngjoo Yiortuno (Eds.). Springer, Singapore (2021). p. 228 pp edited by

With the advances in and widening acess to technologies, contemporary communication and meaning construction are not just limited to traditional monomodal form; on the contrary, it i multimodal. The growing prominence of multimodal communication and meaning-making has reconceptualized writing as multimodal composing, which engages writersto create and communicate meaning through a combination of semiotic modes such as word, image, sound, and video. Writers have become more involved in multimodal composing tasks for different purposes and audiences, whatever their language backgrounds and educational levels. Therefore, multimodal composing has become an expanding area of inquiry in TESOL, applied ingusics, and related fields (e.g., iteracy ed. ucation) (Jiang et al., 2022). Copious multimodal composing research has primarily been conducted in L2 contexts (Harman & Shin, 2018; Smith et al, 2017). Relatively lttle importance has een givento multilinguals multimodal composing in mulilingual contexts. A comprehensive investigation of multilinguals multimodal composing in multilingual contexts is necessary to facilitate multilin guals language and literacy development. With an emphasis on U.S.K-16 ESL setigs and EFL settings, this volume makes in-depth and critical explorations f the current ste of multimodal composing and literacies (focusing on English language learners' language and literacy development) and provides theoretical, methodological, and pedagogical implications for the teaching and learning of multimodal composing for multilingual learners.

This volume consists of 11 chapters, as wellas a prologue and epilogue written by the editors. In the prologue, the editors present key social semiotic concepts of multimodal composing. They proceed with an overview of current theoretical, methodological, and pedagogical issues in investigating multimodal composing in multilingual teaching and learning contexts.

The 11 chapters icuss a variety of topics on researching multimodal writing and its praxis in multilingual contexts across various educational lels including elementar, secondary, and tertiary ESL/EFL classrooms. Included in the 11 chapters are nine empirical studies and two theoretical and methodological reviews. The nine empirical studies elucidate various aspects of multimodal composition such as the nature, engagement, affordances, constraints, and pedagogical implications of multilinguals' multimodal composing. Two reviews addresstheoretical and methodological isues in ths line f reearch. The 11 chapter are tructured into four parts: Part I, Theoretical and Methodological Isue in Researching Multimodal Composing; Part I, Multilingual Writers Engagement with Multimodal Composing; Part II,Affordances and Constraints of Multimodal Composing Multilingual Contexts; and Part IV, Pedagogical Isues Concerning Employing Multimodal Composition Pedagogy. The first three parts are composed of theoretical and methodological chapters that provide scholarly readers in the fields of TEsOL, applied linguistics, literacy studies, and teacher education with a broader knowledge regarding research methodologies to gain a more comprehensive understanding of various aspects of multimodal composing in multilingual ontexts. The last part is intended primarily for teachers and teacher educators who may be looking for information about praxis in multimodal composing and literacies for their K-16 curricula.

Part I (Chapters 1 and 2) introduces primary theories and methodologies that analyze, describe, and/or evaluate the multimodal composing of L2/multilingual writers. In Chapter 1, Sun, Yang, and Silva trace the intellectual rots of multimodality and review the historical development of multimodality in an increasingly globalized multilingual world by discussing the concept of multimodality in L2/multilingual writing. To respond to the increasing complexity of multilingual language learning and use, the authors argue that multimodality in L2 writing should be examined based on the concept of "transmodality" (Hawkins, 2018) to better understand \*the negotiability, permeability, and fluidity of the boundaries among language and other modalities in meaning-making" (p. 3). This concept challenges the traditional asumption of a monolingual writing norm and emphasizes that multiple modes are intertwined as a dynamic synergy to construct meaning.

Chapter 2, authored by Yi, Shin, Cimasko, and Chen, describes major methodological approaches that have been used to conduct multimodal composing research. This chapter begins with a brief introduction of the four dominant theoretical frameworks that have been frequently employed in multimodal composing research in TEsOL and applied linguistics. These theoretical frameworks are social semiotics, systemic functional linguistics, multilitracies, and sociocultural theory. The discussion in Chapter 2 is a review of various methodological designs that have been adopted in multimodal composing research, such as case studies, ethnography, action research, design-based research or design experiments, mixed methods research, and quantitative research. When introducing the research designs, the authors not only demonstrate how the various analyses drew on different theoretical and analytical frameworks that have been conducted in multimodal composing research, but also provide specific examples of how to analyze the data. The authors advocate for more mixed methods research and other approaches beyond qualitative methods in the field.

Part I contains three chapters. These chapters investigate the process and products of multilinguals' multimodal composing from a social semiosis perspective and a systemic functional linguistic approach. Thee chapters also llustrat the multifaceted complexit of multimodal and multilingual meaning-making proceses. In Chapter 3, Zhang, Harman, Aghasafari, and Delahunty investigate how multilingual learners in a mixed-level high school ESL clasroom in the Unite States responded to a multimodal curriculum informed by design-based research (DBR) and systemic functional linguistics (SFL) approaches. Through analysing the learners' wrten text, drawings, peformance (recordings of classroom interaction), and art desigs, the findings reveal the trengths and chllenges in using the curriculum to support multilingual learners in multimodal composing as they grapple with globalization and immigration issues. While the curriculum provided leaners with various semiotic resources which enabled them to use creative, critical, and intertextual ways to express their insights and lived experiences with complex social isues, it was hard to balance disciplinary knowledge and literacy development and to use multi-semiotic resources appropriatly. This chapter demonstrates that DBR helps to put high-level theories such as SFL and multimodality into practice. The authors call for refining embodied teaching and learning approaches with multilingual learners.

Chapter 4, authored by Davila and Susberry, presents a qualitative study conducted in ESL clasrooms in a United States high school. The authors investigate the processes through which adolescent newcomer English learners (ELs) collaboratively used various semiotic resources during their creation of multilingual and multimodal identity texts for civic learning and engagement. These learners' various writen works (worksheets, screenplay, and poster, as well as field notes and recordings of classroom interaction, were analyzed. It was found that using multiple semiotic toos in collaborative writing allowed these learners to use and negotiate various semiotic resources to foster transnational civic identitie acros multiple and global setigs. This chapter reals the dynamic relationships among identity formation, translingual practice, and civic engagement in an increasingly interconnected and digital world.

In Chapter 5, Park investigates how 78 undergraduate ESL students at several American universities utilized and orchestrated multiple semitic modes to ompose reflective multimodl leter addressing ther utur les in their first-yar composition course. After conducting a multimodal discourse analysis and a content analysis on the multimodal videos produced by these students, these students were found to use multiple modes (i.e, language, sound, and image), language as a primary mode, and language-image intermodal relations to describe their literate lives and future aspirations. This chapter illustrates the influence of multimodal projects on meaningful connections between school assgnments and out-of-school lives, and students' growing awareness of a future possible self.

Part II (Chapters 6-8) examines the affordances and constraints of multimodal composition in multilingual contexts for learner agency. In Chapter 6, Liaw and Accurso present a year-long ethnographic study on the influence of afifth-grade teacher's critical multilingual/multimodal composition pedagogy on her Chinese-English dual immersion students in the United States in terms of meaning-making proces, identity construction, and textual production when producing multilingual/multimodal compositions. Based on a grounded analys f interview and observation data combined with a multimodal discourse analysi of student texts, the findings suggest that this pedagogy provided students with a more dynamic text production process in which they were able to draw on a wider range of semiotic resources and experiences to make meaning. Aditionally, students were sulied with opportunities to construct and formulate wider range of meanings and identities in the literacy classoom. This chapter indicates an important need to reframe literacy.L2 teachers and literacy researchers who wish to take up critical multilingual/multimodal composing pedagogy need to shift from viewing writing as a product to a process of multimodal assembling and composing.

In Chapter 7, Smith, Malova, and Amgott describe their qualitative study of 98 10th-grade bilingual students' perspectives on multimodal composition when participating in three multimodal instructional units in an English Language Arts (ELA) clas at a U.S. high school. Based on an analysis of desin intrviews, wrien reflections, and vido observations, the authors dentified that students displayed overwhelming perspectives on the affordances of multimodal composing, along with some common constraints, when they were asked to communicate through multiple modes. The main affordances of multimodal composing discussed by the students were conceptualizing through visuals and sounds; expressing meaning creatively through multiple modes; expressing identities through multiple modes; and contextualizing literature by traversing networks of hyperlinked multimedia and informational websites. Stu. dents encountered several constraints including various technical isues and difficulty in selecting the perfect mode to encapsulate their ideas. They also had limited time to complete their digital projects and experienced challenges in condensing each group member's designs into one final project and had difficulty accurately expressing their intended ideas with multile modes. Building on these perspectives, the chapterillustrates the importance of providing suficient intruction to scaffold students multimodal composing process when integrating digital multimodal composing into the multilingual classroom.

In Chapter 8, Tseng provides an in-depth investigation of how multimodal composing tasks facilitated learning transfer to assist four pre-service Taiwanese EFL teachers as L2 writers' reflective writing and acquisition of the reflection genre. The participants multimodal texts, drafts of their reflection papers, learning journals, and interview responses were analyzed based on theories of multimodalit, transfer frameworks of analyzing inter-semiotic complementarity, and reflection writing. The findings reveal that inter-semiotic relations between multimodal composition and genre writing may contribute to the learning transfer of genre knowledge. This chapter demonstrates the potential benefits of the multimodal-design approach for academic genre teaching and writing practices.

The last part, Part IV (Chapters 9-11), is about the pedagogical enhancement of multimodal composition, namely how multimodal composing curcula can be integrated into all clases. In Chapter 9, King examines a multilingual second-grade teacher's pedagogical strategies that scaffolded and supported the second- and third-grade students throughout the composition proces at a French-English dual language immersion school in the United States. Additionall, the author explores the choices that these students made in their design processes to increase their awareness of communicative intent and meaning-making as they engaged in a multilingual multimodal composition project on How to Make the World a Better Place'. The findings suggest that the teacher utilized SFL, genrebased pedagogy, and translanguaging to scaffold the students awarenes of communicative intent and meaning-making. The students made various choices throughout the composition proceses inthe development of their projects. Throughout the design process and during the proposal presentations, the role of the audience influenced the pedagogical decisions and students' medium and mode selections. This chapter ilustrate the importance f a genre-based approach under the guidance of FL asa caffld for multimodal writing and pedagogy.

In Chapter 10, Sultana and Turner explore pedagogical ssues i terms of employing multimodal writing pedagogy in L2 classrooms by reporting two case studies of multimodal texts composed in two different settings. The first case study involves an author' critical examination of eight graduate students' multimodal media productions about social justice issues at a large public university in the United States. The author of the second study conducted an ethnographic doctoral study of multimodal media production by urban middle schoo students in the United States. These studies were conducted to investigate the impacts of multimodal textual composition on in-school and out-of-schoo literacies and the potential tensions for integrating multimodal composing into classroom practices. The findings demonstrat that the use of multimodal text production in classrooms was an effctive pedagogical tool that empowers learners with target language skils, content knowledge, and critical media litracy for social transformation. Several pedagogical constraints for integrating multimodal composing ino classoom practices include a lack of effective assessment tools, skeptical perceptions towards multimodal composing, limited time for producing multimodal texts, students' limited acces to digital tools, and teachers' lack of training in employing multimodal pedagogy. This chapter contributes to enhancing educators' and teachers' understanding of pedagogical, which they find helpful in executing multimodal pedagogy in L2 classrooms.

In Chapter 11, Gilland, Galdames, and Villalobos Quiroz present a qualitative study that discusses how a teacher educator developed a blog assignment to support 21 s-year L1 Spanish students in a Chilean university EFL course in learning to compose multimodal texts of problem-solution narratives. They analyzed the students' collboratively written multimodal blog posts and accompanying comments. The findings show that the cllaborative multimodal blog posts fostered student' embodied experiences, development of voice, and investment i their writing processes. Students ook advantage of the affordances of the blog gere to design image-rich descriptions of outings, writing posts in a unified voice and commenting from their perspectives. These findings shed further light on how to implement multimodal activities in language-learning contexts.

This volume concludes with an epilogue. The editors first discuss al the chapters in terms of expanded theoretical and methodological frameworks and contributions to multilinguals multimodal composing. The editors submit that conducting multilingual research on multimodal writing expands the theoretical and methodological frameworks of current research studies and enhances multilingual writers' engagement in multimodal composing. These chapters make contributions to enhancing the understanding of multimodal meaning-making, multimodal affordances for language development, and innovative multimodal pedagogy and teacher knowledge. Furthermore, the editors point to future directions for researchers, practitioners, and teacher educators who wish to transform L2 writing education for the multimodal compositio of multilingual, based on the findings and limitations from reported research and discussions in this volume. They also present theoretical, methodological, and pedagogical implications for multimodal writing research and pedagogy..

The core strength of this volume lies in five aspects. Firstly, this volume highlights the importance of developing multilingual writers' linguistic and non-linguistic semiotic repertoire. Although non-linguistic modes have not been acknowledged as much as linguistic modes, they are as important as linguistic modes in L2 writing research and pedagogy. This volume attaches importance to enhancing non-linguistic and linguistic mode awareness by delving into language and metalanguage development through multimodal composition. Another strength revealed in this volume is exploring the processand product of multilinguals multimodal composing in empirical or conceptual reearch. Thirdly, this volume critically examines and discuse ssues concerning the assessment of multIinguals multimodal composing, which has been one of the most challenging and criticl isues in L2 writing research and pedagogy. These issues include what, how, and when to assess.In terms of what to asess, the chapters report the assessment of multimodal products, particularl focusing on the assessment f written language. As to how toassess the formative asessment method (Chapter 10) was employed to evaluate multilinguals multimodal composing. Regarding when to assess the chapters report final ssessment (Chapters 5 and 11) for measuring multimodal composing. Fourthly, this volume provides valuable insights for enhancing multimodal pedagogy to teach multimodal composing and for developing teacher knowledge of other semiotic modes beyond language and pedagogical knowledge that teachers can use in their instruction. Lastly,different from existing books, this volume brings together theory, research finding, and practice on multimodal composing, which broadens the agenda for L2 writing research and pedagogy.

This volume is not without shortcomings. This volume aims to present various aspects of multimodal composing to global aud. ences. The research contexts represented in the chapters were mostly situated in the United States. Furthermore, the majority of studies examine multimodal composing processes and products with qualitative short-term case studies. To beter understand the complexity of multilinguals' multimodal composing, Ionger-term studies with mixed methods and other approaches beyond qualitative methods are clearly one of the most important ways to expand the research methodology of multimodal reaching and teaching.

In conclusion, this volume presents the complexities of multimodal composing across K-16 multilingual teaching and learning contexts from multilingual perspectives. It clarifies the key ssues related to multimodal writing research and pedagogy. Moreover, it expands the boundaries of current research on multimodality and multimodal composing through a collection of empirical and conceptual studies. This volume is highly recommended to a wide audience. I i beneficial for scholars in TEsOL, applied inguistics second language studies, language education, literacy studie, and teacher education. It serves as a useful resource for teacher educators who are working on implementing multimodal composing and literacy pedagogy in their ESL or EFL class. This volume expands the knowledge base on multimodality and multilingual writing for current and prospective graduate students.

# Funding

This work was supported by Humanities and Social Sciences Youth Foundation of Ministry of Education of China (Grant number 23YJC740025). This work was supported by Jiangsu Province Education Scientific Planning Project (Grant number C/2023/01/140).

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Qiaoya Huang: Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Liping Chen: Writing - review & editing.

# References

Haman,  hi, . (2018) mdl an cnt-ad ita: Atie igllr ee chol. nG. ari, . ge s.) Handook of Research on Pedgogies and Cultural Considerations for Young English Language Leamers (pp. 217-238). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.   
Hins 018 a  r i.  1) 5/g 10.1093/applin/amx048   
Jig ,   (0 ors   i  th t practice. Journal of Second Language Writing, 57, Article 100869. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2022.100869   
Smith,  ho   d. 017)mg Bil  p ing c  d . Second Language Writing, 36(2), 6-22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2017.04.001

Qioya ,  k  f F   e, t.   dens iterature, multilingual and multi-literacy development, and second/foreign language acquisition.