# Comparing L1 and L2 organizational patterns in the argumentative writing of Japanese EFL students

Keiko Hirose

Faculty of Foreign Studies, Aichi Prefectural University, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1198, Japan

# Abstract

The relationship between first language (L1) and second language (L2) writing has attracted the attention of L2 writing researchers. Recent studies have pointed to not only differences but also similarities between L1 and L2 writing. The present study compared L1 (Japanese) and L2 (English) organizational patterns in the argumentative writing of Japanese EFL student-writers. The study made within-subject comparisons of L1 and L2 compositions in terms of organizational patterns, organization scores, and overall quality. Student perceptions of L1 and L2 organization were also investigated by incorporating their comparisons of their own L1/L2 compositions into the analysis. The results revealed that (a) a majority of students employed deductive type organizational patterns in both L1 and L2; (b) despite similarities between L1 and L2 organizational patterns, L2 organization scores were not significantly correlated with L1 organization scores; (c) L2 composition total and organization scores differed significantly from those of L1; and (d) some students evidenced problems in organizing both L1 and L2 texts. Possible implications of the results are discussed as they pertain to research, pedagogy, and the dispelling of stereotypes about Japanese and English rhetoric.

$©$ 2003 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Argumentative writing; Contrastive rhetoric; EFL; Japanese students; L1 writing; L2 proficiency; L2 writing; Organizational patterns; Rating scales; Self-report data

The present study investigated the relationship between Japanese students’ first language (L1) and second language (L2) writing in terms of organization. Previous contrastive rhetoric research involving Japanese writers has found mixed results concerning organization. On the one hand, Japanese is claimed to have distinct organizational patterns from English (e.g., Hinds, 1983, 1990). On the other hand, some studies cast doubts on such claims (Kubota, 1992, 1998b). Is there any characteristic of text organization specific to Japanese writing? It is often argued that in opinion-stating essays Japanese writers are hesitant to take a position initially, and the reader has to wait for the writer to state his/her position until the final part of the text (e.g., Oi, 1986). This tendency to postpone one’s main point until a later position has been found not only in student texts but also in those written by professional writers. Based on his analysis of the column tensei jingo (Vox Populi, Vox Dei) from the Asahi Shimbun, one of the major Japanese newspapers, Hinds (1990) characterized Japanese organizational pattern as ‘‘quasi-inductive.’’ Similarly, Maynard (1996) analyzed 38 opinion columns from the same newspaper and suggests that Japanese is ‘‘bottom-heavy’’ in the sense of sentence, paragraph, and the whole text. Reviewing the findings of contrastive rhetoric studies on English and Japanese, Kubota (1998a) concluded that ‘‘one feature commonly identified by researchers as a characteristic of Japanese writing is ‘induction’ ’’ (p. 478).

Such a ‘‘bottom-heavy’’ tendency has been also observed in L2 English texts written by Japanese learners of English. Contrastive rhetoric studies have found that Japanese EFL students tend to employ the specific-to-general (inductive) organization, whereas American L1 students are more inclined to use the generalto-specific (deductive) organization in English (e.g., Kobayashi, 1984; Oi, 1984). However, deductive patterns were also reported to be employed by L2 Japanese writers. Kobayashi (1984) found many Japanese EFL university students used the specific-to-general organizational pattern, whereas advanced Japanese ESL students studying in the U.S. tended to favor the general-to-specific pattern. Oi (1984) also found that just over half of the Japanese EFL students writing in L2 had a preference for the general-to-specific organization, although American university students showed a stronger preference for this pattern. Drawing on 130 English expository compositions written by intermediate and advanced Japanese students in the U.S., Achiba and Kuromiya (1983) discovered that linear (deductive) rhetorical patterns $( 3 4 \% )$ were most frequently employed, followed by circular and inductive patterns $( 2 7 \% )$ . These previous studies suggest that L2 Japanese students with some L2 writing experience or a certain English proficiency level may tend to use the organizational pattern that many studies have identified as the preferred L1 English one.

The transfer of organizational patterns from L1 to L2 has been a controversial issue. Some argue that L2 organization reflects that of L1, whereas others claim that poor L2 organization manifests only a developmental problem rather than L1 transfer (Mohan & Lo, 1985). We cannot discuss student L2 organizational patterns without taking into consideration student L1 and L2 writing background in terms of writing conventions, instruction, and experience, as well as L2 proficiency level. Thus, in this paper, Japanese students’ writing background is dealt with before a review of previous findings on the L1/L2 writing relationship.

Regarding L1 writing conventions, the ki-shoˆ-ten-ketsu pattern has often been used to characterize Japanese writing. According to this pattern, the writer introduces the topic in $k i$ , develops the topic in shoˆ, then makes a transition in ten, and finally concludes the topic in ketsu. Most Japanese are familiar with this writing pattern. However, there is no definitive interpretation of the pattern (Kubota, 1998a). It was originally derived from a Chinese poetry form, and some claim the pattern should be restricted to literary writing because it is most appropriate for writing that attempts to move or appeal emotionally to readers (e.g., Kinoshita, 1990). Nevertheless, this organizational pattern can be applied to many genres of writing. In argumentative writing, for example, the writer states his/her position $( k i )$ , gives supporting reasons for the position $( s h \hat { o } )$ , introduces a counter-argument and opposes it with further reasons (ten), and restates the position (ketsu). This use of the ki-shoˆ-ten-ketsu in argumentative writing is actually exemplified in high school Japanese writing textbooks (e.g., Oˆ oka et al., 1998). Of the four sections, the ten, which is believed to make an abrupt transition in the development of the argument, has attracted the most attention (e.g., Hinds, 1983), because it is considered alien to English organizational patterns. However, the ten section in argumentative writing can be regarded as a development of the discussion from a different viewpoint from that of the writer to further justify his/her position. In this light, the transition may not be alien but even acceptable to L1 English readers. This view of the ki-shoˆ- ten-ketsu pattern may indicate the possibility of similar rhetorical structures in argumentative writing between Japanese and English, although this certainly requires further investigation.

In regard to L1 writing instruction, Japanese students do not generally receive any formal L1 expository or academic writing instruction at any level of Japanese education. They have the most writing experience in expressive writing (writing about their experiences in journals/diaries), summaries and kansoˆbun (personal impressions) of materials read, and the least in expository and argumentative writing at school (e.g., JACET Kansai Chapter Writing Teaching Group, 1995). The traditional view of Japanese writing instruction has attached great importance to writing about what the writer hears, sees, thinks, or feels, which inspires emotion in the readers (Oˆ kuma, 1997).1 Writing about one’s personal thinking or feeling directly on paper seems to have constituted the basis of L1 Japanese composition instruction. According to this view of writing, the important point is whether the reader empathizes with the writer when reading the text. This view still has a great influence on Japanese writing instruction, but many writing researchers/practitioners have realized this type of writing is not sufficient, and that it is also necessary for Japanese students to learn expository writing (e.g., Kinoshita, 1981; Oˆ kuma, 1997). For example, based on his experience as a reviewer for an international journal of physics,

Kinoshita (1981) noticed that many of the Japanese authors submitting manuscripts lacked the kind of rhetorical and expository writing instruction that has been provided in the U.S. and advocated the implementation of such writing instruction in Japan.2

In spite of such perceptions suggesting the necessity for instruction, L1 writing courses are not usually offered even at universities, which is in sharp contrast with U.S. universities. For example, as a Japanese who was born and received education up to graduate school level in Japan, I have not taken a single L1 writing course, and other Japanese bilingual academics share this background (see Casanave, 1998). L1 academic writing tends to be self-taught, and it is taken for granted that students are able to write an academic paper for a course they take at university. Although expository/argumentative writing instruction rarely has a place in the Japanese educational system, some high school students may receive preparatory lessons geared for shoˆronbun, which in English literally means a short thesis or essay but refers to specific writing for examination purposes. Many universities require shoˆronbun as part of the entrance examination. In shoˆronbun, writers are supposed to state their thoughts (opinions, interpretations) based on analysis and/or synthesis of facts regarding a given topic (Kabashima, Uegaki, Soda, & Satake, 1989). In a typical shoˆronbun, students read a Japanese passage and write expository prose concerning the thesis of the passage or issues provided by the passage. The past shoˆronbun questions are available to the public through publications of preparatory schools (e.g., Kawaijyuku Shoˆronbunka, 2002), so examination candidates can prepare using similar tasks before taking the entrance examinations. Some high schools offer supplementary lessons for shoˆronbun writing. Even without being given such preparatory courses at school, students can take such lessons in a commercial examination preparatory school, and may receive individual instruction through correspondence courses. They can also resort to handbooks and guidebooks on how to produce good shoˆronbun. Although students’ experience with shoˆronbun instruction varies from null to extensive, we cannot ignore its possible effects on student writing. At university, students take written tests or write research reports/papers in L1, or both, for their evaluation in the courses they take.3

Regarding L2 English writing, Japanese students’ experience is practically non-existent. L2 writing instruction in high school is oriented toward translation from L1 to L2 at the sentence level (e.g., JACET Kansai Chapter Writing Teaching Group, 1995). Because writing is the least emphasized skill in English language education at every level including university, it is possible for a Japanese non-English major university graduate not to have taken any English writing courses or not to have had any English writing experience. In such cases, it can be assumed that L1 writing instruction/experience predominantly influences how students write in L2. Examining Arabic and Japanese ESL students’ L1 writing backgrounds, Liebman (1992) found that the Japanese regarded persuasive writing to be like expressive writing in that writers express their personal emotions, which was in sharp contrast with the Arabic students who considered logic or supporting evidence essential to persuasive writing. The differences found in their perceptions of persuasive writing can be partly explained by their previous L1 writing background. The Japanese student in her study had reportedly received expressive writing instruction using journals, whereas the Arabic students received transactional writing instruction, including discussion and peer reading. Without much argumentative writing experience in L1, EFL Japanese university students can therefore be expected to have problems with argumentative writing in L2. Inexperience with such writing in L1, not to mention unfamiliarity with L2 writing, may cause problems in L2 argumentative writing, which result from ‘‘both developmental and transfer factors’’ (Mohan & Lo, 1985, p. 517).

While early empirical studies of English–Japanese contrastive rhetoric used between-group comparisons (e.g., Kobayashi, 1984; Oi, 1984), several later studies have investigated Japanese students’ L1 and L2 texts using a withinsubject research design. Although still small in number, these within-subject studies constitute an important step in exploring how an individual student organizes L1/L2 texts and whether each student’s L1/L2 organizations are similar. Whereas previous contrastive rhetoric studies involving Japanese and English had a tendency to focus on differences (see Connor, 1996, for a review), these recent studies shed light on similarities between them.

Examining Japanese university students’ L1 and L2 expository and persuasive writing from the perspective of organization, Kubota (1998b) found that many students’ L1/L2 texts were organized similarly, and L1/L2 organization scores correlated positively in both types of writing. These results seem to suggest that EFL Japanese students write not so differently in L1 and L2 in terms of organization. Although Kubota’s (1998b) participants’ L2 proficiency levels were not reported, they were third- and fourth-year university undergraduates and graduates who were assumed to ‘‘reflect the outcome of academic training in Japan’’ (p. 76). Using a similar method to analyze L1/L2 organizational patterns within the writing of each individual student, Hirose (2001) found that in L2 both ‘‘good’’ and ‘‘weak’’ EFL Japanese student-writers chose deductive organizational patterns, whereas in L1 ‘‘good’’ writers chose either deductive or inductive patterns, although those choosing the latter were smaller in number. The finding that most students used deductive organizations for both L1 and L2 did not concur with the findings of earlier research (e.g., Kobayashi, 1984). Although the results should be treated with caution because of the small sample sizes, these recent studies suggest that similarities in L1/L2 organizational patterns may deserve more attention.

In addition to providing some insight into the organizations of L1/L2 writing, Hirose (2001) and Kubota (1998b) also reported apparently opposing results concerning evaluation of L1 Japanese rhetorical organization. Hirose (2001) found that L1 essays with inductive organization received neither higher nor lower evaluation from experienced L1 raters than those with deductive organization. That is, differences in the choice of rhetorical patterns did not seem to have had much influence on the organization score, nor on the total score. On the other hand, Kubota (1998b) reported that Japanese texts with inductive organization were likely to receive lower evaluation by experienced Japanese readers, suggesting that deductive organization may be as highly valued in Japanese as in English. Thus, the relation between choice of organizational patterns and text evaluation is another issue in dispute that requires further research.

Third, Japanese students’ own perceived preferences regarding rhetorical patterns have not been fully addressed except in a few recent studies such as Kubota (1998b) and Rinnert and Kobayashi (2001). Kubota (1998b) found that Japanese students tended to organize texts inductively, whereas, on reflection, they showed a preference for deductive style. Furthermore, Rinnert and Kobayashi (2001) showed that the more L2 writing experience EFL learners, including teachers, have had, the closer their perceptions of English writing come to those of L1 English native speakers $\left[ = \right.$ teachers). Student perceptions of L1/L2 writing are presumably influenced by not only the L1/L2 instruction they have received at school, but also the information available through mass media, such as books and magazines. The dichotomy between direct English and indirect Japanese is a prevalent stereotype among Japanese students (Kubota, 1998b). What are Japanese students’ preferred organizational patterns in Japanese and English? Are their preferred patterns in the two languages similar? These issues require empirical investigation based on students’ own L1/L2 writing. The present study included the writers’ self-evaluations comparing their own L1 and L2 texts in terms of organization in its design, because such data were expected to give insight into whether students conceived their L1/L2 organizational patterns to be similar and what they thought of their actual patterns compared to their beliefs and expectations, as reported by them retrospectively.

The present study addressed the following two sets of research questions:

1. Are there differences in organizational patterns between L1 and L2 argumentative texts written by the same Japanese EFL students? How do the student-writers evaluate the organizational patterns they employed in L1/L2 argumentative writing?   
2. Are there differences in quality of text and organization between L1 and L2 argumentative texts written by the same Japanese EFL students? What

is the relation between rhetorical patterns and evaluation in L1/L2 argumentative texts?

# Method

# Participants

A total of 15 Japanese EFL students $( \mathbf { M } = 2 , \mathbf { F } = 1 3$ ) participated in the present study. The participants were third- and fourth-year students majoring in British and American Studies in a public university, who were enrolled in one of my courses during the 2000–2001 academic year.4 They took the Comprehensive English Language Test (CELT) Form A (Harris & Palmer, 1986). The CELT consists of structure, listening, and vocabulary sections, with a maximum possible score of 300 points (100 per section). Their total CELT scores ranged from 182 to 230 (mean score $= 2 0 5 . 4 ,$ ).5 The mean scores of each section were as follows: structure 79.8 (range: 67–93), listening 70.4 (range: 56–88), vocabulary 55.2 (range: 41–69). Judging from their CELT scores, their English proficiency level approximately corresponded to high-intermediate. Their level may be slightly higher than that of the average Japanese EFL student because, as English majors, they had taken courses with the heaviest weight given to English, including writing courses, at the university. All the students had studied English for at least 8 years in Japan and received university level English education based on the same curriculum for at least 2 years.

Regarding L2 writing instructional background, they all took a course in the basics of academic writing when they were in their second year. The course focused on organizing and developing essays with particular attention given to logical and appropriate language use for expository writing. The 10 third-year students had taken the 1-year-long English writing course, whereas the 5 fourthyear students had taken such writing courses that prepared them for academic writing for 2 years. These writing courses were taught by English nativespeaking professors, and students learned the key concepts of formal writing, such as topic sentence and the three-part structure of introduction, body, and conclusion, and had written expository/academic essays, some of which were revised on the basis of teacher feedback. According to one of the third-year students who kept all her written work, she had completed 17 compositions/ essays throughout the previous year. The ultimate goal of these writing courses was to prepare students to develop academic writing skills necessary to write a research paper in English.

The fact that all the participants had some formal writing experience in English is important because Japanese EFL students often lack such experience, and whether they have writing experience or not has been found to influence writing quality (Kubota, 1998b; Sasaki & Hirose, 1996). Although they were not highly experienced writers in L1 or L2, they all wrote shoˆronbun as part of the entrance examination in L1 and had some experience in academic writing in L1/L2 at the university as explained above.

# Data

# L1 and L2 compositions

In both L1 and L2, the participants wrote an argumentative composition taking one of two given positions and supporting it. The following prompt was given in L1 for the L2 task:

There has been a heated discussion about the issue of ‘school uniforms’ in the readers’ column in an English newspaper. Some people think that high school students should wear school uniforms, whereas others believe students should choose what to wear at school. Now the editor of the newspaper is calling for the readers’ opinions. Suppose you are writing for the readers’ opinion column. Take one of the positions described above, and write your opinion in English.

The same prompt was used for the L1 task, except for changing ‘‘an English newspaper’’ to ‘‘a newspaper.’’6 In spite of the potential for a practice effect, the same topic was used for L1 and L2 because different topics may influence writing quality including the choice of organizational pattern (see Hamp-Lyons, 1990, for the effects of topic variables). The topic of ‘‘school uniforms’’ was chosen because it was considered familiar to the participants.7

For both tasks, the participants were not informed beforehand that they would be writing in class, nor about the topic. The participants first wrote in L2, and a week later, wrote in L1. It was not possible to counterbalance the order because both L1 and L2 data were collected in regular class hours of the same course. The L2 compositions were written in the very first class in the academic year, when I did not know beforehand who and how many students would enroll. This order (L2 before L1) was chosen because the opposite order (L1 before L2) was considered to induce more retention (recall) of the first writing and to facilitate translation in the second writing (Hirose & Sasaki, 1994). They were asked to write for $3 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ , but they were allowed to stop when, or continue until, they felt they had finished.8 The time they spent ranged from approximately 15 to $4 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ . They were not permitted to use a dictionary.9

Different rating scales were used to measure students’ L1 and L2 writing abilities because readers’ expectations may be different in evaluating L1 Japanese and L2 English compositions. The L2 compositions were scored by three nativespeaking English professors who taught English writing courses at Japanese universities. Following Jacobs, Zinkgraf, Wormuth, Hartfiel, and Hughey’s (1981) ESL Composition Profile, ratings were assigned for the five differently-weighted criteria: content, organization, vocabulary, language use, and mechanics (see Table 2). Each participant’s score was the sum of the three rater’s scores, with a possible range of 102–300 points. The L1 compositions were rated by three Japanese professors who were researchers specialized in L1 Japanese education. Using the L1 rating scale specifically developed for this type of L1 Japanese compositions (Sasaki & Hirose, 1999), six criteria were employed, each receiving 30 points, clarity of the theme, appeal to the readers, expression, organization, knowledge of language forms, and social awareness (see Table 3). Each participant’s L1 composition score was the sum of the three raters’ scores, with a possible range of 18–180 points. All the raters in the present study scored the compositions separately without a practice session, which was not possible to arrange because of practical constraints.

# Analysis of L1/L2 organizations

In order to examine English and Japanese organizational patterns, the present study applied the three types of analysis originally employed by Kubota (1992): (a) the location of main idea(s); (b) the macro-level rhetorical pattern; and (c) presence or absence of a summary statement.10 I applied these three types of analysis in a preliminary study (Hirose, 2001), and simplified some categories for the present study (see Kubota, 1992, for a complete list).11 In this study, a writer’s position statement either for or against ‘‘school uniforms’’ was considered as a main idea. First, the location of the opinion-stating sentence was identified as one of the following four: Initial (stated in the introduction), Middle (in the middle section), Final (in the conclusion), or Obscure (not clearly stated). There were no cases of more than one position taken in the same text. Furthermore, the macro-level rhetorical pattern was identified for each text as one of the following three major patterns: Explanation (the writer’s opinion precedes a supporting reason), Specification (the writer’s opinion and a preview statement of a supporting reason are followed by the reason), or Induction (a supporting reason precedes the writer’s opinion) (see Appendix A for more details). The Explanation and Specification were considered instances of deductive style, whereas Induction was regarded as inductive style. Third, the presence or absence of a summary statement at the end of the text was coded as one of the following three : $^ +$ ðthe writer’s opinion on the topic is re-presented or what was discussed in the text is summarizedÞ; ðneither opinion nor summary is presented), or 0 (the writer’s only statement of opinion is located at the end of the essay).

The coding was done by me and an experienced Japanese EFL instructor who was engaged in this analysis in a previous study (Hirose, 2001). There was $9 6 . 7 \%$ agreement for the location of the opinion-statement sentence, $70 \%$ for the macro-level rhetorical pattern, and $9 6 . 7 \%$ for the summary statement. In the case of discrepancies, we arrived at an agreement on each of them after discussion.

In the present study, the coding was also done by the student-writers themselves. Three months after the participants wrote the L2/L1 compositions, each of them was assigned to read the compositions they had written to analyze them in terms of the three types of analysis explained above. Before they analyzed their compositions, they read Kubota (1998b) and so learned the metalanguage used in the analyses. Between the coders and each participant, there was $9 6 . 4 \%$ agreement for the location of the opinion-statement sentence, $8 2 . 1 \%$ for the macrolevel rhetorical pattern, and $100 \%$ for the presence/absence of a summary statement. The discrepancies concerning macro-level rhetorical patterns were mainly concerned with subcategories of Explanation, that is, either Comparison or Collection (see Appendix A).

In addition to the three types of analysis, the participants were asked to analyze their own L1/L2 compositions concerning the following points: (a) whether the

L1 text differs from the L2 text in terms of location of position-taking statement and supporting evidence; (b) why they think their L1/L2 texts are either similar or different; and (c) how they can improve their texts if they revise them (see Appendix B for more details). All participants except one, who was absent from the class when they did the analysis, gave open-ended responses in written Japanese. When a clarification check was necessary to understand their written responses, follow-up interviews were conducted in person. All the quotes from written student analysis, oral interview responses, and L1 texts in this paper were translated into English by me.

# Data analysis

For Research Question Set 1, the L1/L2 compositions of the participants were compared in terms of the three points mentioned above. Self-report data from the participants’ comparisons between L1 and L2 compositions were also analyzed. For Research Question Set 2, the L1/L2 compositions were compared in terms of organization scores and total scores. The Wilcoxon Matched-Pairs Signed-Ranks test, a non-parametric equivalent of the paired $t$ -test, was conducted to check for statistically significant differences. Because the sample size of the present study was not large, applying parametric procedures to the results was not considered appropriate. Because I made two comparisons, organization and total scores, the alpha level of 0.05 for the study was adjusted to 0.025 by a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparison (Tabachnick & Fidell, 1996). Furthermore, correlations among total and subscores of L1/L2 compositions were all measured. The overall length of L1/L2 compositions was also measured by counting the total number of characters/words per composition.

# Results and discussion

Research Question Set 1

# Overall organizational patterns

Table 1 presents the results of the two coders’ analysis of the organizational patterns of students’ compositions. As shown in Table 1, in which no cases of Obscure are reported, all the participants clearly stated their opinions in L1/L2. On the whole, comparisons of L1/L2 organizational patterns showed more similarities than differences. More specifically, 6 out of 15 participants $(40 \% )$ organized their L1/L2 compositions in exactly the same way in terms of the location of main idea, rhetorical pattern and summary statement (2, 3, 4, 5, 8, and 11), and 5 of them $( 3 3 . 3 \% )$ did so in a similar way (6, 7, 9, 12, and 15). Similarities in L1 and L2 organizational patterns could be taken for granted, considering the writing conditions. The writers wrote on the same topic with an interval of a week between them in class. Similarities can thus be explained by writers’ retention of the first writing and transfer to the second writing. The students themselves considered their L1/L2 texts basically similar when they analyzed them in terms of position, location of position, macro-level pattern, and evidence to support position, whereas they also noticed various alterations between L1 and L2 texts. For example, Writer 4 wrote exactly the same way in L1/L2 (Table 1); however, her positions were opposite and supporting reasons were accordingly different between her L1 and L2 texts. In all cases, the L2 texts were similar to the L1 texts in some ways, but the former were not the translation equivalents of the latter (see Appendix C for one student’s sample L1/L2 compositions). The results of the analysis of location of main idea, macro-level patterns, and summary statement are each discussed separately below.

Table 1 Location of main ideas, macro-level patterns, and summary statements   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Writer number</td><td colspan="2">Main idea</td><td colspan="2">Pattern</td><td colspan="2">Summary statement</td></tr><tr><td>L1</td><td>L2</td><td>L1</td><td>L2</td><td>L1</td><td>L2</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Final</td><td>Initial</td><td>Induction</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>0</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Initial</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Initial</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Initial</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Initial</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>Initial</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Comparison)</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>Initial</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>+</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>Initial</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>Initial</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>-</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>Middle</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>Initial</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Comparison)</td><td>Explanation (Comparison)</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>Initial</td><td>Initial</td><td>Explanation (Comparison)</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>+</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>Final</td><td>Initial</td><td>Induction (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Collection)</td><td>0</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>14</td><td>Final</td><td>Initial</td><td>Induction (Collection)</td><td>Explanation (Comparison)</td><td>0</td><td>-</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Location of main idea

As Table 1 shows, in L2 all the participants put their positions (either for or against ‘‘school uniforms’’) in the initial section and used deductive patterns. In L1, however, 11 participants $( 7 3 . 3 \% )$ stated their positions in the initial section, 3 $( 2 0 \% )$ in the final section, and 1 $( 6 . 7 \% )$ in the middle section. Most used deductive patterns and some, although much smaller in number, chose inductive patterns. Thus, these results did not support the view that Japanese prefer inductive style. The participants’ overall tendency to state their point of view initially in both L1 and L2 seems not to conform to the following discourse features pointed out as typical of Japanese writing: ‘‘overall organization moving from specific to general,’’ ‘‘no strong specific position taken by the writer, thus leaving more up to the reader’’ and ‘‘presentation of the topic in the introduction without indicating a specific point of view about it’’ (Rinnert & Kobayashi, 2001, p. 192).

In addition to these major findings, there also emerged subtle variations in some students’ writing: (1) several students made neutral statements before taking positions in both L1 and L2, and (2) some located the main idea at the end of the essay in L1. In this section, I will consider (1) why most students stated their positions initially, (2) what those students who did not state their positions at the outset of the introductory paragraph did instead, and (3) possible reasons why some students differed in the location of their positions between L1 and L2.

First, why did most students make a position statement at the outset of the introductory paragraphs in L1/L2? It seems likely that past writing instruction led them to do so and to employ similar organizational patterns in L1/L2. In an openended section of the self-analysis, four participants who put their positions initially in L1/L2 texts wrote that they made conscious decisions in locating their position statements. For example, Writer 5 stated she consciously put her position statements initially in L1/L2, later clarifying this in a follow-up interview by explaining that she could not have done so unconsciously. More explicitly, Writer 4 reported that she believed a position statement should be made at the very first position, which she surmised she had probably been taught at school. These students’ reflective reports suggest that they learned to locate their main points at the initial position and consciously put this knowledge into practice regardless of language. Because none of them specified whether it was L1 or L2 instruction or both that had influenced their choice of where to locate their main points, it was not possible to trace instructional effects to instruction in either language. Whichever instruction influenced their conscious decision, the effects of instruction can be speculated to have been made across languages.

Nevertheless, the main idea does not always appear at the outset of the introductory paragraph in English or in Japanese. According to Rinnert and Kobayashi (2001), the introductory paragraph of English essays ‘‘tend[s] to contain a thesis statement toward or at the end of the introduction’’ (p. 201) rather than at the beginning of the paragraph. In other words, the placement of the main idea at the outset of the introductory paragraph may not represent either a preferred English or Japanese pattern. In fact, in the follow-up interview, Writer 5 reported what she learned through English writing instruction at university was, among other things, to state the thesis statement preferably at the end of the introductory paragraph. She said that she always made a conscious effort to put this into practice while writing. For the present L1/L2 tasks, however, she stated her position at the outset of the introductory paragraph.

In sum, the present results concerning the initial location of main ideas can be interpreted in several ways. First, the participants apparently used their learned knowledge of stating the main ideas initially. They might have over-generalized the ‘‘rule’’ about placing the topic sentence in the initial position (Rinnert & Kobayashi, 2001). Or, even if they knew a preferred English pattern as Writer 5 did, it must not have been easy to apply the pattern to this task, especially within the limited time of the composition task. Within the time constraints, it must have been easier for them to place the thesis statement at the beginning, rather than near or at the end of the introductory paragraph. Third, it is also likely that the opinion letter task itself influenced their choice of organizational patterns. The explicit task of taking a position on an issue may have pushed them to express their positions for/against the given topic at the outset of their writing. Furthermore, the organization of such writing for the readers’ opinion columns in a newspaper can be expected to differ from those of argumentative writing. For example, opinion letters often begin with an identification of the article or the issue being responded to and a writer’s agreement/disagreement/evaluation of the article.

Related to the issue of what to start with, several students did not present their positions in the first sentence of the introductory paragraph in L1/L2. In L2, 13 students $( 8 6 . 7 \% )$ stated their positions in the first sentence of the introductory paragraph, whereas 2 students $( 1 3 . 3 \% )$ placed them in the second sentence. Writer 12’s first sentence was ‘‘When we think about this kind of problem, there are many opinions,’’ and Writer 13’s first sentence was ‘‘The issue that the uniform in junior high school and high school is necessary or not seems to be difficult to argue in such a limited space.’’ The latter sentence received negative feedback from one of the native-speaker teacher-raters, who commented that it was ‘‘odd to waste space saying there isn’t enough space in this essay.’’ In her analysis, Writer 13 regarded this sentence as ‘‘unnecessary.’’

In L1, apart from three students who stated their positions finally, two students provided similar neutral information that did not support either position at the beginning. Writer 2 stated that ‘‘Now there are many arguments going on about school uniforms at junior and senior high school,’’ which was immediately followed by her position-taking statement in the second sentence. Furthermore, Writer 10 used the whole introductory paragraph for such general information as follows:

I actually wore school uniforms when I was a junior and senior high school student. As all schools adopted school uniforms at that time, I regarded it natural to wear them when I entered high school. Recently, however, quite a few schools have abolished the system of school uniforms and let students wear whatever they like.

Writer 10 then stated her position ‘‘I agree with the school uniform system.’’ at the outset of her second paragraph; hence the location of her main idea was rated as Middle (Table 1). In her retrospective report, Writer 10 analyzed this paragraph ‘‘as an introduction which stated my thoughts about school uniforms’’ (my emphasis). Given the topic, personal experience with school uniforms probably came to her mind. Although the writer’s position immediately followed the paragraph, this type of neutral information cannot be regarded as supporting evidence for the position taken, but rather as personal reflections on the topic. If personal experience is used as support for the writer’s argument, it can contribute to establishing the credibility of the writer (Connor, 1990). Personal information can also play an effective role in persuading the reader.12 Writer 10’s use, however, does not seem to serve the same role, because her introductory paragraph above does not include orienting statements to be developed in the rest of the composition. Similarly, Writer 13, one of the writers who stated their positions finally, also started with general information instead of discussing the issue directly.

Those writers who filled the opening space with neutral or personal information related to the topic probably needed this as a springboard for arguing the topic, and they drew on what they had in mind about the topic for that purpose. Oi (1986) reported that Japanese students ‘‘usually start with hesitation or [a] neutral statement’’ (p. 44), and suggests that one of the characteristics of Japanese L1/ L2 argumentative writing is the presence of neutral statements. Although most students in the present study showed no hesitation to reveal their stance initially, especially in English, there were several students who resorted to neutral statements in Japanese, probably to avoid arguing an issue from the very beginning.

This type of springboard statement also seems to exist in L1 English writing. However, such statements might differ from those that appeared in Writer 10’s introductory statements in Japanese. Rinnert and Kobayashi (2001) presented the following introductory paragraph as representing a typical American rhetorical pattern:

In our society, almost every family owns at least one TV set. TV functions to send information throughout the society; in addition, we can enjoy a variety of programs for entertainment and education. However, a TV set prevents us from communicating with family members and this problem gets worse when families own multiple TV sets. (p. 208)

In this paragraph, the first and second sentences providing background information about the topic can be considered as springboard statements, which are followed by the thesis statement. Unlike the present study, the topic of Rinnert and Kobayashi’s (2001) essay was the disadvantages of owning a television, and the writer intended to discuss the disadvantages rather than to present his/her own position on owning a television. In the first two sentences, the writer not only presented background information related to the topic but also acknowledged the advantages of owning a television. It seems these sentences functioned to strengthen the argument strategically. In contrast, in her introductory paragraph, Writer 10 did not appear to have the intention to orient the reader to any specific point because it was not directly linked to her following argument, as explained above.

Another finding that is noteworthy regarding the location of the main idea is that four students differed in where they placed their main ideas in L1/L2. How did those writers account for the difference? Writer 14, who started with reasons to support her position without any introductory remarks in L1, explained the differences between L1 and L2 writing as follows:

In English, I consciously put my position statement sentence initially. On the other hand, in Japanese, it was as though I wrote whatever came to mind on paper until I made a summary in the end.

In essence, Writer 14 attributed the L1/L2 difference to the conscious (L2) versus spontaneous (L1) writing processes. While writing in L1, the idea of writing the position statement did not happen to rise to the surface of her consciousness. In other words, the final location of the writer’s position in L1 resulted from her spontaneous writing process. This contrastive observation is interesting especially in light of the finding that some students reported consciously writing their positions initially in L1/L2. Without their consciousness having been raised, more students could have placed the main points anywhere but initially. Some students like Writer 14 might have approached L1 writing with more spontaneity. In their L1 writing, as some students actually noted, they could manage to put into words even superfluous points. Unlike the situation in their L2 writing, they did not have linguistic problems expressing their intended meaning in L1. With such linguistic advantages, they could keep L1 writing processes more spontaneous, which probably induced more variations in the L1 organizational patterns.13

Furthermore, in L1, Writer 14 stated her opinion in the very last sentence in the form of a rhetorical question, called hango, as follows: ‘‘Considering the abovementioned points, isn’t it the case that wearing school uniforms has more merits than not wearing uniforms?’’ Hirose (2001) also reported that two of the ‘‘good’’ writers $( n = 6$ ), and no ‘‘weak’’ writers, finished with a position statement of this question type in Japanese. These results might imply that finishing with the main idea in the form of a rhetorical question is associated with a good writer’s strategy. In Japanese, the use of rhetorical questions is considered an effective way of claiming one’s opinion politely and also a rhetorical way of closing an argument (M. Murai, an L1 Japanese writing pedagogy specialist, personal communication, March 16, 2001). In fact, Writer 14’s L1 organization and total score were the second best of the whole group, and did not seem to be negatively influenced by the inductive organization.

Lastly, the three participants who stated their positions in the final sections in L1 all expressed concerns about the location. Writer 14, for example, raised the question of whether she should make the opinion-statement initially in revising her L1 text. More definitely, Writer 1 wrote, ‘‘I think it’s better to write an opinion-statement initially.’’ Thus, the students all seemed to share the same perception that the initial position is a better place for an opinion-stating sentence than the final position both in English and Japanese. These students’ perceptions regarding the location of the main idea might have been affected by reading Kubota (1998b) and can be considered probable instructional effects. However, whether their preference for the initial position is warranted or not remains to be further explored (see the Research Question Set 2 section for the relation between the choice of organizational patterns and organization/text quality).

# Macro-level rhetorical pattern

Regardless of language, the participants favored Explanation (Collection), that is, they enumerated supporting reasons after presenting their positions (see Table 1). More specifically, in L2, 12 participants $( 8 0 \% )$ used Explanation (Collection) and 3 $( 2 0 \% )$ Explanation (Comparison), whereas in L1, 9 $( 6 0 \% )$ used Explanation (Collection), 3 $( 2 0 \% )$ Explanation (Comparison), and the other 3 $( 2 0 \% )$ used Induction. Thus, there were slightly more variations in L1 organizational patterns. More than half of the participants (8) used Explanation (Collection) for both L1 and L2. In contrast, none of the participants in this study used Specification, which has a statement of the main idea as well as a preview statement of supporting reasons before the presentation of the subsequent argument. These results are somewhat different from Kubota (1998b), who found more variations in the choice of patterns in both L1 and L2. Dominant use of Explanation in the present study can be explained in several ways. First, because the participants have had some experience in expository/ academic writing in L1 and L2, they have presumably acquired the Explanation (Collection) pattern through such experience. Second, as some students actually explained in their self-analysis, they consciously applied their learned rhetorical patterns (position-stating in the introduction $\longrightarrow$ supporting the position with reasons $\longrightarrow$ restating the position in the conclusion) to this writing task. Third, Specification requires more detailed planning before writing than Explanation because it should include a preview statement. Unlike the participants in Kubota (1998b), who wrote at home without any time constraints, those in the present study wrote under timed conditions in class, and it would therefore have been easier for them to resort to Explanation, especially in L2.

# Presence or absence of summary statement

As shown in Table 1, the results of presence/absence of summary statements in the final section revealed a difference between L1 and L2. More students wrote position restatements in L1 than in L2. In 9 out of 15 $( 6 0 \% )$ in L2, the writer’s opinion on the topic was re-presented or what was discussed in the text was summarized. The remaining 6 $(40 \% )$ presented neither opinion nor summary in the final part of the L2 writing. On the other hand, in L1, 11 $( 7 3 . 3 \% )$ had summary statements, whereas only 4 $( 2 6 . 7 \% )$ had neither opinion nor summary in the final section.

Furthermore, another difference between L1 and L2 emerged in the selfevaluations of those students who had no summary statements. Two of the four students who wrote no summary statements in L1 pointed out the addition of summary statement to the final section as a candidate for revision, whereas none of those who had no summary statement in L2 did so. For example, Writer 4, who had no summary statement in L1 or L2, considered the absence of a summary statement in L1 as being in need of revision as follows: ‘‘I think I should write a summary or something in the end. Without such a summary statement, the ending doesn’t sound like a closure.’’ Similarly, Writer 9 wrote, ‘‘I need a conclusion in the end.’’ This perception of lack of completeness resulted from having no summary statement in the end, and this perception was found more conspicuously in L1 than in L2. Although reading Kubota (1998b) might have influenced these students’ opinions on the absence of a summary statement, it is interesting that they observed it only in L1. This may be related to the ‘‘bottom-heavy’’ preference (inclination) in Japanese (Maynard, 1996). The ending with summary statements does not reflect what some have called a Japanese tendency to avoid perspicuous closure, which leaves it up to the reader to infer the writer’s intention (Kobayashi & Rinnert, 1996). The present finding seems to run counter to such a claim.

How did those writers who had no summary statements finish their texts? They seem to have stopped when they finished writing the last reason. Thus, lack of a summary statement suggests that these writers did not think of a concluding remark placed in final position. There were three participants who had no summary statement in either L1 or L2 (4, 10, 11; Table 1). For example, Writer 4’s L1/L2 texts finished with the final reason. An examination of the final elements in some students’ essays also revealed the possibility of a mismatch between the writer’s intended meaning and the expressed meaning (i.e., the readers’ probable interpretation). Writer 14’s final statement in L2 created a mismatch between her intention and the linguistic expressions (see the second sentence in the following extract).

. . Third, when the student wears the uniform, we can easily identify which school does the student go. Even if the student did good or bad thing, we know soon, and in side of the student, they would be responsible themselves.

Writer 14 explained in the follow-up interview that what she meant to say by the final sentence was: ‘‘When a student behaves either well or badly, others immediately recognize which school s/he belongs to from the uniform. This way wearing school uniforms helps students to take responsibility for themselves.’’ However, the final sentence was unlikely to be taken as such by the readers. This example seems to reflect the writer’s sentence-level problems with syntax as well as inter-sentence-level problems with connecting sentences. This type of gap was probably due to the writer’s low L2 proficiency level or to her writing ability being insufficient to express the intended meaning. Students can be expected to overcome this type of problem as their L2 proficiency develops.

In summary, there was not much difference found in organizational patterns between L1 and L2 argumentative writing. The students showed their preference for the initial positioning of their main idea, deductive type organization, and to a lesser extent the presence of a summary statement for both L1 and L2 writing. In some cases, however, there were differences between L1 and L2 texts in terms of the use of general or neutral information as well as the location of main ideas. L1 texts exhibited more variation. This could be accounted for partly by the use of less conscious, more spontaneous writing processes in L1. Their prior L1/L2 writing instruction or experience has presumably exerted an influence on their writing. The results suggest that deductive patterns may not be difficult for Japanese students to learn to employ especially in their L2 writing, and instruction can be effective in this respect.

# Research Question Set 2

# Descriptive statistics and reliability

Tables 2 and 3 show descriptive statistics for the total scores and the subscores of L2 and L1 compositions, respectively. Reliability estimates for the L1/L2 composition scores are interrater reliability estimates based on the coefficient alpha formula. For the L2 subscores, most interrater reliability values were acceptable, whereas the reliability estimates for the L1 composition subscores, especially social awareness and organization, were relatively low.14 The interrater reliability for the L1/L2 total scores was acceptable (0.77 and 0.91, respectively). Because L1/L2 organization and total scores were used in the final analysis of the present study, the results concerning organization should be treated with caution. Tables 2 and 3 also present total numbers of words/characters, respectively. Because English and Japanese have different graphical systems, it was not possible to measure composition lengths by the same measure. Following the standard procedures in each language, every word was counted for English, whereas every character, kanji (Chinese character), hiragana, and katakana, was counted for Japanese.

Table 2 Descriptive statistics and reliability estimates for L2 composition scores   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Measure (total possible)</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>Range</td><td>Reliability estimates</td></tr><tr><td>Content (90)</td><td>57.53</td><td>6.92</td><td>41-67</td><td>0.79</td></tr><tr><td>Organization (60)</td><td>40.07</td><td>5.43</td><td>31-47</td><td>0.69</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary (60)</td><td>38.33</td><td>4.61</td><td> 32-47</td><td>0.77</td></tr><tr><td>Language use (75)</td><td>43.40</td><td>6.28</td><td>33-54</td><td>0.69</td></tr><tr><td>Mechanics (15)</td><td>9.87</td><td>1.13</td><td>7-11</td><td>0.72</td></tr><tr><td>Total (300)</td><td>189.2</td><td>21.91</td><td>149-223</td><td>0.91</td></tr><tr><td>Total number of words</td><td>143.7</td><td>27.0</td><td>92-195</td><td>-</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Descriptive statistics and reliability estimates for L1 composition scores   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Measure (total possible)</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>Range</td><td>Reliability estimates</td></tr><tr><td>Clarity of the theme (30)</td><td>22.80</td><td>2.31</td><td>17-26</td><td>0.60</td></tr><tr><td>Appeal to the readers (30)</td><td>19.53</td><td>2.92</td><td>15-26</td><td>0.69</td></tr><tr><td>Expression (30)</td><td>20.87</td><td>2.70</td><td>16-26</td><td>0.60</td></tr><tr><td>Organization (30)</td><td>19.73</td><td>3.99</td><td>12-27</td><td>0.57</td></tr><tr><td>Knowledge of language forms (30)</td><td>22.27</td><td>2.43</td><td>18-27</td><td>0.64</td></tr><tr><td>Social awareness (30)</td><td>21.07</td><td>2.02</td><td>19-25</td><td>0.51</td></tr><tr><td>Total (180)</td><td>126.27</td><td>13.54</td><td>107-157</td><td>0.77</td></tr><tr><td>Total number of characters</td><td>434.5</td><td>99.2</td><td>268-564</td><td>-</td></tr></table></body></html>

In the present study, the total score was considered to reflect overall text quality in L1/L2. On the surface, there do not seem to be salient differences between the two languages. The total composition mean $( \% )$ was 63.1 (L2) versus 70.2 (L1).15 In terms of percentages, overall the participants scored better in L1. Nevertheless, the L1/L2 scores should not be compared within the same writer because different scales were used to evaluate L1/L2 compositions. The L2 organization mean $( \% )$ was 66.8, and the students’ scores $( \% )$ ranged between 51.7 and 78.3, that is, from ‘‘fair to poor’’ to ‘‘good to average,’’ according to Jacobs et al.’s (1981) Profile. On the other hand, the L1 organization mean $( \% )$ was 65.8, and the scores $( \% )$ ranged from 40 to 90, which covered between ‘‘fair’’ and ‘‘very good’’ (Sasaki & Hirose, 1999, p. 477). These findings concerning organization may imply that many participants have not yet developed organizational competence in L1 sufficient to surpass their organizational competence in L2. Therefore, many of the participants still need to learn to improve organization to write logically connected or well-organized sentences/ paragraphs in both L1 and L2.

Table 4 Correlation matrix for L1/L2 composition scores   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>6</td><td>7</td><td>8</td><td>9</td><td>10</td><td>11</td><td>12</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td>1 L2 total</td><td>1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2 L2 content</td><td>.93**</td><td>1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3 L2 organization</td><td>.85**</td><td>.80** 1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4 L2 vocabulary</td><td>.91**</td><td>.76**</td><td>.64**</td><td>1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5 L2 language use</td><td>.94**</td><td>.79**</td><td>.69**</td><td>.92**</td><td>1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6 L2 mechanics</td><td>.69**</td><td>.64**</td><td>.39</td><td>.70**</td><td>.69** 1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7 L1 total</td><td>.15</td><td>.07</td><td>.29</td><td>.11</td><td>.12</td><td>.13</td><td>1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8 L1 clarity of theme</td><td>.13</td><td>.04</td><td>.18</td><td>.06</td><td>.22</td><td>.12</td><td>.70** 1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9 L1 appeal to readers</td><td>.01</td><td>.08</td><td>.11</td><td>.01</td><td>.01</td><td>.28</td><td>.93**</td><td>.75**</td><td>1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10 L1 expression</td><td>.00</td><td>.13</td><td>.29</td><td>.02</td><td>.04</td><td>.34</td><td>.79**</td><td>.39</td><td>.76** 1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>11 L1 organization</td><td>.23</td><td>.20</td><td>.30</td><td>.15</td><td>.20</td><td>.04</td><td>.84**</td><td>.63*</td><td>.69**</td><td>.41</td><td>1.00</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12 L1 knowledge of language forms</td><td>.25</td><td>.21</td><td>.30</td><td>.25</td><td>.17</td><td>.17</td><td>.77**</td><td>.18</td><td>.57*</td><td>.66**</td><td>.65** 1.00</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>13 L1 social awareness</td><td>.10</td><td>.05</td><td>.24</td><td>.11</td><td>.05</td><td>.15</td><td>.91**</td><td>.53*</td><td>.88**</td><td>.83**</td><td>.62*</td><td>.74**1.00</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

p < :05. \*\* p < :01.

# Correlations among L1/L2 composition scores

A Pearson correlation coefficient matrix (Table 4) revealed that all the subscores of L2 composition had significant positive correlations with the L2 total score. Similarly, all subscores of L1 composition had significant positive correlations with the L1 total score. Furthermore, L2 subscores were significantly correlated with each other except for organization and mechanics, and so were L1 subscores except for a few items. However, none of the L1 composition subscores or total score had significant correlations with the L2 total score or subscores. In particular, L1/L2 total scores had no significant correlations with each other, and neither did L1/L2 organization scores. The finding that there were no significant correlations between L1 and L2 argumentative writing either in organization or in other aspects examined is inconsistent with those of previous studies dealing with Japanese EFL students’ L1/L2 writing relationship (e.g., Kamimura, 1996; Kubota, 1998b). Kamimura (1996) examined L1/L2 narratives elicited from pictures and found significant correlations between them. Regarding organization, Kubota (1998b) reported a positive correlation between Japanese and English writing on both expository and persuasive topics.

The discrepancy found between the previous studies and the present study can be accounted for in several ways. First, different types of tasks were used in these studies. Second, different methods were used to measure students’ L1 and L2 writing in these studies. Unlike the present study that used different rating scales, Kamimura (1996) used the same three-point scale of holistic rating for L1/L2. In Kubota’s comparative study (1998b), organization was evaluated with a range of 5 (excellent) to 1 (poor). Using the same three- or five-point scale for evaluating L1 and L2 compositions might have inflated the correlations between L1 and L2 writing. The lack of significant correlations found between L1 and L2 writing in the present study might have partly resulted from using different scales specifically designed for L1 Japanese and L2 English writing. The question of which type of scales would be appropriate measures to use for research dealing with more than one language should be further investigated before reaching any consensus. Furthermore, the raters’ backgrounds in these studies were also different. The same two Japanese raters specialized in L2 writing evaluated both L1 and L2 texts in Kamimura (1996), whereas two native-speaking raters who had experience in marking compositions in the respective languages: Japanese professors of education and graduate students of ESL rated L1 and L2 texts, respectively in Kubota (1998b). The three raters specialized in each of the respective languages evaluated the L1 and L2 texts in the current study. Rater background was found to have significant effects on the evaluation of EFL compositions (Kobayashi & Rinnert, 1996). This could also apply to the assessment of L1 Japanese compositions. Comparative studies of L1/L2 writing would need a much larger number of raters as well as consideration of rater background. Finally, the participants’ L2 proficiency level and writing background varied according to individual studies. More specifically, the present study’s participants were more homogeneous in terms of L2 writing experience and L2 proficiency than Kubota’s (1998b) participants, who included not only graduate students and returnee students but also those with no L2 writing experience. The effects of previous writing experience on L2 writing have been found to be significant (e.g., Sasaki & Hirose, 1996), and cannot be ignored. The relatively homogeneous studentwriters in terms of L2 proficiency and instructional background in the present study showed a different tendency from those found in these previous studies, which had more varied participants in terms of L2 proficiency and L2 writing background.

Comparisons of L1/L2 organization and total scores Regarding the statistical differences between L1 and L2 organization and total scores, the results of the Wilcoxon Matched-Pairs Signed-Ranks test revealed that the differences were significant in both cases (the z values for organization and the total scores were both $- 3 . 4 1 \rangle$ .

Among the present participants, good L2 writers did not necessarily write well in L1. The student who got the best total score in L2 also scored best in L1, whereas the second best L2 writer got the lowest score in L1. There were also opposite cases of good L1 writers who did not write as well in L2. The corresponding cases (i.e., either above or below the mean scores in both L1 and L2) consisted of nine students $( 6 0 \% )$ . The cases of discrepancy between L1 and L2 comprised six students $(40 \% )$ . Because L1 organization had a relatively low reliability, the results concerning organization should be treated with caution. Nevertheless, a similar tendency toward diversity seems to hold true for their organization scores. Good organizers in L2 did not necessarily correspond to those in L1. Thus, the present study found that student L2 writing ability did not necessarily correspond to that of L1 in a relatively high L2 proficiency group. Other factors such as motivation for writing and interest in the topic might have exerted an influence on their L1/L2 writing. When writing on the same topic the second time in L1, some students might have lost interest in writing, and others could have been more motivated to write.16

Relations between rhetorical patterns and evaluation

With regard to the relation between rhetorical patterns and evaluation, the present study did not lead to the conclusion that the use of deductive patterns resulted in better organization/text. Although fewer students chose inductive over deductive patterns in L1, the inductive users (1, 13, 14) scored above the mean scores in both the organization and the total scores of their L1 compositions. The use of inductive patterns does not seem to be directly related to lower evaluation. The results also showed the inverse, that is, that the use of deductive patterns did not simply lead to higher evaluation of organization and text quality. These results imply that the choice of organizational patterns is not the only factor that contributes to quality of text organization or overall text quality. Other factors such as coherence and connection between/within paragraphs also contribute to the quality of organization, and these other features may carry more weight in evaluation than the choice of organizational patterns does (Kobayashi & Rinnert, 1996).

# Conclusion

The present study revealed that (1) Japanese EFL student-writers used deductive organizational patterns in L2, and to a lesser degree in L1; (2) despite overall similarities between L1 and L2 organizational patterns, there was no significant correlation between L1 and L2 organization scores; (3) L2 text quality (represented in terms of the total score) did not correlate with L1 text quality; (4) organization and text quality of L2 significantly differed from that of L1; (5) the use of an inductive pattern in L1 did not necessarily result in low evaluation in either total or organization scores; (6) features other than the choice of organizational patterns seem to be more closely related to organization quality scores; and (7) although the results hinted at instructional influence on their organizational patterns, some students apparently had developmental problems in argumentative writing not only in L2 but also in L1. Furthermore, the students’ own analysis of their L1/L2 argumentative texts showed that students favored a deductive type organizational pattern, regardless of language, for argumentative writing.

The small sample size and its selective nature may limit the generalizability of the results; thus, the findings should be confirmed with a larger sample of participants. It is also important to confirm the results with different topics or types of tasks other than argumentative writing in a short period of time, or with different groups of students such as those with higher or lower L2 proficiency levels. In particular, the study would need to be extended to validate its findings with non-English major Japanese students who have little background in L2 writing instruction/experience, unlike the participants of the present study. They may constitute a more appropriate participant group to investigate the effects of L1 writing instruction/experience on L2 writing.

Despite the limitations, the present study suggests several directions for future research. First, the relation between L1 and L2 organizational patterns needs further investigation. The results of this study imply that multi-faceted factors are involved in students’ choices of L1/L2 organizational patterns. Both writer-related factors, such as instructional background and perceptions about good organization, and other factors like task (including time) had influences on their choices. Besides conducting large-scale research, it is equally important for studies within the contrastive rhetoric tradition to examine these factors in much greater depth. For example, the effects of L1 writing experience and instruction on L2 writing are required to elucidate whether and how such prior writing experience affects students’ choices of essay organization in L2. Those L2 writers who have not yet acquired sufficient organizational ability in L1 argumentative writing may need such writing experience in L1, which can then potentially benefit their L2 argumentative writing. Alternatively, L1 argumentative writing experience may not be a necessary condition for L2 organizational ability to develop. L2 writing instruction and experience may be transferable to L1 writing. These issues remain for further study. Finally, regarding the factor of readers, L1 and L2 readers’ perceptions of good organization and writing should also be addressed in more in-depth studies. It may be possible to make comparisons between English-speaking and Japanese-speaking readers’ perceptions and expectations of argumentative organizations. Both groups may share similar organizational patterns or schema. Such future study will help to contribute to new approaches to contrastive rhetoric research by helping dispel some of the misguided stereotypes of Japanese and English writing so prevalent in the contrastive rhetoric field.

# Acknowledgments

This is a revised version of a paper presented at the Annual Conference of the Japan Association for Language Education and Technology, on August 4, 2001. I would like to thank all the participants and composition raters in the present study for their invaluable cooperation, Mariko Murai for informing me about L1 Japanese writing, Emiko Sugiura for coding the data, and Carol Rinnert, Christine P. Casanave, and Ryuko Kubota, the editors and three anonymous reviewers of the Journal of Second Language Writing for their insightful comments and suggestions. Needless to say, the positions taken and any errors that may remain are solely my responsibility. The research reported in this paper was funded by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C2) (No. 12680281) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology in Japan.

# References

Achiba, M., & Kuromiya, Y. (1983). Rhetorical patterns extant in the English compositions of Japanese students. JALT Journal, 5, 1–13.   
Casanave, C. P. (1998). Transitions: The balancing act of bilingual academics. Journal of Second Language Writing, 7, 205–241.   
Connor, U. (1990). Linguistic/rhetorical measures for international persuasive student writing. Research in the Teaching of English, 24, 67–87.   
Connor, U. (1996). Contrastive rhetoric: Cross-cultural aspects of second-language writing. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Hamp-Lyons, L. (1990). Second language writing: Assessment issues. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 69–87). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Harris, D. P., & Palmer, L. A. (1986). CELT: Examiners’ instructions and technical manual. New York: McGraw-Hill.   
Hinds, J. (1983). Contrastive rhetoric: Japanese and English. Text, 3, 183–196.   
Hinds, J. (1990). Inductive, deductive, quasi-inductive: Expository writing in Japanese, Korean, Chinese, and Thai. In U. Connor & A. M. Johns (Eds.), Coherence in writing: Research and pedagogical perspectives (pp. 87–109). Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of other Languages (TESOL).   
Hirose, K. (2001). Persuasive writing in L1 and L2: A look at Japanese EFL students’ rhetorical organization strategies. JACET Bulletin, 33, 43–56.   
Hirose, K. (2003). Comparing L1 and L2 writing processes of advanced Japanese EFL students: An exploratory study. The Journal of the Faculty of Foreign Studies, Aichi Prefectural University (Language and Literature), 35, 1–36.   
Hirose, K., & Sasaki, M. (1994). Explanatory variables for Japanese students’ expository writing in English: An exploratory study. Journal of Second Language Writing, 3, 203–229.   
JACET Kansai Chapter Writing Teaching Group. (Eds.). (1995). Daigaku ni okeru eisakubun sidoˆ no arikata: Eisakubun jittai choˆsa no hoˆkoku [English writing instruction at the university levels in Japan: A survey of English writing instruction]. Kyoto: Authors.   
Jacobs, H. L., Zinkgraf, S. A., Wormuth, D. R., Hartfiel, V. F., & Hughey, J. B. (1981). Testing ESL composition: A practical approach. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.   
Kabashima, T., Uegaki, S., Soda, F., & Satate, H. (1989). Fukutake kokugo jiten [Fukutake Japanese dictionary]. Tokyo: Fukutake Shoten.   
Kamimura, T. (1996). Composing in Japanese as a first language and English as a foreign language: A study of narrative writing. RELC Journal, 27, 47–69.   
Kawaijyuku Shoˆronbunka (Department of Shoˆronbun, Kawaijuku). (2002). 2002 nendo daigaku nyushi shoˆronbun mondaishuˆ [Collections of shoˆronbun for university entrance examinations in the year 2002]. Tokyo: Kawai Shuppan.   
Kinoshita, K. (1981). Rikakei no sakubun gijyutsu [Writing skills for scientific writing]. Tokyo: Chuo Koronsha.   
Kinoshita, K. (1990). Repoˆto no kumitate kata [How to organize papers]. Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo.   
Kobayashi, H. (1984). Rhetorical patterns in English and Japanese. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Columbia University Teachers College, New York.   
Kobayashi, H., & Rinnert, C. (1996). Factors affecting composition evaluation in an EFL context: Cultural rhetorical pattern and readers’ background. Language Learning, 46, 397–437.   
Kubota, R. (1992). Contrastive rhetoric of Japanese and English: A critical approach. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Toronto.   
Kubota, R. (1998a). An investigation of Japanese and English L1 essay organization: Differences and similarities. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 54, 475–507.   
Kubota, R. (1998b). An investigation of L1-L2 transfer in writing among Japanese university students: Implications for contrastive rhetoric. Journal of Second Language Writing, 7, 69–100.   
Liebman, J. (1992). Toward a new contrastive rhetoric: Differences between Arabic and Japanese rhetorical instruction. Journal of Second Language Writing, 1, 141–165.   
Maynard, S. K. (1996). Presentation of one’s view in Japanese newspaper columns: Commentary strategies and sequencing. Text, 16, 391–421.   
Mohan, B. A., & Lo, W. A.-Y. (1985). Academic writing and Chinese students: Transfer and developmental factors. TESOL Quarterly, 19, 515–534.   
Oi, K. (1984). Cross-cultural differences in rhetorical patterning: A study of Japanese and English. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, State University of New York at Stony Brook.   
Oi, K. (1986). Cross-cultural differences in rhetorical patterning: A study of Japanese and English. JACET Bulletin, 17, 23–48.   
Oˆ kuma, T. (1997). Kokusaika jidai jyoˆhoˆka jidai niokeru ronritekina bunshoˆ o kakukoto no igi [The significance of writing logical sentences in the eras of internationalization and information]. In Chugakkoˆ Kokugoka Kyoˆiku Jissen Koˆza Kankoˆkai (Ed.), Chugakkoˆ kokugoka kyoˆiku jissen koˆza dai 4 kan [Practical seminar in Japanese language education at junior high school Vol. 4] (pp. 218–221). Tokyo: Nichibun.   
Oˆ oka, M., et al. (1998). Kokugo hyoˆgen [Japanese writing]. Tokyo: Shougaku Tosho.   
Rinnert, C., & Kobayashi, H. (2001). Differing perceptions of EFL writing among readers in Japan. Modern Language Journal, 85, 189–209.   
Sasaki, M., & Hirose, K. (1996). Explanatory variables for EFL students’ expository writing. Language Learning, 46, 137–174.   
Sasaki, M., & Hirose, K. (1999). Development of an analytic rating scale for Japanese L1 writing. Language Testing, 16, 457–478.   
Silva, T. (1993). Toward an understanding of the distinct nature of L2 writing: The ESL research and its implications. TESOL Quarterly, 27, 657–677.   
Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (1996). Using multivariate statistics (3rd ed.). New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.

# Appendix A. Macro-level patterns17

1. Explanation (Collection): The writer’s opinion on the topic is presented and then supporting reasons are enumerated.

Explanation (Comparison): The writer’s opinion on the topic is presented and then a supporting reason is presented by comparing or contrasting two elements.

2. Induction: The main idea is placed at the end and preceding arguments constitute supporting reason(s) for it.

Induction (Collection): The writer’s opinion is realized in the final section; the preceding arguments constitute premises or reasons which are arranged in a form of enumeration.

# Appendix B. Work sheet18

Read your L1/L2 compositions. Did you state your position in relation to the task given? Where did you make your position statement? What reasons did you present in what order to support your position? Which macro-level pattern (Kubota, 1998b, p. 100) did you use?

1. Underline your position statement.   
2. Identify the macro-level pattern.   
3. Are the following similar or different in your L1 and L2 compositions? (a) position (b) location of position statement (c) macro-level pattern (d) reasons and justifications to support your position (e) others   
4. If you find differences in the above analysis, why do you think L1 is different from L2?   
5. If you have a chance to revise your L1/L2 compositions, what will you improve?   
6. If you find anything else in comparing your L1/L2 compositions, please write about it here.

# Appendix C. Student sample L1/L2 compositions19

#3+tL3 E+ 50tAR0}tt0+tb50-#\* 31t5.

#AR0#o\$3Lt\*bt3nTL\*5# Lb>L#A3Tt<t5Lt<3 T3Tt<

5#R\*T\*t75ntL\*t#+. Eb\$T3L75hTb0Tl<t0l3btTltlOTF]T+.

UE0t>6t#&30t<{ ttA1(Total # of characters: 442)

# L1 (translation of original Japanese)

I do not think the clothes students wear at school should necessarily be school uniforms. I would rather think the clothes students choose and like to wear are better because they show each student’s individuality. These clothes represent what students like; in other words, they are one way to show part of their individuality.

Many people think we should have school uniforms because the uniform is the symbol of a school and free choice of clothing runs the risk of students’ dressing too roughly. In fact, however, there are many students who wear uniforms not the way the school or society expects them to but sloppily. Students’ clothes are sloppy regardless of whether they wear school uniforms or choose their clothing freely, and sloppy clothes are caused by students’ inner problems.

Furthermore, students can hardly adjust to high or low temperature in school uniform. They also get into trouble when their uniforms become stained. In this respect, free choice of clothing is convenient. Students can choose what to wear depending on the temperature, their physical condition, and feelings on a particular day. They also do not have the problem of what to wear the next day after they get their clothes dirty.

For the above reasons, I think we should admit free choice of clothing for students at school instead of imposing school uniforms.

#

I think school uniform is not always necessary and important for students. They can express themselves by their clothes. Without school uniform, we can rather easily find what kind of person he or she is by looking his or her clothes. Wearing favorite clothes is one of the ways to express our personality. On the other hand, school uniform is the same as other student’, so we tend to seem the same as others. Some say that school uniform is important to unite students as students of a school, and that if they wear their favorite clothes, they will wear too freely and make people who see it uncomfortable. I think, however, the same thing can be said to school uniform. Nowadays, many students wear their school uniform in rather free style; they don’t wear it the way schools require. Until they wear it the good way, it is meaningless. So I think students should be allowed to wear their favorite clothes and express their personality, rather than wear meaningless school uniform. (Total number of words: 172.)

Note: Grammar and word choice errors are left intact.