# Book review

# Review of “Conducting genre-based research in applied linguistics: A methodological guide”

Conducting genre-based research in applied linguistics: A methodological guide, Matt Kessler, Charlene Polio (Eds.). Routledge, New York and London (2024). \$39.16 (paperback), pp. $\mathbf { X } + \mathbf { 2 4 7 }$ , ISBN: 9781032292823

Genre has long been an important concept and extensively debated in the field of language education, or applied linguistics broadly defined (e.g., Hyland, 2021; Matzler, 2021). However, this seemingly simple concept is complex in nature, which requires highly interdisciplinary scholarship and various approaches. Consequently, genre-based research in applied linguistics involves different methodologies that are central to the pursuit of scientific study for all researchers and practitioners (Butler and Huang, 2023, p. 8; see also Huang and Zhang, 2020). It is important, particularly for beginners, to acquaint themselves with the necessary methods used in genre-based language education. The edited volume, Conducting Genre-Based Research in Applied Linguistics: A Methodological Guide by Matt Kessler and Charlene Polio, fills the gap by offering a useful resource through a thorough exploration of central approaches, methods, and tools within different theoretical frameworks of genre-based applied linguistics.

The book is divided into three sections, containing 10 chapters, preceded by an introduction. The beginning chapter by Kessler and Polio offers a brief review of different paradigms regarding genre-based applied linguistics. It highlights the three distinct approaches/schools in genre-based studies, i.e., English for Specific Purposes, Systemic Functional Linguistics, and the New Rhetoric/Rhetorical Genre Studies. Given that each of them conceptualizes genre in distinct ways, the differences, such as varying interpretations of external factors influencing text and diverse linguistic frameworks for making sense of text-related features, have resulted in a wide spectrum of research objectives, conceptual frameworks, and pedagogical suggestions for classroom instructors.

The first section includes two chapters, dealing with established qualitative research methodologies. Chapter two by Negretti and Khuder is concerned with the use of case studies. It indicates that case studies in genre research examine how individuals or groups learn to produce a genre, considering typical or atypical factors such as time, specific conditions, genrebased teaching approaches, and materials. It also discusses the problems and potential future directions in the application of case studies as a pedagogical tool.

Chapter three by Tardy focuses on ethnographic research. By conceptualizing genre not simply as a linguistic form but a social practice, she posits that ethnographic research emphasizes the social context in which genre is (re)produced and used, typically examining how individuals and social groups use a particular genre or set of genres, or how a genre may influence a group’s social practice. Worthy of mention is that both chapters emphasize the importance of triangulation in data collection and/or analysis for confirming research results and findings through qualitative case studies or ethnographic methods and thus increasing the validity of complex genre studies.

Section two includes six chapters that adopt a greater diversity of methods, including quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods, in some of the most prominent topics and types of analyses. Chapter four by Hyland offers a valuable overview of metadiscourse research, emphasizing its centrality in academic writing and the utility of a corpus-driven approach to identify genre-specific patterns. The chapter also highlights some key challenges, including conceptual ambiguity of metadiscourse itself and a predefined set of words/phrases to be searched in a corpus realizing different metadiscoursive functions. Following an analysis of some insightful case studies, it also suggests avenues for further research, such as identifying new metadiscourse elements, exploring genres beyond research articles, and examining metadiscourse in non-English languages.

Chapter five by Casal and Kessler positions rhetorical move-step analysis as a key methodology to identify recurring rhetorical structures of genre-specific practices and the linguistic features in the realization of such rhetorical intentions. Very practically, it provides a step-by-step process of doing rhetorical move-step analysis, urging researchers to ensure methodological transparency and reproducibility. This chapter encourages researchers to emphasize the connections between analytical scholarship and pedagogical practice and to explore non-academic genres and other languages rather than English.

Chapter six by Cortes is concerned with how writers utilize frequently occurring lexical bundles and phrase frames to achieve their rhetorical goals in a particular genre. Advocating for a corpus-driven approach, such kind of research usually covers genre description, text type comparison, and analysis of L1/L2 language production (e.g., Wei et al., 2020). The chapter also acknowledges challenges arising from corpus limitations, e.g., L2 learner texts with grammatical errors or incomplete expressions leading to incorrect frequency of certain formulaic constructs. Cortes finally invites future research to explore spoken corpora, refine functional taxonomies, and investigate the role of formulaic language in diverse academic contexts.

Chapter seven by Goulart and Staples deals with multidimensional analysis, a research method using exploratory factor analysis to categorize co-occurring linguistic features within specific genres. Its advantage, as the chapter indicates, lies in its deeper analysis of genre-based linguistic patterns rather than focusing on a single feature. However, the chapter also points out that multidimensional analysis requires expertise not only in statistics and corpus techniques but also knowledge of both the variables and the involved genres to interpret the identified factors. While this method has primarily been applied to academic writing and learner genres, the authors recommend extending its application to spoken and multimodal genres.

In Chapter eight, Polio and Yoon discuss methods for measuring complexity, accuracy, and fluency (CALF) in genre-specific texts. They firstly review the historical development of CALF studies, emphasizing the focus on written genres among children, adolescents, and L2 learners. Using sample studies, they illustrate the two main methods, i.e., experimental and corpusbased approaches to measuring CALF. They also pose some methodological challenges, including measuring variables and ensuring internal validity. For future studies, they suggest exploring a wider range of genres in various languages, focusing on pedagogical implications and integrating CALF measures with other methods.

Chapter nine by D’Angelo and Marino explores multimodal analysis, where meaning is constructed by integrated verbal and non-verbal modes. It clarifies the definition of “multimodal” within genre analysis and calls for new frameworks for the increasingly diverse multimodal genres due to digital advancements. It also showcases through sample studies three approaches to multimodal genre analysis, i.e., Systemic Functional Multimodal Discourse Analysis, Social Semiotics Multimodal Analysis, and Multimodal Corpus Analysis. Despite the challenges, such as the laborious nature of these methods, the chapter acknowledges its value and suggests future research directions, including digital educational material design and online social interactions, which can include, among other things, activities to raise students’ genre awareness relating to the purpose, context, audience, culture and linguistic features of different genres.

Section three includes two chapters, addressing the scholarship on learner and learning. Chapter 10 by Sommer-Farias explores how multilingual learners of varying proficiency engage with diverse written genres. It offers a brief review of genre-based writing by L2/multilingual learners and highlights methodological issues and best practices through analysis of example studies, such as commitment to multiple coders, data triangulation, and inter-coder reliability. It invites future research on how linguistic, cognitive, and social factors interact to shape multilingual writing, urging exploration of multimodal genres and the role of multiple languages in text construction, particularly in K-12 contexts.

Chapter 11 by Accurso and Marr discusses SFL genre analysis and the teaching and learning cycle for disciplinary literacy instruction, guiding students through genre stages and register choices. It introduces the three research phases, involving a linguistic phrase analyzing texts within SFL, a teaching and learning phase supporting writing development, and a phase evaluating students’ writing to understand their repertoires and the instructional impact. While acknowledging the timeconsuming nature of corpus-based SFL genre analysis, it emphasizes its value in pedagogical practice and calls for more research on translanguaged texts reflecting students’ multilingual repertoires and genre’s role in social change.

As the first book that focuses on research methodologies in genre-based applied linguistics, the volume showcases a rich array of methodologies such as case studies and ethnographic approaches, various analyses, including metadiscourse, rhetorical move-step analysis, multidimensional analysis, lexical bundles and phrase frames, CALF measures, and multimodal analysis. It is laudable that the editors and authors have adopted a similar internal structure for all content chapters, though each of them addresses different research methods, tools, or topics pertaining to genre-based research, which enhances the book’s coherence and accessibility. Also notable is that each chapter provides sample studies pertaining to genre analysis, guiding readers step-by-step toward the application of the introduced methodologies and tools.

While we do not have any intention to nitpick, we think that it would greatly enhance the book’s utility if the book included links and recommended readings specifically related to the methods and tools introduced in each chapter, such as websites for corpus software, among other things. Overall, this volume offers theoretically and methodologically diverse insights into key genre-related concepts and detailed discussions on the challenges and practical considerations in genre analysis. It proves itself to be a valuable guide not only for beginners but also experienced scholars in the field of applied linguistics, especially those involved in L2 acquisition, genre-based analysis, theoretical explorations and related pedagogical practices.

# Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

# Declaration of competing interest

There is no conflict of interests in this study.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Tao Li: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Lawrence Jun Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization.

# References

Butler, Y. G., & Huang, B. H. (2023). Research methods for understanding child second language development. London: Routledge.   
Huang, Y., & Zhang, L. J. (2020). Does a process-genre approach help improve students’ argumentative writing in English as a foreign language? Findings from an intervention study. Reading Writing Quarterly, 36(4), 339-364. https://doi.org/10.1080/10573569.2019.1649223.   
Hyland, K. (2021). Teaching and researching writing ((4th ed.)). London: Routledge.   
Matzler, P. (2021). Mentoring and Co-Writing for Research Publication Purposes: Interaction and Text Development in Doctoral Supervision. London: Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003152637.   
Wei, X., Zhang, L. J., & Zhang, W. (2020). Associations of L1-to-L2 rhetorical transfer with L2 writers’ perception of L2 writing difficulty and L2 writing proficiency. J Eng Acad Purposes, 47(100907), 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100907.

Tao Li, Ph.D., is Associate Professor at the School of Foreign Languages, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include corpusbased translation studies and discourse analysis. His work has appeared in journals such as Target, Perspectives, Discourse & Society, Journal of Specialised Translation, Discourse, Context & Media and edited books published by Routledge and Palgrave Macmillan. He is also co-author of Reappraising Self and Others: A Corpus-Based Study of Chinese Political Discourse in English Translation (Springer, 2021), Introducing Corpus-based Critical Translation studies (Higher Education Press, in Chinese, 2018).

Lawrence Jun Zhang, Ph.D., is Professor of Linguistics-in-Education and Associate Dean for the Faculty of Education and Social Work, University of Auckland, New Zealand. His major interests and publications are on the psychology of language learning and teaching, especially learner metacognition, L2 readingwriting development and teacher assessment literacy. His publications have appeared in journals such as Applied Linguistics (Oxford), Applied Linguistics Review (de Gruyter), British Journal of Educational Psychology (Wiley), Discourse Processes (Routledge), Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development (Routledge), Journal of Second Language Writing (Elsevier), Journal of Psycholinguistic Research (Springer), Measurement (Routledge), Modern Language Journal (Wiley), Perceptual and Motor Skills (Sage), TESOL Quarterly (Wiley), Language Teaching Research (Sage), Learning and Instruction (Elsevier), RELC Journal (Sage), System (Elsevier), Frontiers in Psychology (Frontiers), among others. He serves on editorial boards for Applied Linguistics Review (de Gruyter), Australian Review of Applied Linguistics (Benjamins), Chinese Journal of Applied Linguistics (de Gruyter), Journal of Second Language Writing (Elsevier), Metacognition and Learning (Springer), Journal of Second Language Studies (Benjamins), Language Teaching for Young Learners (Benjamins) and RELC Journal (Sage). He is Co-Editor-in-Chief for System (Elsevier). He was honored by the TESOL International Association (USA) in 2016 with the award of $^ { * } 5 0$ at $5 0 "$ , which acknowledged “50 Outstanding Leaders around the world in the field of TESOL”. In the Stanford University Rankings 2022 and 2023, he was listed in the top $2 \%$ of Scientists in the World in the disciplinary areas of Linguistics/Applied Linguistics/Educational Linguistics. Email: lj.zhang@auckland.ac.nz