# Exploring EAP teachers' expertise: Reflections on practice, pedagogy and professional development

Damian Fitzpatrick a,\*, Tracey Costleyb, Parvaneh Tavakoli c

a University of the Arts, London, UK b Department of Language and Linguistics (University of Essex), London, UK c Department of English Language and Applied Linguistics, London, UK

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Expertise   
EAP teachers   
Professional development

The last 10-15 years has seen significant change in the ways in which English for Academic Purposes (EAP) is labelled and positioned within higher education institutions in the U.K. (Hyland, 2018). EAP teachers are often viewed and treated as a uniform group even though they work under a number of often interchangeable and locally specific titles, deploying their teaching expertise across a range of different settings. Despite such generic perceptions of EAP teachers and teaching, little is known about what EAP teachers see as central to their profession, what constitutes EAP teaching expertise, and how this expertise is gained and enhanced. This paper reports on a mixed-methods design study that sought an emic perspective on what EAP teachers consider as their expertise and what opportunities they have to develop professionally. Drawing on 116 questionnaires and 15 interviews with EAP teachers the data gives voice to EAP practitioners, which has often been missing from research in the field (Ding & Bruce, 2017). Initial findings highlight issues including the types of training and development colleagues feel they need and what they receive, where EAP professional knowledge and expertise is located and the position of EAP knowledge within the broader academy.

# 1. Introduction

With the fast development of EAP as an independent field (Hamp-Lyons, 2011) and a wellestablished industry over the past two decades (Ding & Campion, 2016), EAP teachers have become important players in academia in the UK (Hyland, 2018). Their central role in engaging students in the world of aademic English and preparing them for the academic practices they will be involved in during their studies has been recognised by cholars (Ding & Bruce, 2017). Despite the centrality of their role in the field of EAP, there is ittlereearch investigating EAP teachers in terms of background and qualifications or their views and beles about their professional practice (Ding & Bruce, 2017). EAP teachers are often viewed and treated as a uniform group even though they work under a number of dffernt ites that are oft overlapping, intrchangeable and locll spfic, with ther teaching exprtise spread across a range of different sttings within and acros the academy. Despite such generic perceptions about EAP teachers and teaching, lttle is known about what EAP teachers see as central to their profession, what constitutes AP teaching expertise, and how this expertise is gained and enhanced. Expertise, defined as knowing, acting and being of experts (Tsui, 2009a, p. 190) and as a dynamic processthat develops over time (Tsui, 2003) is an under-reearched are f EAP. So far, littl rearch has ben conducted to understand how EAP teachers perceive their own expertise or how their professionalism develops over time. This is a gap the current paper aims t hel ill Adopting ateaching expertise perspective (Johnson, 2005; Tsui, 2009a) and situating our work in the area of teacher cognition (Borg, 2015), we aim to understand and provide evidence for what EAP teachers consider as the expertise in their profession and what opportunities they have to develop professionall. In order to do this, we ive voice to AP practitioners, which has oten ben missing from research in the field (Ding & Bruce, 2017).

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. EAP and EAP practitioners

Several studies have aimed at exploring and identifying the position of EAP and EAP teachers. While there are different views about whether EAP is a sub-discipline f applied linguistics, English language education or English for Specific Purposes (ESP) (SeeGillt, 2011; Ding & Campion, 2016; Ding & Bruce, 2017), there iscommon consensus that EAP is \*a legitimate academic discipline in which research and publication are component parts, integrated with teaching" (Davis, 2019, p. 72). The fact that EAP is considered a specialist, theory- and research-informed branch of English language and litracy education' (Ding & Bruce, 2017, p. 53) indicates that EAP teachers/practitioners are a specialist group of academics who provide language and literacy education.

Davis (2019) argues that the term practitioner more appropriatel defines this profession as their practice goes beyond teaching to include th wider contex ftheir profesion from idnfying students neds to facilitating the relaionship betwe students and thir subject/content tachers. Despite the consensus about both EAP being a field and the scope of EAP practitioners work, ther is less certainty/transparency about the position of EAP practitioners in universities. Research in this area (Charles & Pecorari, 2015; Davis 2019; Ding & Bruce, 2017) suggests that EAP practitioners academic status and teaching and research roles vary, quite considerably, across different contexts, leading to ambiguity about who EAP practitioners are and what roles and responsibilitie they hold. The variation, although largely influenced by educational systems and cultural contexts, can usually be observed in a single educational culture. For example, in the UK higher education, variations exist acros institutions i terms of EAP practitioners academic status, educational background, qualifications required, and oportunities for development and promotion. There i evidence, for example, to suggest that while AP is recognised as distinct field of study in British universitie, many f the teachers move from teaching General English to EAP (Campion, 2016), and routes that allow practitioners to move into the profession, are most ften informal and ad hoc' (Alexander, 2007, p. 1).

Most EAP teachers in the UK context, will typically hold an advanced language teaching diploma such as the Diploma in English Language Teaching (DELTA) with universities often requiring applicants to also hold a Master's degree in TESOL or a related field, though few of these have an EAP component (Stapleton & Shao, 2018; Ding & Campion, 2016). Over recent years BALEAP (BALEAP: the global forum for EAP professonals) has positioned itself as the dominant professional body for the development of EAP and is increasingly influencing the ways in which EAP is conceptualised within the UK. It has established the Teaching English for Academic Purposes (TEAP) (BALEAP, 2014) which offrs a series of pathways for individuals to continue with their EAP professional del. opment, and although this is positive, some limitations of the current scheme have been highlighted (Ding & Campion, 2016). Despite not universall considered to be an EAP-relevant qualification in terms of ontent (Campion, 2016), the DELTA/Diploma qualification is often considered to be a marker f god classrom practice for example classrom management and lesson planning. his means the reliance on these qualifications indicates something of a gap in the professional development, and/or the professional identity of EAP teachers.

# 2.2. EAP teacher cognition

The importance of teacher cognition and its impact on teacher practice has been known for a long time (See Lortie, 1975; Woods, 1996; Breen et al., 2001). Teacher cognition, or \*what teachers know, think, and believe and how these relate to what teachers do" (Borg & Burns, 2008, p. 457) has been of interest to the field of language ducation as resarching cognition is identified as an effective way to understand teachers' practice. Borg (2009, p. 163) argues that we cannot make adequate sense of teachers experiences of learning to teach without examining the unobservable mental dimension of this learning experience. Research in this area has provided a strong and almost \*uncontested view" (Borg, 2009, p. 166) that therei a strong relationship between teacher cognition and practice, with some (Borg & Burns, 2008; Phipps & Borg, 2009) arguing that teachers' core beliefs are the most influential factor in shaping teachers instructional decisions. This relationship, although it may look linear and straightforward, is shown to be highly complex and dynamic as teaching experience and cognition interact with one another as teachers' experiences develop (Borg, 2009, 2013). Research has also highlighted factors influencing this relationship including context, prior learning experience and opportunities for development. A significant contribution of teacher cognition research has been providing an insight into the process of both becoming a teacher and developing professionally as a teacher. In this study, while we are interested in both these perspectives, our main focus is on the latter that is how EAP practitioners develop professonally as they practise their profession every day.

While research on teacher cognition among in-service/practicing teachers has focused on a range of diverse aspects of teaching it has been predominantly concerned about teachers' views, beliefs and thoughts that inform teachers' practice (Borg, 2009). An important branch of this body of research has examined the opportunities for teacher professional development (PD). PD courses/activitie ae commonly known as opportunities that enable teachers to learn new ideas and develop knowledge and skills (Johnson, 2009; Ur, 2019). PD is typically anticipated to result in some kind of teacher learning reflected in a change in teacher understanding, knowledge and/or belief. PD is therefore assumed as a learning opportunity that will i turn lead to a change in teaching practice (Desimone, 2009, Sokel, 2019). While some (e.g. Borg, 2013) argue that PD is limited in providing a potential for sustainable change in teachers' practice, most researchers (e.g., Borg, 2013; Johnson, 2009) agree that PD i a rich source of earning which may result in a change in cognition and/or practice over a period of time. Other researchers (e.g., Cimer, Cakir, & Cimer, 2010; Paran, 2017; Ur, 2019) argue that providing PD even in the form of a short-term intervention has direct implications for teacher cognition and practice. Despite such deates about whether PD results in change or how long the change lasts, there is ittle disagrement about the important role of PD in teachers' development and in enabling them to become professionals in their fields. In the field of EAP, there is ittle research vidence to suggest what PD is available to teachers and in what ways it can help teachers become professional in their fields. This study aims to provide an insight into this rarely researched aspect of EAP.

# 2.3. Expertise and professionalism in teaching EAP

Our interest in teacher professionalism and expertise originates from questions raised in the iterature about the distinctiveness of EAP as a professional practce It is known that many EAP teachers have moved from neighbouring professions such as teaching general English to EAP, and as such they face specific challenges when working as an EAP practitioner (Alexander, 2012; Campion, 2016). It is also known that in making such transitions, most teachers have had to obtain new ducational or professional qualifications that would predictably prepare them for their professional practice. What remains unknown is what kind of training and support they receive n the job to give them the opportunit to become a professional EAP practitioner or to develop expertise in teaching EAP (Campion, 2016). This is in contrast with the more established fields of language teaching (e., TEsoL), in which a more long-standing history in educating practitioners and providing them with opportunities for PD can be observed (Borg, 2011; Farrll, 2012). Before providing an overview of research in EAP teacher expertise and professionalism, it is necessary to define and discuss the two terms.

Expertise in this paper, following from Tsui (2009b, p. 422) is perceived as the distinctive qualities" of successul EAP tachers that distinguish them not only from novice teachers, but also from those who have made the transition from neighbouring disciplines and which may lead them to fee challenged by many principles and practices of teaching EAP. Expertise in teacher education can be seen from varying perspectives, including \*a state of superior performance achieved after a number of years of experience and practice" (Tsui, 2009, p. 422). In our study, however, we are interested in the concept of expertis from the teachers own perspective and we are keen to know whether such views are linked with both their background and qualifications as wellas opportunities for PD. We take a process-based approach to understanding expertise where expertise is perceived as "a process f continuous search for excellence, in which practitioners work at the edge of their competence" (Tsui, 2011, p, 32).

The second important term to define here is the concept of professionalism. Leung (2009, p. 49) defines professonalism as a term regularly used to refer to \*practitioners' knowledge, skills and conduct'. At the core of the concept lies important questions such as What teachers should know, what kills and abilities they should bring to their practice, and how they should cary out their teaching. Leung (2009) considers professinalism to be of two types: sponsored versus individual professionalism. In his cassification, sponsored professionalism denotes an \*institutionally endorsed and publicly heralded" concept presented by an institution on behalf of all teachers. Indvid profesionais, in conrast, refers t indvidual techer developing a social and political ntionf rofessionalis (Leung, 2009, p. 49-50). Leung (2009) argues that English language teaching programmes should provide teachers with opportunities in which they can create a balance between the two..

This brief introduction demonstrates the complex and multidimensional concept of professionalism and the key questions it raises about teachers knowledge, skils and conduct and the relationship between them. Professinalism is undoubtedly a more complex phenomenon in the field of EAP as it is a relatively new and inherently diverse discipline. To shed light on the complex interaction between knowledge, skill and conduct in EAP, BALEAP (2008) introduced a framework in which, following Aitken (1998), competency was defined as the technical kills and professional capabilitis that a teacher needs to bring to a position in order to fulfil its functions completely (BALEAP, 2008, p. 1). The framework aims at providing an outline of what knowledge, skill and capabilities new EAP teachers should bring tothe job and how they can expand their knowledge and skills to develop professionally. For example, according to the framework:

Practitioners are expected to demonstrate a systematic understanding of the main theoretical areas of a discipline and critical awarenes of current ssues and problems. They should be able to exercise independent initiative to make complex decisions, plan tasks or deal with problems in the absence of complete or consistent information. They should show a commitment to continue to develop professionally (BALEAP Competency Framework, 2008, p. 1).

The BALEAP competency framework was originally developed on the concept of individual professionalism as it emerged from individual teachers views (responding to a survey in 2005-6). However, in its current form it serves as sponsored professionalism in Leung's (2009) terms as i is instutionally endorsed and publicly advocated. The study we ae reporting here is aimed at investigating professionalism from an individual perspective, but we are aware that teachers may refer to the sponsored profesionalism in terms of their expectations. Therefore, the results may provide us with an opportunity to compare issues related to both types of professionalism.

# 2.4. A summary of research on professional development and expertise in EAP

While there is ample research on specific characteristics of EAP teaching and learning, there is ittle research on EAP teachers professional development and expertise (Ding, 2019; Ding & Bruce, 2017; Ding & Campion, 2016; Kaivanpanah et a., 2021). Ding and Campion (2016, p. 548) have highlighted the ned for research in this area by arguing that despite the plurality of identities oles, contexts, and praxis in EAP, there is very ittle research in this area to stipulate the details of this diversity, while Blaj-Ward (2014, p. 113) sees a dearth of literature on EAP professional development, which clearly sugests a need for more understanding of this area. One of the few studies conducted in this area is Kaivanpanah et al. (2021) who have examined teaching competencies and professional development needs among 105 EAP teachers in Iran. Their study was partcularl interestd in language skill areas focusing on teachers' self-reported beliefs about their strengths and areas of development. Drawing on their data collected through questionnaires and interviews, the authors oserved that most teachers considered themselves competent in teaching academic reading and translation, and were able to identify their needs in developing expertise in listening and writing skils. An important finding of the study is that the teachers were aware of their needs, but the employers were not providing PD opportunities to mee those needs. The authors have called for more research in this area.

# 3. Methodology

As highlighted above, this paper is driven by an interest in better understanding the different types of professinal development (PD) that UK-based EAP teachers engage with and whether, and to what extent, this mirrors their own views on what they would like o. think they should be engaging in. We are interested in this not only in terms of what it tels us about current PD practices within the field but also in terms of how it can inform future directions and opportunities or PD. As such, we addres the following research questions:

1) What forms of Professional Development do EAP teachers receive and what do they want?   
2) What characterises current EAP Professional Development practices?   
3) Where might EAP Professional Development go in the future?

A mixed-methods design and an emic perspective are employed in this study in order to give voice to EAP practitioners who we know have not been well represented in the field (Ding & Bruce, 2017). The data reported on here are part of a larger project in which we conducted semi-structured interviews with 15 EAP teachers from a wide range of Higher Education Institutions in the UK and surveyed 171 EAP teachers from around the world. Given what we know about the diversity and scope of practice and practitioners that is subsumed under the heading of EAP, this larger project was driven by an interest i gaining a better understanding of current EAP practitioners in terms of their professional practices, development and experiences. For the purposes of this paper, we draw from the interview data and specificall from the questionnaire data provided by the 116 UK-based EAP practitioners and as they were the largest group of practitioners from one particular area, the paper is writen from a UK perspectie. The data were collcted over a number of months between 2017 and 2018. We were all involved in conducting the interviews as well in designing, piloting and disseminating the questionnaire.

# 3.1. Semi-structured interviews

15 teachers participated in semi-structured interviews that took place during 2017-2018. The main goal of these interviews was to explore participants routes into EAP and what they felt are the necessary qualities, characteristics and professonal knowledge EAP practitioners need to have and develop (see Appendix A for the interview questions). While the focus of the interviews was oriented towards writing (for further discussion see Costley et al., 2020), many of the questions invited participants to talk about their training and development as an EAP teacher. 13 of the 15 interviews were conducted face-to-face and lasted between 15 and $6 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ each. Each interview was audio-recorded and transcribed and the authors all onducted between three and five interviews each. Two participants, Who were unable to meet in person but who were ken to participate, were emailed the interview questions and responded in writing. At the time of the interviews, our participant (6 males and 9 females) had allbeen teaching for between 13 and 36 years and had been specifically teaching EAP for between 5 and 20 years..

# 3.2. Questionnaires

In addition to the 15 teacher interviews, we employed a questionnaire to discover more about how EAP teachers described their practice(s). Based on themes that emerged from the teacher interviews as well as from the literature (e.g. Ding & Bruce, 2017), the questionnare was divided into five broad sections which included a biographical section as well as sections on teachers understanding of EAP, their experiences of and atitudes towards professonal development, their views on the challenges of being an EAP practitioner, as well as their views and experiences on teaching writing (ee Appendix B). The questionnaire comprised 41 questons: 19 closed questions and 22 open-answer questions prompting the participant to provide free text answers. While such a high number of open-ended questions may be les common in questionnaire designs (Doryei, 2007), we made this choice in order to give respondents as much opportunity as possibl to share their experiences in their own words. After piloting the questionnaire, we adopted a snowball technique to collect partcipants by sending the rearch instrment toolleaue and various profeional bodies that are connected to EAP teaching such as The European Association for the Teaching of Academic Writing (EATA), BALEAP: the global forum for EAP professionals and the British Association for Applied Linguistics (BAAL).

# 3.3. Data analysis

Following a grounded theory approach (Charmaz, 2014), the data handling was an iterative process involving cycles of time working in the data and in discussion with each other and the research iterature (se aso Baralt, 2011). With regard to handing and analysing the data we adopted a complementary processfor both the interview and questonnaire data. We collected allthe answers to questions relating to professional development that were open-ended and qualitative in nature. The first round of coding was led by one team member who worked through the data coding the response to each question separately. When this fist round of intial/open coding (Friedman, 2012) was complete the codes were shared with the second coder who went through all of the codes to check for agrement and disagrement. hile there was coe agrement betwen coders it was stilla multiste process interms of finlising the codes. The next stage was to revisit the coded datato identif paterns and themes within each of these main codes alowing us to move to the next stage of our analytical work that involved working with descriptive statistics to identify and present patterns.

# 3.4. Participants

In total, 171 teachers from 27 different counre responded to the questionnaire demonstrating the current increasing global reach of EAP. Of these 171 respondents, 116 were teaching in the UK (either full o part-time) and it i thi goup who form the data for this paper. The large number of respondents working in the UK may be due to the fact that the researchers are based there and that we used both the BALEAP and BAAL listservs to recruit participants.

One of the aims of this study is to discover more about what it means to work as an EAP teacher, especially as there is significant variation in what the role actually means and does (Ding & Bruce, 2017). Thi lack of homogeneity can be seen in the wide range of the job titles from the participants in our study. From our 116 participants 81 different job titles/posts were given within which only 27 participants actually included a reference to EAP in their job title such as EAP Course Tutor; EAP Lecturer or EAP Manager. Around $2 0 \%$ of the participants (25) reported holding some sort of management role such as programme leader, director, coordinator or head with many of these sharing both a management and teaching role. 92 of the participants jobtles can be described predominantly as being related to teaching but even here diffrent terminology is used (See Appendix C for most common job titles). Such diversty raises interesting questions about what the diffrences are in these roles, identitie, contracts and possilities of progression for teachers, tutors, lecturers or ellows. This myria fttls higlights not just thediffern ontexts that EP practtioners work inat the university but also how they operate and are seen to operate. For example, 26 of the participants had the word lecturer in their title (Associate Lecturer (2); EAP Lecturer (7) Lecturer (3) and Senior Lecturer (13), whil there was one associate professor and one assistant professor of English language suggesting that these roles may wel allow access to such things as promotion and funding, which is not always the case for many other job titles of teachers in this study (See Appendix D for fullist of job titles).

The majority of those who participated in the study were experienced teachers with all but one of them having taught for more than 6 years. With respect to this EAP teaching experience, 64 of them (around $5 5 \%$ ) had worked in EAP teaching for more than 10 years (see Table 1 below). This suggests that in terms of participants in this study, this is a group of experienced teachers who are well positioned and equipped to discuss their work and who are alo likely to be aware of and possibly belong to professional development groups such as BALEAP.

As may be expected, there was a broad range with respect to how the 116 participants described their qualifications, withall but one of them, who leaned on the job posessing either Certificate, Diploma, Masters, Doctorate or a combination of some (or all) of them (see Table 2).76 participants held at least a CELTA qualification with the vast majority of these also possessing a Diploma and a Masters (49). A majority of the participants have a Master's degree (99), with some having more than one, whil the most common of these degrees were an MA TEsOL or MA in Applie Linguistics, though there were also 39 other Masters degree included in the data. Interestingly, there did not seem to be a consistent or typical qualification path' but the most common set of qualifications that participants held was a combination of the Certificate, the Diploma and a Masters (49) with another 20 holding a Diploma and a Masters.

# 3.5. Teachers' professional development

When asked if they had received any EAP in-service training 73 of the respondents said yes. The most common types included attending conferences, participating in Continuing Professional Development workshops, BALEAP-related events, in-house training, mentoring and receiving different kinds of funding.

Table 1 Participants' teaching experience $( \mathtt { n } = 1 1 6 )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Number of Years Teaching</td><td>Number of Years Teaching EAP</td></tr><tr><td> 0-1 year</td><td>0</td><td>4 (3.5%)</td></tr><tr><td>2-5 years</td><td>1 (0.8%)</td><td>16 (13.5%)</td></tr><tr><td>6-10 years</td><td>8 (6.85%)</td><td>32 (27%)</td></tr><tr><td>10+ years</td><td>107 (90.5%)</td><td>64 (55%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Participants' qualifications $( { \bf n } = 1 1 6 )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Qualification</td><td>Numbers</td></tr><tr><td>Doctorate (PhD/EdD)</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>MA (TESOL)</td><td>31</td></tr><tr><td>MA (Applied Linguistics)</td><td>41</td></tr><tr><td>Other MAs</td><td>39</td></tr><tr><td>Diploma/DELTA</td><td>77</td></tr><tr><td>Certificate (e.g. CELTA)</td><td>76</td></tr><tr><td>PGCE</td><td>24</td></tr><tr><td>TEAP</td><td>6</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4. Data discussion and findings

# 4.1. Interview data

As mentioned above, the interviews explored themes about writing and what was involved in supporting students in developing the literacies they need to participate successully within their studies. For the purposes of this paper, we report on the responses we received when we asked participants what training they felt EAP tutors need. In coding the responses to this question, we identified four key themes that emerged from the data and which characterise the responses we received in asking this question. These were 1) EAP-specific knowledge and training, 2) Qualifications 3) Insight and understanding of what students are asked to do, and 4) Observations of peers.

With regard to the first theme of EAP-specific knowledge and training' four collagues mentioned EAP skils and EAP content as being important and focused on aspects such as grammar, lexis and voice'. Others spoke of the need for training in psycholinguistics and genre studies as well as more training in academic literacies. Lastly, two colleagues talked about the ways in which EAP-specific knowledge and training developed through experience and through doing the job.

The next most common focus in our participants' responses were references to qualifications with 12 different comments. Within these comments, eight diffrent participants talked about the kinds of qualifications they felt EAP practitioners benefit from having with references made to CELTA, DELTA, TEAP and Master's level study (MA TESOL and MA Applied Linguistics). A key feature of these comments is that these qualifications were seen very much as starting points and useful baselines with the following quote capturing this sentiment very well:

"And then I think the has to be .. thee has to be at least some peronal experience f acdemia, or higher eucation, I dot think it's enough to, say, have your CELTA or DE or maybe just  BA, Ithink you really do need some ort of post-grad qualification.I think in Education or Linguistics or maybe an MA in TEsOL or something because ulessyou've actually been part f that community of practice and you had to enact those kind of requirements of post-grad study you're really at a disadvantage'. (Teacher 1)

The five responses that were coded under Insight and understanding of what students are asked to do' allfocused on the need for training and development that promoted their understanding of "what it means to be learning English within a higher education instit. tion". These responses highlighted the need for teachers to have a knowledge and awareness of what the general universt expectations are as well as an Awareness of how kowedge s used, constructed, tansmite, rered, and crted whin the uiversity across different disciplines."

Within their discussion of training and development four references were made to the importance of and need for Observations of peers'. Two of the comments referred to observations of peers and colleagues within EAP and two referred to the need for EAP col. leagues to oserve ther colleagues and practitioners across the University. Here we quote one of thee later comments in which one of our interview said  think i ould be relly interesing toget pre . an AP tcher to actully shdow a min corse ttor and gt totlk to thm  th f e  a di h fo s  the s thik  th o  th  c to EAP on the sorts of issues that they are confronted with". (Teacher 2).

Another question we asked in the interviews and which yielded interesting data on professional development and expertise was What advice would you give teachers interested in moving into EAP? Across the 15 interviewes the four themes discussed above were reiterated and a further interrelated theme emerged strongly and this was the need to understand the dynamic and continuing nature of professional development within EAP. There were ten comments that implored colleagues to get ready' and be open to the idea of ongoing learning and development. As the following quote exemplifies, understanding professional development as a process was identified as a common experience of EAP training and development: AP teaching s continuous development and you willtil be wet behind the ears for a good whileye. Thats een my experience, and th experience of other teachers that I know of." A further eight comments built on this by highlighting the need for colleagues to engage in reading and that this is a necessary part of developing knowledge and expertise and the following quote captures this sentiment clearly, "red about EAP, investigate the literature, .- f this doesn't make you interested to find out more, then perhaps EAP isn't for you."

# 4.2. Questionnaire data

In addition toasking the participants about their language teaching qualifications (see Table 2 above), we also wanted toknow what qualifications they thought EAP teachers should have. Almost half of them (52) felt that CELTA was necessary, with a further 89 suggesting that a DELTA was important to have, while 90 of the participants suggested that having a Master's(e. MA TESOL/Applied Linguistics) would be useful. Interestingly, 42 mentioned that a TEAP qualification would be beneficial for EAP teachers (mostly in conjunction with a Master's or a Diploma) but only 8 of the cohort actuall had this qualification at the time. The low number of participants with the TEAP qualification is likely to be a result of the qualfication still being quit new (or that participants did not have time to do it) but the responses suggest that a TEAP qualification is seen as covering areas that an MA or DELTA do not.

# 4.3. Professional development/in-service training

Within the questionnaire, we asked participants f there was any additional in-service training they would like to have and 60 of the 107 responded saying yes. This was followed up with a question that sought to understand what kinds of additional training these EAP participants would like to have. Table 3 (below) shows an overview of the dominant codes that emerged along with the number of comments related to each code.

With regard to Classoom management, practical sils, and materials development' the main focus of the comments was on technology (3), curriculum design and course planning (3) and new/creative approaches to asessment and differentiation (3). Other comments highlighted an interest in specific areas, such as decolonising the curriculum (1), sEN (1) and pronunciation (1). The two next most frequent codes provide more insight into the kinds of content our respondents expressed interest in, as wel as the ways in which they would like to receive that training.

The 13 comments coded under the theme Content, subject, and discipline training' show that colleagues identified the broader field of linguisticsas the primary source for knowledge and information and where the broader knowledge base is sen as residing with respect to our participants. Allresponses highlighted an interest in training that focused on disciplinary knowledge in some way and the ollowing quot is an llustration of the ways in hich colleages resonded: "Relating AP delivery to seificdisciline areas". Other broader areas were also identified such as "some training in teaching ESP" along with more specificrequests such as Practical SFL [Systemic Functional Lingustics] awarenes taining for cassroom use" and "Incorporating the AcLits [Academic Litracies] philosophy into $E A P ^ { \prime \prime }$ . The responses also highlight our participants interest in pedagogies (and training more broadly) that are research-informed. Where the responses to 'Content, subject, and discipline training focused on broad content, the 13 responses that were coded under Knowledge, skill and experience sharing' very much focussed on the ways in which our participants flt this knowledge and information should be sought and provided. Attending professional seminars" and being able to ask questions to experts and other colleagues were the most frequent answers in this code (with nine). Within the comments there was equal importance placed on in. house seminars as well a attending external events such as conferences. In adtion to these actvities there was also an emphasis on "pee oservation" and the need to "bserve more experience taff" (from four of the participants). The overwhelming impression from the comments under this code is a clear sense of colleagues wanting to make sure that what they are doing is consistent with what is happening within and across other similar institutions and contexts.

The comments we coded as Keeping up to date with the field/discipline' were the next most frequent (with seven) and are closely linked to the two previous codes. All of the comments here referred to the need to engage with EAP research and to ensure that time was available in individuals' workloads/working wees to be able to read and aces up-to-date information as evidenced in the following comment "more time or scholarship acivity". The comments reveal a clear sense that colleagues felt that the field moves at pace and that they feel under (professional) pressure to keep up. An equal number of responses were also coded under Formalised (certified) training' and of these the BALEAP's TEAP competencies were referred to twice with other comments highlighting the need for "something like DELTA", as well as EAP more generally. Under the code Local ontext knowledge and institution related training', four comments highlighted the need to ensure that colleagues were made aware of what was required of them within their institutions and the following comment highlights this theme well Applying to local context - I've worked here for 10 years and leant on the job but some training beforehand would have been good for the context".

The smallest code (with only three respondents) collected together comments that related to working with academics'. The three comments are: "portunities with academic dearments -Ithink thereis lttle understnding mongt acadmics about what we do, but lso sometimes we ar set i our ways and tech AP without relly adpting to the context and relife tass our students ill nd to perform in academia"; "More training on supporting staff from other disciplines with EAP" and "on co-working with academic/desining embedded academic literacies" It is interesting that there are only thre comments that make explicit cll for closer working relationships with academics althoughit is worth noting that within the code Knowledge/experience sharing the use of experts and profesionals may well be referring to other academic colleagues.

Table 3 What kind of EAP in-service training would you like to have? $( \mathbf { n } = 1 0 7 )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Classroom management, practical skills and materials development</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>Content, subject, and discipline training</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td>Knowledge, skills and experience sharing.</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td>Keeping up to date with field/discipline.</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Formalised (certified) training</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Local context knowledge and Institution related training.</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Collaboration with &#x27;academics&#x27;</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>7</td></tr></table></body></html>

In addition to asking participants what training and development they have and would like to have, we also asked what they felt teachers should have to see if there were any differences between their lived experiences and their expectations. This question generated a higher number of responses than the previous questions with 96 responses and Table 4 below presents these responses from highest to lowest frequency. We initiall coded this question separately to the previously discussed questions, however, as we continued to work with the data, we found that al but one of the codes that we were identifying were the same. The additional emerging code is Experience-based input/Not sure/it depends' and we discuss all of these in more detail below.

The 23 responses provided in relation to Keeping up to date with the field allincluded a focus on professional development and the need for on-going and regular provision. The comments overwhelmingly highlighted the nee for colleagues to not oly keep abreast of current rsearch within the field but alo the need to know how these ideas can be applied as praxis. The following quotes have been selected as they characterise the main focus and range of ideas in which our participants highlighted the need for: Regular practicel sesions groundd n rch/obseatiothory tht ie ors somethin to take int the clsroom"; "portie to sty up to dat ith current pedagogical research" and the opportunit to "attend conferences engage with EAP reading, association memberships". The responses showed a clear preference for workshops and conferences as the medium via which knowledge and training should be disseminated and the role ofexperts and experienced colleagues was highlighte as being important i terms of who is best placed to provide this training.

The next two categories, Classoom management, practical skills and materials development' and Knowledge, skill and expe. rience sharing follow the same patten as the previous ones (seeTables 3 and 4 above). Within the 17 comments relating tolassroom management, practical skill and materials, ten were focussed specifically on the need for training in aproaches, technologies and practices that would help colleagues to better adressthe needs of the wide range of students they find themselves teaching such as. "techniques for cassroom management epecialy given the wide disparity in students motivations and abiliy levels, often found within the same classrom', and How to teachtrtiary-lel students, with a more academic-ased focus (away from traditional ELT stl teaching)". Explicit reference was made for the need for idea for materials design and syllabus development (four different comments) and to ways of approaching feedback and nees analyses (three). The focus of the comments was much more on general classroom pedagogies and practices rather than speific and/or named training. With respect to the idea of Knowledge, sills and experience sharing all 14 of the responses expressed an interest in and continued need for mentorship, peer observation and sharing practice. The following quotes are characteristic of the responses given in which participants highlighted the opportunity to share practice, peer observations, shadowing experienced teachers", while another recurring feature was the focus on this support and mentorship being provided in house' and that this was seen very much as a Departmental activity (and obligation).

'Experience-based input/Not sure/it depends' is the code we gave to the next most frequent set of responses (11). As we mentioned before, this theme did not emerge in relation to the responses presented in Table 4. This is a helpful code in that i provides an insight into what might be missing from currnt training and development. The main focus of responses under this heading is the idea that training and development is (or should be) related to and dependent upon teachers' prior experiences and backgrounds as is demonstrated clearly in the two following responses: "AP teacher fter how many years of service? Training depends onthe nees of the teacher ndi ou diffe differn e f evice." d  onxpriece.  the g, th s shud now AP differs from ther forms of FL. Ltr, the fous should be on the expectations of the students chosen acadmic prorammes." The two quotes do a very good job of highlighting the need to take the variety of teacher backgrounds into account and that for training and development to be meaningful i should be individualised rather than generic. The majorit of comments (seven stresse the ned for flexibility and only one response suggested that "once they are employed, further qualifications may not be necessary". Within the category, Local context knowledge and instution related training the ten comments al highlighted the need for training to ensure that colleagues understand the local, intitutional requirements and how this impacts what is required of their students. This suggests that it might currently be an area that participants feeli overlooked and the focus on carefully designed induction activities also re iterates the need for training to be localised and context informed.

As might be expected, the nine responses that were coded under Content, subject, and discipline training' and the eight unde. Formalised-structured (certified) training were more specific in the detail participants gave. With regard to the first of these, the following quotes are characteristic of what participants highlighted as being important, which were: "Knowledge of discourse analysis and socio-semantic hories of language" and "Disciplin-specific writig conventions (law, engineering report, etc)". The comments also provided insight into why participants feel that thee particular areas are necessary and important and what they help teachers to do, for example \*warenessrisig of how to identify the specific requirements of a discipline (or ee degee programe). I think gnel EAP is fairly inadequate". A similar comment highlighted the need for "discourse and genre analysis, in my view an EAP tutor $=$ discourse analyst, otherwise we just kep reeating some common-sesical rules of language and literacy in academia". Within the eight comments that made reference to formalised training, there was a clear sense that training needed to be structured and formalised in some way yet only three made reference to specific examples for example, "there should be time given for doing TEAP, MA, PhD, etc." and "Extensive workshops on the differences between EFL and EAP based on BALEAP's TEAP.

Table: 4 What kind of in-service training do you think EAP teachers should receive?   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Keeping up to date with the field.</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>Classroom management, practical skills and materials development</td><td>17</td></tr><tr><td>Knowledge, skills and experience sharing.</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>Experience-based input/Not sure/it depends</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>Local context knowledge and Institution related training.</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Content, subject, and discipline training.</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Formalised-structured (certified) training</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Collaboration with &#x27;academics&#x27;</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>4</td></tr></table></body></html>

The final category under which we coded responses to the question of what professonal development colleagues think should be available is Collaboration with academics in which four people responded. The following quotes represent the ideas participants put forward, which were: "Training that helps them work efectively within the subject disciplines" and "communicating and establishing re lationships with academics". Of the four comments, the following stands out as it is quite dierent in focus from the others in that the participant adocated training subject teachers to have anguage understanding" This i the only comment in which the need for training and development is not focused on the teachers themselves.

At the end of the questionnaire, we invited further responses with the following question: Do you have any other comments about EAP teaching? Of the 57 comments that were provided in response to this question, ten were related to professional development and of these, ix touched on a theme that had not been raised in any of the previous questions and this was the importance of the idea of scholarship within EAP. The responses in which scholarship was mentioned allsimilarl noted the need for EAP practitioner to engage in some way with research with one participant referring to this as the need for EAP practitioners to be "research minded", while another said I could probably say much more. I would stess how important it i to learn about AP s a dscipline - EAP teaching should be research-iformed, th n wareness f wat that rerch i, een if the AP prctitioner os not crry out rearch themsele. chlarshp is vital"'.

# 5. Key themes and discussion

As discussed above, this paper set out to explore three inteconnected rearch questions related to developing our understanding of the ways in which professonal development is organised and experienced by EAP practitioners working in UK context. These questions are re-stated below as they help to frame the discussion that follows:

1. What forms of Professional Development do EAP teachers receive and what do they want?   
2. What characterises current EAP Professional Development practices?   
3. Where might EAP Professional Development go in the future?

With regard to question 1, our data show that there is a recognition that the PD that colleagues are engaging in is considered to be valuable, apropriate and necessary and that the kinds of PD our participants said was available mirrored the kinds of PD that they thought should be available. Across the data, collagues foregrounded the role of peer mentoring, observations and shadowing experienced colleagues as invaluable sources of professional development. As is echoed elsewhere the support of colleagues (Martin, 2014, p. 311) was highly regarded and this is likely influenced by the on the job nature f EAP knowledge and expertise development as discssed by our participants see also lsteds 2012 work. Similarly, acrossallthe data high value was placed on participating in conferences and workhops, as wellas inviting 'experts' in to provide training. These were seen as essential ways f ensuring that pedagogies are informed by, and in line with, current research and findings and that colleagues were aware of current literature.

From the data then, there is a clear pattern of and preference for the ways in which PD should take place. This is important as it highlights not only our participants interests in PD continuing and being aregular part of their professional lives but that the nature of this PD reflects need for it tobe fluid and responsiveto the needs of practitioner. There was a clear focus on being able t invite and engage with peakers and explore the application of different practce through observations. These practices are al collaborative in nature but importantly they also give colleagues a clear agency in terms of ensuring that the PD they engage in i relevant to them. In this sense our participants highlight that PD is not understod to be a passive activity but one in which colleagues can and should be active agents in their own development.

In terms of characteritics f current provision as framed in question 2, our data, as might be anticipated, show that the regularity and provision of PD is not consistent (see also Bond, 2020; Ding and Bruce, 2017; Hyland, 2018). For some collagues there is a formalised PD structure with regularlyscheduled sessions and input, for others this is more individually decided and local deter. mined. While diffring experiences of PD were represented, the data show clear agreement on and recognition of the need for EAP practitioners to be able to engage in a wide variety of on-going professional development. Our participants highlighted the need to ensure that collagues are given the requisite time, opportunity and resources to maintain, update and grow their professional knowledge. This was seen as being vital in ensuring that they are not only equipped with the most efective tools and strategies for understanding, acessing and meting the language and iteracy needs of their students but that their pedagogies are informed by, and in line with, current rearch nd findigs. I is alo important here to acknowledge that 40 participants dd not fee that further PD was necessary or needed, and not al participants elaborated on their views about what they thought PD should look like. Similarly, it is necessary to note that in this study we have investigated teacher cogntion to answer our rearch questions. As disused earlier, there is substantial rearch evidence to suggest that teacher cognition plays a role in shaping teacher practice. Given the design of the study, we have not been able to examine teacher practice in relation to professional development and professonalism. This is an area future research should invest in.

As we have discussed, our data show that as a field there is a strong commitment to professional development and engagement in collaborative and supportive practices and developmental opportunities and this, we argue, has clear implications for directions that EAP professional development might go in the future (as posed in question 3). These practice are allfirmly grounded in research and data around the ideas of collaboration, teacher training and development, as well as reflective practice and are in many ways the foundation of good pedagogy. An important characteristic of this work however is that in terms of flows of knowledge and expertisethe pattern we seeis one that remains very much contained within the field of EAP and the boundaries of our own practices. What we see in our data is that the mechanisms and practices that we value and make use of in our professional development - peer review, obser. vations, workshops, invited talks - may also be the mechanisms that restrict and contain our expertise and ensure (inadvertently) that we are our own audience.

Much of the EAP literature continues to demonstrate that EAP practice and practitioners arestilloften marginalised, on the fringes and at the service of the University (Bond, 2020; Ding & Bruce, 2017; Hyland, 2018; Raimes, 1991). In discussing this positioning, Hyland argues that, We have failed to establish the value of our work and the status of our profession. In part EAP units have brought this on themselves in their willngnessto work FOR rather than WITH subject specialiss (Hyland, 2018, p. 395 (author's mphasis). In much the same way that other disciplinesclaim, maintain and defend their own spaces we must also strive to do the same and here we cho Furneaux's (2017, p.22) cll to put our heas above the arapet.. and take part across or instittions'. othis end we suggest that while some of our current practices around professional development may be a key factor i our marginalisation they also offer us a way out. The mechanisms by which we share good practice and kee up to date are very much in place and clearly sucessully used within centres and cohorts of colleagues. Thesesame mechanisms could be drawn upon in order to begin to share and disseminate our good practices and expertise with colleagues acros the wider aademic context. Some possible future changes that may help both to mitigate and to disseminate our expertise(s) beyond the boundaries of EAP are:

$\bullet$ Engaging in observations beyond our peers;   
$\bullet$ Inviting other university colleagues to observe our practices;   
$\bullet$ Organising presentations across the university where 'we' are the 'experts' and   
$\bullet$ Using this EAP expertise as a way of providing professional development to academic departments.

# 6. Concluding comments

As with existing studies (Bond, 2020; Ding & Bruce, 2017), our data show that the EAP collagues who participated in this research come from a broad range of teaching experiences and academic backgrounds and that they entered into EAP by a range of different avenues and experinces. This finding may not be new information to many, but the current study is the first to provide research evidence that highlights this broad variation/diversity. The data also show that they are highly qualified in terms of academic degrees and teaching qualifications and that as practitioners, their skill and expertise are deployed in myriad ways within the different university contexts represented. As a result of this diversity of experience and practice, our data show that there i no one siz fits all approach to professonal development. Rather, what comes through is that our participants see professional development as an ongoing process which by nature needs to be fluid and dynamic allowing them to keep up to date with the field of EAP and to maintain their expertise (cf Tsui, 2011). A further important point here is that our data show that professional development needs to be appropriately resourced and prioritise for practitioners which is an area that could be further explored, particularly how cultures of professionalism develop and are sustained.

# CRediT author statement

The three authors have participated in all aspects of this paper.

# Appendix. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101140.

# References

Alxander.007g in th a    h ght t in gish r  . ch d.) hg academic purposes. Edinburgh: IALS, Edinburgh University.   
Alexander, 0.(2012). Exploring techer beliefs in teaching EAP at low proficiency levels. Jounal of English for Academic Puposes, 1(2), 99-11.   
Baleap. (208). ompetecy framework for teachers of glish for academic purpse. Aailable at htt://ww.balep.g k/meda/plods/pdfs/ teapcompetency-framework.pdf, 05.01.15.   
Baleap. (2014). TEAP scheme. Available at: http://www.baleap.org.uk/projects/teap-scheme, 05.01.15.   
Baralt,  1.tie d e, e   .), h m  o /.10.1002 9781444347340.ch12   
Blaj-Ward, L. (2014). Researching contexts, practices and pedagogies in English for academic purposes. Springer.   
nd   . doi.org/10.21832/9781788929301.   
Borg, S. (2009). English language teachers' conceptions of research. Applied Linguistics, 30(3), 358-388.   
Borg, S. (2015). Teacher cognition and language education. London: Bloomsbury Publications.   
Borg, S., & Burns, A. (2008). Integrating grammar in adult TEs0L classrooms. Applied Linguistics, 29(3), 456-482.   
Borg, S (2013). Teacher research in language teaching: A critical analysis.. Cambridge University Press.   
Bre     ir  1n f  r  a ti p Linguistics, 22(4), 470-501.   
ampion, . 016).Th nr  n hr v othtio l ish P  f ish  c  23 59-70.   
Charles, M., & Pecorari, D. (2015). Introducing English for academic purposes. Routledge.   
Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing grounded theory. Sage.   
er, . air  er 0 e te fi o i-r ef Education, 33(1), 31-41.   
sy   icn   .  p 286-297). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. https:/doi.org/10.1017/9781108774390.025.   
Davis, M. (2019). Publishing earch as an EAP practitioner: Opportunities and threats. Jounal of Eglishfor Aademic Pupose, 39(1), 72-86.   
ne 0  r i r 38 (3), 181-199.   
Dng,2019. AP pri t. nK d  .) ie sh dri  d A h ptic . 63-76) Routledge.   
Ding, A., & Bruce, I. (2017). The English for academic purposes practitioner. Palgrave Macmillan.   
Dng A n . 016) A tcr et nld .  .), The  ook of ish r   .571-583) Routledge.   
Dornyei, . (2007). Rerch methods in pplied linguistics Quantitive, qudlitative and mixed methodologies. Oxford: xford Universt Pres.   
Frian2t   ti  . (pp. 180-201). Wiley-Blackwell.   
Furneaux, C. (2017). Opening plenary: State of the union: What union. In M. Gillway (Ed.), Proceedings of the 2017 BALEAP conferene.   
Gillett, A. J. (2o11). What is EAP?. Available at: http:/www.uefap.com/bgnd/. February $1 ^ { \mathrm { s t } }$ 2022.   
Hm-Ly 01). ih o  . n  o f     ( 05)e York: Routledge.   
Hyland, K. (2018). Sympathy for the devil? A defence of EAP. Language Teaching, 51(3), 383-399.   
Johnson, K. (2005). Expertise in second language learning and teaching (Vol. 128). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.   
.)  in p 20-29). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
a   01 t   te    ianP practitioners. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 50, Article 100971. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Lortie, D. (1975). School teacher: A sociological study. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
ar . 1    i     .   
Paran, A. (2017). 'Only connect': Researchers and teachers in dialogue. ELT Journal, 71(4), 499-508.   
Phipps, S., & Borg, S. (2009). Exploring tensions between teachers grammar teaching beliefs and practices. System, 37(2), 380-390.   
ames 199)ati t  win i    o linguistics (pp. 238-249). Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.   
Sokel, F. (2019). The effectiveness of a professional development course: Teachers' perceptions. ELT Journal, 73(4), 409-418.   
Stapleton, P, & ha, Q. (2018). A worldwide survey of MAS0L programs in 2014: Patems and perpecties. Language Teachin Reerch, 221) 10-28.   
Tsui, A. B. M. (2003). Understanding expertise in teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
i teacher Education (pp. 190-199). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Tsui, A. B. M. (2009). stintive qualities of xprt techr. chers and ching Thry and Practice, 15(4), 421439. htp://doi.or/10.1080/ 13540600903057179   
01    f h   139).w York & London: Routledge.   
Ur, P. (2019). Theory and practice in language teacher education. Language Teaching, 52, 450-459.   
Woods, D. (1996). Teacher cognition in language teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.