# Public speaking performance improvement as a function of information processing in immediate and delayed feedback interventions

Paul E. King, Melissa J. Young & Ralph R. Behnke

To cite this article: Paul E. King , Melissa J. Young & Ralph R. Behnke (2000) Public speaking performance improvement as a function of information processing in immediate and delayed feedback interventions, Communication Education, 49:4, 365-374, DOI: 10.1080/03634520009379224

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/03634520009379224

# Public Speaking Performance Improvement as a Function of Information Processing in Immediate and Delayed Feedback Interventions

Paul E. King, MelissaJ. Young, and Ralph R. Behnke

Treatments of performance feedback in the communication literature have generally focused on the pragmatic advantages of such systems while remaining uncritical of the information processing context in which such instructional interventions are employed. Communication theorists have distinguished between tasks that reguire conscious deliberation and tasks that are executed automatically. In the present study, the efficacy of using immediate and delayed feedback in generating improvement on a subsequent performance, for tasks which vary in information processing requirements, was examined. Analyses indicate that immediate feedback intervention is more effective when automatic processing occurs while delayed feedback produces greater change with tasks involoing deliberative and effortful processing. Interpretation of the findings, in light of extant theory and research, is provided. Keywords: feedback, information processing, feedback intervention, public speaking.

Originating as a cybernetic concept in the fields of physiology, engineering, and mathematics (Littlejohn, 1992), feedback is conceptualized as the element in communication systems which provides the knowledge of progress necessary for subsequent adjustment of behavior. Yet, feedback has received limited attention in the communication literature and scholars have tended to treat it as an object in the form of a response to a message, rather than as a process (Cusella, 1987). As a consequence, "In contrast to its fundamental and central position in other social sciences, feedback still occupies a limited and restricted place in theories of communication." (Frandsen & Millis, 1993, pp. 79-80).

Broadly defined, feedback is an essential element of systems that are adaptive in nature. Absent knowledge of performance, there is a lack of strategic adjustment in the form of performance improvement (Sorenson & Pickett, 1986). Perhaps the absence of more illuminating findings regarding feedback can be traced to oversimplified treatment of the concept. For example, while significant distinctions are made between cognitive processes that require conscious or automatic information processing (Kahneman, 1973; Langer, 1979) or that rely on short- or long-term memory processes for performance effectiveness (King & Behnke, 1989a), such distinctions have seldom found their way into feedback research. The present study is focused on the efficacy of feedback interventions in the improvement of a subsequent speaking performance based upon timing of feedback (immediate vs. delayed) and type of feedback (automatic vs. effortful mental processes).

Paul E. King is an Associate Professor of Speech Communication at Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, TX 76129; pking@gamma.is.tcu.edu (e-mail); 817-257-6076 (phone); 817-257-7090 (fax). Melissa J. Youngis an Assistant Professor and Ralph R. Behnke is a Professor in the same department.

Communication Education, Vol. 49, No. 4, October 2000, pp. 365-374 Copyright 2000, National Communication Association

# Background and Statement of the Problem

Clement and Frandsen (1976) argue that feedback is not an independent activity, but a complex set of relationships that influences an entire system. In contrast, however, feedback has typically been defined in communication research as deliberate descriptive and/or evaluative comments given to a speaker following a presentation (Book, 1985; Booth-Butterfield, 1989; Clement & Frandsen, 1976). As a result, feedback research has focused on those post-performance comments typically associated with speech criticism.

The effectiveness of post-performance feedback is unclear. While some scholars have found that post-performance feedback increases motivation (Butler & Nissan, 1986; Fried & Ferris, 1987) and performance (Swindell & Walls, 1993), others have found little or no improvement attributable to feedback (for excellent reviews of the mixed results, see Balzer, Doherty & O'Connor, 1989; Bangert-Downs, Kulik, Kulik, & Morgan, 1991; Kluger & DeNisi, 1996). In fact, a meta-analysis of over 600 effect sizes found that over $3 8 \%$ of the effects were negative, or opposite the direction intended by the feedback (Kluger & DeNisi, 1996). The authors conclude, "... that the presence of negative effects of feedback interventions on performance are robust and not artifacts" (Kluger & DeNisi, 1996, p. 258). Moreover, intervening variables appear to play a crucial role in the learner's interpretation of feedback. For example, in an attributional study of feedback efficacy, Booth-Butterfield (1989) established that communication apprehension level influences the manner in which students are likely to interpret post-performance feedback. In similar studies distinctions are made between positive, reinforcing feedback and negative, corrective feedback (Book, 1985).

# Delayed vs. Immediate Feedback

While research has been focused primarily on traditional approaches to feedback, numerous suggestions have been offered for providing immediate feedback during performances. One early immediate feedback system involved audience members by asking them to hold up various colors of cards to indicate their positive, negative, and neutral reactions to a message (Amato & Ostermeier, 1967). Nyquist and Wulff (1982) report some success in changing public speaking behaviors through a \*bug in the ear' system which allowed spoken comments to be sent to students during performance. The Communication Effectiveness Trainer (ComET) integrated a video monitor into the speaker's lectern for the purpose of transmitting instructional feedback during performances (Behnke & Beatty, 1977; Behnke & Beatty, 1979; King & Behnke, 1985). The ComET system has since been adapted to the purpose of sensitizing students to naturally occurring forms of feedback which audiences themselves can provide (King & Behnke, 1989b).

Indications of pedagogical success with the ComET system have been reported (Behnke & Beatty, 1979; Jurma & Froelich, 1984). In addition, the inherent advantages of immediate feedback have been explored, including the enabling of instructors to operate within the "teachable moment' (Quigley & Nyquest, 1982, p. 328) and to comment on what is happening rather than what has happened (King & Behnke, 1998). It is suggested that delays in providing feedback may result in students simply not remembering the behavior in question. Finally, allowing a performance to continue to its conclusion without correcting speaking behavior results in a situation where the student practices, and possibly makes a habit of, the inappropriate behavior.

In some contexts, experimental evidence supports the effectiveness of immediate feedback systems (Schroth, 1995). Reports of success in the use of immediate feedback most often appear in modifying psychomotor skills, such as speech delivery skills. In sports, the inherent advantage of immediate feedback has long been appreciated (for example, see Simek & O'Brien, 1978). However, public communication is an extraordinarily complex task and many elements of it's execution require high levels of planning. Berger (1997) suggests that, "as attentional resources are increasingly devoted to conscious planning processes, one would expect increments in the degree to which action production in general and message production in particular can be monitored by the message producer' (p. 228). Clearly, as a communicator devotes attentional capacity to strategic message features, less attentional resources are available to monitor and control the automatic features of communication behavior (e.g., eye contact, gestures, vocal rate and volume, disfluencies, facial expression, etc.). The proper execution of these automatic and nonconscious behaviors can best be managed with a feedback system which prompts the speaker to learn behaviors by repeatedly practicing them correctly.

However, executive processes (Greene, 1997) which require conscious, effortful deliberation and preplanning are probably best managed through post-performance feedback. For example, organizational features, transitions, and the citation of evidence must be planned in advance. Interruption of a performance to correct mistakes in these areas would not result in immediate adaptation and would be disruptive. In developing a theory of interactive conversational planning, Waldron (1997) discusses the differing effects of preplanned and online (during conversation) planning. Several debilitating effects are attributed to online planning, including diversion of attention, processing delays and disfluencies. This problem may be exacerbated by high workload conditions (Waldron, 1990).

In short, while the activation and assembly of plans and scripts is performed immediately and with minimal conscious awareness, executive activities require conscious and deliberative efforts to access long-term memory and arrive at communicative alternatives for problems. Croce, Howat and Roswal (1996) provide evidence that students who receive only immediate feedback upon the completion of each trial preserve less information in long-term memory than participants who receive only delayed, summary feedback.

Delayed, post-performance feedback provides students with opportunity to rehearse changes, based upon the instructor's suggestions (Beck & Lindsey, 1979), leading to improved long-term memory storage of the changes in behavior. An alternative explanation for the presence of a delay retention effect (i.e., when feedback is more effective following a delay) is that initial error responses decay during delay intervals and so do not interfere with learning correct responses based upon the corrective feedback. This phenomenon is known as the interferenceperseveration hypothesis (Kulhavy & Anderson, 1972). In a test of this hypothesis, Swindell & Walls (1993) found evidence that different cognitive mechanisms were at work in immediate vs. delayed feedback conditions. High confidence in incorrect behavior interfered with the acquisition of correct responses under immediate feedback conditions. In contrast, low confidence responses decayed and the presentation of delayed feedback (both reinforcing and corrective) served as instruction, thus supporting the interference-perseveration hypothesis. In combination, these perspectives suggest that feedback delays contribute to successful long-term memory storage while immediate feedback can create forms of cognitive interference which inhibits Iearning.

In summary, current views of human information processing distinguish between effortful and automatic behaviors. Delayed feedback promotes effective execution of effortful processes because of the delay retention effect. Immediate feedback aids in the production of automatic, nonconscious behavior by assisting in its habituation through rehearsal. Since delivery skills are automatic in nature and receive minimal attentional energy, memorization alone is insufficient for their proper execution.

# Feedback Intervention Theory

As suggested earlier, the over-all effectiveness of instructional feedback is unclear. Kluger and DeNisi (1996) maintain that researchers in this area can become uncritical advocates of instructional feedback while study results are limited and often misinterpreted. In fact, they document highly variable effects of feedback interventions, including studies showing attenuation of task performance associated with increases in feedback. In proposing feedback intervention theory, they define feedback interventions as, "actions taken by (an) external change agent(s) to provide information regarding aspects of one's task performance" (p. 255). Feedback intervention theory represents an effort to integrate and explain the wide range of results found in the feedback literature through a variety of academic disciplines. The theory was supported by means of a meta-analysis of 607 effect sizes.

In predicting the effect of feedback on performance, feedback intervention theory proposes three salient classes of variables: message cues, the nature of the task performed, and personality variables. Of these three, message cues and personality variables have been most extensively explored in the literature. Kluger & DeNisi (1996) find this lack of attention to the nature of the task surprising and suggest that the lack of a sufficient task taxonomy is partially responsible for the oversight (p. 268).

Through a moderator analysis, the authors draw two major conclusions. First, cues which draw attention to meta-task processes (i.e., reinforcement that causes the subject to direct attention to self) attenuate performance while cues which draw attention to task motivation or learning processes augment performance. Second, and of greatest relevance to the present study, is that feedback effectiveness is moderated by the nature of the learning task.

In the present study, task properties related to automatic and effortful processing during public speaking are investigated in regard to how those properties relate to immediate and delayed feedback interventions. For the purpose of this study, we are using the terms automatic and effortful, to distinguish cognitive tasks on the basis of information processing requirements: automatic referring to activities that are so entrenched as a behavioral routine that they are executed mindlessly, and effortful referring to tasks requiring high degrees of attention capacity (as in J. O. Greene's term "executive processes"). In exploring information processing requirements of the task as a potentially important property, feedback intervention theory can be further developed and expanded.

H1: Immediate feedback will prove most effective when applied to tasks involving high levels of automaticity.

H2: Delayed feedback willprove most effective when applied to tasks involving effortful processing of information.

Since literature related to instructional applications of immediate feedback systems has consistently been focused on the issues of learner anxiety and interest (for example, see King & Behnke, 1985), it was determined that affect and anxiety levels of immediate and delayed feedback systems should be compared. This issue is of pedagogical importance since immediate feedback systems (such as ComET) are quite unlike traditional classroom approaches for providing instructional feedback. Affect levels can affect student motivation to learn. Speaker anxiety is a salient concept to student speakers and is a factor in the skill acquisition process. Greene, et al. (1998) argue, cogently, that the onset of state anxiety produces disruptive, off-task cognitions. Moreover, it is argued that state anxiety can retard skill acquisition through mechanisms such as heightened arousal and behavior inhibition (Greene, Rucker, Zauss, & Harris, 1998). As a result, instructional delivery systems, including those which provide immediate feedback, may circumvent the advantages of improved instructor/student information flow if they produce large differences in state anxiety levels. Consequently, the following research question was advanced:

RQ1: How is participant anxiety and affect impacted by feedback timing?

# Method

# Participants

Ninety-one undergraduate students enrolled in a moderately-sized private university participated in the study. A decision was made not to involve students currently enrolled in public speaking performance-based courses due to potential interaction effects between experimental treatments and current classroom instruction. Instead, students were drawn from non-performance based speech communication classes. A balance between males $( \bar { \boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } } = 4 \bar { 3 } )$ and females $( \bar { \boldsymbol { \mathbf { n } } } = 4 \bar { \boldsymbol { 8 } } )$ was achieved and subsequent random assignment to treatment conditions were stratified by gender. Participation in the study was voluntary and constituted one elective means by which students could fulfill departmental service participation requirements. Appropriate safeguards for participant welfare and confidentiality were maintained and approved by a university oversight committee.

# Procedures

Participants were randomly assigned to one of three groups: control, immediate feedback, or delayed feedback. A 4 to 5 minute, prepared speech related to international human rights was provided to participants who were then asked to write their own introduction. Use of a standardized, rather than student authored, presentation was selected as a means of assuring experimental control. Student planned introduction length served as a variable in the study and was easily distinguished from the standardized speech provided. Students were scheduled to meet with an experimenter on an individual basis to present the speeches. They were informed that this initial presentation was a practice session.

Participants in the immediate feedback condition utilized the ComET system for receiving instructional feedback during the performance. The current version of the ComET system included a notebook computer capable of displaying instructional feedback through video projection to a screen in front of the participant. Comments were prerecorded and displayed by striking a single key. Students in the delayed feedback condition were given identical comments in written form at their next scheduled class meeting, the following day. Students in the control group were simply thanked for their presentation.

In the immediate feedback condition, feedback was choreographed in the planned speech so that participants would receive comments at standardized moments. Feedback consisted of a series of four intervening comments. The first two, "need more eye contact ... look up" and "introduction should be longer and more detailed"' were subject to later analysis. The second two, "smile," and "add transitions between your major points" operated as distracters. Essentially, there was concern that an over-sensitization to the treatment variables might occur if they were offered in isolation. Also, it was felt that ecological validity was enhanced by including more than two feedback messages since speech criticism regularly involves multiple suggestions. It should be noted that the comments related to introduction length and transitions require conscious and effortful planning while eye contact and smiling may be adjusted during performance and are generally regarded as nonconscious and automatic activities during public speaking.

# Instruments

At the conclusion of the initial, practice presentation, all students completed a scale assessing affect toward the learning task as well as the Speilberger, Gorsuch & Lushene (1970) A-state anxiety scale, short form. The affect measure, drawn from Andersen (1979) has performed effectively in studies of attitudes toward learning (Comstock, Rowell & Bowers, 1995; Richmond, 1990; Wanzer & McCroskey, 1998). It is operationalized by four 7-point semantic differential scales, including good-bad, worthless-valuable, fair-unfair, and positive negative. The A-state anxiety scale, short form, has also been used extensively and is well-established as a valid measure of state anxiety during public speaking performance (Beatty, 1988; Ayres, 1996). In the present study, alpha reliability was .81 for the affect measure and .94 for the anxiety measure.

# Analysis

During a second, subsequent performance of the same speech, three to five days following the initial practice speech, a videotape of the participant's performance was made. Length of introduction was measured in seconds. Eye contact was measured by counting the number of times the speaker looked up from the text. Initial plans to determine the length of eye contact were abandoned when it was observed that over $9 0 \%$ of the observations were for brief glances of less than one second duration. Individuals involved in counting and timing were not aware of the treatment conditions in which the participants were placed. Eye contact was utilized as a common delivery variable, relatively automatic in its execution. Introduction length, related to speech disposition, requires a degree of planning and conscious effort.

# Results

One-way analyses of variance were conducted to examine the effect of no feedback, immediate feedback and delayed feedback on eye contact and introduction length.

Significant effects were found for both eye contact $[ F ( 2 , \ 8 8 ) = 1 5 . 7 1 $ $\pmb { \mathscr { p } } < . 0 1$ $\mathsf { e t a } ^ { 2 } = . 2 6 3 \mathrm { ] }$ and introduction length $[ F ( 2 , 8 8 ) = 1 6 . 6 4 , \phi < . 0 1 $ $\mathsf { e t a } ^ { 2 } = . 2 7 4 ]$

An examination of means indicates trends in the directions suggested by hypotheses one and two. For eye contact, means ranged from 59.8 $\left( \bar { S } D = 3 8 . 6 \right)$ in the immediate feedback group to 30.62 $\langle S D = 1 5 . 9 \rangle$ and 26.9 $\langle S D = 1 2 . 4 \rangle$ in the delayed feedback and control groups, respectively. Scheffe tests indicated significant differences $\left( \pmb { \mathscr { p } } < . 0 5 \right)$ between the immediate feedback group and both other groups, but not between the delayed feedback and control groups.

For introduction length, means ranged from 54.41 $\langle S D = 2 0 . 9 \rangle$ in the delayed feedback group to 38.06 $\mathbf { \nabla } S D = 1 4 . 2 )$ and 32.69 $\langle S D = 8 . 4 7 \rangle$ in the immediate feedback and control groups, respectively. Again, Scheffe tests confirmed significant differences between the highest mean (delayed feedback) and the other two groups, but not between the two low means.

In response to the research question, a significant one-way analysis of variance indicated differences in affect toward the public speaking task $[ \dot { F } ( 2 , 8 8 ) = 4 . 0 7$ $\pmb { \beta } < . 0 5 , \mathrm { \ e t a } ^ { 2 } = . 0 8 5 ]$ with participants indicating significantly higher levels of affect $\left( \pmb { \mathscr { p } } < . 0 5 \right)$ in the immediate feedback. $( M = 2 1 . { \overset { \triangledown } { 2 7 } }$ $\mathbf { \bar { \boldsymbol { S } } } \mathbf { \boldsymbol { D } } = 3 . 4 _ { i } ^ { \mathbf { \dot { \prime } } }$ condition than in the delayed feedback $( M = 1 9 . 6 $ $S D = 4 . 7 $ ) or control ( $M = 1 8 . 2 2$ $S D = 3 . 4 ;$ conditions. No significant differences were found in levels of state anxiety, $F ( 2 , 8 8 )$ , n.s., though care should be taken in interpretation of this finding given the level of statistical power (.55 anticipating a medium or .93 anticipating a large effect size, Cohen, 1988, p. 313).

# Conclusions

Confirmation of the two hypotheses indicates that the efficacy of instructional feedback was dependent upon matching the timing of the feedback (immediate or delayed) to the processing requirements of the behavior to be modified. Written instructional feedback was an effective incentive for participants to expand and Iengthen planned introductions. It was, however, not effective in changing the number of attempts to establish eye contact. Likewise, eye contact was successfully modified through immediate, but not through delayed feedback.

Consistent with current theoretical views on information processing (for a discussion, see King & Behnke, 1999), behaviors which are accorded minimal attentional capacity appear to require a heavy dose of experiential adaptation. This adaptation is achieved when students are prompted to perform tasks in a new way during rehearsal. On the other hand, behaviors which involve planning and effortful processing benefited most from traditional, written feedback which is reviewed and considered apart from performance. This is consistent with the delayed retention effect found in previous research. Interestingly, the research documenting a delayed retention effect, such as the Swindell and Walls (1993) study, used traditional testing of memorized content as a method. The results of the current study are in accord with these findings since completion of a test is certainly an effortful activity. Of critical significance in the present study was the fact that incorrect matches between feedback type and processing requirements were no more successful in producing behavior change than the absence of any instructional feedback.

The findings serve to extend and elaborate feedback intervention theory. While Kluger & Denisi's meta-analysis of the feedback literature clearly indicates that feedback efficacy is dependent upon the nature of the task, they further suggest that, "the exact task properties that moderate feedback intervention effects are still poorly understood" (p. 275). Moreover, "With very rare exceptions, feedback intervention researchers have ignored the theoretical importance of task characteristics' (p. 268). The lack of research in this area is somewhat surprising since knowledge of results (feedback) studies show differing patterns of effects on motor, perceptual and verbal tasks (Annett, 1969). In the present study, task processing requirements were shown to be important in understanding the effective instructional feedback.

Kluger and DeNisi argue forcefully that cues which direct attention away from processing needs (as is the case in both praise and ego threatening feedback) reduce feedback efficacy. It seems reasonable that information processing factors such as direction of attentional capacity may be an underlying explanation for the success of feedback interventions, both in terms of the cues provided and in terms of task requirements. Since public speaking performance can be highly ego threatening, communication researchers may wish to investigate traditional approaches to speech criticism to determine whether instructional effectiveness is being lost due to misdirection of attention to meta-task cues (i.e., evaluation, criticism, grades). For example, Booth-Butterfield (1989) established that corrective feedback was highly related to learner anxiety. It would be of interest to investigate whether the experience of anxiety retards feedback effectiveness, possibly through activation of the behavioral inhibition system (Freeman, Sawyer & Behnke, 1997). Alternatively, it could be the diversion of attention to the anxiety which retards learning.

Participants in the present project indicated more positive attitudes in the immediate feedback condition than in the other two experimental conditions. While this may be little more than a Hawthorne effect derived from the additional attention of receiving immediate comments through the ComET system, it is hopeful and noteworthy that such systems may be used to supplement traditional instruction with no apparent loss of positive affect nor increase in performance anxiety. It should also be noted that participants in the delayed feedback condition did not receive their written comments until the day following the practice session during which affect and anxiety were assessed. As a result, it is also possible that students simply have more positive affect when feedback is available.

The naive assumption that more feedback is always best is challenged by findings like those in the present study. Variables such as the nature of the information processing requirements inherent in the task, direction of attention, and timing of feedback are vitally important in learning. Future research should continue to examine how these and other important constructs contribute to learning in the classroom and behavior change in everyday communication settings. For example, the feedback sensitivity construct has been developed for use in interpersonal settings (Edwards, 1990; Edwards & Pledger, 1990), but might also be applied in instructional settings to explain individual differences in the processing and utilization of messages from an instructor. It might be argued that learners high in feedback sensitivity should benefit more than low sensitivity learners from the presence of instructional feedback because they are more likely to attend to feedback cues. Alternatively, it could be argued that high sensitivity learners are more disturbed by negative evaluation and more likely to activate defense mechanisms. Thus, they could benefit less from feedback than low sensitivity learners. As another example, the impact of feedback on the process of planning and message generation is a fertile area for communication researchers. As an important component of the communication process, feedback should be as central to our theory and research as it is in basic communication textbooks.

References   
Amato, P P, & Ostermerer, T H (1967) The effct of audience feedback on the beginning public speaker The Speech Teacher, 16, 56-60   
Andersen,J F (1979) Teacher immediacy as a predictor of teaching effectiveness In D Nimmo (Ed), Communcaion yearbook 3, (pp 543-559) New Brunswick, NJ Transaction Books   
Annett,J (1969) Feedback and human behaviour Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England Pengun Books   
Ayres,J (1996) Speech preparation process and speech apprehension Communcation Educatton, 45, 228-235   
Balzer, W K, Doherty, M E, & O'Connor, R,Jr (1989) Effects of cogntve feedback on performance Psychological Bulletin, 106, 410-433   
Bangert Downs, R L, Kulik, C C, Kulk, J A, & Morgan, M T (1991) The instructonal effect of feedback in test like events Revrew of Educatronal Research, 61(2), 213-238   
Beatty, M J (1988) Situatonal and predspostional correlates of publc speaking anxiety Communicaton Education, 37,28-39   
Beck, F W, & Landsey,J D (1979) Effects of immedate information feedback and delayed informative feedback on delayed retention Journal of Educatronal Research, 72, 735-746   
Behnke, R. R, & Beatty, M J (1979) Modifying nonverbal behavior of student teachers through immedate video display Journal of Appled Communication Research, 7, 110-115   
Behnke, R R, & Beatty, M J (1977) Crtqung speaker behavior through ummedate video display Communcation Education, 26, 345-348   
Berger, C R (1997) Producing messages under uncertanty InJ O Greene, (Ed), Message productton Advances in communication theory (pp 221-244) Mahwah, NJ Lawrence Erlbaum Associates   
Book, C L (1985) Providing feedback The research on effective oral and wntten feedback strategies Central States Speech Journal, 36, 14-23   
Booth Butterfield, M (1989) The interpretation of classroom performance feedback An attrbutonal analyss Communication Education, 38, 119-131   
Butler, R, & Nssan, M (1986) Effects of no feedback, talk related comments, and grades on intrnsic motvation and performance Journal of Educational Psychology, 78, 210-216   
Clement, D A, & Frandsen, K D (1976) On conceptual and empincal treatments of feedback in human communucaton Communscation Monographs, 43, 11-28   
Cohen,J (1988) Statistical power analysis for the socal sciences Hillsdale, NJ Lawrence E ErIbaum   
Comstock,J, Rowell, E, & Bowers, J W (1995) Food for thought Teacher nonverbal immedacy,student leaning and curvilinearity Communicaton Education, 44, 251-266   
Croce, R., Howat, M, & Roswal, G (1996) Augmented fedback for enhanced skill acqusstion in individuals with traumatic brain injury Perceptual and Motor Skills, 82, 507-515   
Cusella L P (1987) Feedback motvaton and performance In F M Jablin, L L Putnam, K H Robertsand, & L W Pooter (Eds ), Handbook oforganizational communication (pp 624-678) Newbury Park, CA Sage   
Edwards, R (1990) Sensitivity to feedback and the development of self Communcation Quarterly, 38, 101-111   
Edwards, R, & Pledger, L (1990) Development and construct valdaton of the sensivity to feedback scale Communication Research Reports, 7, 83-89   
Frandsen, K. D, & Mills, M A (1993) On conceptual, theoretcal and empirical treatments of feedback in human communication Fifteen years later Communication Reports, $\delta ,$ 79-91   
Freeman, T, Sawyer, C E, & Behnke, R R (1997) Behavioral inhubition and the aributon of publhc speaking anxiety Communication Education, 46, 175-187   
Fned, Y, & Ferris, G R (1987) The valdty of the job characterstucs model A revew and meta analyss Personnel Psychology, 40, 287-322   
Greene,J O (1997) Asecond generation action assembly theory InJ O Greene, (Ed), Messag productton Advances in communication theory (pp 151-170) Mahwah, NJ Lawrence ErIbaum Associates   
Greene, J O, Rucker, M P, Zauss, E S, & Harns, A A (1998) Communicaton anxiety and the acqusiton of message production skill Communicaton Education, 47, 337-347   
Jurma, W E, & Froelich, D L (1984) Effects of immediate instructor feedback on group discussion partcipants Central States Speech Journal, 35, 178-186   
Kahneman, D (i973) Attenton and effort Englewood Cluffs, NJ. Prentice Hall   
King, P E, & Behnke, R R (1985) Teaching interviewing skills by electronically medated simulatons Journal of Research and Development in Educatron, 19, 45-48   
King, P E, & Behnke, R R (1989a) The effect of tme compressed speech on comprehensive, interpretive, and short term listening Human Communication Research, 15, 428-443   
King, P E, & Behnke, R R. (1989b) Video audience simulaton technique The Southern Communcaton Journal, 54, 294-303   
King, P E, & Behnke, R. R (199) Technology based instructional fedback intervention Educatonal Technology, 39(5), 43-49   
Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (1996). The efects of feedback interventions on performance: A historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory. Psychological Bulltin, 119, 254-284.   
Kulhavy, R. W., & Anderson, R. C. (1972). Delay-retention effect with multiple-choice tests. Journal of Educational Psychology, 63, 505-512.   
Kulik, J. A., & Kulik, C.L. C. (1988). Timing f feedback and verbal learning. Review of Educational Research, 58, 79-97.   
Langer, E.J. (1979). Mindfulness. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.   
Littlejohn, S. W. (1992). Theories of human communication. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.   
Nyquist, J. L, & Wulf, D. H. (1982). The use of simultaneous feedback to alter teaching behaviors of university instructors. Journal of Classroom Interaction, 18(1), 11-17.   
Peeck,J, van den Bosch, A. J., & Kreupeling, W. (1985). Effects of informative feedback in relation to retention of initial responses. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 10, 303-313.   
Quigley, B. L., & Nyquist, J. L. (1992). Using video technology to provide feedback to students in performance courses. Communication Education, 41, 324-334.   
Richmond, V. P. (1990). Communication in the classroom: Power and motivation. Communication Education, 39, 181-195.   
Schroth, M. L. (1995). Variable delay of feedback procedures and subsequent concept formation transfer. Jounal of General Psychology, 122, 393-399.   
Simek, T. C., & OBrien, R M. (1978). Immediate auditory feedback to improve putting quickly. Percetual and Motor Skills, 47, 1133-1134.   
Sorenson, R L, & Picket, T. A. (1986). A test of two teaching strategies designed to improve interview effectieness: Rating behavior and videotaped feedback. Communication Education, 35, 13-22.   
Speilberger, C. D., Gorsuch, R L., & Lushene, R E. (1970). Manual for he state-trait anxiety inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.   
Swindell, L. K., & Walls, W. F. (1993). Response confidence and the delay retention efect. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 18, 363-375.   
Waldron, V. R. (1990). Constrained rationality: Situational influences on information acquisition plans and tactics. Communication Monographs, 57, 184-201.   
Waldron, V. R. (1997). Toward a theory of interactive conversational planning. In J. O. Greene (Ed.), Message production: Advances in communication theory (pp. 195-220). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Wanzer, M. B., & McCroskey,J. C. (1998). Teacher socio-communicative style as a correlate of student affect toward teacher and course material. Communication Education, 47, 43-52.