# Syntactic complexity in learner-generated research paper introductions: Rhetorical functions and level of move/ step realization

Aysel Saricaoglu a,1,\*, Zeynep Bilki a, Lia Plakans b

a TED University, Ziya Gokalp Caddesi No.48 Kolej, Cankaya, 06420, Ankara, Turkey b The University of Iowa, 240 South Madison Street, Iowa City, 52242, Iowa, United States

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords: Syntactic complexity Rhetorical functions Move/step realization Research paper introductions

This study explored the relationship between syntactic complexity and rhetorical functions and the relationship between syntactic complexity and level of move/step realization in learnergenerated research paper introductions. We created a corpus of 79 introductions written by undergraduate L2 students at intermediate to high-intermediate levels. We annotated the introductions for moves and steps, measured their syntactic complexity at the global, clausal, and phrasal levels, and rated their level of move/step realization across four levels (no, low, intermediate, and high). We conducted one-way MANOVA, one-way ANOVA, Pearson correlation, and stepwise multiple linear regression analyses. We found sentences realizing Reviewing items of previous research function to be significantly longer than other steps in Move1 and to contain significantly more clausal and phrasal complexity features. Sentences performing Claiming centrality function also demonstrated significantly more phrasal complexity features as measured by complex nominals per clause. We also found a higher level of phrasal complexity in introductions with a higher level of move/step realization, which can be attributed to introductions including Step1 and Step3, rather than containing all steps. Our findings imply that there is value in developing explicit instructions on how to use complex structures in performing rhetorical steps in research paper introductions.

# 1. Introduction

To better understand second language (L2) writing, scholars have paid substantial attention to syntactic complexity, which is defined as \*the range of forms that surface in language production and the degre of sophistication of such forms' (Ortega, 2003, p. 492). A commonly held assumption is that L2 writers demonstrate more syntactic complexity as their language develops (Crossley & McNamara, 2014; Yang, Lu, & Weigle, 2015). Thus, syntactic complexity measures are ften considered as indices of language development and have been used to gauge proficiency and describe performance, especially L2 writing quality (e.g., Bulte & Housen, 2014; Casal & Lee, 2019; Crossley & McNamara, 2014).

Most L2 writing studies have depended on language forms in investigating syntactic complexity. However, complex structures are meaning-oriented and related to communicative context (Palloti, 2009). A functional view of language requires evaluating yntactic complexity in relation to meaning rather focusing only on structure. A meaning-based understanding of complexity has "a much better chance of generating workable links between syntacticomplexity as a goal and particular pedagogical contents and practices to meet educational needs" (Ortega, 2015, p. 86) L2 writing intruction can be most efective in enhancing learners development of syntactic complexity features in relation to the particular communicative purposes that they serve (Ryshina-Pankova, 2015).

The meaning dimension of syntactic complexity has caught the atention of some researchers. Ryshina-Pankova (2015) has illustrated the link between complex forms and complex meanings through nominalizations as an indicator of complex linguisic forms in advanced L2 writing. Lu, Casal, and Liu (2020) have demonstrated that sentences realizing different rhetorical functions in published research article (RA) introductions varied significantly in syntactic complexity. Lu, Casal, Liu, Kisselev, and Yoon (2021) has observed significant disciplinary variation in syntactic complexity of sentences realizing rhetorical steps in RA introductions. The difference i syntactic complexity fetres has also been oserved across ifferent R sctions and disciplines Caal, Lu, Qiu, Wang, & Zhang, 2021). Yin, Ga0, and Lu (2021) have revealed that ifferent sections of published RAs produced by emerging and expert writers have important differences in syntactic complexity features.

In our study, we attempt to contribute to this growing body of research with a focus on inexpert or learner-generated writing to examine rhetorical functions and complex syntactic structures in research paper introductions. In addition, we also explore syntactic complexity and the level of move/step realization. Our hope i to add to the developing literature on understanding the nuances of complexity in research papers. With our narrowed lens, we are not making clams about writing quality or overall rhetorical organization, but intend to understand the role that complexity plays in the quality of introductions written by non-expert research writers. In terms of the lvel of move/step realization, we developed and applied a scale, operationalized as completeness and clarity. To reiterate, this study is exploratory, and we were curious if such a scale would yield useful findings. Further, given that the linguistic realization of iferent moves and steps is ssociated with certain distinct complex syntactic structures (Lu et al., 2020, 2021), we wonder if performing certain rhetorical functions steps) impacts the syntactic complexity of an introduction for this sample of writers. Having a focus on novice writers provides insight for both practitioners who teach academic writing and for researchers of academic writing.

# 1.1. Syntactic complexity

Syntactic complexity is defined as the range and sophistication of syntactic forms produced in spoken or written language (Ortega, 2003). In L2 writing, some studies have shown that increased language proficiency yields more complex syntactic structures (Crossley & McNamara, 2014; Yang et al., 2015). However, more complexity does not always signal higher proficiency or bettr language performance, as argued by Ortega (2003) since there are the effcts of register, genre, and tas (Lu, 2011; Palloti, 2009). Palloti's (2009) study demonstrated that nonnative speakers phone conversations included longer and more complex syntactic units in an unnatural or inappropriate way than those of native speakers. Likewise, in the study of Mancill, Polat, and Akcay (2017), native speakers engaged in more subordination while nonnative speakers engaged in more cordination and phrasal sophistication in their discussion board postings. Thus, specific tasks and genres, particularl in the spoken genre, may require lower syntactic complexity at a higher proficiency level.

Syntactic complexity is traditionally measured through length-based measures (Norrs & Ortega, 2009). Existing literature contains studies that have found a relationship between syntactic complexity and length-based measures such as mean length of T-unit, mean length of sentence or mean length of clause ., Casanave, 1994; Ortega, 2003); however, reliance n just one dimension of yntactic complexity has been criticized (Biber,Gray, & Poonpon, 2011; Norris & Ortega, 2009). Norris and Ortega (2009) argue for a multidimensional operationalization of syntactic complexity with sub-constructs at the global, clausal, and phraal levels. This argument is rooted in the theory of systemic functional lingustics (SFL). In particular, the SFL perspective projects that language development starts with expressing ideas through coordination, continues with connecting ideas through subordination, and reaches an advanced level of lexical density that is realized through nominalizations (Halliday & Matthessen, 199). Based on this developmental pro gression, Norri and Ortega (2009)claim tha coordination complexity indices work better for measuring language development a the beginning lel, subordination indices at intermediate and upper-intermediate levels, and subclausal or phrasal indice at an advanced level. There i also empirical evidence that supports the need to operationalize syntactic complexity as a multidmensional construct provided by Biber et al. (2011). In their corpus-based study comparing 28 grammatical features in conversational language and academic written language, Biber et al.found out that clausal complexity measures reflect the complexities of spoken language while phrasal complexity measures represent the complexities of academic writing. In line wth the theoretical and empirical justifications to consider syntactic complexity as a multi-dimensional construct Biber et al. (2011) (Norrs & Ortega, 2009), in this study, we analyze syntactic complexity based on a number of global, clausal, and phrasal measures.

Some major topics of interest i syntactic complexity research have been the relationship between students written complexity and English proficiency, the comparison of automated judgements of syntactic complexity with human judgements, the changes in stu dents complexity over a course period or the impact f some factors on syntactic complexity, such as L1 background, planning time, or genre (e.g., Bulte & Housen, 2014; Ellis & Yuan, 204; Guo, Crossly, & McNamara, 2013; Lu, 2011; Lu & Ai, 2015; Way, Joiner, & Seaman, 2000). Such investigations of syntactic complexity have depended mainly on language forms.

The function dimension of syntactic complexit (i.., the use of complex linguistic forms to perform communicative goals) has only recently begun to receive atention in L2 writing research. Ryshina-Pankova (2015) has applied SFL to the investigation of syntactic complexity. She has demonstrated that grammatical metaphor realized as nominalizations can help L2 writers make complex meaning in advanced texts. Lu et al. (2020) have examined rhetorical functions of syntacticall complex sentences in published RA introductions and found out that sentences with different rhetorical functions vary significantly in syntactic complexity. Lu et al. (2021) has shown that syntactic complexity of sentences realizing rhetorical teps in RA introductions i affcted by the disciplinary backgrounds. Yin et al. (2021) have revealed that emerging and expert writers of published RAs produced engage in syntactic complexity features in different RA sections. Similar to these studies, in our study, we examine complex syntactic structures in sentences realizing different rhetorical functions, but our corpus is comprised of research paper introductions written by inexpert L2 writers. In addition, we explore syntactic complexity along with level of move/step realization.

# 1.2. Rhetorical moves and steps

Texts are organized around rhetorical structures, or moves (Swales, 1990). Moves are described as functional units that have their own specific communicative purposes, which serve the overall communicative purpose of a text within speific social groups. Also, key in the rhetorical structure are steps, which refer to the elements that serve the overall communicative purpose of the moves (wales, 1990). When studying these aspects of rhetorical structure, researchers have often focused on RA introductions (e.g., Cortes, 2013; Hirano, 2009; Loi, 2010; Samraj, 2002; Sheldon, 2011).

This attention may have originated with Swales (1990, 2004), who developed a move schema for RA introductions, calld the Create a Research Space (CARS) Model. This model consists of three moves: Establishing a tertory (Move1), Establishing the niche (Move2), and Presenting the present study (Move3), with each move having a number of steps. The CARs Model has inspired numerous studies. Some researchers compared the rhetorical structure of RA introductions from different disciplines and revealed variation in the rhetorical organization of RA introductions across disciplines (e.g., Samraj, 2002). Some others compared the rhetorical organization of RA introductions in two languages and demonstrated differences in the extent to which moves and steps were performed e., Hirano, 2009; Loi, 2010). Languages other than English (e.g., Brazilian Portuguese or Chinese performed rhetorical functions that the CARS Model did not account for, which according to Loi (2010) is because the CARS Model was developed based on RAs in English.

There are also a few studies which have discovered a link between recurrent linguistc forms (i.e, formulaic expressions or lexical bundles) and rhetorical functions in RA introductions (Cortes, 2013; Durrant & Mathews-Aydinl, 2011). Cortes (2013) found longer lexical bundles, including six or more words to be related to only one step of a move as i the rest of the paper is organized as follows" from Move3 Ste7 Outlining the structure of the paper (p. 38). What has begun to appear in recet literature are studies on the complex syntactic features of rhetorical functions (Lu et al, 2020, 2021; Yin et al., 2021), as reviewed in the previous sections. We aim to contribute to this emerging iterature with a specifi focus on research paper introductions wrtten by undergraduate level 2 leaners Gaining insights in these emergent academic writers i important as it can inform instruction that is key to student suces in higher education.

The level of move/step realization (i.e., to what extent moves and steps are performed) in published RA introductions has ben widely investigated (Arvay & Tank0, 2004; Hirano, 2009; Ozturk, 2007; Sheldon, 2011). In addition, the fact that sentences per. forming different rhetorical functions vary significantly in syntactically complex structures has already been documented in the litrature (Lu et al., 2020, 2021). These studies suggest that different moves and steps are linguistically realized through complex syntactic structures. In line with this, our study explores move/step realization with non-expert, non-published writers, and these writers' use of syntactic complexity within the rhetorical functions of their research paper introductions.

# 1.3. Research questions

In this exploratory study, we aim to examine the syntactic complexity features of different rhetorical functions in learner-generated research paper introductions and consider the level of syntactic complexity in the level of move/step realization. To this end, we asked the following research questions:

1 Is there a relationship between syntactic complexit features and rhetorical unctions in research paper introductions written by L2 learners?   
2 Is there a relationship between the level of syntactic complexity and the level of move/step realization in research paper in. troductions written by L2 learners? If yes, which syntactic complexity measures best predict move/step realization ratings of research paper introductions?

# 2. Methodology

# 2.1. Data

The learner corpus included 79 research paper introductions, 3,300 sentences, and 72,493 words with an average number of 918 words per introduction. The inroductions were written by undergraduate students enrolled in three sections of a second-year research methods course at an English medium university in Turkey. Al students were native speakers of Turkish and L2 learners of English. They were from three education majors: Early Childhood Education $( \mathtt { n } = 8 )$ , Primary Education $( \mathtt { n } = 1 )$ , and Guidance and Psychological Counseling $( \mathbf { n } = 6 9 )$ . Their ages ranged from 18 to 21. Their English proficiency levels were intermediate to high-intermediate (B1-B2 CEFR).

The research methods course was designed to develop students research knowledge and research writing skill. Students leaned types of research methodologies (e.g, quantitative and qualitative methods), steps of a research process (e.g, sampling, data collection, data analysis), and components of a research paper (e.g., introduction, iterature-review, research questions and hypoth. eses). They also demonstrated skill in writing a research paper introduction, conducting a review of literature, and formulating research questions. One of the requirements of the course was to produce an advanced level inroduction for a research paper. Leaners were not required to produce and/or disseminate new knowledge in this course.

The research paper introduction assignment required students to choose a research topic of interest from their own fields and produce a reearch paper inroduction. Before the assiment, (se suplementary material for the assinment, students were taught the moves and steps in research article introductions see Table 2) by explicitly studying the move-step schema, examining sample published introductions in the field of education for rhetorical organization, and doing exercises on identifying the moves and steps in a set of introductions. Students were required to apply the move-step schema within their introduction assgnment. The content re quirements of the asignment were created based on the CARs Model with the premise that learning to write an inroduction would help students in their subsequent 4th-year Research Project course. In the Research Project course, students would produce new knowledge y conducting a study and then write afull research paper, although submission for publication was not a requirement. The moves were also outlined in the assgnment intructions asking students to introduce their specific topic, provide general background, review previous research, indicate a research gap, present positive justification, and describe their study with its purpose, research questions and/or hypotheses. The evaluation rubric involving the moves was presented to students as part of the assignment in. structions so that they knew how their research paper introductions would be evaluated. The introduction assignment made up $2 0 \%$ of the final course grade.

# 2.2. Measurement of syntactic complexity

We measured syntactic complexity of each introduction using Lu's (2010) automated L2 syntactic complexity analyzer (L2SCA). Following similar studies that used L2SCA and the recommendation to operationalize syntactic complexity as a multi-dimensional construct including measures of different levels as global, clausal, and phrasal (e.g., Casal & Lee, 2019; Lu, 2011; Norris & Ortega, 2009; Yang et al., 2015), we focused on seven syntactic complexity indices: two global indices, three clausal, and two phrasal. Table 1 presents these measures with their sub-construct categories and definitions:

L2SCA has been reported to have a good level of accuracy in identifying and calculating complexity scores, with the following correlations between scores computed by human raters and the system: MLS (1.00, MLT (0.987), MLC (0.932), DC/T (0.950), T/S (0.919), CP/C (0.834), and CN/C (0.867) (Lu, 2010).

# 2.3. Annotation of the rhetorical functions

In order to analyze the syntactically complex features of sentences with different rhetorical functions, we annotated each sentence in research paper introductions for moves and steps. For the annotations, we used the move-step schema that Cortes (2013) adopted from Swales (190, 2004) by merging steps from the original 1990 model and the revised 2004 model. Table 2 presents the move-step schema with the number of sentences annotated with each step.

It i important to note that, given the academic level of the participants in this study and the requirements of the course assinment we included only the first two steps of Move3 in our move-step schema Announcing present reearch descriptively and/or purposively and Presenting research questions or hypotheses) and excluded the other five Move3 steps (Defintional clarificatios, Summarizing methods Announcing principal outcomes tting the value f thepreent rech, and tlining the structe of the paper. In Move3, we divided Step1 into two separate stes s Announcing present reerch decritively and Announcing preset reearch purposively, to make the stes clearer to the students and to have equal number of steps in each move for the purposes of the rating scale. In Announcing present research descriptively, the author briely indicates the focus of the study. For example, the following learner sentence illustrate this step:

This study focuses on long-term psychological, emotional, social and physical consequences in adulthood who exposed domestic violence in their childhood.

Table 1 Syntactic complexity measures.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Complexity sub-construct</td><td>Measure</td><td>Definition</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Global complexity</td><td>MLS: mean length of sentence</td><td># of words divided by # of sentences.</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Global complexity</td><td>MLT: mean length of T-unit</td><td># of words divided by # of T-units</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Clausal elaboration</td><td>MLC: mean length of clause</td><td># of words divided by # of clauses.</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Clausal subordination</td><td>DC/T: dependent clauses per T-unit</td><td># of dependent clauses divided by # of T-units</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Clausal coordination</td><td>T/S: T-units per sentence</td><td># of T-units divided by # of sentences</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>Phrasal coordination</td><td>CP/C: coordinate phrases per clause</td><td># of coordinate phrases divided by # of clauses</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td> Phrasal complexity</td><td>CN/C: complex nominals per clausea</td><td># of complex nominals divided by # of clauses.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. Since scA's measurement f lausal subordination does not include non-finite cluses, DC/T measure rersto finite clausal suordnation only. a Using L2SCA, we aso follow Lu's (2010) definition of complex nominals for phrasal complexity, which was based on Cooper (1976): "i) noun plus adjtive, osive, prsitional phe, elive clase, paie, r psitive ) n clses, ad (i gds an itives in subject position' (p. 483). Analyzing these structures, L2scA creates a holistic score for complex nominals per clause.

Table 2 Move-step schema adopted and number of annotated sentences.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move-Step</td><td>Description</td><td>Number of Annotated Sentences</td></tr><tr><td>Move 1</td><td>Establishing a territory</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Claiming centrality</td><td>125 (3.79 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Step 2</td><td> Making topic generalizations</td><td>1770 (53.64 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Step 3</td><td>Reviewing items of previous research</td><td>1101 (33.36 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Move 2</td><td>Establishing a niche</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Indicating a gap or</td><td>67 (2.03 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Step 2</td><td>Adding to what is known</td><td>26 (0.79 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Step 3</td><td>Presenting positive justification.</td><td>24 (0.73 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Move 3</td><td>Presenting the present work.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Announcing present research descriptively</td><td>22 (0.67 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Step 2</td><td>Announcing present research purposively</td><td>73 (2.21 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Step 3</td><td>Presenting research questions or hypotheses Total</td><td>92 (2.79 %) 3,300 (100 %)</td></tr></table></body></html>

For consistency and clarity in annotations, two of the researchers engaged in a training session practicing the move-step schema on six randomly-sected introductions. They discussed instances of disagrement until they developed a common understanding of the schema. After the training session, they annotated $2 5 ~ \%$ $[ \mathbf { n } = 2 0 ]$ of the introductions. Inter-annotator reliability was assessed using Cohen's Kappa. The Kappa statistic showed almost perfect agreement between the two researchers for moves (0.93) and substantial agreement (0.63) for steps. After they resolved all the discrpancies through discussion, the second reearcher anotated the rest f the sentences.

This research will focus students' performance in term, effects of instructional techniques for students. In contrast, when Announcing preset reearch purposefuly, the author explicitl states the aim/purpose of the study. The following learners' sentences are examples of this step (see Table 1A in supplementary material for an example of an annotated introduction):

The aim of this study is to explore the long-term effects of domestic violence on children who witnessed it.   
The purpose of the research is to find out the relationship between bipolar disorders and creativity.

# 2.4. Rating of the level of move/step realization

In order to determine the level of move/step realization, we rated the introductions for move realization. We developed a rating scale based on the move-step schema we used. Since Swales' (1990; 2004) CARS Model was developed based on an analysis of performance data (i. writen RA inroductions), using his model allowed us to indirectly employ an empirical approach to constructing our rating scale (Fulcher, 2003). With this framework, we developed criteria and descriptors for a four-level rating scale: no move realization (level 1), low move relization (lel 2), intermediate move realization (level 3), and high move realization (level 4) (see Table 3 for the descriptors for each level). We developed the descriptors for the levels of move realization based on two criteria presence/absence of steps and functional clarity of the present steps. In our rating, functional clarity refers to the extent to which rhetorical functions are clearly performed. Due to grammar and vocabulary issues in some leaner sentences, it was often diffcult to clearly understand what the intended rhetorical function was. For example, what rhetorical function the following learner sentence performed was not clear enough: If experts alk about, how can it be supported?" However, based on the context of the paragraph, it was annotated as Move2 Ste2 Adding to what i known. Introductions that included sentences with such uncler functions were rated as low or intermediate move realization depending on how many steps of the move were performed.

We first applied the rating scale to Move1, Move2, and Move3 separately in each introduction and then calculated the mean scores for the overall move realization in inroductions (see Table 2A in supplementary material for an example of arated introduction). Since we explore yntactic complexity in more rhetorically developed research paper introductions, al steps were weighted equally withn each move, and all three moves were weighted equally. Out of 79 introductions, the majority $( \mathtt { n } = 4 2$ $5 3 \%$ ) had a low level of move realization; 25 introductions $( 3 2 \% )$ had an intermediate level of move realization; a few introductions $( \mathtt { n } = 1 1$ $1 4 \%$ ) had a high level of move realization; and only one introduction had no move realization.

To build consistency and clarity in applying the scale (Myford & Wolfe, 2004), the three researchers met for training sessions in which they coded and rated a set of calibration introductions $\left( \mathtt { n } = 6 \right)$ ) and discussed instances of disagreement until they had a common understanding of both the framework and the scale. After the training sessions to calibrate the scale, two of the researchers rated $2 5 \%$ $\left( \mathtt { n } = 2 0 \right)$ of the introductions with a $7 8 \%$ inter-rater agreement. The Kappa statistic results showed substantial agreement between the two raters' coding: $\mathrm { K } = 0 . 6 8 3$ $( \mathbf { p } < . 0 0 0 5 )$ $9 5 ~ \%$ CI (0.534, 0.832). After they discussed rating disagreement, which was largely due to larity, and reached agreement, a single rater rated the rest of the data.

Table 3 Rating scale levels and descriptors.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Levels</td><td>Descriptors</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>No move realization</td><td>The introduction does not have any steps.</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Low move realization</td><td>The introduction has two of the steps, but they are not clear or the introduction has only one step, and it is clear.</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Intermediate move realization</td><td>The introduction has three of the steps but they are not clear or the introduction has two of the steps, and they are clear.</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>High move realization</td><td>The introduction has all the steps, and they are all clear.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 2.5. Statistical analyses

Because there was a huge diffrence between the number of sentences annotated with Move1 and the number of sentences an. notated with Move2 and Move3, with the majority of sentences belonging to Move1, we decided to limit our data analysis to Movel data. We recognize that this limits the potential claims, and findings should be applied with caution; however, we made this decision to respond to the parameters of the learner data drawn from a real academic writing classroom. It was a tradeoff that prioritized data transparency and ecological validity.

To address the first research question, we firs calculated the complexity measures for Step1 sentences, Ste2 sentences, and Step3 sentences separately for each introduction. Following the analytical procedures of Lu et al. (2020), we onducted a one-way MANOVA and one-way ANOVA analyses to find out whether there were significant diffrences between syntactic complexty indices across steps.

To address the second research question, we calculated the complexity measures for all Move1 sentences together for each introduction. We used Pearson correlations to identify the relationship between syntactic complexity measures and move/step real. ization ratings. We used a stepwise linear regresson analysis to determine which syntactic complexity measures best predicted move ratings.

In order to check multicollinearity (i.e., whether there was any relationship between the independent variables of syntactic complexity measures), we ran Pearson correlations fo all syntactic complexity measures. A very strong correlation was found between MLS and MLT $\left( \mathbf { r } = . 9 5 \right)$ . A strong correlation was found between MLS and MLC $( \mathbf { r } = 0 . 8 0 )$ . Since sentence length was used in a similar previous study (Lu et al., 2020), we decided to keep MLS and removed MLT and MLC measures from the analysis. In order to find out if there were any univariate outliers, we calculated z scores for each syntactic complexity variable. We found four introductions to be outliers and removed them from the data analysis. We checked multivariate outliers with Mahalanobis Distance analysis, and we did not find any introductions with $\mathbf { p } < . 0 0 1$ . The data analysis was completed with 75 introductions.

# 3. Findings

# 3.1. Syntactic complexity features and rhetorical functions

Table 4 presents the descriptive statistics of the syntactic complexity measures across Move1 steps. The results of the one-way MANOVA analysis showed significant syntactic complexity differences between Move1 steps (Wilks' Lambda $= 0 . 7 1$ $\mathrm { F ( 1 0 , } 3 8 0 ) =$ 7.24, $\mathbb { P } < . 0 1$ $\eta 2 = 0 . 1 6 0 \AA$ . Sentences realizing Move1 steps differed significantly in four syntactic complexity measures: global complexity (MLS, $\operatorname { F } ( 2 , 1 9 4 ) = 1 7 . 7 8$ $ { \mathbf { p } } < . 0 1$ $\eta 2 = 0 . 1 5 5 )$ , clausal subordination (DC/T, $\mathrm { F } ( 2 , 1 9 4 ) = 1 3 . 8 0 , \mathrm { p } < . 0 1$ $\begin{array} { r } { \eta 2 = 0 . 1 2 5 , } \end{array}$ , phrasal coordination (CP/C, $\operatorname { F } ( 2 , 1 9 4 ) = 3 . 5 3$ $\mathbf { p } < . 0 5$ $\begin{array} { r } { \eta 2 = 0 . 0 3 5 } \end{array}$ , and phrasal complexity (CN/C, $\operatorname { F } ( 2 , 1 9 4 ) = 6 . 3 2$ $\mathbf { p } < . 0 1$ $\begin{array} { r } { \boldsymbol \eta 2 = 0 . 0 6 1 } \end{array}$ There was no significant between-step differences only in clausal coordination (T/S, $\operatorname { F } ( 2 , 1 9 4 ) = 2 . 1 3$ $\mathtt { p } > 0 5$ $\begin{array} { r } { \eta 2 = 0 . 0 2 1 \mathrm { . } } \end{array}$

According to the results of the post hoc analysis regarding global complexity measured by MLS, sentences realizing the function of Move1 Step3 Reviewing items of previous research $\mathbf { \langle M = 2 5 . 2 5 }$ $\displaystyle \mathbf { S D } = 6 . 9 6$ were significantly longer $( \mathbb { p } < . 0 1 )$ than Move1 Step1 Claiming centrality $( \mathbf { M } = 2 0 . 2 1$ 3 $\mathrm { S D } = 7 . 5 1 $ ) and Move1 Step2 Making topic generalizations $( \mathbf { M } = 1 8 . 9 9 $ $\mathrm { S D } = 5 . 2 5$ ) sentences. Similarly, sentences relaying the function Move1 Step3 Reviewing items of previous research $( \mathbf { M } = 0 . 7 7$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 3 2 $ were more complex at the clausal level including a significantly higher number of dependent clauses per T-unit $\left( \mathbf { p } < . 0 1 \right)$ than Move1 Step1 Claiming centrality $\mathbf { \Delta M } = 0 . 4 8$ $\mathbf { S D = }$ 0.52) and Move1 Step2 Making topic generalizations $\mathbf { M } = 0 . 4 9$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 2 2 $ sentences. Sentences with the function Move1 Step3 Reviewing items of previous research $( \mathbf { M } = 0 . 5 7$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 2 6 $ also included significantly more phrasal coordination structures $\left( \mathbf { p } < . 0 5 \right)$ than Move1 Step2 Making topic generalizations $\mathbf { M } = 0 . 4 4$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 2 4 _ { . }$ ) sentences. Regarding phrasal complexity, sentences realizing Move1 Step1 Claiming centrality $\mathbf { \Delta M } = 1 . 8 3$ $\mathrm { { S D } } = 0 . 7 7 { \mathrm { { } } }$ ) contained significantly more complex nominals per clause $\left( \mathbf { p } < . 0 1 \right)$ than Move1 Step2 Making topic generalizations $( \mathbf { M } = 1 . 5 0$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 4 2$ ). Sentences with the function Move1 Step3 Reviewing items of previous research $( \mathbf { M } = 1 . 7 5$ , SD $= 0 . 4 8 $ also included significantly more complex nominals per clause $\left( \mathbf { p } < . 0 5 \right)$ than sentences with the Move1 Step2 Making topic generalizations $( \mathbf { M } = 1 . 5 0$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 4 2 $

# 3.2. Syntactic complexity and level of move/step realization

Table 5 presents the descriptive statistics of the five syntactic complexity measures for move/step realization ratings. Introductions ith higher ratings, based onthe scal of ompletenes and clarit (see Table 3), displayed geater complexity with some mesures and not with others. More specifically, inroductions with higher move/step realization ratings were found to have higher MLS, T/, and

Table 4 Descriptive statistics of syntactic complexity measures across Move1 steps.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">MLS</td><td colspan="2">DC/T</td><td colspan="2">T/S</td><td colspan="2">CP/C</td><td colspan="2">CN/C</td></tr><tr><td>Move1 Steps</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>m</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Step1</td><td>20.21</td><td>7.51</td><td>0.48</td><td>0.52</td><td>1.19</td><td>0.31</td><td>0.45</td><td>0.48</td><td>1.83</td><td>0.77</td></tr><tr><td>Step2</td><td>18.99</td><td>5.25</td><td>0.49</td><td>0.22</td><td>1.13</td><td>0.13</td><td>0.44</td><td>0.24</td><td>1.50</td><td>0.42</td></tr><tr><td>Step3</td><td>25.25</td><td>6.96</td><td>0.77</td><td>0.32</td><td>1.11</td><td>0.14</td><td>0.57</td><td>0.26</td><td>1.75</td><td>0.48</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 Descriptive findings for syntactic complexity measures across rhetorical organization ratings.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Level of rhetorical organization</td><td>N</td><td colspan="2">MLS</td><td colspan="2">DC/T</td><td colspan="2">T/S</td><td colspan="2">CP/C</td><td colspan="2">CN/C</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td></td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Low</td><td>28</td><td>20.38</td><td>5.15</td><td>0.60</td><td>0.20</td><td>1.10</td><td>0.08</td><td>0.46</td><td>0.17</td><td>1.46</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><td>Intermediate</td><td>32</td><td>21.86</td><td>3.03</td><td>0.62</td><td>0.22</td><td>1.14</td><td>0.09</td><td>0.48</td><td>0.17</td><td>1.58</td><td>0.31</td></tr><tr><td>High</td><td>15</td><td>22.53</td><td>4.14</td><td>0.59</td><td>0.17</td><td>1.13</td><td>0.09</td><td>0.52</td><td>0.18</td><td>1.76</td><td>0.26</td></tr></table></body></html>

CN/C indices, but they did not have higher indices of clausal subordination (DC/T) and phrasal coordination (CP/C).

Table 6 summarizes the correlations between five syntactic complexity measures and move/step realization ratings. Global complexity (MLS), clausal subordination (DC/T), clausal coordination, and phrasa coordination (CP/C) did not correlate with move/ step realization ratings. However, phrasal complexity (CN/C) had a significant moderate correlation with the ratings $( \mathbf { r } = . 3 5 $ $\mathbf { p } < . 0 1 \cdot$ This means that inroductions that accomplished a higher level of move/step realization contained a significantly higher number of phrasal complexity structures, but evels of move/step realization, based on our scale, did not have a pattern with global or clausal complexity structures.

The stepwise regresson analysis yielded a significant model for move/step realization ratings, which included the same variable as a significant predictor of rhetorical organization ratings: phrasal complexity (CN/C), $\operatorname { F } ( 1 , 7 3 ) = 1 0 . 1 9 7$ $p < . 0 0 1$ (see Table 7). CN/C accounted for $1 2 \%$ of the variation in the ratings of move/step realization.

In summary, research paper introductions with a higher level of move/step realization demonstrated higher phrasal complexity. Phrasal complexity was found to be a significant predictor of a higher level of move/step realization in research paper introductions. Other syntactic complexity measures did not yield patterns on the scale of rhetorical move/step realization. Considering these findings in light of the first reeach question, the differences between the complexity wth each ste may e overriding distinctivenes of levels based on the rating scale. However, this finding also provides some evidence of the salience of the steps in a move.

# 4. Discussion

Our findings demonstrated a relationship betwen four types of syntactic complexity structures and rhetorical functions in learner. generated research paper ntroductions: global complexty captured by mean length of sentence (MLS), clausal subordination captured by dependent clauses per T-unit (DC/T), phrasal coordination captured by coordinate phrases per clause (CP/C), and phrasal complexity captured by complex nominals per clause (CN/c). Regarding global complexity, learners' sentences reviewing items of previous research were significantly longer than sentences with the other steps in Move1. Sentences with this rhetorical step were also found to be significantly longer in Lu et al.'s (2020) study. They explained the asociation between sentence length and the function Move1 Step3 Reviewing items of previous research by the tendency of writers (expert writers in their study) to synthesize or make connections between specific points of previous studies, which does not appear to be the case in our study. A manual reexamination of Move1 Step3 sentences in our learner data showed that students reviewed individual studies rather than synthesizing them or making connections between them. This may be explained by their language proficiency level, as synthesis required the use of difficult discourse synthesis abilities. But, Movel Ste3 sentences were stll longer than other Movel sentence in the corpus, as demonstrate in the example below from Student 19's introduction:

Move1Step1: Teenage pregnancies have been creating problems for both developing countries and developed countries.

e1Step2: In Africa, this rate is $1 1 5 \ \% $ and in Latin America this rate is $7 5 \ \%$

Move1Step3: Durmaz (2013) proved that there i a positive elationship betwen being prenant in adolescence and decreasing el-respec and self-care to use open-ended questions at interviews.

At the clausal level, sentences in Move1 Step3 Reviewing itms of previous research also included significantly more dependent clauses per T-unit. This finding isimilar to the findings of Lu et al. (2020) who also found sentences reviewing items of previous research rhetorical step contained significantly higher proportions of clausal subordination through finite dependent clauses. In a further exploration of students' use of dependent clauses in Movel Step3 sentences, we saw that relative clauses were very common, as exemplified below in three excerpts of students' introductions:

Intro27: In their research, they found that the time that children spend on watching TV depends on the time that parents and siblings spending on watching.

Table 6 Correlations between move realization ratings and syntactic complexity measures.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sub-construct</td><td>Complexity Measure</td><td>r</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td>Global complexity</td><td>MLS</td><td>.201</td><td>.08</td></tr><tr><td>Clausal subordination</td><td>DC/T</td><td>-.007</td><td>.95</td></tr><tr><td>Clausal coordination</td><td>T/S</td><td>.177</td><td>.128</td></tr><tr><td>Phrasal coordination</td><td>CP/C</td><td>.129</td><td>.272</td></tr><tr><td>Phrasal complexity</td><td>CN/C</td><td>.350**</td><td>.002</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. \*\*Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level.

Table 7 Regression results for syntactic complexity predictors of move/step realization ratings.   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Rhetorical Organization Ratings</td><td>Predictor</td><td>r</td><td>R2</td><td>B</td><td>SE</td><td>Beta</td><td>95 % CI</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CN/C</td><td>.350</td><td>.123</td><td>.853</td><td>.267</td><td>.350</td><td>.320, 1.385</td></tr></table></body></html>

Intro34: Kim and Lennon (2007) found that at least $\% 5 0$ participants who watched Friends were affected by this television program in order to have idealized body and the other result is that fashion and beautiy magazines were read more than others.

Intro39: As a result of experiment which is made by Robazza, Pllzzari and Hanin in 2004shown that when awarenesscomes f for one time, ath a rn themseles acordingtohis wldg exnd ther ow kill nd ter chologi och to thmsele fonot only academic lives but also their social lives (p.398).

At the phrasal level,sentences with the function Movel Ste3 Reviewing items of previous research also included significantly more phrasal coordination structures. In students' Step3 sentences, "and' appears to be the most common coordinator conjoining noun phrases, as occurred in the following examples of student writing:

Intro24: Thee re age gender, and ucational ackround, power f participation in high education, universal sl-repect, academic elf perception and academic stress. (Michie, Glachan & Bray, 2001).

Intro30: Dainton and Aylr (2001) found that individuals in long-distance elationships are les ikel to use maintenance behaviors and as a result of those, less trust, more jealousy, and more uncertainty occur.

Intro50: Namely, children from divorced families had about a $1 0 \%$ higher probability of engaging in binge drinking, alcohol consumption, tobacco use, and marijuana use when they were aged 12-18 years (Gustavsen & Nayga, 2015).

In almost allsyntactic complexity measures, it was Move1 Step3 Reviewing items of previous research sentences that differed significantly from the other two Movel stes. Only at the phrasal complexity level, two steps significantly differed from the group in complex nominals per clause: Move1 Ste1 Claiming centrality and Move1 Step3 Reviewing items of previous reearch. In Lu et al.'s (2020) study, sentences with the Claiming Centality rhetorical step included more nominalizations and was also syntactically more complex. Below are a few examples of Move1 Step1 sentences from our study with complex nominals:

Intro41: People have been very familiar to the concept of burn out syndrome in recent years.

Intro068: When the extensive usages and effctivenessof the facial expressions are considered, importance of studying on this subjec disclosed.

Intro69: Language and literacy development in early childhood years has a critical importance in an individual's life.

A further look at the sentences annotated with Move1 Step3 Reviewing items of previous research in the learner corpus revealed that students mostly reviewed previous research by mentioning their specific research focus, research design, and results. Lu et al. (2020) explain that such sentences \*include methodological, theoretical, or implication-based information" and are \*propositionally dense" (p. 10). The following student examples illustrate this approach:

Intro14: The athors used  singl-se rech dein wth 6 Cucasi boys in kindergarten ndst gd measure th efftivenes of Adlerian play therapy on children's classroom behaviors.

Intro70: Santosa et al. (2007) firstly asessed non-eminent creativit in euthymic bipolar (BP) and unipolar major depressive disorder (MDD) patients, creative discipline controls (CC), and healthy controls (HC).

Intro72: According to the Population and Housing Survey, in 2011, the labor force partipation rate of women over the ge of 15 was $2 9 , 5 \%$ and this rate has increased in Turkey.

The findings of our second research question revealed a significant corrlation between high-rated introductions and phrasal complexity (CN/c). CN/C was also found to be asignificant predictor of high ratings. However, according to the findings of the first research question, it was Ste1 Clamng centality and Step3 Reviewing items of revious reearch sentences that contained significantly more complex nominals per clause. This suggests that research paper itroductions containing Step1 and Step3 had higher complexity. Thus, including these two specific teps appears to increase the phrasal complexity of inroductions, rather than including all Move1 steps. In short, better overall move/step realization in an inroduction does not necessaril lead to higher syntactic complexity of the introduction.

Our findings regarding clausal subordination should be interpreted taking into consideration the capability of the automated system that we used for assessig syntactic complexity indices. L2sCA excludes nonfinite clauses but includes only finite clauses when assessing clausal subordination (Lu, 2010). This is a major limitation acording to Deng, Lei, and Liu (2020) since nonfinite subordinate clauses such as present/past participle phrases as non-finte adverbial clauses are common in academic writing. For example, "Examining the 250 largest North American single-name contracts, Porter (2015) found that characteristics of many CDS reference entities .." (p. 3). Not including such nonfinite clausal structures in the complexity measurement lowers the subordinate clausal complexity, which Deng et al. (2020) consider to be a major efect. To address this limitation, studies should include nonfinite dependent clauses as a separate complexity measure, as done by Lu et al. (2020) who did not ind any significant differences i clausal subordination complexity of sentences realizing Move1 steps.

# 5. Conclusion

In this exploratory study, we examined syntactic complexity features of sentences performing Move1 rhetorical steps and syntactic complexity in relation to move/step realization in rearch paper introductions written by L2 writers. We found significant differences in syntactic complexty features of sentences with Move1 rhetorical functions. We also found significant relationship between phrasal complexity, as measured by complex nominals per clause, and high-rated introductions, based on a researcher-developed scale of completeness and clarity, and no significant findings for global or clausal complexity.

While our study contributes to the growing literature on function-oriented approaches to syntactic complexity research, i has some limitations. One major limitation concerns the many ungrammatical sentences in our learner corpus, which might have afected the accuracy of automated syntactic complexity measurement by L2SCA. Lu (2010) states that learner errors such as determiner or agreement errors do not pose a major problem in structural analysis. However, our learner corpus includes more serious erors such as the lack of a subjec or a verb (., Inro8 Belief of supersitious based on a very old time and stil continues today). e do not know how L2SCA process sentences with such erors and if itis capable f computing syntactic complexit of such sentences. This is a issue to be addressed in future research. Next, the rating scale developed for ths study was exploratory and a fairly blunt instrument. There are nuances that we could not adress with the scal, such as capturing diffrent weighting of moves. While small corpus sie is not uncommon in the move analysis literature, syntactic complexity studies commonly include a larger corpus as the analyse re mostly done in an automated way. Because we used texts that students produced for the purposes of a specific research methods course, the number f iroductions was limite to 79. Even though this corus size is aeptable, an avenue for future reearch would certainl e to examine syntactic complexity in a much larger corpus of learner-generated introductions. Another limitation, mentioned in the methods section, is in the narrow scope of focusing only on one move and the steps therein. This leads to cautious claims from the study, but, hopefully, we met our intent of exploring an understudied research area and using a new methodology for this type of research (a rating scale). Moreover, our syntactic complexity analysis was based on a small number of measures, although we operationalized syntactic complexity as a multidimensional construct involving global, clausal, and phrasal measures. Because we used Lu's (2010) L2sCA, we depended on the holistic score created for complex nominals per clause. An analysis of how the specific types of complex nominals included in that holistic score (e.g., nouns plus adjectives, possessves, prepositional phrases, relative clauses, participle, or appositives) (Casal & Lee, 2019) are related to rhetorical steps and move/step realization could reveal more detailed information. Future research could also compare published research article introductions with research paper introductions written by learners so as to inform academic writing pedagogy to help L2 learners reach the desired complexity level in achieving communicative purposes in research writing.

Our findings suggest that L2 learners use complex nominals in rhetorically organizing research paper introductions. This outcome implies that there would be value in developing explicit instructions on how to use these complex grammatical structures in research writing. An example of how to enact ths can be found in a study on the development of writte syntactic complexit of two L2 leaners in an instructional ontext over a period of four semesters (Vyatkina, 2013). The researcher documented that learners' use of ifferent complex nominals increased as a result of explicit grammar instruction. Her study demonstrates the role of direct instruction not only in incresing students awarenes of complex structures but aso their capabilities of producing them in writig. In L writing research, there i already a focus on syntactic complexity in inexpert writers' research papers (.g., Casal & Lee, 2019). L2 writing pedagogy will benefit from a similar trend.

Our study contributes to the syntactic complexity literature by focusing on rhetorical functions, using a rating scale in the analysis of move/step realization, and analyzing inexpert writing. Whil earlier investigations on syntactic complexity have mostly relied on linguistic forms, recent research call and trends point in the direction of function-oriented approaches to analyzing syntactic complexity (Ryshina-Pankova, 2015; Lu et al., 2020). In line with this perspective, our study focused on syntactic complexity and rhetorical functions in L2 learners' research paper introductions. Although our analysis was limited to Move1 stes only, our findings support those f Lu et al. (2020) demonstrating significant difference in syntactic complexity structures among sentences with Move1 rhetorical steps at global, clausal, and phrasal levels.

The second contrbution of our study is the analysis of the level of rhetorical organization in relation to syntactic complexity through the use of a rating scale. The use of rating scales in writing research and assessment has shown that these scales can provide useful and reliale information. The move/step realization rating scale used in our study has shown that the completenessof move/ step realization does not mattr in the level of syntactic complexity. Rather, including certain steps that are ingusticall realized through complex phrasal structures increases the syntactic complexity of introductions.

Third, our corpus of introductions was built on learner writing in comparison to move analysis research which tends to be based on published expert writing. Learner data can inform thinking not only in SLA research but also in teaching, thus the findings can help to improve L2 learning and teaching (Granger, 2002). Although our corpus was not large, the findings demonstrated significant associations between certain syntactic complexity structures and Move1 rhetorical steps and a significant relationship between high-rated introductions and phrasal complexity. This highlights the importance of teaching student writers how to achieve the communicative purposes of an introduction using syntactically complex phrases when writing up research. With higher-education institutions recognizing the value of inquiry-based learning today, students are engaged in research-oriented learning experiences and research writing early in their studies. Thus, reearch papers are ecoming a typical example of academic writing at the undergraduate level. An understanding of syntactic complexity features of rhetorical steps is an important step towards designing academic/research writing courses at the undergraduate level.

# Author statement

Aysel Saricaoglu: Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal analysis; Methodology; Writing - original draft - review & editing Zeynep Bilki: Conceptualization; Formal analysis; Methodology; Writing - review & editing. Lia Plakans: Conceptualization; Methodology; Writing - review & editing.

# Acknowledgment

We presented our study at the Sig Writing 2018 Conference in Antwerp. We would like to thank the audience for their constructive comments. We are also grateful or the valuable fedack provided by the editors and the anonymous reviewers on earlier draft of this article.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.101037.

# References

Ara,  00ti a  s i . is Language Teaching, 42, 71-100.   
Bier, , Gra, , & Poon,  (201. huld we us charcteristic f coverstion to mere grmatica omplexity in 2 witing deloent?l Quarterly, 45(1), 5-35. https://doi.org/10.5054/tq.2011.244483   
Bulte, ., & Huse A (2014). oing and mering short-tem change in  wting complxt. Jal of Sond nge Witing 26, 4265.   
Casal, J e, J.J. (2019.tic compxty ad wting qulit inasd first-2 wiig. Jo f Sond g wting 4, 162. of English for Academic Purposes, 52, 1-12.   
nave, . (194)   i  j. o   7-01. /001/0037439490067   
Cooper, T. C. (1976. Mesring wite yntactic ptens of sod language leners f Gman. The Jounal of Edcationl Reerch, 69, 176-183.   
Core, . 213.   st t   hi  f sh   12 33-43.   
Crosle, . A amara, .. 2014). D witing dlment equal wing qualit? A comttion ietigatio f yctic complxit in 2 ler. Journal of Second Language Writing, 26, 66-79.   
Deg       i   c   l Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amz069 26, 59-84.   
Fulcher, G. (2o03). Testing second language speaking. London: Pearson Education.   
gr, .0     . and foreign language teaching (pp. 3-33). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Guo, L, Cros, .  ca, . 2013). Prding hman m f ey qualit i h inrad ad innt ond g writng samples: A comparison study. Assessing Writing, 18, 218-238.   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, C. (199. Construing experience through meaning: A language-based approach to cognition. Cassel. 28, 240-250.   
Loi . . (2010 h rtice tion in he a glish  cortive ged dy. l of Eish for dc e, 9, 267-279   
Lu, X. (2010). Automatic analysis of syntactic complexity in second language writing. Intenational Jounal of Corpus Linguisic, 15, 474496.   
Lu,  (201). c- f tic mplxt e a n f ce wier  me.  l, 451) 36-62.   
Lu  i 15.ic x n -eishwtg f a we  r  kd. f nge Writing, 29, 16-27.   
Lu       c  i Academic Purposes, 44, 1-16. Variation among four social science and engineering disciplines. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 52, 1-13.   
Manll,     .017 t tie  iveih a e w tc coxt  ous online discussions. Applied Linguistics, 38(1), 112-134.   
Myford,  Wle, . 204. ig  mn rar efts si mny t rach met Prt .   Sh h s.) Introduction to rasch measurement (pp. 518-574). Maple Grove, MI: JAM Press.   
Nors, J  209  a ititi  L  f pxt. sics 304 57. 492-518.   
Ortega, L. (2015). Syntactic complexity in L2 writing: Progress and expansion. Jounal of Second Language Writing, 29, 82-94. 25-38.   
Pallotti, G. (2009). Caf: Defining, refining and differentiating constructs. Applied Linguistics, 30, 590-601.   
Ryshina-Panva, . (2015.  ng-bad aproch to the stdy of complexty in 2 witing The caf gtl mtaphor. Jol of ond ne Writing, 29, 51-63.   
Samraj, B. (2002). Introductions in research articles: Variations across disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 21, 1-17.   
h 1 10, 238-251.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge University Press.   
Vyakina, . 013).  stic plty ml pinf ividls a n an r s. e  l, 97 (S1), 11-30.   
Way, The Modern Language Journal, 84, 171-184.   
. .f    t writing quality. Journal of Second Language Writing, 28, 53-67.   
Yin, .,  1) xt   l   at ins System, 97, 1-14.

Aysel Sari is s Pr f ish  d ie a  sit f Anar  nl  wng mat Assessing Writing, CALL, and ReCALL.

yne i  t th and writing, teclg-nced fon angage lng, and ng techer cio he has bn an Engih nge ctor in Turkey and USA.

Lit n g d .       d i  r  - sets d   . rh   is n mor s s a rl, ti  itig, and Engis      th     h sit Michigan Press.