# Intercultural learning through Chinese-American telecollaboration: results of a song sharing project

Han Luo & Pan Gao

To cite this article: Han Luo & Pan Gao (2024) Intercultural learning through Chinese-American telecollaboration: results of a song sharing project, Computer Assisted Language Learning, 37:1-2, 85-113, DOI: 10.1080/09588221.2022.2026405

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2022.2026405

# Intercultural learning through Chinese-American telecollaboration: results of a song sharing project

Han Luoa $\textcircled{1}$ and Pan Gaob

a Department of Foreign Languages and Literatures, Lafayette College, Easton, PA, US A; bSchool of Foreign Languages, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China

# ABSTRACT

This study reports on the results of a semester-long Chinese-American telecollaborative exchange via WeChat, in which students from China and the U.S. shared thematically similar songs in their respective languages and discussed relevant cultural topics that were suggested by the students. Various types of qualitative data collected from the exchange (i.e. WeChat group discussion transcripts, videoconferencing audio recordings, final reflection journals, and end-of-semester interviews) showed that the students participated actively in the program and were able to engage in in-depth conversations on various topics with their partners through WeChat group discussion and one-on-one videoconferencing. Many students attributed their positive experience to the intrinsic ability of music to engage college students. In order to evaluate the students’ intercultural learning, Byram’s intercultural competence assessment model was adopted to guide the data analysis. Results showed that the students demonstrated evidence of developing four types of intercultural competences during the exchange: interest in knowing other people’s way of life and introducing one’s own culture to others, knowledge about one’s own and others’ culture for intercultural communication, ability to change perspective, and knowledge about the intercultural communication process, with particularly overwhelming evidence indicating the prominence of the first two types.

# KEYWORDS

Intercultural learning; telecollaboration; virtual exchange; Chinese; song

# 1.  Introduction

The teaching of culture is widely recognized as an integral part of foreign language (FL) teaching (Brooks, 1968; Byrnes, 2010; Hall, 2002; Kramsch, 1995, 2013; Zhu Hua, 2019), as clearly shown in the two key reference documents for foreign language (FL) educators: the World-Readiness Standards for Learning Languages developed by the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL, 2015)

and the Common European Framework of Reference (CEFR) (Council of Europe, 2001). Despite much debate regarding exactly what is meant by the term ‘culture’ (Levy, 2007), language educators tend to agree that ‘communicative competence alone is no longer adequate as the sole goal of FL learning’ (Thorne, 2006, p. 5). Instead, the development of intercultural competences, described as the capacity to mediate multiple identities and situations (Byram & Zarate, 1997), should be the objective of today’s FL teaching (Byram, 1997, 2012; Kramsch, 2011; Kramsch & Zhu Hua, 2016; Liddicoat & Scarino, 2013; Sercu, 2004). This intercultural movement in language education ‘has promoted a rethinking of fundamental ideas about languages, cultures and the ways these are taught’ (Liddicoat, 2021, p. 224).

The rapid development of computer technology and the internet has brought about a transformation in global communications that is ‘not just a change in degree, but a change in kind’ (Kramsch, 2003, p. 3). The internet is now an indispensable part of the daily routine of millions of people around the world, offering diverse new ways of communicating through various software applications such as social media platforms, videoconferencing, and multimodal tools. This creates an important opportunity for intercultural learning and foreign language instruction (Arnold, 2007). In this environment, telecollaboration (Belz, 2003a), also known as virtual exchange, online intercultural exchange (O’Dowd, 2007) or internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education (Belz & Thorne, 2006), has attracted an increasing amount of scholarly attention in the past twenty years. The dramatic growth of interest in this pedagogical activity has also invited practitioners and researchers to critically reflect on the different terminologies that have been used (Colpaert, 2020; O’Dowd, 2021). Belz (2003a) defines telecollaboration as ‘institutionalized, electronically mediated intercultural communication under the guidance of a language cultural expert (i.e. a teacher) for the purpose of foreign language learning and the development of intercultural competence’ (p. 2) and this is the definition adopted for the present study. Telecollaboration has become ‘a useful tool for enabling students to develop intercultural competence’ (Schenker, 2012, p. 450) that also holds a wide variety of other pedagogical benefits (e.g. Kern, 2006; Luo & Yang, 2021; Müller-Hartmann, 2006; O’Dowd, 2003; Rienties et  al., 2020; Thorne, 2003; Ware, 2005; Ware & Kramsch, 2005). Moreover, the practice of telecollaboration has begun to ‘exert a significant and broad-based influence on the character, processes, and perhaps even goals of mainstream foreign language education’ (Thorne, 2006, p. 3).

Despite its great potential and far-reaching influence, telecollaboration has scarcely been utilized in the instruction of less commonly taught languages such as Chinese (Belz, 2003b; Belz & Thorne, 2006; Chun, 2014; Lewis & O’Dowd, 2016; Luo & Yang, 2018; Ryder & Yamagata-Lynch, 2014). Empirical research on telecollaborative exchanges involving Chinese as the target language remains sparse, and innovative pedagogical attempts that incorporate the use of telecollaboration in teaching Chinese as a foreign language (CFL) have yet to be explored. In the hope of further promoting intercultural learning through telecollaboration in the CFL field, this study reports on the results of a Chinese-American telecollaborative song sharing project. Students from both sides of the partnership held intercultural discussions on songs in both English and Chinese, selected by the students to reflect similar thematic content.

# 2.  Literature review: intercultural learning and telecollaboration

The practice of teaching culture in the field of foreign language education has gone through several stages, including ‘the factual transmission met ho d, t he cross-c ultural contrastive approach, t he communicative-competence-based teaching, and the intercultural competence perspective’ (Liaw, 2006, p. 50). While earlier models of cultural learning tend to focus on transmitting facts about the target culture, its people, and their lifestyle, the latest model (i.e. the intercultural approach), places emphasis on the understanding and reflection of the learners’ own culture. In previous approaches, ‘the implicit aims are for the learners to develop a positive attitude towards the culture they are studying and ultimately take on the norms and values of the foreign culture in order to achieve native-like competence in the target language’ (O’Dowd, 2000, p. 51). In contrast, the intercultural approach encourages students to ‘debunk stereotypes, examining both themselves and the other from multiple frames and perspectives’ (Lomicka, 2009, p. 1227).

Intercultural learning involves two important processes: the process of reflection and the process of distancing. Language learners bring to the context of the foreign language learning their own cultures and at the same time are exposed to the target culture. In the intercultural approach, learners are not expected to reject their own culture and take on the target culture. Rather, they are encouraged to reflect on the differences and similarities that exist between their own culture and the target culture and gain insights into the target culture through the lens of their own. However, this process of reflection is conducted not in one’s own culture nor in the target culture, but in a ‘third space’ (Kramsch, 1993, p. 236) between the home and target cultures, where everything is viewed as grounded in a particular context. In this space, language learners examine their own culture, demonstrate understanding of the other culture, and reflect on how the culture of the target language interacts with one’s own cultural experience.

Distancing is another crucial aspect for intercultural learning (Cummins & Sayers, 1995). This process ‘encourages learners to question the ordinary, the known and the accepted when exploring something new or different’ (Lomicka, 2009, p. 1228). When we interact with people from a different culture who are not familiar with ours, we are forced to explain our lives, culture, and country to them, and re-examine the world in which we live. In other words, we apply the process of distancing when we engage in intercultural communication. The development of distancing does not come automatically; instead, it is an internal and individual process that is achieved over time through efforts such as ‘prodding one’s curiosity and knowledge of what makes the other ‘other,’ negotiating similarities and differences, confronting any cultural conflicts that may ensue, and understanding another person’s perspective without losing one’s own’ (Lomicka, 2009, p. 1228).

The ultimate goal of teaching culture is to help learners develop intercultural competences, which prepare individuals to interact appropriately and effectively with those from other cultural backgrounds (Sinicrope et  al., 2007). However, it should be noted that intercultural competence is a widely discussed, yet extremely complex concept that is very difficult to define (Deardorff, 2006; Freiermuth & Huang, 2021; Rathje, 2007). In the past decades, a variety of academic disciplines have attempted to demystify the concept and produced various models to describe intercultural competence and its development, resulting in ‘the lack of any unity in the definition of the term ‘intercultural competence’ itself ’ (Rathje, 2007, p. 255). A few examples of such theoretical models include but not limited to Bennett’s (1993) Developmental Model of Intercultural Sensitivity (DMIS), Gudykunst’s (1993) Anxiety/ Uncertainty Management Model (AUM), Byram’s (1997) Multidimensional Model of Intercultural Competence, and Deardorff ’s (2006) Process Model of Intercultural Competence, among which Byram’s (1997) model has been arguably the most influential within the field of foreign language education.

In Byram’s (1997) framework, intercultural competence is characterized as ‘a readiness to suspend disbelief and judgement with respect to others’ meanings, beliefs and behaviors’ and ‘willingness to suspend belief in one’s own meanings and behaviors, and to analyze them from the viewpoint of the others with whom one is engaging’ (p. 34). More specifically, Byram’s model of intercultural competence consists of five components: knowledge of self and other, attitudes of openness and curiosity, skills of interpreting and relating, skills of discovery and interaction, and critical cultural awareness (or political education). This model is learner-centered and focuses on how teachers can plan lessons on the basis of the objectives and the learning outcomes they desire for their learners. It also includes discussion of how the intercultural learning can be assessed. Moreover, the model intends to ‘help foreign language teachers to plan more deliberately than they often do, to include intercultural competence in their pedagogical aims’ (Byram, 2009, p. 324). Not surprisingly, it has been widely used by language teachers and scholars to guide curriculum development and plan teaching and assessment.

Despite its huge impact on foreign language pedagogy, Byram’s (1997) model of intercultural competence has received some criticisms from language researchers and scholars in the past years (e.g. Dervin, 2010, 2016; Hoff, 2014, 2020). One strand of criticism revolves around the model type (Matsuo, 2012; Rathje, 2007). This model is an individual-oriented list model which identifies the main characteristics of the competences needed in multicultural and international encounters from a conceptual analysis. Byram (2009), himself, admits that this model is prescriptive in nature and the competences included are not exhaustive. Moreover, this model does not describe relations among the subcompetences, or provide any definition of levels or degrees of ability, knowledge, and attitudes, nor does it model interaction, or predict development. A related criticism is the componential (rather than developmental) nature of the intercultural competence depicted in the model. The conception of intercultural competence seems to be reduced to a stable body of knowledge divided into different components that is capable of providing finalized answers for intercultural communication and interaction (Matsuo, 2016). Instead, intercultural competence development is now widely recognized as an ongoing process (Deardorff, 2006, 2011). Therefore, intercultural competences ‘cannot be precisely defined by a distinctive set of features that can be kept inside a box and pulled out to be examined and used whenever the need arises’ (Freiermuth & Huang, 2021, p. 187).

Another strand of criticism centers around the model’s perspective on culture (Belz, 2007; Kramsch, 1999; Matsuo, 2012). The model is ‘based on the explicit assumption that language teaching needs to focus on one or more countries where the language is spoken’ (Byram, 2009, p. 322). In other words, it tends to ‘sidestep the need to define culture by equating it with the national culture of nation-states’ (Matsuo, 2012, p. 364). This view of culture is criticized by Kramsch (1999) because it implies a rigidity in the boundaries between cultures that do not exist and sees national cultures as much more homogenous than they really are. Similarly, Belz (2007) has pointed out that this model ‘does not adequately recognize or value national-internal diversity … or the evidence of ideologically or ethnically bound groups that span national borders … or who have no national borders’ (p. 137). In addition, the focus on the national culture(s) of the target language indicated in the model has caused some pedagogical dilemmas in foreign language teaching. For example, as Freiermuth and Huang (2021) have observed, the EFL classroom materials still place high value on the teaching of English language cultural norms rather than attaching importance to the cultural content that would be familiar to the local language learners despite the fact that the majority of EFL learners tend to live day by day within the confines of their own cultures. They thus call for exchanges of cultural information between groups of EFL learners using English as the lingua franca.

In response to these criticisms, Byram (2008, 2013, 2014), in his more recent works, has further developed the critical cultural awareness component, i.e. the center piece in his 1997 model of intercultural competence into the concept of intercultural citizenship, which combines the aims of language teaching with the aims of citizenship education, but modifies and improves both. Intercultural citizenship promotes ‘the formation of communities of action beyond the boundaries of the state/ country’ (Byram, 2009, p. 328). Within this framework, the main concern of foreign language teaching is to ‘develop competence for communication and interaction whilst stimulating critical thinking and action in the world’ (Byram, 2013, p. 53). Furthermore, intercultrual citizenship no longer focuses on the national culture(s) in which the target language is spoken. As Byram (2013) poignantly explains, ‘It is not a matter of what culture to learn or to learn about, but which cultures to explore in addition to our own – and the answer is: any culture of any social group with which learners can be encouraged to interact’ (pp. 59–60).

Various types of definitions and theoretical models of intercultural competences give rise to a wide variety of assessment proposals (e.g. Byram, 1997, 2000; Deardorff, 2006, 2011; Godwin-Jones, 2013). As Belz (2007) has noted, Byram is one of the very few scholars who consistently and extensively operationalize the notion of intercultural competence in foreign language education. In addition, the assessment approach suggested by Byram has the advantage of clarity and is thus relatively easy to implement. Byram (2000) proposes a portfolio approach to the assessment of intercultural competence that aims to produce a record of learners’ competences and experiences. As shown in Table 1, this assessment model includes five dimensions, which is adopted to guide the data analysis for intercultural learning in this study.

Scholars continue to grapple with how intercultural competences can be further developed in foreign language teaching. Kramsch (1998) suggests that ‘an increase in the quantity and quality of contacts between learners across national borders through student exchanges’ (p. 25) could result in learning environments conducive to the development of intercultural competences. The development of computer technology and the internet makes such contact increasingly possible through online virtual exchanges or telecollaboration.

Table 1. Byram’s (2000) portfolio-based assessment model of intercultural competence.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Dimension</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>A. Interest in knowing other. people&#x27;s way of life and introducing one&#x27;s own culture to. others</td><td>.I am interested in other people&#x27;s experience of daily life, partic- ularly those things not usually presented to outsiders through the media. .I am also interested in the daily experience of a variety of so-</td></tr><tr><td>B. Ability to change perspective.</td><td>cial groups within a society and not only the dominant culture. :I have realized that I can understand other cultures by seeing things from a different point of view and by looking at my</td></tr><tr><td>C. Ability to cope with living in a different culture</td><td>culture from their perspective.n. I am able to cope with a range of reactions I have to living in a different culture (euphoria, homesickness, physical and</td></tr><tr><td>D. Knowledge about one&#x27;s own and. others&#x27; culture for intercultural communication</td><td>mental discomfort etc.). .I know some important facts about living in the other cultures and about the country, state and people.. .I know how to engage in conversation with people of the</td></tr><tr><td>E. Knowledge about the intercultural communication. process</td><td>other culture and maintain a conversation.. .I know how to resolve misunderstandings which arise from people&#x27;s lack of awareness of the view point of another culture. I know how to discover new information and new aspects of the other culture for myself.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Many studies have investigated the positive impact of telecollaboration on the development of intercultural competences and adopted Byram’s (1997) model to analyze how various aspects of intercultural competence development could be achieved in telecollaborative exchanges in a variety of contexts (Belz, 2003a; Liaw, 2006; Müller-Hartmann, 2006; O’Dowd, 2003, 2007; Schenker, 2012). Typically, telecollaborative projects are established between foreign language learners and L1 speakers of the language. However, in recent years, educators have realized that students are likely to use a foreign language such as English not just with L1 speakers, but also with other L2 learners as a lingua franca in various contexts. Therefore, a growing number of studies have examined telecollaborative exchanges involving the use of lingua franca and reported positive results (Bueno-Alastuey & Kleban, 2016; Freiermuth & Huang, 2012, 2015, 2018; Kohn & Hoffstaedter, 2017), especially in terms of the development of intercultural competences (Freiermuth & Huang, 2021). Telecollaboration has proven to be effective in implementing the intercultural approach in language teaching and developing learners’ intercultural competences due to its interactive nature (Avgousti, 2018; O’Dowd, 2000). Telecollaboration has furthermore catalyzed a compelling shift in language teaching, becoming one of the main pillars of the intercultural pivot in foreign language education (Thorne, 2006). This is because telecollaboration ‘allows educators to engage their learners in regular, (semi-)authentic communication with members of other cultures in distant locations and also gives learners the opportunity to reflect on and learn from the outcomes of this intercultural exchange within the supportive and informed context of their foreign language classroom’ (O’Dowd, 2012, p. 340).

Meanwhile, it should be noted that the positive effects of telecollaboration are often accompanied by various types of challenges (Fuchs, 2016; Ware, 2005). It is very common for telecollaborative exchanges to end in failed communication with ‘low levels of participation, indifference, tension between participants, or a negative evaluation of the partner group or culture’ (O’Dowd & Ritter, 2006, p. 623) for a wide range of reasons. These exchanges may often ‘result in little more than superficial pen-pal projects where information is exchanged without reflection’ (O’Dowd, 2003, p. 121). It is thus very important to design engaging tasks (Hauck & Youngs, 2008; Müller-Hartmann, 2000; O’Dowd & Ware, 2009), create effective groups (Schenker, 2019), and find ways to motivate students to interact actively in conversations and engage in in-depth discussions.

As language educators continue to awaken to the motivational value of learning while being entertained (Campbell et  al., 1997), the use of art has advanced a new trend in foreign language teaching and learning (Lubliner & Scott, 2008). In particular, language learning through songs has been reported to have a variety of pedagogical benefits (Ludke et  al., 2014; Murphey, 1992) and has become one of the most popular language-arts-based activities for foreign language learners (e.g. Coyle & Gracia, 2014; Li & Brand, 2009; Schön et  al., 2008). However, to date, no telecollaborative projects have been documented that make use of songs from two cultures to structure exchanges and facilitate learners’ intercultural communication.

Moreover, despite its great success in intercultural learning, telecollaboration has not received sufficient attention in the CFL field (Luo & Yang, 2018). The paucity of research on telecollaboration involving CFL learners can be attributed to challenges on both the practical and research level. In recent years, there has been a gradual rise in the number of publications describing telecollaborative projects involving CFL learners (Wang et  al., 2013, 2016; Wang & Tian, 2013), but documented Chinese-American partnerships are still very limited in number (Jiang et  al., 2014; Jin & Erben, 2007; Luo & Gui, 2021; Luo & Yang, 2021; Ryder & Yamagata-Lynch, 2014). Existing research on telecollaborative projects involving CFL learners have generally reported positive aspects of telecollaboration, including its beneficial impact on intercultural learning (Jin & Erben, 2007; Luo & Yang, 2021; Ryder &

Yamagata-Lynch, 2014). Notably, very few existing studies on telecollaboration involving Chinese as the target language have focused on examining CFL learners’ development of intercultural competences as a result of telecollaboration.

To bridge these practical and empirical gaps, this study designed a Chinese-American telecollaborative exchange through song sharing via WeChat (i.e. the most popular mobile social media platform in China) to facilitate intercultural learning. During this project, students from both sides of the partnership suggested songs in their native languages that shared common themes and held cross-cultural discussions on relevant topics. Based on a variety of qualitative data (i.e. WeChat group discussion transcripts, one-on-one videoconferencing sound recordings, final reflection journals, and end-of-semester interviews), this study attempts to explore the role of songs in facilitating student interactions and the effectiveness of song sharing in promoting intercultural learning. More specifically, this study intends to provide answers to the following two research questions:

1. How was the use of songs in the Chinese-American telecollaborative exchange perceived by the CFL students?   
2. Did the Chinese-American telecollaborative exchange through song sharing promote the development of intercultural competences? If yes, in what ways?

# 3.  Methods

# 3.1.  The Chinese-American exchange

The Chinese-American exchange under discussion was a semester-long, online project mediated through WeChat, connecting eleven CFL students in a third-year Chinese language class (i.e. CHN211) at a liberal arts college in the U.S. and eleven English language students at a university in Shanghai, China. All the CFL students at the U.S. college (six males, five females) were English-speaking American students except one Vietnamese international student. All the participants from the Chinese university (eight females, 3 males) were Mandarin Chinese speakers and had studied English as a second language for at least seven years. The two researchers were the instructors of the Chinese and English language classes respectively on each side of the partnership. As the English language class in China was much larger than the Chinese class in the U.S., eleven Chinese students were selected on a volunteer basis so that each CFL student was paired with a Chinese partner. For the CFL students in the U.S., their performance in this program accounted for $1 5 \%$ of their final grade in CHN211. In contrast, the eleven Chinese students could gain an extracurricular activity credit at their university for participation in this program.

This exchange was designed around the 15-week fall semester schedule of the U.S. college. Due to mismatched academic calendars in Chinese and American universities, the first four weeks were preparatory, in which a WeChat group was created and students from both sides were invited to provide self-introductions and identify their partners. In Week 5, the students were instructed to work with their partners and prepare two songs (i.e. lyrics and music videos), one in English and one in Chinese, that shared a common theme. Ideally, the two songs reflect the students’ perceptions of American and Chinese cultures and were able to generate cultural comparisons and discussions on the selected theme. In addition, the students were also required to provide rationales of their song choices and suggest a number of discussion questions. For example, for the theme of parent-child relationships, the Chinese song selected was ‘动物森林’ (Animal Forest), the theme song of the TV series ‘虎妈猫爸’ (Tiger Mom and Cat Dad), and the English song was ‘You Raise Me Up’. Below is an excerpt of this pair’s rationale:

We chose the OP of the TV series ‘虎妈猫爸’ as our Chinese song. In this TV series, the mother played the hard role like a tiger and the father the soft role like a cat. Although such phenomenon is becoming more and more common in Chinese society, the traditional Chinese picture is: father makes all the big decisions while mother plays the housewife role. You Raise Me Up is a classic English song singing parents’ praises. We grow up under parents’ care, encouragement and protection. Parents accompany us through ups and downs till we are strong enough to stand on our own. We believe it is the same in every culture, but there can be differences in the way parents bring up children in different cultures. What are the parents’ roles in your family and in your culture? How do Chinese and American parents bring up their children? In what way do parents’ expectations of their children differ in the two cultures?

For the remaining weeks of the semester, two songs and a list of discussion questions on a selected topic were posted in the WeChat group each week, serving as a springboard for intercultural discussions, except for the weeks of Fall Break, Thanksgiving and the final week. As a result, the WeChat group discussions covered seven cultural topics encapsulated in fourteen songs suggested by the students, spanning themes such as daily routines, friendship and family, and love and marriage. In the WeChat group, students were allowed to post in English or Chinese. In addition to WeChat group discussions, the students were also encouraged to conduct a minimum of five one-on-one video chats over WeChat with their partners throughout the semester. The students were encouraged to conduct these conversations half in Chinese and half in English. The CFL students were asked to submit the audio recordings of the videoconferencing. Towards the end of the Chinese-American exchange, the CFL students at the U.S. college were required to write a final reflection journal and participate in an end-ofprogram interview, which were not expected from the students in China.

# 3.2.  Data collection and data analysis

The researchers collected four types of qualitative data for analysis, including naturally occurring interaction data (i.e. WeChat group discussion transcripts and videoconferencing audio recordings), final reflection journals, and end-of-semester interviews. Not all the students were able to conduct five video chats due to time difference and busy schedules, and occasionally they failed to record the video conversations. In the end, thirty-eight audio recordings of the video chats (ranging from 20-50 minutes) were collected. These audio recordings were carefully reviewed by the first researcher and transcribed for analysis. All the eleven CFL students at the U.S. college submitted the final reflection journals (2-3 pages). The students were allowed to use the following prompts to guide the writing of their final reflections: 1) What new aspects of Chinese culture have you learned and what cultural differences between China and the U.S. have you identified? 2) Are these cultural gains important? Why? 3) What do you think contributed to your intercultural learning? Meanwhile, the students were encouraged to discuss whatever aspects of their experience that they found worthy of reflection. All eleven of the CFL students at the U.S. college also participated in the end-of-semester interviews. The interviews were semi-structured and guided by the following general questions: 1) What did you think of the Chinese-American song sharing program this semester? 2) What did you like about it? 3) What did you dislike about it? The participants were also encouraged to pursue any other topics that interested them. Each interview lasted around 8-10 minutes. The interviews were then transcribed for analysis and each participant was given a pseudonym in the transcription.

This study focused on examining the CFL students’ perceptions of the exchange and their intercultural learning. In terms of student perceptions, we only examined the data (i.e. final reflections and interviews) produced by the CFL students at the U.S. college. The Chinese students were not asked to turn in final reflections or participate in the end-of-semester interviews. The naturally occurring data co-constructed by students on both sides, i.e. the WeChat group discussion transcripts and the videoconferencing audio recordings data, are used as a reference point for understanding the American students’ perceptions and development of intercultural competences.

The data were coded and analyzed by the first researcher. In order to answer research question 1, (i.e. the role of songs in facilitating the exchange), a grounded-theory approach (Strauss & Corbin, 1990) was undertaken to analyze the various sources of qualitative data. First introduced by Glaser and Strauss (1967), the grounded-theory methodology has become one of the most commonly adopted data analysis procedure to derive meaningful, data-based categories from qualitative data. It is defined as ‘a general methodology for developing theory that is grounded in data systematically gathered and analyzed’ (Strauss & Corbin, 1990, p. 158). With no preconceived hypothesis in mind, the first researcher examined the reflection journals and end-of-program interviews to look for central ideas and identify a full range of patterns that emerged and reoccurred from the data, with special attention given to students’ perceptions of the use of songs in the exchange. The initial coding of the data produced a set of labels, which were then merged and sorted into fewer conceptual categories until the core categories were identified and selected. Meanwhile, WeChat group discussion transcripts and video chat sound recordings were used to triangulate with the analysis.

In order to answer the second research question (i.e. the effectiveness of the exchange in developing intercultural competences), Byram’s (2000) intercultural competence assessment model was adopted to guide the data analysis. One of the components in the model, which focuses on learners’ ability to cope with living in a different culture, was excluded from the discussion of the present study due to irrelevance. Thus, this study examined various types of qualitative data to determine whether the exchange could help the students develop the remaining four types of intercultural competences outlined in the model; namely, 1) interest in knowing other people’s way of life and introducing one’s own culture to others, 2) knowledge about one’s own and others’ culture for intercultural communication, 3) ability to change perspective, and 4) knowledge about the intercultural communication process. When analyzing the final reflections and interview transcripts, evidence of intercultural learning was first identified and then assigned a label indicative of one of the four types of intercultural competences in Byram’s model. During the process of coding the WeChat group discussion and videoconferencing transcripts, the episodes surrounding one topic were identified by locating the first and final turn of each topic; evidence of intercultural learning was then coded within each topic. All evidence of intercultural learning was categorized into one and only one category (Constas, 1992).

# 4.  Results

# 4.1.  Research question 1: CFL students’ perceptions of the use of songs

All the eleven CFL learners indicated positive perceptions of the use of songs in this telecollaborative project. The theme of ‘motivation’ emerged overwhelmingly from the grounded-theory-based analysis of the reflection journals and interview transcripts in regard to CFL students’ perceptions of the use of songs in the exchange. Various sources of evidence (e.g. interviews, final reflections, WeChat group discussion transcripts, one-on-one videoconferencing audio recordings) showed that the use of songs helped motivate the students’ participation in the exchange and facilitate in-depth interactions.

As shown in the end-of-semester interviews and the final reflection journals, the CFL students in the U.S. college provided overwhelmingly positive feedback on the song-sharing exchange under discussion, describing the program as ‘lots of fun’, ‘exciting’, ‘interesting’, ‘lively’, and ‘rewarding’, among other positive descriptors. In particular, the vast majority of the CFL students (i.e. 8 out of 11) explicitly attributed the success of the program to the use of songs. As Jack explained in the end-of-semester interview, ‘I thoroughly enjoyed this semester’s Chinese-American program. It’s much better than the previous one when we were in elementary Chinese. I think it is because we used Chinese and English songs. Everyone loves to listen to music. It’s easier to draw people closer and get college kids excited about things’. In the final reflection journal, Colin expressed similar thoughts: ‘Due to music’s intrinsic ability to provoke emotion in people, I feel that the conversations were able to go deeper than those that would have occurred had the discussion topics not included our favorite songs’.

Moreover, the data indicated that the use of songs contributed to the positivity of students’ experience with regard to various aspects of the Chinese-American program (e.g. WeChat group discussion, videoconferencing, suggested songs and discussion topics, language learning), enhancing their motivation to participate in the exchange and explore Chinese language and culture through music.

In the WeChat group discussion, the students constantly expressed their appreciation regarding the sharing of songs and their enjoyment of the ensuing conversations. Brief comments such as ‘It’s a beautiful song’, ‘nice lyrics’, ‘great melody’, ‘this song pictures a beautiful scenery’, as well as ‘such a wonderful conversation with you guys’, ‘amazing point’, and ‘insightful thought’ appeared in discussion throughout the semester. The relaxing atmosphere and supportive environment cultivated by the WeChat group was lauded by many students. During the end-of-semester interview, Lillian observed, ‘The songs are cool. You can easily see that people participate more actively this semester. The conversations are longer and more people would jump in and talk, not just let the discussion die’. Emily echoed, ‘The conversations sometimes get really fun on the WeChat group. We laughed a lot…It’s really nice that people would also share their daily life photos, jokes, and funny newspaper excerpts here. The songs are a nice springboard for all this fun’.

The one-on-one videoconferencing also provided a pleasant platform for the exchange, especially with the help of the songs. The students frequently expressed excitement over meeting their partners ‘face to face’, marveling at the amount of learning fostered from the video conversations featuring discussions on songs. Here is a typical student comment on this aspect: ‘My partner is very sweet and I was definitely very excited to see her face for the first time over WeChat video-chatting… She actually introduced me to many other Chinese songs. I also got to know many famous Chinese pop stars and several music TV shows such as Voice of China, Sing My Song, Masked Singer…’ (Donna, end-of-program interview).

The students also appreciated the use of rationale documents for the suggested songs and cultural discussion questions. The rationale documents ‘provided valuable background knowledge’ for each song (Chris, reflection journal). Through such introductions, partners from the other culture learned about the singer, the song’s underlying message, or the movie for which a song was created. Additionally, the cultural discussion questions were formed ‘on the basis of the rationale’ and thus helped the students to start the discussions with ‘something concrete rather than abstract’ (Justin, reflection journal). As John further explained in the interview, ‘The rationales our class shared were nice to read… The cultural discussion questions then made a lot of more sense… If you, out of nowhere, ask me to talk about child-parent relationship in the U.S., I may not know where to start, but the conversation started nicely with the tiger mom and cat dad described for the week’s songs’.

Finally, students perceived the use of songs to be beneficial for the learning of Chinese language in addition to cultural learning. Throughout the WeChat group discussion, Chinese was used intermittently, with English used as the main language for cultural discussions. The Chinese partners would often introduce interesting Chinese phrases or idioms. For example, when discussing the topic of friends and family, one Chinese student posted, ‘In China, we always say that ‘在家靠父母, 在 外靠朋友,’ which means that ‘Depend on parents when at home, depend on friends when outside.’ So it is difficult for me to pick who are more important’. The CFL students also shared their insights on how the unique features of the Chinese songs motivated them to learn Chinese. Sophia shared her perspective in the end-of-program interview: ‘Many of the Chinese songs are clear and simple. I can even understand some parts of them, which makes me feel learning Chinese is rewarding’. Similarly, Amy commented in the reflection journal, ‘Chinese songs can be a very nice tool for learning the language. When the melody is catchy and lots of parts are repeating, it’s easier to remember those vocabulary’.

# 4.2.  Research question 2: intercultural learning through the exchange

A close analysis of the various sources of qualitative data revealed a large number of examples indicative of intercultural competence development in each of the four types outlined in Byram’s (2000) assessment model. The statistics and examples illustrated in Table 2 were based on the end-of-program interviews and final reflection journals. As seen here, evidence demonstrating the development of the first two types of intercultural competencies was more abundant than that of the latter two types, with the data from the WeChat group discussion transcripts and one-on-one videoconferencing revealing a similar trend. Due to the limited scope of the journal article medium, only a few examples exhibiting the development of each type of intercultural competence are included for discussion in this section.

Table 2. I ntercultural competence types and examples.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>No.</td><td>Intercultural competence type</td><td>Example</td><td>N and % of participants</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Interest in knowing other people&#x27;s way of life and introducing one&#x27;s own culture to others.</td><td>&quot;You can easily see that everyone is super enthusiastic about exchanging ideas and very curious about the other culture. There is lots of excitement in the WeChat group almost every day.&quot;</td><td>11 (100%)</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Knowledge about one&#x27;s own and others&#x27; culture for intercultural communication</td><td>&quot;I really enjoyed talking to my partner. We compared our school work loads and complained about our classes. We discussed various aspects of American and Chinese culture as well. Especially Taylor Swift, who I have learned is very big and beloved in China&quot;.</td><td>11 (100%)</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Ability to change perspective</td><td>&quot;One night while video chatting with me, my partner was in a classroom at her college, much like how students here would go to Pardee at night to study. She. eventually got kicked out around 10pm because the building was closing and the electricity turned out. I was shocked. She then explained to me that there were benefits of doing that. It helped save electricity</td><td>7 (63.6%)</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Knowledge about the intercultural communication process</td><td>and guarantee the students&#x27; safety. It&#x27;s great that I got opportunities to look at things differently&quot; &quot;My partner enthusiastically showed me around her dorm room during video-chatting and asked me to do the same, but I refused. I then detected her disappointment and decreased interest in talking with me. To make up for it, I tried to explain that my roommate may not feel comfortable to show her bed and everything to someone she does not know. We then talked about Chinese and American people&#x27;s perceptions of privacy. My partner then seemed to be understanding. I think I handled it well.&quot;</td><td>5 (45.5%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.2.1.  Interest in cultural exchange

Learners’ interest in knowing other people’s way of life and introducing one’s own culture to others is listed as the very first criterion in Byram’s (2000) model. In this exchange, students from both sides demonstrated strong interest in cultural exchange, as revealed in their continuous enthusiasm throughout the program, active participation in the WeChat group discussion, and lengthy, in-depth interactions while videoconferencing.

In the process of videoconferencing and facilitating WeChat group discussions, students would frequently initiate discussion by first introducing their own culture and then soliciting their partners’ perspective as a member of the other culture. For example, here is how Jack started a conversation with his partner during a video chat: ‘The English song Hey Brother is about the closeness of family, regardless of how far away they are or how much trouble they are in. This is extremely important to me, because family is the most important thing in my world. The relationship I share with my twin brother and my extended family is extremely important. I wonder how you and your friends relate to this song’. Posts like the following were very common on WeChat: ‘In China, we do not call others ‘a friend’ easily, what about in the U.S.?’ ‘In American culture a catchy beat can be just important or even more important than the lyrics themselves. Do you feel that this is similar in your culture?’

In the final reflection journals and the end-of-program interviews, students also often commented on their own interest as well as their partners’ interest in learning about each other’s culture. Here is an example: ‘My partner was very interested in my life in the United States and I was also super interested in hers in China, and we talked about topics that ranged from our classes to our home lives and our thoughts on world politics’ (Tim, reflection journal). During the interview, Emily expressed her strong excitement about the program and her Chinese partner: ‘This exercise opened my eyes and mind to more of China’s culture, especially from their youth. My partner and I have greatly enjoyed talking to each other and getting perspective on each other’s culture. I have come to consider my Chinese partner a dear friend and intend to remain in contact with her after the project is finished’.

# 4.2.2.  Knowledge of one’s own and others’ culture

Knowledge about one’s own culture and others’ culture for intercultural communication in Byram’s (2000) model involves two aspects of learning: knowing important facts about living in the other cultures and knowing how to engage in conversation with people of the other culture.

Overwhelming evidence from various types of data showed that the students learned a large number of new facts about life in China and the U.S., covering a wide range of areas including academics, home life, social life, athletics, pop culture and more. These facts were often exchanged through personal stories when they inquired about each other’s lives: ‘I was shocked to learn about their school structure – she attends a college in which the lights are turned off in the dorms at ten in the evening’ (Chris, end-of-program interview); ‘Chinese students are stuck with about six people in each dorm room’ (Amy, end-of-program interview); ‘My Chinese partner takes twelve courses this semester! Our courses must be very different because I only take four’ (Tim, reflection journal). Moreover, newly-learned facts about the other culture often prompted the students to identify cultural differences and analyze the reasons behind them: ‘A major difference I learned was about the meaning and importance of family. In China everyone lives together, with younger generations supporting older ones, whereas in America the goal is specifically to move out of one’s family house and strike out for themselves. Put simply: the Chinese emphasize age while Americans emphasize youth’ (Emily, reflection journal). In addition to differences, the students also discovered considerable cultural similarities that invited intercultural learning. For example, after rounds of discussion on parent-child relationships in the WeChat group, a Chinese student exclaimed: ‘Before talking to you guys, I used to think that there might [be] large differences between Chinese and American parenting. Turns out parents do share the same DNA’. This specific example was cited by many CFL students in their reflection journals as an interesting moment of intercultural learning. Finally, new discoveries of the other culture often urged the students to reflect on their own culture: ‘One of the most striking things I learned about China is the popularity of American culture there. Movies, music, and other celebrities from America are well known and beloved in China. It gave me perspective on our country’s role in the world…and the amount of culture we export is truly startling’ (Lillian, reflection journal).

Ample evidence also demonstrated that the students learned how to engage in conversation with members of the other culture during the exchange. As shown in the WeChat group discussion transcripts and one-on-one videoconferencing recordings, students from both sides were able to successfully communicate about Chinese and American culture and maintain relevant conversations for a sustained period of time. Moreover, the conversations were often very ‘happy’, ‘comfortable’, ‘enjoyable’, or even ‘exciting’, in the students’ own words. All eleven CFL students expressed their satisfaction towards the success of communication in the WeChat group in some capacity: ‘The class group chat was one of my favorite parts about the Chinese-American program this semester. I was excited to hear about the perspectives of my fellow classmates both at my college and abroad…Some discussions allowed our classes to enter rather deep conversations. Not only did they allow for us to understand how our classmates felt about issues, but also increased comfortability due to the depth of conversation’. The videoconferencing engaged the students in one-on-one conversations with peers in the target culture and created valuable learning opportunities greatly appreciated by the students: ‘While my partner and I did a video chat every week, we also communicated through WeChat’s text-based function regularly throughout the week on whatever subject came to mind. The majority of our conversations have been in excess of forty minutes long. I have learned a lot from these conversations and gained more confidence in talking to native speakers of Chinese’ (Jack, reflection journal).

# 4.2.3.  Ability to change perspective

Learners equipped with the ability to change perspective are able to understand other cultures by seeing things from a different point of view and by looking at one’s own culture from the perspective of others (Byram, 2000). As discussed previously, the intercultural communication experienced by the Chinese and American students in the course of this exchange was, in general, amiable and smooth. While the supportiveness and enjoyment exhibited in the WeChat group discussions and video conversations were implicit indications of a shared openness to different perspectives, prominent examples of students’ ability to change perspectives were identified explicitly from reflection journals and interviews.

For example, during the end-of-program interview, Justin described a moment when he tried to understand his partner from the Chinese point of view: ‘One important aspect I learned about Chinese culture actually have to do with privacy. When my partner and I were discussing our home lives and our parents, she asked me how much money my parents made. This question surprised me and I didn’t actually have an answer. I was not offended or anything. As it turns out, Chinese people are more open to talking about topics that Americans might find intrusive such as income, age or marital status. I am sure many things Americans do may also sound weird to them in China…’ According to Sophia, the most important lesson she learned from this exchange was that ‘values are relative’. In the final reflection journal, she not only explained how the song sharing program helped her understand ‘it is often a matter of perspective’, but also confessed that this new understanding helped her develop a more rounded view of the world and countries beyond China. Below is an excerpt of her journal:

It is sometimes very hard to understand why it is okay to value the community above the individual [like Chinese do] and Americans often denounce others’ values if they are different than our own. Our weekly music videos exemplify a contrast in values very simply. Whether it was a song about romance, family, relationships, or career dreams, the accompanying American music video we watched often portrayed a similar theme in a different light. I am grateful for the opportunity to have realized these important lessons about cultural differences and relativism because it has given me a better understanding of relations between countries and cultures. When someone in my government class raises a question about relations in the middle east, difference in values is an important way to thoroughly analyze the situation; when I watch a Chinese movie about family relationships, such as the movie Shower, I can look at their norms not negatively, but just as different.

# 4.2.4.  The process of intercultural communication

According to Byram (2000), knowledge about the intercultural communication process entails two specific abilities: the ability to resolve misunderstandings arising from people’s lack of awareness of the view point of another culture, and the ability to discover new information and new aspects of the other culture on one’s own. Based on various types of qualitative data, the Chinese and American students in this exchange did not seem to experience many misunderstandings in the process of communication and interaction. When misunderstandings did occur, the students were able to resolve the issue and avoid communication breakdowns by being polite and understanding, demonstrating a willingness to listen, or providing further explanation. Below is an excerpt from the WeChat group discussion:

Xie: My parents haven’t known that I am in a relationship yet   
Collin: $@$ Xie that happens in American culture too   
Xie: Haha   
Amy: Agreed. Often times we don’t tell our parents until/unless it gets serious Jack: My mother to this day has never been informed of any of my relationships. Xie: Vow, but they are actually able to notice our little changes   
Amy: $@$ Jack Wow! That’s crazy. $@$ Xie they definitely notice   
Xie: My mom once asked me if I already had a boyfriend. I played dumb. Jack: That had to be a fun conversation.   
Xie: Indeed it was! I am a terrible actress

Emily: $@$ Xie How long have you been dating?

Xie: Wow that’s kinda personal…

Emily: Sorry. Didn’t mean to be rude.

Xie: That’s fine. We’ve known each other for more than a year before we finally decided to give it a shot. And we are at the same college.

Emily: Aww! Good luck to you

In this excerpt, Xie is a Chinese student, and Collin, Jack, Amy and Emily are from the U.S. college. When Emily asked Xie how long she had been dating, Xie thought this question was quite personal and was a little reluctant to respond, but continued to give the answer anyway after Emily gently apologized. Communication did not break down but continued to grow during moments like this because both sides were respectful of each other and willing to make efforts to maintain a successful conversation. It should also be noted that the students inserted various types of emoji icons whenever appropriate in the WeChat group discussion, but these icons were removed from the transcript excerpt presented above due to technical difficulty. For example, when Xie replied, ‘Wow that’s kinda personal…’ in the excerpt above, she inserted a cute and shy face emoji icon right after her line. The use of various types of emoji icons in WeChat group discussion emerged as a salient and effective strategy for promoting intercultural communication, helping to mitigate misunderstandings while also fostering a comfortable rapport among the American and Chinese students.

In addition to resolving misunderstandings, this exchange also encouraged the students to discover new information and new aspects of the other culture independently. For example, Justin confessed in the interview: ‘After the conversation with my partner, I went to do some research on the privacy issue. I learned that China is a collectivist culture, which explains why Chinese people are less sensitive to privacy’. A number of students mentioned in the interview that they ended up researching the suggested Chinese singers and checking out many of their other songs as well as other Chinese movies, TV shows, and websites that came up during the exchange.

# 5.  Discussion

The use of songs was reported to have facilitated active participation and in-depth discussion in this exchange. Consistent with the findings of previous research (Ludke et  al., 2014; Murphey, 1990), this study offers further support for the motivational value of learning while being entertained. The enhanced student motivation as exhibited in the present song-sharing telecollaborative exchange could find explanations in existing research on student motivation in foreign language learning. Many studies (e.g. Deci & Ryan, 1985; Dörnyei, 2002; Freiermuth & Huang, 2012) have shown that attractive language learning tasks can help facilitate students’ intrinsic motivation in language learning. Moreover, Freiermuth and Huang (2012) identified four major task-based elements that affect motivation in language learning classes, including willingness to communicate, task attractiveness, task innovation, and need to use the target language. In the song-sharing exchange under discussion, the use of music and the format of telecollaboration incorporated all the four elements into the tasks. Future telecollaborative exchanges may continue to explore the potential of the use of songs and other art forms (e.g. films, poems, humor) to engage students. This study focused on the use of songs to promote intercultural learning, without fully exploring the potential benefits of songs on language learning, which can serve as a reasonable direction for future endeavors on telecollaboration.

Corroborating the results of existing studies on Chinese-American telecollaboration (Jiang et  al., 2014; Jin & Erben, 2007; Luo & Yang, 2021; Ryder & Yamagata-Lynch, 2014), this study also found that telecollaboration was conducive to intercultural learning. In particular, the CFL students in this exchange were reported to have exhibited evidence of developing four types of intercultural competences as outlined in Bryam’s (2000) model, establishing Chinese-American telecollaboration as a promising pedagogical tool for teaching culture in Chinese language classrooms. Meanwhile, similar to the findings of Liaw’s (2006) study, evidence indicative of the development of the first two types of intercultural competences (i.e. interest in cultural exchange, knowledge about one’s own and the other culture) was much more abundant than the other two types (i.e. ability to change perspective, knowledge about the intercultural communication process). Moreover, examples demonstrating students’ development of various types of intercultural competences seemed to have derived implicitly from participation in the exchange, rather than from any explicit instruction from the instructors. Thus, future telecollaborative projects may add an explicit teaching component and focus on designing tasks and activities that foster the development of different types of intercultural competences, especially the latter two types.

Scholars have pointed that it is common for students to position their telecollaborative partners as oversimplified representatives of monolithic cultures in bilingual/bicultural exchanges (Kern, 2014; O’Dowd, 2020). A close examination of the qualitative data in this study provides support to this view, showing that the CFL students in this study tended to inevitably make (over)generalizations about ‘national cultures’ from their interactions with their assigned partner(s). For example, Justin realized that Chinese people are more open to talking about topics (such as income and age) that Americans might find intrusive based on his communication with his Chinese partner. Later on, he further attributed this aspect of Chinese behavior to being a characteristic of collectivist cultures. Interestingly, in the WeChat group discussion excerpt between Xie and Emily, it was actually the Chinese student, Xie who viewed the American student, Emily’s question on dating to be too personal, which contradicts Justin’s generalization. This could be employed as a meaningful example for the instructor to mentor students about the problematicity of overgeneralization in intercultural learning and the importance of developing the ability to evaluate and refine generalizations about another culture. In order for telecollaboration to be an effective tool for the development of intercultural competences, the teacher plays an essential role. The success of telecollaborative projects, to a great extent, depends on ‘how teachers can actively integrate the exchanges into their classes and mentor their students as they negotiate the linguistic, cultural, and digital hurdles of online intercultural collaboration’ (O’Dowd et  al., 2020, p. 147).

Finally, in spite of the overall success of this song sharing program, the telecollaborative exchange was not free of challenges. Many students experienced difficulties and frustrations in scheduling one-on-one videoconferencing conversations due to the sizable time difference between China and America and the busy schedules of college students, as reported in previous studies (Luo & Gui, 2021). Technology also presented various issues. At the beginning of the semester, a few American students experienced difficulty in setting up a WeChat account, but were able to resolve the issues with the help of their instructors. When students began to share music video links for the suggested songs via WeChat, they soon discovered that the YouTube links were not accessible in China. The students ended up having to share two sets of music video links, one for access in China and one for access in America. Although WeChat has proven to be an effective technological platform in this exchange, other less commonly used features of WeChat such as Moments and voice messaging may also be explored in future Chinese-American exchanges.

# 6.  Conclusion

This study reports on the results of a Chinese-American telecollaborative exchange facilitated through song sharing. Various types of qualitative data showed that the students participated actively in the program and were able to engage in in-depth conversations with their partners. Many students attributed the success of the exchange to the intrinsic ability of music to engage college students. Moreover, the students were reported to have demonstrated evidence of developing the four types of intercultural competences outlined in Byram’s (2000) model. These findings indicate that Chinese-American telecollaboration may be promoted as an effective pedagogical approach for teaching culture in the CFL field.

However, the results of this study need to be interpreted with caution due to certain limitations. First, only the audio recordings of the videoconferencing were collected for analysis. The full recordings (including the visuals) of the synchronous video chats could have provided richer data. Second, only CFL students’ perceptions were examined in this study. Adding the Chinese students’ reflections to the data may have produced more complex insights. Third, the adoption of Byram’s (2000) assessment model of intercultural competence to guide the data analysis has a potential limitation: new categories, i.e. those outside of Byram’s group of four may have gone unnoticed since the research started with the categories outlined in the model. Mechanisms such as having two experienced researchers code the data independently may have assuaged the problem. Finally, all of students’ perception data was collected at the end of the semester. The adoption of a longitudinal design instead may have allowed for opportunities to collect more in-depth data. All these areas require consideration and improvement in future research on Chinese-American telecollaboration.

In conclusion, the findings of this study show that Chinese-American telecollaboration serves as a promising pedagogical activity that promotes intercultural learning. In addition, the use of songs and music in structuring telecollaborative exchanges has the potential to facilitate a lively learning atmosphere and enhance students’ motivation in learning language and culture. It is highly recommended that Chinese language instructors continue to explore the benefits of Chinese-American telecollaboration in teaching and to make use of music and other forms of arts such as humor creatively in designing telecollaborative tasks.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

# Notes on contributors

Han Luo is currently an Assistant Professor of Chinese at Lafayette College, USA. She received a PhD in Foreign Language Education with a specialization in the teaching

of Chinese from the University of Texas at Austin in 2011, and a PhD in Linguistics and Applied Linguistics from Beijing Foreign Studies University in 2007.

Pan Gao is an associate professor of English at the East China University of Science and Technology in Shanghai, China.

# ORCID

Han Luo $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3237-5785

# References

ACTFL. (2015). World-readiness standards for learning languages. Author.   
Arnold, N. (2007). Technology-mediated learning 10 years later: Emphasizing pedagogical or utilitarian applications? Foreign Language Annals, 40(1), 161–181. https:// doi.org/10.1111/j.1944-9720.2007.tb02859.x   
Avgousti, M. I. (2018). Intercultural communicative competence and online exchanges: A systematic review. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 31(8), 819–853. https:// doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2018.1455713   
Belz, J. A. (2003a). Linguistic perspective on the development of intercultural communicative competence in telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7, 68–117.   
Belz, J. A. (2003b). From the special issue editor. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 2–5.   
Belz, J. A. (2007). The development of intercultural communicative competence in telecollaborative partnerships. In R. O’Dowd (Ed.), Online intercultural exchange (pp. 127–166). Multilingual Matters.   
Belz, J. A., & Thorne, S. L. (Eds.). (2006). Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education. Thomson Heinle.   
Bennett, M. J. (1993). Towards ethnorelativism: A developmental model of intercultural sensitivity. In R. M. Paige (Ed.), Education for the intercultural experience (2nd ed., pp. 21–71). Intercultural Press.   
Brooks, N. (1968). Teaching culture in the foreign language classroom. Foreign Language Annals, 1(3), 204–217. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1944-9720.1968.tb00135.x   
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Multilingual Matters.   
Byram, M. (2000). Assessing intercultural competence in language teaching. Sprogforum, 18(6), 8–13.   
Byram, M. (2008). From foreign language education to education for intercultural citizenship. Multilingual Matters.   
Byram, M. (2009). The intercultural speaker and the pedagogy of foreign language education. In D. Deardorff (Ed.), The Sage handbook of intercultural competence (pp. 321–332). Sage.   
Byram, M. (2012). Conceptualizing intercultural (communicative) competence and intercultural citizenship. In J. Jackson (Ed.), The Routledge handbook of language and intercultural Communication (pp. 86–98). Routledge.   
Byram, M. (2013). Foreign language teaching and intercultural citizenship. Iranian Journal of Language Teaching Research, 1(3), 53–62.   
Byram, M. (2014). Twenty-five years on—From cultural studies to intercultural citizenship. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 27, 209–225. https://doi.org/10.1080/07908 318.2014.974329 learning and teaching. Council of Europe.   
Byrnes, H. (2010). Revisiting the role of culture in the foreign language curriculum. T h e Mo d e r n L ang u ag e Jour n al , 9 4 ( 2 ) , 3 1 5 – 3 1 7 . http s : / / d oi . org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2010.01023.x   
Bueno-Alastuey, M. C., & Kleban, M. (2016). Matching linguistic and pedagogical objectives in a telecollaboration project: a case study. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 29(1), 148–166. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2014.904360   
Campbell, J. R., Voelkl, K., & Donahue, P. L. (1997). NAEP 1996 trends in academic progress. U.S. Department of Education.   
Chun, D. M. (2014). Editor’s introduction. In D. M. Chun (Ed.), Cultura-inspired intercultural exchanges: Focus on Asian and Pacific languages (pp. xi–xx). University of Hawaii, National Foreign Language Resource Center.   
Colpaert, J. (2020). Editorial position paper: How virtual is your research? Computer Assisted Language Learning, 33(7), 653–664. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2020.1 824059   
Constas, M. A. (1992). Qualitative analysis as a public event: The documentation of category development procedures. American Educational Research Journal, 29(2), 253–266. https://doi.org/10.3102/00028312029002253   
Council of Europe. (2001). The Common European framework of reference for languages: Learning, teaching, assessment. http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/CADRE_EN.asp   
Coyle, Y., & Gracia, R. G. (2014). Using songs to enhance L2 vocabulary acquisition in preschool children. ELT Journal, 68(3), 276–285. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccu015   
Cummins, J., & Sayers, D. (1995). Brave new schools. Challenging cultural literacy through global learning networks. St. Martin’s Press.   
Deardorff, D. (2006). Identification and assessment of intercultural competence as a student outcome of internationalization. Journal of Studies in International Education, 10(3), 241–266. https://doi.org/10.1177/1028315306287002   
Deardorff, D. (2011). Assessing intercultural competence. New Directions for Institutional Research, 2011(149), 65–79. https://doi.org/10.1002/ir.381   
Deci, E., & Ryan, R. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior. Plenum.   
Dervin, F. (2010). Assessing intercultural competence in language learning and teaching: A critical review of current efforts. In F. Dervin & E. Suomela-Salmi (Eds.), New approaches to assessment in higher education (pp. 157–173). Peter Lang.   
Dervin, F. (2016). Interculturality in education: A theoretical and methodological toolbox. Palgrave Macmillan.   
Dörnyei, Z. (2002). The motivational basis of language learning tasks. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Individual differences in second language acquisition (pp. 137–158). John Benjamins.   
Freiermuth, M., & Huang, H. (2012). Bringing Japan and Taiwan closer electronically: A look at an intercultural online synchronous chat task and its effect on motivation. Language Teaching Research, 16(1), 61–88. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168811423341   
Freiermuth, M., & Huang, H. (2015). Employing online chat to resolve task-based activities: Using online chat to promote cultural language exchange between Japanese and Taiwanese learners. In M. Thomas & H. Reinders (Eds.), Contemporary task-based language teaching in Asia (pp. 211–227). Bloomsbury Academic.   
Freiermuth, M., & Huang, H. (2018). Assessing willingness to communicate for academically, culturally, and linguistically different language learners: Can English become a virtual Lingua Franca via electronic text-based chat? In B. Zou & M. Thomas

(Eds.), Handbook of research on integrating technology into contemporary language

learning and teaching (pp. 57–85). IGI Publishing.   
Freiermuth, M., & Huang, H. (2021). Zooming across cultures: Can a telecollaborative video exchange between language learning partners further the development of intercultural competences? Foreign Language Annals, 54, 185–206. https://doi.org/10.1111/ flan.12504   
Fuchs, C. (2016). Are you able to access this website at all? – Team negotiations and macro-level challenges in telecollaboration. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 29(7), 1152–1168. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2016.1167091   
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Aldine.   
Godwin-Jones, R. (2013). Integrating intercultural competence into language learning through technology. Language Learning and Technology, 17(2), 1–13.   
Gudykunst, W. B. (1993). Toward a theory of effective interpersonal and intergroup communication: An anxiety/uncertainty management (AUM) perspective. In R. L. Wiseman & J. Koester (Eds.), Intercultural communication theory (pp. 33–71). Sage.   
Hall, J. K. (2002). Teaching and researching language and culture. Pearson Education.   
Hauck, M., & Youngs, B. L. (2008). Telecollaboration in multimodal environments: The impact on task design and learner interaction. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(2), 87–124. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588220801943510   
Hoff, H. E. (2014). A critical discussion of Byram’s model of intercultural communicative competence in the light of Bildung theories. Intercultural Education, 25(6), 508–518. https://doi.org/10.1080/14675986.2014.992112   
Hoff, H. E. (2020). The evolution of intercultural communicative competence: Conceptualisations, critiques and consequences for 21st century classroom practice. Intercultural Communication Education, 3(2), 55–74. https://doi.org/10.29140/ice. ${ \tt V } 3 { \mathrm { n } } 2 . 2 6 4 $   
Jiang, S., Wang, H., & Tschudi, S. (2014). Intercultural learning on the web: Reflections on practice. In D. M. Chun (Ed.), Cultura-inspired intercultural exchanges: Focus on Asian and Pacific languages (pp. 121–137). University of Hawaii, National Foreign Language Resource Center.   
Jin, L., & Erben, T. (2007). Intercultural learning via instant messenger interaction. CALICO Journal, 24(2), 291–311. https://doi.org/10.1558/cj.v24i2.291-312   
Kern, R. (2006). Perspectives on technology in learning and teaching languages. TESOL Quarterly, 40(1), 183–210. https://doi.org/10.2307/40264516   
Kern, R. (2014). Technology as pharmakon: The promise and perils of the internet for foreign language education. The Modern Language Journal, 98, 340–357. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2014.12065.x   
Kohn, K., & Hoffstaedter, P. (2017). Learner agency and non-native speaker identity in pedagogical lingua franca conversations: Insights from intercultural telecollaboration in foreign language education. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 30, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2017.1304966   
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford University Press.   
Kramsch, C. (1995). The cultural component of language teaching. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 8(2), 83–92. https://doi.org/10.1080/07908319509525192   
Kramsch, C. (1998). Language and culture. Oxford University Press.   
Kramsch, C. (1999). Thirdness: The intercultural stance. In T. Vestergaard (Ed.), Language, culture and identity (pp. 53–89). Aalborg University Press.   
Kramsch, C. (2003). Introduction: How can we tell the dancer from the dance? In C. Kramsch (Ed.), Language acquisition and language socialization: Ecological perspectives (pp. 1–30). Continuum.   
Kramsch, C. (2011). The symbolic dimensions of the intercultural. Language Teaching, 44(3), 354–367. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444810000431   
Kramsch, C. (2013). Culture in foreign language teaching. Iranian Journal of Language Teaching Research, 1(1), 57–78.   
Kramsch, C., & Zhu Hua. (2016). Language, culture and language teaching. In G. Hall (Ed.), Routledge handbook of English language teaching (pp. 38–50). Routlege.   
Levy, M. (2007). Culture, culture learning and new technologies: Towards a pedagogical framework. Language Learning & Technology, 11(2), 104–127.   
Lewis, T., & O’Dowd, R. (2016). Online intercultural exchange and foreign language learning: A systematic review. In R. O’Dowd & T. Lewis (Eds.), Online intercultural exchange: Policy, pedagogy, practice (pp. 21–68). Routledge.   
Li, X., & Brand, M. (2009). Effectiveness of music on vocabulary acquisition, language usage and meaning for mainland Chinese ESL learners. Contributions to Music Education, 36(1), 73–84.   
Liaw, M. (2006). Elearning and the development of intercultural competence. Language Learning & Technology, 10(3), 49–64.   
Liddicoat, A. J. (2021). Teaching languages from an intercultural perspective. In R. Amber, M. Weinmann, & J. Blackmore (Eds.), Rethinking languages education (pp. 224–241). Routledge.   
Liddicoat, A. J., & Scarino, A. (2013). Intercultural language teaching and learning. Wiley-Blackwell.   
Lomicka, L. (2009). An intercultural approach to teaching and learning French. The French Review, 82(6), 1227–1243.   
Lubliner, S., & Scott, J. A. (2008). Nourishing vocabulary: Balancing words and learning. Corwin Press.   
Ludke, K. M., Ferreira, F., & Overy, K. (2014). Singing can facilitate foreign language learning. Memory & Cognition, 42, 41–52. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421- 013-0342-5   
Luo, H., & Gui, M. (2021). Developing an effective Chinese-American telecollaborative language learning program: An action research study. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 34, 609–636. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2019.1633355   
Luo, H., & Yang, C. (2018). Twenty years of telecollaborative practice: Implications for teaching Chinese as a foreign language. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 31, 546–571. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2017.1420083   
Luo, H., & Yang, C. (2021). Pedagogical benefits of Chinese-American telecollaboration: A study of student perceptions. ReCALL, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1017/ S0958344021000203   
Matsuo, C. (2012). A critique of Michael Byram’s intercultural communicative competence model from the perspective of model type and conceptualization of culture. Fukuoka University Review of Literature & Humanities, 44, 347–380.   
Matsuo, C. (2016). A dialogic critique of Michael Byram’s intercultural communication competence model: Proposal for a dialogic pedagogy. In N. Tomimori (Ed.), Comprehensive study on language education methods and cross–linguistic proficiency evaluation methods for Asian languages: Final report (2014) (grants-in-aid for scientific research (B), Japan Society for the promotion of Science) (pp. 3–22). Tokyo University of Foreign Studies.   
Müller-Hartmann, A. (2000). The role of tasks in promoting intercultural learning in electronic learning networks. Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 129–147.   
Müller-Hartmann, A. (2006). Learning how to teach intercultural communicative competence via telecollaboration: A model for language teacher education. In J. A. Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education (pp. 63–84). Thomson Heinle.   
Murphey, T. (1990). The Song-Stuck-In-My-Head phenomenon: A melodic din in the LAD? System, 18(1), 53–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/0346-251X(90)90028-4   
Murphey, T. (1992). Music and song. Oxford University Press.   
O’Dowd, R. (2000). Intercultural learning via videoconferencing: A pilot exchange project. ReCALL, 12(1), 49–63. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344000000616   
O’Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the “other side”: A qualitative analysis of intercultural learning in networked exchanges. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 118–144.   
O’Dowd, R. (Ed.). (2007). Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign language teachers. Multilingual Matters.   
O’Dowd, R. (2012). Intercultural communicative competence through telecollaboration. In J. Jackson (Ed.), The Routledge handbook of language and intercultural communication (pp. 342–358). Routledge/Taylor & Francis.   
O’Dowd, R. (2021). Virtual exchange: Moving forward into the next decade. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 34(3), 209–224. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2021.1 902201   
O’Dowd, R. (2020). A transnational model of virtual exchange for global citizenship education. Language Teaching, 53, 477–490.   
O’Dowd, R., & Ritter, M. (2006). Understanding and working with “failed communication” in telecollaborative exchanges. CALICO Journal, 61(2), 623–642.   
O’Dowd, R., Sauro, S., & Spector-Cohen, E. (2020). The role of pedagogical mentoring in virtual exchange. TESOL Quarterly, 54(1), 146–172. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.543   
O’Dowd, R., & Ware, P. (2009). Critical issues in telecollaborative task design. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(2), 173–188.   
Rathje, S. (2007). Intercultural competence: The status and future of a controversial concept. Language and Intercultural Communication, 7(4), 254–266. https://doi. org/10.2167/laic285.0   
Rienties, B., Lewis, T., O’Dowd, R., Rets, I., & Rogaten, J. (2020). The impact of virtual exchange on TPACK and foreign language competence: Reviewing a large-scale implementation across 23 virtual exchanges. Computer Assisted Language Learning. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2020.1737546   
Ryder, L., & Yamagata-Lynch, L. (2014). Understanding tensions: Activity systems analysis of transpacific collaboration. CALICO Journal, 31(2), 201–220. https://doi. org/10.11139/cj.31.2.201-220   
Schenker, T. (2012). Intercultural competence and cultural learning through telecollaboration. CALICO Journal, 29(3), 449–470. https://doi.org/10.11139/cj.29.3.449-470   
Schenker, T. (2019). The effects of group set-up on participation and learning in discussion forums. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 34, 685–706. https://doi. org/10.1080/09588221.2019.16   
Schön, D., Boyer, M., Moreno, S., Besson, M., Peretz, I., & Kolinsky, R. (2008). Songs as an aid for language acquisition. Cognition, 106(2), 975–983.   
Sercu, L. (2004). Intercultural communicative competence in foreign language education: Integrating theory and practice. In O. S. John, K. van Esch, & E. Schalkwijk (Eds.), New insights into foreign language learning and teaching (pp. 115–130). Peter Lang.   
Sinicrope, C., Norris, J., & Watanabe, Y. (2007). Understanding and assessing intercultural competence: A summary of theory, research, and practice. Second Language Studies, 26(1), 1–58.   
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques. Sage.   
Thorne, S. (2006). Pedagogical and praxiological lessons from internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education research. In J. Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education (pp. 2–30). Heinle & Heinle.   
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 38–67.   
Wang, Y., Fang, W.-C., Han, J., & Chen, N.-S. (2016). Exploring the affordances of WeChat for facilitating teaching, social and cognitive presence in semi-synchronous language exchange. Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 32(4), 18–37.   
Wang, Y., & Tian, J. (2013). Negotiation of meaning in multimodal Tandem Learning via Desktop Videoconferencing. International Journal of Computer Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 3(2), 41–55.   
Wang, J., Zou, B., Wang, D., & Xing, M. (2013). Students’ perception of a wiki platform and the impact of wiki engagement on intercultural communication. System, 41, 245–256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2013.04.004   
Ware, P. (2005). Missed’ communication in online communication: Tensions in a German-American telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 64–89.   
Ware, P., & Kramsch, C. (2005). Toward an intercultural stance: Teaching German and English through telecollaboration. The Modern Language Journal, 89(2), 190–205. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2005.00274.x   
Zhu Hua. (2019). Exploring intercultural communication: Language in action (2nd ed.). Routledge.