# Ungrading as an assessment philosophy: Reliability, validity, and practicality

Sara T. Cushing

Georgia State University, Department of Applied Linguistics & ESL, Georgia, USA

One of my favorite teaching artifacts is a handwritten paragraph by an intermediate-level ESL student titled “My childhood neigborhood” (sic). Linh has written in simple but moving language about her childhood in Vietnam and the best friend she still misses. In response, the teacher has marked a few grammatical errors and written across the top $^ { \mathrm { 4 6 } } \mathrm { C } +$ . Good effort.”

I like to show this paper to novice teachers because it illustrates poignantly some of the issues with grading discussed in Crusan’s essay. Rather than responding to the student’s ideas, the teacher has focused only on linguistic errors, provided a grade with no justification, and given faint but unactionable praise. Linh has no way of knowing how to improve, other than to correct the errors that the teacher marked. The teacher’s grade may indeed have halted Linh’s learning process, as Luxon (2022, cited by Crusan) claims grades do.

Scenarios like this are part of the impetus behind the educational trend called ungrading, defined by Masland (2023) as “a phi losophy of assessment that seeks to decenter grades (i.e., letters or numbers) in the learning process” (p. 89). I find it useful to frame ungrading as a philosophy of assessment, rather than a set of specific practices, as these may differ from teacher to teacher and from context to context. Like Crusan, I believe that assessment is central to teaching, and teachers need a wide range of assessment options, including many of the practices discussed in her paper. And I concur with many of the cited authors on the value of promoting assessment practices that encourage learning (i.e., assessment for learning rather than assessment of learning; Wiliam, 2011) and of involving students in the assessment process. However, as with any assessment practice, it is important to include considerations of reliability, validity, and practicality (Weigle, 2007) when designing and implementing classroom assessment, including ungrading.

Reliability has to do with consistency in grading; as Crusan notes, ungrading practices may be more subjective, and thus less reliable, than more traditional forms of assessment. Teachers can reduce these threats to reliability through the use of careful planning, clear communication of the goal of an activity, and transparent rubrics. For example, self-assessment, an oft-cited ungrading practice, can lead to benefits such as more self-regulated learning and metacognitive awareness, but without sufficient training, learners do not always assess themselves accurately (see, e.g., Summers et al., 2019). Teachers wishing to use self-assessment should be prepared to take the time in class to provide both a rationale and sufficient practice so that students can assess themselves reliably and confidently.

Validity, or the degree to which we are assessing the knowledge, skills, and abilities that are important for the specific decisions to be made, is possibly the main selling point of ungrading. Practices such as portfolio assessment and opportunities to revise writing after feedback have more claim to validity than, for example, timed one-draft essays. On the other hand, some practices discussed under the rubric of ungrading may reduce rather than enhance validity. For example, while power-sharing with students may seem like a worthwhile goal, teachers should not forget that they are the ultimate authority in their classrooms. Teachers are the experts from whom students expect to learn, and they are the models for how to acquire the content or skills being taught. For accountability and fairness, teachers should be able to justify their grading practices with evidence of student growth or achievement. Going to the ex tremes of ungrading, such as allowing students to grade themselves “simply because [the teacher] is required to submit final grades”

(Stommel, 2023, p. 73) can be seen an abdication of this role or, worse, as flaunting the privilege of secure employment, since, as Crusan notes, teachers with more precarious employment may not be able to be so casual about their grading practices.

Reducing reliance on tests and quizzes and finding alternate assessment methods similarly can have both positive and negative effects on validity. Ungrading enthusiasts rightly point out that these assessment tools are limited in their ability to validly assess student learning, particularly at higher levels of Bloom’s taxonomy. On the other hand, some research suggests that multiple lowstakes assessments can be more motivating and conducive to learning than fewer high-stakes assessments (see Schrank, 2016), particularly when the course content involves facts, vocabulary, and conceptual understanding, which can be assessed efficiently through short quizzes. In the writing classroom, which may rarely rely on formal tests, the principle of multiple low-stakes assessments may still apply. Grading individual items in a portfolio according to a rubric, with indications of how to improve and the opportunity to revise for a higher score, might be less anxiety-provoking and lead to more revisions than providing only comments without grades until the final submission.

Finally, with regard to practicality, Crusan notes that some ungrading practices require substantial investments of time and effort. She describes the “tremendous amount of feedback” she provides on drafts and her disappointment when students don’t take up her suggestions and revise their papers. For the sake of practicality, it may be helpful for teachers to recognize that they may be more motivated to teach students to write well than students are to work hard at writing, and adjust their expectations accordingly. For example, rather than giving extensive feedback to all students, teachers might give students the choice of receiving either feedback or an immediate grade on a draft. Thus, extensive feedback can be reserved for those students who are sufficiently motivated to use it for improvement. This practice would not only save time for the teacher, thus addressing practicality, but would also serve one of the goals of ungrading, which is to empower students to take control of their own learning. Had Linh’s teacher not felt she needed to respond to everyone’s drafts, she might have been able to respond more effectively to Linh’s.

# Data Availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

# References

Luxon, E. (2022, March 21). Ungrading doesn’t necessarily mean no grades. So, what does it mean? 〈https://umdearborn.edu/news/ungrading-doesnt-necessarilymean-no-grades-so-what-does-it-mean〉.   
Schrank, Z. (2016). An assessment of student perceptions and responses to frequent low-stakes testing in introductory sociology classes. Teaching Sociology, 44(2), 118–127.   
Stommel, J. (2023). Undoing the grade: Why we grade, and how to stop. Hybrid Pedagogy, Inc. https://doi.org/10.1080/15512169.2024.2338479   
Summers, M. M., Cox, T. L., McMurry, B. L., & Dewey, D. P. (2019). Investigating the use of the ACTFL can-do statements in a self-assessment for student placement in an Intensive English Program. System, 80, 269–287.   
Weigle, S. C. (2007). Teaching writing teacher about assessment. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16, 194–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2007.07.004   
Wiliam, D. (2011). What is assessment for learning? Studies in Educational Evaluation, 37(1), 3–14.