# Negotiating socioacademic relations: English learners reception by and reaction to college faculty

Ilona Leki \*

Department of English, University of Tennessee, 301 McClung Tower, Knoxville, TN 37996-0430, USA

# Abstract

The experiences of English learners in tertiary education in the US are significantly colored by their interactions with faculty in courses across the curriculum, who are largely responsible for setting the tone in their classes. The intersection between L2 students’ expectations, abilities, and needs and the requirements and attitudes of their instructors may be a site of frustrating contention or of enabling accommodation on both sides. Despite the potential academic and personal importance of such socioacademic interactions, relatively little research has systematically examined this feature of the academic context in which L2 undergraduate students must function.

This report, based on case studies of immigrant and visa undergraduate students in the US and interview research with college faculty, explores these socioacademic interactions from three perspectives: the degrees and types of accommodation that faculty made for L2 students; the faculty’s interview comments about L2 students; and the focal students’ interview commentary on their experiences with these professors. In illuminating the relational context of these L2 students’ undergraduate studies, this examination points to the students’ efforts to manage their relationships with faculty and to construct comfortable subject positions for themselves in the context of unequal power relations.

$©$ 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Socioacademic relationships; L2 undergraduates; Disciplinary courses; Sociocultural theory; Identity; English for academic purposes

# 1. The culture of college: English learners’ reception by and reaction to college faculty

During the 1990s and 2000s second language studies researchers have moved increasingly away from a view of language learning and use as autonomous cognitive activity and toward explorations of the political, community, and institutional contexts in which this activity is embedded and which this activity both reflects and constructs. This social turn, as Trimbur (1994) referred to it in L1 English composition studies, resulted in research reports peopled with individuals, their histories, voices, and interactions with others in community settings, workplaces, elementary schools, high schools in English dominant countries, postcolonial contexts, and especially North American postsecondary educational settings.

Despite the apparent close investigation of contexts of learning in tertiary educational settings (e.g. Leki, 1999; Losey, 1997; Spack, 1997), nearly all the studies have looked at the human relationships involved in these contexts in a rather abstract way. That is, although many feel that “the student–teacher relationship lies at the heart of education” (Johnston, 2003, p. 106) and that “some level of involvement [by teachers in the lives of students] is inevitable” (p. 101), we rarely find L2 undergraduate students talking in any specific way about teachers.1 Qualitative, naturalistic research studies have opened important windows on L2 undergraduates’ struggles and sometimes frustrations, yet these students’ emotional responses to their experiences are typically reported as directed either at course activities or at professors generally (e.g. Fox, 1994 or Holmes & Moulton, 1995).

The same is true of the other side of the equation. Except in rare instances and brief glimpses, the teachers of L2 undergraduates have usually explained their expectations, plans, opinions in relation to L2 students as a group, not as individuals (Losey, 1997; Zamel, 1995). In addition, most of the teachers who appear in the literature are the students’ writing or ESL teachers (e.g. Johnston, 2003; Schneider & Fujishima, 1995) rather than disciplinary teachers, despite the fact that L2 undergraduates ultimately have far more dealings with teachers outside writing and ESL classes.

In a few cases, research recounts faculty opinions about the performance of L2 undergraduates in courses across the curriculum (e.g. Fishman & McCarthy, 2001; Johns, 1991). These reports begin to get at student/faculty interactions but the relationships between undergraduate L2 students and the faculty they encounter remain generalized and somewhat distant. Two major exceptions to the pattern are Spack (1997), who reports mainly on her participant’s efforts to understand and accept professors’ lectures or requirements, and Benesch (2001), whose work describes her attempts to help her students manage their academic environment through dealings with faculty.

A small body of research on L2 graduate students has focused specifically on their interactions with faculty, provocatively examining the effects of power differentials in these relationship and the struggle of L2 graduate students to assert their wills (see, for example, Belcher (1994) and Casanave (1992), also Myles and Cheng (2003)). Other research has documented L2 graduate students’ desire for professional guidance in the form of increased interaction with faculty (Dong, 1998). Yet, graduate students may actually require less personal guidance or attention than L2 undergraduates, especially in large English-medium universities. L2 undergraduates are typically younger, less focused academically, less close to academic advisors, and arguably left more to their own devices. Interactions these undergraduates do manage to have with faculty may, therefore, have a considerable impact on their experiences. Given their potential importance to understanding the academic lives of L2 undergraduates, the more specific, and more human, reactions of L2 students and faculty to each other have been notably understudied.

# 1.1. Theoretical frame

The research reported here draws on theoretical formulations that emphasize the social relations involved in learning. Social theories of learning such as sociocultural theory (Lantolf, 2000a,b) and situated learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991) have been particularly fruitful and influential in L2 studies. Often intersecting with this work in the last 10 years has been the increasingly prominent research on identity and L2 learners.

Sociocultural theory views language as a symbolic mediating artifact indispensable both to human mental processes (themselves considered to originate in social processes) and to the regulation of social interaction. In sociocultural theory, learning is not viewed as solely a cognitive activity but rather as crucially a social process dependent on face-to-face, dialogic interaction between a learner and a more experienced other. The requirement for face-to-face interaction obviously presupposes some kind of social relationship. That relationship is dynamically constructed by the participants in the activity that brings them together, in the context of their varied goals, actions, beliefs, and sociocultural histories, within a given setting, and mediated by the tools inherent in or brought into the system (including semiotic tools like language). It is within this activity system (see Dias, Freedman, Medway, & Pare, 1999 or Russell, 1997) that the regulation of social interaction, among other things, takes place. Since socially oriented theories of human learning assume that individuals act not alone but in concert with others, they inevitably index “issues of affiliation and belonging” (Pavlenko & Lantolf, 2000, p. 156).

Even an individual’s identity has been regarded as “fundamentally relational” (Johnston, 2003, p. 100). A great deal of important and interesting work has appeared in the last 10 years on L2 learners and identity, discussing both how discourses make some identity positions available and close off others and how learners take up or resist the categories available or create alternative identity positions for themselves (Angelil-Carter, 1997; Hawkins, 2005; Norton, 2000; Thesen, 1997). The relational aspect of identity reflects both the discourse of others and the learner’s resistance to or acceptance of that discourse. In educational settings, a key player in negotiations over identities is the course teacher, who consciously or not helps to make institutional identity categories available to learners in the lopsided power configuration of schooling.

Because institutional positionings of college students are somewhat diffuse, it may be difficult to get at L2 college students’ struggles to inhabit comfortable subject positions and even fight back, asserting their own agency and their own power to assign, not just be assigned, identity through evaluations and judgments of the instructors and professors with whom they daily interact. Yet, as identity researchers have recognized, for some L2 users, learning itself may be less important than the construction and projection of a satisfying identity.2 This suggests that learners may seek interaction with knowledgeable others not only with the direct purpose of learning but also, for some perhaps more so, with the purpose of being seen as a particular type of person, perhaps even simply of being seen at all.

I have used these social theories of learning to try to understand the human social context of the academic experiences of a group of L2 undergraduates at a North American university. In the course of a longitudinal study of these immigrant and visa/international students’ experiences, it became clear that their relationships with and reactions to the faculty and other students they interacted with both aided and impeded their academic work. I use the term socioacademic relationships to try to capture both the social dimension of these relations and the academic context that helped to define the interactions and determine their nature. I intend the term to reference those relationships, often friendly, that students develop with people through their academic interactions in shared classes but that do not turn into out-of-school friendships. In my study of these students, their socioacademic relationships with faculty whose classes they took were highly influential and played a powerful role in the students’ experience of various moments in their college years as positive or negative.

# 1.2. Methods

The research reported here is part of a larger longitudinal, qualitative research study of the literacy experiences of a group of L2 immigrant and international students during their undergraduate careers. The study took place at a major research institution in the US, which enrolls about 1000 international students a year in a student body of about 23,000. Students were recruited at the required post-admission English placement exam at this institution. Except on the rare occasion when their personal or academic schedules would not permit it, the four focal students, who volunteered for the study were interviewed bi-weekly from the beginning of their undergraduate studies until they graduated.

The interviews usually lasted around $4 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ and followed a semi-structured interview guide focused on the students’ academic experiences, particularly their literacy experiences. The interview guide in effect designated topics to be covered at some time during each interview, such as the kinds of academic tasks confronting the students, any problems they were experiencing with them, the way the students approached the tasks, the strategies they were using to address any problems. However, in the tradition of ethnographic and phenomenological interview research (Taylor & Bogdan, 1984), the interviews were intended to elicit an account of the students’ lived experience, of “how [these] people define their world” (p. 9) and thus invited the students to talk freely about whatever aspects of their course work and their educational experiences interested them or were on their minds.

Interviews were also conducted over the years with 58 of the students’ professors and instructors, that is, all those both in their majors and in general education courses across the curriculum, excluding English, who assigned writing in their courses. Although the full faculty interviews covered a range of issues, data reported on here is limited to one interview question, which asked faculty to comment specifically on any special challenges they felt L2 students in their courses faced or advantages they benefited from. All interviews were tape recorded and transcribed with permission from participants following standard procedures required by Institutional Research Board guidelines for human subjects research. All names are pseudonyms.

Observations of the students’ courses in which writing was assigned occurred from one to six times in each course. The number of observations depended on how often written course work would be discussed in a given class.3 Interview and observational data was triangulated with a variety of documents, including journals the students kept for this research, their course textbooks, class notes, early and final drafts of course papers, exams submitted and returned to them, course syllabuses, and any other education-related texts that became available.

As might be imagined, because interviews with the students took place so often and over such a long period of time and because the students were encouraged to bring up any issues they themselves felt an urge to discuss, my research assistant and I became very familiar with the focal students’ academic and personal histories and current lived experiences. The rapport and trust that developed between the students and the interviewers led, by all appearances, to the students speaking quite frankly and openly about their classroom experiences, including their relationships with and opinions about the human context they operated within.

# 1.3. Data analysis

In keeping with qualitative research data analysis methods, all interview transcripts, field notes, and other documents were read reiteratively in an effort to organize the data into meaningful categories. In an attempt to build an emic perspective, which would get at the focal students’ understandings of their own experiences, categorization of the data for the most part followed themes that became salient primarily in the student interview data through either frequency of appearance or emotional significance for the student.4 Thematic elements of interest were then linked to evidence from the other data sources. Categorization of the data from the faculty interviews followed the same bottom-up procedure and themes were linked where possible to the student data.

The research questions that guided the analysis of the data reported here centered on:

(1) the degrees and types of accommodation, specifically in relation to course work, that faculty made for L2 students in their classes;   
(2) the faculty’s interview comments about L2 students in general and, when available, about the focal students in particular;   
(3) the focal students’ interview commentary on their experiences with these faculty members.

The coding categories, which were derived from and pertinent to these research questions and from reiterated examinations of the collected interview and documentary data are:

† faculty accommodation of L2 students † faculty non-accommodation of L2 students † faculty comments on L2 students unexamined faculty assumptions about L2 students students’ attempts to accommodate faculty students’ comments on faculty.

# 1.4. Student participants

The four focal students embody a wide variety of characteristics.

† Ben from the PRC majored in Engineering. An able, though not outstanding student, he nevertheless often expressed pride in his professional development as an engineer.   
Yuko from Japan in Social Work was a brilliant, perceptive, and deeply reflective student, the admiration of both faculty and peers.   
Yang from the PRC was a returning student in Nursing, who had been a pediatrician before coming to the US Yang’s problems with oral English plagued her throughout her nursing studies and caused her to be in perpetual anxiety about her status in the Nursing program.   
† Jan, an immigrant to the US from Poland, majored in Business. A rocky start academically resulted in his maneuvering desperately to avoid being dismissed from college. For the first two and a half of his 5 years in college, he also struggled, mostly unsuccessfully, to establish social relations with his domestic peers.

Both Ben and Jan had graduated from a US high school before enrolling at this university. It might seem reasonable to expect that Ben and Jan would share attitudes and expectations about their relationships with college faculty since they both attended US high schools. This proved not to be the case, however, perhaps because of differences in their high school experiences (in the northeast vs the upper-south), their cultural backgrounds (Chinese vs Polish), their college majors, and/or their personalities. In any case, for these students, their shared status as immigrant students gave them no more in common with each other than with the two non-immigrant students. Each of the four students’ experiences with faculty followed quite independent trajectories.

All four students eventually graduated, although Jan et al., at times experienced difficult academic struggles. Yuko, on the other hand, seemed to handle everything in her life astonishingly well.

# 1.5. Faculty perspectives

# 1.5.1. What did the faculty do to accommodate these students?

Faculty interviews in particular but also the student interview data and class observations indicated two primary forms of accommodating L2 students, adjustments to language and to time constraints.5 The most common form of accommodation attested in the data was a willingness on the part of some faculty to overlook language issues in written submitted coursework. In addition, in response to perceived L2 student needs, faculty reported adjusting their own language in lectures and on exams, homework assignments, and course requirements to clarify and to avoid jargon and slang, ambiguity, and implicitness. Some of these adjustments were ad hoc. For example, sometimes faculty altered their normal procedures when they became alerted to specific problems that L2 students either exhibited or complained about. One law professor was horrified to realize that an L2 student in her class did not know the meaning of the word “will,” as in legal wills, and was desperately attempting to interpret her lecture within a framework generated by the word the student thought she was saying, “wheels,” which of course resulted in a lecture that made no sense. In cases, like this where faculty were suddenly confronted with some specific difficulty, these professors often expressed surprise and chagrin at what they perceived as their having created an unfair disadvantage for L2 students, and they were eager to make adjustments.

Alterations of time constraints noted in the interview data all revolved around exams (no extra time for other kinds of assignments), both lengthening the time allowed for completion of exams and shortening the exams themselves. For example, after a faculty discussion about whether or not it had been unfair to prevent Yang from completing an exam just because the allotted time was up, the faculty decided to give all students who needed it more time in order to get a truer picture of student knowledge generally.

The greatest number and variety of special accommodations were made for Yang. To help her understand lectures, some Nursing professors let Yang make copies of their course lecture notes and transparencies; others even intervened on her behalf with hospital staff to urge them to be patient with her.

In sum, when they became aware of problems confronting L2 students in their courses, many individual faculty members went out of their way to initiate attempts to create a more favorable learning environment for the focal students (and, as a by-product, for domestic students as well). These attempts acknowledged the L2 students’ bid for recognition as legitimate participants in their US college classrooms.

# 1.5.2. When did faculty refuse to accommodate students?

There were also instances of faculty simply refusing to accommodate L2 students’ special needs, refusing to give extra time on exams, for example, saying such exceptions would be unfair to domestic students. Non-accommodation of L2 students’ needs came either from lack of awareness of problems, lack of willingness to make adjustments, or lack of ideas about how to do so.

At times, faculty seemed oblivious to problems caused by certain aspects of their courses. For example, quizzes or exam questions that focused on proper names were particularly difficult for the focal students, yet they turned up regularly in required American history courses.

† What was the original name of San Francisco? † Name two people on the Supreme Court.

Such minutia were simply not salient for these L2 students.

In other instances, the faculty commented in interviews that they were aware of problems created for L2 students but either did not know what to do about them or simply refused to do anything. A history professor, for example, said he knew that the L2 students could not follow everything he was saying but he assumed they would get the pertinent information from the book (although how they would know what the pertinent information was is not clear since that information was precisely what they missed in the lecture). Another conceded that ‘foreign students will just have to accept’ the fact that they would be getting lower grades in her classes. Seen in terms of sociocultural theory, these attitudes represent a refusal to engage learners in their Zone of Proximal Development and a de-legitimization of the students’ positioning on the periphery of participation in these learning situations (Lave & Wenger, 1991).

# 1.5.3. What did faculty have to say about L2 students?

1.5.3.1. Positive comments. Even faculty who did nothing to accommodate L2 students in their classes, the positive feelings they almost invariably expressed toward them suggested an affective environment of admiration. Faculty mentioned these students’ intelligence, willingness to work hard, respect for education, motivation, drive. And as one said, “They show up more.” The students were also said to bring with them a variety of advantages:

† Analytical skills, such as good training in math and logic;   
† Vocabulary acquisition skills, which allowed them to learn specialized disciplinary vocabulary;   
† Cultural sophistication from their cross-cultural experiences.

Faculty members also noted that L2 students added cultural diversity, broadened domestic students’ perspectives, brought cross-cultural points of view to bear on course material, and generally gave domestic students a richer school experience (although, as several faculty members mentioned, most domestic students missed their opportunity to interact with L2 students, not realizing the ‘treasure’ they had in their midst).

1.5.3.2. Concerns. Even the most sympathetic faculty also saw problems and difficulties both for the L2 students and with respect to the programs they were working in. The predominant negative response to the students’ perceived difficulties was one of passive (disapproving or pitying) observation. One faculty member, for example, criticized L2 students for associating primarily with other L2 students instead of making friends with domestic students in order to practice English.

Nursing faculty, on the other hand, had more specific concerns. They worried first about communication breakdowns between L2 students and hospital patients and staff, potentially putting someone’s health and even life in danger, but also about the students’ performance on the state licensing exams, which L2 nursing candidates nearly always failed on the first try. Each time a student nurse failed the licensing exam, that student’s Nursing School’s accreditation rating was threatened, potentially leading to a loss of accreditation for the Nursing School. Even once licensed, L2 students had a more difficult time finding jobs in area hospitals, leaving faculty to wonder about the ethics of admitting and taking the money of students, who would not eventually get the job they had trained for. Faculty concerns were so powerful that some wanted to reconsider the wisdom of admitting L2 students into the program at all. At the same time, the Nursing faculty were very concerned to not be perceived as discriminating against L2 students and, perceptions aside, did not want to discriminate against these students. Thus, faculty relationships with L2 students were complicated by the broader institutional and professional context. Each L2 student admitted was represented as a potential threat to the Nursing program and to the Nursing faculty’s self-identity as open-minded and fair.

# 1.5.4. Flattened identities in the contact zone

Most of these concerns were at least based on experiences with actual L2 students. Instances also arose, where faculty assigned identities to the students based on their national backgrounds and then reduced them to those unidimensional identities. Two incidents exemplify the imposition of an essentialized identity.

When Yuko’s American history class came to World War II and the bombing of Japan, the instructor leading the discussion session inadvertently began to refer to the “Japs”, pulling on readily available “us and them” discourse. He stumbled over the word as he appeared to remember Yuko’s presence in the class and tried to glide over the misstep. In an apparent attempt to signal respect, the instructor then asked Yuko for the Japanese perspective on the bombing of Japan. Although she gamely tried to accommodate him, she admitted later that this was not an issue she felt at all comfortable being called upon to address in a room full of American students. She had gone from being invisible to the teacher to being cast as The Japanese Person in class. Whatever position of expertise she might have been able to speak from had already been undermined by the instructor’s slur, her testimony turned into a sop, a mere minor detail in the main event—the American version of the story of WWII.

A less prickly, more humorous situation occurred in Jan’s international business class. Jan had left Poland several years previous as a teenager in high school. When his Business professor asked whether there were any international students in the class, Jan did not self-identify as an international student. But his professor knew he was from Poland and all semester long called on Jan for commentary on business events in Eastern Europe. Jan’s comment during an interview was:

Jan: I’m the expert of the East Europe, the way he calls me.

I: Are you able to answer his questions [in class]?

Jan: I’m guessing, I don’t have no idea. He always look at me, and you know it’s like, yeah, yeah, yeah, [I] just wave my head [hand?] like I know something.

In both these instances the L2 students were asked to represent entire cultures and to act as spokesperson for co-nationals and even for other generations. Their supposed qualification and expertise for this job resided solely in their “master status” (Becker, 1963) as Japanese and Polish persons. In Pavlenko and Blackledge’s (2004) formulation, Jan’s identity was ‘assumed’ or accepted as given; Yuko’s was “imposed,” that is, “not negotiable in a particular time and place” (p. 21), but both were created by their professors and publicly displayed.

# 1.6. Student perspectives

# 1.6.1. What did these students do to accommodate faculty?

Along with the faculty making adjustments (or not) to accommodate the needs of the L2 students in their courses, the focal students also gave interesting signs of how they worked to manage these important relationships with the faculty in ways that would make their work together easier. The students used two main methods to accomplish this: (1) working to understand faculty motivation and personality and (2) using language (or other signifying devices) to mediate their relationships.

Ben worked harder and possibly succeeded better than any of the other students in attempting to recreate faculty motivation behind course assignments, aligning his perceptions as fully as possible with those of faculty. In fact in one instance in an assignment in a humanities course he seemed to grasp the benefit of the assignment better than the faculty member did. In this case, the students were asked to read non-scholarly accounts of historical events written for a popular audience, here a book on the famous Donner Party that became trapped by snow attempting to cross the Rocky Mountains in the 1800s; many of them died. The professor explained that he had the students read the book because:

Professor: I just want them to have the experience of reading something in history besides a textbook.

But Ben’s explanation for why the professor included this book was actually more satisfying than that of his professor:

Ben: Because it create the background for the people in the West and during that time the teacher teach about national expansion, about the people going west. and how difficult it was at that time. Right now you can just drive a car to go through it [the Donner Pass], but you don’t have to worry about you caught in a storm.

Yuko also worked to engage with faculty motivation and personality but took a much more personal approach. She was interested in a broader and more intimate understanding of both the learning community of which she was a part and of individual faculty members and used those understandings to manage her relationships with other members of the community more effectively in a variety of delicate socioacademic situations. For example, because she was sensitive to a rumored complaint by domestic students that L2 students were unfairly privileged by faculty, who looked over early drafts of their course papers, she refrained from automatically taking early drafts to professors until the professor had invited the whole class to do so. In another instance after visiting a professor during her office hours with questions, Yuko came away feeling that the professor had not fully grasped the intent of her queries. She considered how to simplify them, went back a second time, and got the answers she needed. Thus, in appraising the social context and accommodating the needs of the faculty and her domestic peers, Yuko was able to manipulate the learning, and social, situation to her advantage.

Finally, in the communities of practice in which these students functioned, they had little power to dictate the circumstances of their relationships with powerful others. The price for failing to accept conditions imposed by faculty was possible failure in their course work. But none of the four focal students simply passively accommodated themselves to faculty demands or expectations. In addition to trying to understand faculty motivation and personality, the students made use of symbolic mediating systems to exert some control over their interactions. Both Yuko and Jan frequently wrote short personal messages to instructors on exams or on work they turned in, Yuko usually apologizing for bad handwriting or sometimes faulty grammar, Jan usually writing funny or exculpatory messages. He prefaced one paper he turned in with a xerox of a picture of himself buying tickets to a football game, in reference to and as a reminder of some personal exchange he had had with the professor. This violation of genre norms was done in full awareness of its potential. As he often remarked, Jan wanted to stand out, to be personally memorable to his teachers because he felt, almost certainly correctly, that more attention typically got him more sympathy. Similarly, in big lecture classes, he would purposely wait after class to ask a question and, as he said, counted on his accent to prompt the professor to ask him where he was from, making him less anonymous and eliciting some interest in him and even admiration from the professor. In this sense, Jan wrested some measure of power both to “impose reception” (Bourdieu, 1991) and to construct his identity after his own preferences. He was in this way able to consciously adjust conditions of the activity system in which he participated.

# 1.6.2. What were students’ comments on faculty?

While the faculty were busy forming opinions about L2 students, the students were also forming opinions about them. The relative lack of research on L2 student reactions to the faculty they work with—this faculty whose judgments of them can be so influential—may leave the impression that these students have no emotional stake in their interactions with others and go about going to classes developing no opinions, likes or dislikes, of the people they encounter. But the focal students did have their own take on their experiences with the faculty and, as might be expected, their attitudes covered a range.

As mentioned earlier Ben strove to apprehend faculty purposes. Yet, he actually paid very little attention to professors themselves. It was always the subject matter that counted, not personal relationships with individual faculty. Rather, faculty represented a convenient (and trusted) wedge into what was important to Ben, mastering the content of engineering courses.

At the opposite end of the spectrum was Jan, for whom the subject matter was close to irrelevant and what mattered most was the teacher of the course.

Jan: All depends on the teacher. Professor change everything.

In his first several years as an undergraduate, Jan struggled with the academic work. But he also struggled against being cast as a failure. As a result, he often characterized teachers as deceiving students, tricking them, or simply refusing to give out vital information in courses where he was having trouble.

In world business:

I: What kinds of things are you supposed to turn in? Jan: I have no idea. She didn’t tell us anything.

In geography:

I: Do you have quizzes in there?

Jan: Yeah. You never know what’s going to be on this quiz, so it’s impossible to study for.

In management:

I: What do you think you had to do well, or what do you think you had to show your teacher to do well on this?

Jan: I don’t know. Maybe call psychic hotline, you know, before exam.

Rather than accepting the identity category of unsuccessful student, Jan preferred to construct himself as the victim of his professors’ arbitrary and incomprehensible whims.

Jan’s bid for agency also took the form of visceral responses to the faculty. The very interviews themselves in which he discussed his reactions to his academic life gave him the opportunity to evaluate and, better still, the power to publicly label faculty members—in at least one case as a psychopath. In interviews, he could cast himself as arbiter of fates, fabricating imagined vengeance scenarios:

Jan:. as a professor, her future, her future is going to be really short. Maybe she should get a job where she’s making macros for some kind of corporation, closed in a small room $6 \times 6$ and let her sit over there all day long.

Denied a desired subject position in class, out of class Jan took advantage of the mediational power of language to re-position himself as judge, powerful and mocking.

Like Jan, Yang’s relationship with and opinions about the professors she encountered also ranged widely, between gratitude for kind professors and sharp criticisms for others. She was especially critical of professors who she increasingly came to feel refused to understand her English. Whereas, early in her Nursing studies she had lamented that she did not have the language to show her knowledge, in the later years, Yang tired of having available to her primarily the subject position of incompetent English speaker and she spread responsibility for communication failures around more broadly to some of the faculty.

Yang: They just want to keep misunderstanding. They do not try to understand me. the question is if they wanted to know [my true ability].

Although Yang had warm relations with many of the faculty, her relations with others were rocky, and as a result, she came to the conclusion that she had to be very cautious in dealing with faculty, had to manage her relationships carefully. After an upsetting clash with several professors over her poor performance in clinicals caused by her weak oral skills, she commented:

Yang:. my husband tell me if I deal [had dealt] with the director smoothly, I do not get into trouble, so many trouble. maybe she don’t feel so upset. so I learn from this, I don’t argue.

Yang:. I do not argue with them because I think the American teacher do not like you to argue with something.

In evaluating her relationship to faculty, Yang perceived few options open to her to control her own destiny except to appear to accommodate to faculty wishes, to regulate her socioacademic relationship with them, and in this way to pass under the radar long enough to graduate.

# 1.7. Discussion

Harklau’s (1994) description of L2 high school students’ noted their limited social interactions beyond those with teachers. Except for Yuko, this was also true of the students in this study at certain points. Given a relatively small network of human contacts, the relationships of L2 students with professors may impact them disproportionately. Still, none of the four focal students in this study were merely buffeted around by forces external to them, in this case faculty, or passively slotted into identity categories. Instead, to the degree open to them, they manipulated the social context to their own advantage, not only forming opinions of the people they interacted with but also calculating what their best responses to each one would be. To varying degrees each of the students worked to re-structure the contexts in which they interacted with faculty, to manage the socioacademic relationships they participated in, and to develop subject positions for themselves that they felt comfortable occupying given the constraints of their various communities of practice.

A significant contextual constraint is the unequal power balance between faculty and the adults they teach, a situation, which social theories of learning perhaps do not take sufficiently into account. Sociocultural theory appears to take for granted that the learner and the more experienced other share a harmonious relationship devoted to advancing the learner’s development. That is, in sociocultural theory, the social relationship between learner and more experienced other who guides learning (here the students’ university teachers) has tacitly been assumed to be positive, with little attention given to the actual nature of the socioacademic relations that develop, to the power differential inherent in any learning situation, or to the consequences when relationships between learner and teacher are less than optimal at the personal level.6 Not all experienced others present themselves as or are viewed by the learner as a simple benevolent presence like a parent or older sibling. The potentially negative impact of the power differential may in fact reach its peak in tertiary education, where despite the fact that the students are all adults, their instructors, at least in the US, have much the same kind of disproportionate power over them that teachers in K-12 have. That disproportion may be more palatable in K-12 to the degree that the subordinates are still children. University students are perhaps more likely to see themselves as autonomous and so may be less inclined to accept subordination or accept the role of less experienced self without the assertion of a more powerful self as well.

The students in this study worked toward constructing more powerful subject positions for themselves in various ways. Ben determined faculty goals and internalized them as his own; in this way, in complying with faculty directives, he was in effect carrying out his own goals. Yang managed her relations with problematic faculty by restraining emotional responses she concluded would aggravate a negative situation. Yuko’s responses to the community of practice in which she functioned were nuanced and astute, carefully fashioned to promote her academic and professional goals. Jan attempted to gain some control over his relationships partly, like Yuko, through the symbolic mediation of language and partly through his vehemently negative appraisals of some faculty members, the last resort of chafing subordinates, those in the least powerful positions; at least momentarily it was Jan who had the power to impose identity.

Perhaps for some learners such as those studied here, a part of the learning process is in fact learning to negotiate the socioacademic relationship between the participants. In the learning contexts explored here sometimes the teachers accommodated the learners, sometimes not, but the learners each made active efforts, beyond learning academic material or disciplinary procedures, towards apprehending and/or manipulating their social environment in an effort to construct a subject position from which they could comfortably interact with faculty. As recognized in descriptions of situated learning, progression from the periphery toward the core of a community of practice is not inevitable (see, for example, Lave and Wenger’s (1991) butcher apprentices or Toohey’s (1998) Surjeet). These students’ eventual success was shaped by the socioacademic relationships that they were able to create and use to their advantage.

As suggested by studies of graduate students and their advisors (Belcher, 1994; Casanave, 1992; Dong, 1998; Myles & Cheng, 2003), L2 undergraduates as well may have expectations for personal interactions that do not match those of North American university faculty, or they may simply not know what to expect of these interactions both within and outside the classroom. By participating in the interviews for the research reported here, the four focal students had the opportunity to report and discuss their experiences with the human participants in their socioacademic lives. That is, the interviews themselves opened up space for these students to reflect on and establish some agency over their positionings. The EAP class may be an ideal forum to reproduce that space by recognizing and freely discussing mismatches of expectations or to share students’ experiences with a view to more satisfying management of the human environment.

By the same token it might be useful to make L2 students in English dominant institutions, especially those who study in a sea of domestic students, consciously aware of the specific positive benefits they bring to their classes in terms of cross-cultural experience and perspectives and to help them prepare to step into the role of cultural arbiter, if the occasion arises and they choose to do so. This might include bringing to conscious awareness possible responses to being singled out as The Japanese Person in class or the expert of East Europe.

In addition, as has often been observed, EAP teachers may have a special function as informants to disciplinary faculty, helping them develop ways of recognizing the legitimate participation of L2 students in their courses, which, as attested by faculty in this study, works to the benefit of domestic students as well. Following Benesch (2001), EAP teachers may take on the role of cultural or academic broker by inviting faculty from popular majors to visit EAP classes and discuss their and the students’ experiences and expectations.

Finally, to be credible to students, EAP classes must include content that is intellectually challenging (Leki & Carson, 1994). Aspects of sociocultural theory itself are not beyond the grasp of university EAP students, who are after all dealing with university level content in other courses, and yet might serve to frame EAP student research into the experiences of L2 students across the curriculum. The published surveys and case studies using such a theoretical frame to explore minority language students’ academic lives would stand to make fairly compelling course readings since bringing such research into an EAP class implicitly invites L2 students to voice their own experiences, anchored in the findings of the published material. Border-crossing students like those in EAP classes would have every right to assume an expert stance in dialoguing with these publications. Reading and discussion of sociocultural theories and research grounded in L2 students’ experiences might help EAP students make better sense of their own lived experience. What the students learn from these sources could be supplemented by trying out and evaluating the success of the varied strategies other L2 students have adopted in their management of socioacademic relations. In other words, the experiences and relationships described in this research report represent only some of the interactions of a small group of L2 university students. Other relational configurations are potentially vast. In the spirit of expanded notions of how the personal intersects with the professional or academic (as in feminist research methodologies; see, for example, Olesen, 1994), published research into interpersonal behavior in the academy can function as the starting point for EAP students’ investigations into their experiences while at the same time potentially allowing them to gain some control over their socioacademic lives.

This study suggests that sociocultural theories of learning might usefully be complexified to include attention to the interaction of power differentials, identity struggles, and the relationship between learner and expert Other in investigations of university level L2 students. In addition the findings here encourage EAP researchers and practitioners to take note of L2 students’ human needs for social affiliation, agency, and positive social positionings. Finally, the pedagogical implications of this research include the possibility for EAP students’ reading and writing about socioacademic relationships.

# 1.8. Conclusion

All the faculty members I interviewed and observed in their classes showed sympathy and some admiration for L2 students in their classes. This positive disposition may be an artifact of their interviews with me; most people probably want to be seen as understanding and generous, especially as regards students that they might view as needing special consideration. In addition, except for the Engineering program, which registered about $10 \%$ international students, the numbers of L2 students in most of these teachers’ classes were quite limited, possibly not reaching a critical mass that might have caused susceptible faculty to perceive L2 students as problems in their courses. Finally, although these four students did varyingly well academically, none of them was completely lost, had overwhelming difficulties in their out-ofschool lives, or had suffered from the kinds of interruptions in education or the worst kinds of threats to identity that make life and studies especially difficult. So, it should have been relatively easy for faculty to look kindly on these four and on the few other L2 students they dealt with. Although not all of the faculty I interviewed showed a willingness to accommodate the needs of these students, for the most part, L2 students who might encounter these faculty members could expect to be treated well.

As for the students, it seems clear that L2 undergraduates in the US do not all fit the proverbial descriptions of international students as gushing with respect for education, cowed by the authority they supposedly see as naturally vested in teachers, and passively and unquestioningly accepting, whatever their professors say or do. Clearly these four did not, and even Ben, who was the most accommodating toward the faculty, was certainly not overawed by them; he was focused instead on using their help to make his way through the difficult and compelling material he studied.

In a postmodern intellectual climate, it is difficult to think of individuals as separate, autonomously functioning subjectivities. The fragmentary nature of experience and the hybridity of personal histories are at least in part the result of the voices, in Bakhtin’s (1981) sense, that penetrate through and become entangled in an individual’s experience. Such perspectives suggest the importance of not studying the experiences of L2 undergraduates stripped of their socioacademic contexts. Our notion of context already usefully includes the institution, program, curriculum, classroom, and to some extent sociopolitical. But the relationships that students, including L2 students, are able or unable to develop and sustain with others—faculty and peers—also have an impact on students’ educational experiences and may in fact go some long way toward determining the success or failure of those experiences.

# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to the multiple anonymous reviewers of this manuscript for their helpful comments and particularly to Ken Hyland for his guidance and patience during the revisions of this work.

# References

Angelil-Carter, S. (1997). Second language acquisition of spoken and written English: Acquiring the skeptron. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 263–287.   
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays by M.M. Bakhtin. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.   
Becker, H. (1963). Outsiders. New York: Free Press.   
Belcher, D. (1994). The apprenticeship approach to advanced academic literacy: Graduate students and their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 23–34.   
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes: Theory, politics, and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Bourdieu, P. (1991). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.   
Casanave, C. (1992). Cultural diversity and socialization: A case study of a Hispanic woman in a doctoral program in sociology. In D. Murray (Ed.), Diversity as resource: Redefining cultural literacy (pp. 148–182). Washington, DC: TESOL.   
Dias, P., Freedman, A., Medway, P., & Pare, A. (Eds.). (1999). Worlds apart: Acting and writing in academic and workplace contexts. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Dong, Y. (1998). Non-native graduate students’ thesis/dissertation writing in science: Self-reports by students and their advisors from two US institutions. English for Specific Purposes, 17, 369–390.   
Duff, P. (2001). Language, literacy, content, and (pop) culture: Challenges for ESL students in mainstream courses. Canadian Modern Language Review/La Revue canadienne des langues vivantes, 58, 103–132.   
Fishman, S., & McCarthy, L. (2001). An ESL writer and her discipline-based professor: Making progress even when goals don’t match. Written Communication, 18, 181–228.   
Fox, H. (1994). Listening to the world: Cultural issues in academic writing. Urbana, IL: NCTE.   
Harklau, L. (1994). ESL versus mainstream classes: Contrasting L2 learning environments. TESOL Quarterly, 28, 241– 272.   
Hawkins, M. (2005). Becoming a student: Identity work and academic literacies in early schooling. TESOL Quarterly, 39, 59–82.   
Holmes, V., & Moulton, M. (1995). A contrarian view of dialogue journals: The case of a reluctant participant. Journal of Second Language Writing, 4(3), 223–251.   
Johns, A. (1991). Interpreting an English competency examination: The frustration of an ESL science student. Written Communication, 8, 379–401.   
Johnston, B. (2003). Values in English language teaching. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Kanno, Y., & Applebaum S. (1995). ESL Students speak up: their stories of how we are doing. TESL Canada Journal, 12(2), 32–49.   
Lantolf, J. (2000a). Second language learning as a mediated process. Language Teaching, 33, 79–96.   
Lantolf, J. (Ed.). (2000b). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. New York: Oxford.   
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Leki, I. (1999). ‘Pretty much I screwed up’: Ill-served needs of a permanent resident. In L. Harklau, K. Losey, & M. Siegal (Eds.), Generation 1.5 meets college composition: Issues in the teaching of writing to US educated learners of ESL (pp. 17–43). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Leki, I. (2001). ‘A narrow thinking system’: Nonnative-English speaking students in group projects across the curriculum. TESOL Quarterly, 35, 39–67.   
Leki, I., & Carson, J. (1994). Students’ perceptions of EAP writing instruction and writing needs across the disciplines. TESOL Quarterly, 28, 81–101.   
Losey, K. (1997). Listen to the silences: Mexican American interaction in the composition classroom and community. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
Myles, J., & Cheng, L. (2003). The social and cultural life of non-native English speaking international graduate students at a Canadian university. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2, 247–263.   
Norton, B. (2000). Identity and language learning: Gender, ethnicity and educational change. New York: Pearson Education.   
Olesen, V. (1994). Feminisms and models of qualitative research. In N. Denzin, & Y. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 158–174). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   
Pavlenko, A., & Blackledge, A. (Eds.). (2004). Negotiation of identities in multilingual contexts. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.   
Pavlenko, A., & Lantolf, J. (2000). Second language learning as participation and the (re)construction of selves. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 155–177). New York: Oxford University Press.   
Russell, D. (1997). Rethinking genre in school and society: An activity theory analysis. Written Communication, 14, 504– 554.   
Schneider, M., & Fujishima, N. (1995). When practice doesn’t make perfect. The case of an ESL graduate student. In D. Belcher, & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 3–22). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
Spack, R. (1997). The acquisition of academic literacy in a second language. Written Communication, 14, 3–62.   
Taylor, S. J., & Bogdan, R. (1984). Introduction to qualitative research methods: The search for meanings (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.   
Thesen, L. (1997). Voices, discourse, and transition: In search of new categories in EAP. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 487–511.   
Toohey, K. (1998). ‘Breaking them up, taking them away’: ESL students in grade 1. TESOL Quarterly, 32, 61–84.   
Trimbur, J. (1994). Taking the social turn: Teaching writing post-process. College Composition and Communication, 45, 108–118.   
Zamel, V. (1995). Strangers in academia. College Composition and Communication, 46, 506–521.

Ilona Leki is professor of English and director of ESL at the University of Tennessee. She co-edits Journal of Second Language Writing (with Tony Silva). Her research focuses on second language writing, academic literacy, and the literacy experiences of English learners.