# ‘How can I make something interesting for me relevant for the wider community?’ e An ethnographic exploration of Romanian researchers’ adjustment to research communication standards

Mirela Bardi

Department of Modern Languages and Business Communication, Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Romania

# a r t i c l e i n f o

# a b s t r a c t

Article history:   
Received 4 February 2020   
Received in revised form 30 June 2020   
Accepted 16 November 2020   
Available online 26 November 2020

The practice of multilingual scholars who communicate research outcomes through the medium of English has been often explored in the context of training programmes designed to prepare these scholars to perform at internationally accepted standards in their fields of research. Building on the author’s experience of training professional researchers within the framework of an academic development MA programme in a Romanian university, this ethnographically-flavoured study draws on prolongued involvement in the research setting to explore practices of researchers who have to reconcile conventions dominant in the local academic culture with awareness of internationally accepted standards. Thus, the study aims to contibute to the line of research that calls for investigating aspects of research article drafting in relation to the context in which such texts are created. The findings indicate the need to refine rhetorical communication abilities and reveal participants’ increasing sophistication of perception and refinement of practices. The implications relate to diminishing isolation and widening participation of multiliterate researchers in complex research undertakings. Key words: ethnography, multiliterate researchers, rhetorical functions, controlled redundancy, isolation.

$^ ©$ 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Showing the contribution, relevance and implications of research is a major communicative function to be addressed in research articles proposed for scholarly publication and most researchers are aware of this requirement, as the piece of data quoted in the title of this article indicates. Romanian researchers in the field of economics and business are struggling to come to terms with the need to articulate the rhetorical functions specific to the research article genre that their studies need to communicate beyond the content itself. Awareness of argument construction practices and the necessary link between structure, communicative functions and persuasive use of language are areas where Romanian researchers need most support, as previous research on the needs of this specific group has shown (Bardi & Muresan, 2014; Bardi, 2015; Muresan & Perez-Llantada, 2019 ).

The establishment of English for Research Publication Purposes (ERPP) as a distinct type of special purpose English (Flowerdew, 2015) has generated numerous attempts to reveal the process of learning the practice of publication in scholarly journals by multilingual researchers. It has equally generated the need for training programmes which prepare scholars to perform at internationally accepted standards in their fields of research and to communicate their research to a wider audience. Hence, pedagogical approaches and experiences meant to support the achievement of such aims have been investigated with reference to many geographical areas (Corcoran, Englander & Muresan, 2019). In a potentially complex curriculum, development of research communication abilities in English is a key element which involves training in specific research genres, academic discourse and rhetoric as well as language accuracy.

In addition to documenting the challenges encountered by multilingual scholars in the process of adjusting their research communication practices, scholars have been preoccupied by the methodologies of researching writing practices and the epistemological stances associated with reporting such experiences (Dressen-Hammouda, 2012; Lillis, 2008; Paltridge et al., 2016). The need to justify the adoption of certain methodologies and to explain their value and implications for constructing theory has been put forward compellingly (Dressen-Hammouda 2012). With a view to such expectations, the present study was designed as an exploration of a specific context through the use of a set of methodological tools that can construct an emic perspective and enhance understanding of research writing practices in academic communities that need to adapt to standards and practices that sometimes contradict those in place in their own context.

# 1.1. Context and objectives

This study is situated in a specific academic community e participants to the study are established academics and researchers in economics and business in a Romanian university, all graduates of the academic development MA programme established by the university. This programme has provided the context for understanding and documenting researchers’ efforts to develop their research communication abilities. Equally, it has provided the framework for professional development of applied linguistics lecturers who teach on the programme. Language professionals have taken on challenging roles as tutors of their peers and in the process of addressing the highly specific needs of course participants they have refined their own teaching and research abilities.

Taking into account the call for researching texts in the contexts that generated them (Lillis, 2008) and for exploring learning embedded in the social contex where it takes place (Paltridge et al., 2016), the current study investigates aspects of research article drafting in relation to the context in which such texts are created. Context in this case is constituted both of the prevailing beliefs and practices in the local academic culture as well as of participants’ increased awareness of international practices and standards gained through participation in the MA programme and through repeated publication attempts. The study captures the views of course participants about resolving the challenges of text creation with specific focus on the efforts to justify topic and methodological options and to integrate the content-descriptive level of the text with the rhetorical and linguistic levels. Equally, the study draws on the insights developed through the researcher’s extended involvement with the various groups of graduates, all special in their own ways, and represents an attempt to articulate the lessons learned from participation in the programme during the course of twelve years and as many generations. My role in relation to the group has been twofold: I have been one of their trainers/instructors as well as a group member e we all have the same institutional roles and duties and I belong to the same academic culture. Moreover, in the past few years I have been a researcher of the setting simultaneously with my role as a participant in the setting. Prolonged engagement with the environment (Robson, 2003) has given me sufficient time to develop considerable insight and ‘common-sense knowledge’ (Hammersley & Atkinson, 1995, p. 21), to learn the culture and build a high degree of trust. It also provided access to informal ‘unsolicited accounts’ (Hammersley & Atkinson, 1995, p. 126) and enabled me to construct a detailed understanding of prevailing practices and attitudes that influence the practice of article writing.

Apart from contributing to an already rich body of literature that reports the research writing practices of multiliterate scholars (Buckingham, 2014; Flowerdew, 1999; Li, 2007; Muresan and Llantada, 2019; Perez -Llantada, Plo and Ferguson,  2011), this study can provide insight into the potential development of applied linguistics professionals involved in supporting the publication efforts of their peers. While development of language professionals is not the focus of the study, understanding the needs of multiliterate scholars may enrich understanding of who can actually support these researchers and the kind of expertise language professionals often called upon to provide support need themselves. In resonance with Curry and Lillis (2017: xvi) who indicated several questions to be asked about programs meant to develop research publication skills of multilingual scholars, responses to questions such as Who is given responsibility for designing and implementing pedagogies to support multilingual writers’ practices of writing for publication? What expertise do those responsible for supporting writers have, or need to have? are worth seeking as they may indicate suitable approaches to language teacher education and training of ERPP trainers.

# 1.2. Investigating context in writing for publication research

The ‘socially situated nature of texts’ is highlighted by Paltridge et al. (2016:24) who connect the interest in sociocultural aspects of text production to ‘the move towards more ethnographically-oriented research in academic writing studies’ (2016:28).

With regard to the value of ethnography for the study of language, Blommaert (2018:2) argues against the limited understanding of ethnography as a set of fieldwork techniques for the description of context and highlights its role as a ‘perspective on language and communication’ appropriate for the study of language in society. Thus, ethnography ‘tries to describe and analyse the complexity of social events comprehensively’ through an exploration of ‘variation and stability’ in the structure of events (Blommaert, 2018, p. 149).

The value of ethnography in academic writing research has received scholarly attention both in terms of highlighting its merits in providing contextual understanding and increasing trustworthiness of qualitative studies (Lillis, 2008; Paltridge et al., 2016) as well as in terms of warning about the danger of equating ethnography with detailed description without necessary conceptualisation (Blommaert, 2018). Ethnographic approaches encourage attention to ‘text-external social and contextual factors’ (Flowerdew, 2017, p. 169) at the expense of close analysis of linguistic data. Major paradigms such as Academic Literacies draw on ethnography to build a comprehensive picture of the contexts in which academic texts are created and to focus on the meaning-makers (Flowerdew, 2019). Lillis (2008:355) distinguishes between ethnography as method, ethnography as methodology and ethnography as deep theorising, identifying various levels of situated meanings analysis. Hyland (2016a, 2016b):117) also distinguishes between methods of data collection and methodologies that include ‘the principles and understandings that guide and influence our choice and use of methods’, while he highlights the inseparable connection between the two. I would describe my own approach as an example of ‘ethnography as methodology, involving multiple data sources and sustained involvement in contexts of production.’ (Lillis, 2008, p. 355).

Investigation of context has underpinned several studies that aim to construct emic perspectives on various aspects of publication in elite journals by multilingual scholars. Construction of text-histories of Spanish researchers in the field of finance undertaken by Mur-Duenas (2012) is based on ethnography as methodology (Lillis, 2008) and combines multiple types of data following sustained engagement with participants’ writing practices. Cadman (2017) undertook a reflexive analysis of her own academic and teaching experience over the course of 15 years in order to propose an innovative approach to teaching research writing in the social sciences whereby language development is integrated with epistemological expectations in the respective desciplines. Observation and reflection inform the study conducted by Li and Cargill (2019) on the endeavours of Chinese teachers of English to become EAP teachers, in particular on their perceptions and lessons learned from participation in a professional development course and observation of an experienced EAP trainer. The researcher was a participant observer in the seminar and the fieldnotes were triangulated with three other data types. The result is ‘a holistic and contextualised picture’ (2019, p.158) of experience in a natural setting. The ethnographically-oriented case study of one experienced multilingual scholar reported by Muresan and Perez-Llantada (2019)  captures a unique, complex experience of developing academic literacy in a specific context. The study highlights the effectiveness of self-reflection tools and advances the idea that they can be confidently used in EAP instruction. The dynamics of academic writing and knowledge creation in the contemporary university are documented by a comprehensive literacy study (Tusting et al., 2019) designed to reveal every day social practices and the complex set of relationships in which academics write, a rich study that draws on multiple methods including autoethnography and videography.

# 2. Methodological approach e an ethnographically-tinged study

Citing Hammersley (1990), Starfield (2015:138) highlights the main features of ethnographic methodology that involve the study of behaviour in natural contexts, collection of data from multiple sources and the use of diverse methods in order to capture the specific features of an issue, group or problem, the absence of pre-set categories for data collection and analysis, prolongued engagement of the researcher in the setting. Such engagement allows the emergence of knowledge that is not preespecified by existing theory but can contribute to generating theoretical propositions. Specific to the use of ethnography in applied linguistics is ‘the study of language practices within communities and institutions that are familiar to the researcher rather than exotic and strange as in traditional ethnography.’ (Starfield, 2015, p. 140).

Similarly, in his study of ethnography in applied linguistics, Wei (2019:158) identifies as an essential feature of ethnography ‘collecting evidence of how the members of the community make sense of their own practice’ and ‘presenting an account of one’s observation’. As a methodological approach, ethnography involves several different types of data, ‘focuses on very few cases, often just one, and considers them/it in depth regarding the context.’ (Wei, 2019, p. 158).

Attempting to establish a connection between writing practices and the context in which such practices develop, this study draws on data provided by the tutor as participant observer and on narrative and interview data provided by course participant researchers. A more in-depth understanding of the context will hopefully emerge from integrating these two perspectives. As Hammersley (2006) points out in his review of the main debates and prospects of ethnographic enquiry, ethnographers typically connect interview and observational data most often to compare what people say with what they do. A word of caution is necessary, though. While prolongued involvement in the setting has considerably strengthened my understanding and has provided access to diverse types of data, ethnography involves a kind of immersion in the field of study and intense, prolongued field note-taking. As my involvement in the programme has served primarily a pedagogic rather than a research purpose, I have not taken extensive field notes during the course of the years. The researcher role has gradually emerged in response to the need to improve and diversify my pedagogic interaction with the group. My own observation and reflection were compiled and articulated as a source of data in the form of a research diary kept over the past two academic years (2017e2019), including entries occasioned by critical incidents, opinion exchanges and insights generated by both of the above.

What I propose is an ethnographic approach in the sense explained by Hammersley and Atkinson (1995:17):

‘There is a sense in which all social researchers are participant observers; as a result, the boundaries around ethnography are necessarily unclear …. Participant observation involves participating in the social world, in whatever role, and reflecting on the products of that participation.’

I have therefore articulated my methodological stance (Table 1) in relation to the literature that describes the researcher’s role within an ethnographic paradigm.

While this study cannot claim to be fully ethnographic, I can justifiably argue that prolongued engagement can contribute to increasing the credibility or trustworthiness of a qualitative study (Creswell, 1998). Several recurrent questions concerned me during the process of data collection and analysis e Has my close involvement in the setting influenced the research process, the character and depth of the data and the interpretation generated by the researcher? Would the same kind of data have been generated in the presence of an unknown researcher arriving from nowhere? Are the data richer, deeper, because a relationship exists? Has my involvement generated bias?

# 2.1. Research questions

While the objective of the study was to explore the process of text creation and its relationship with context/academic culture, more specific research questions were also formulated:

How do researchers solve the tensions of text creation and how do they integrate the content with the rhetorical/ communicative and the linguistic levels?   
 Does my prolongued involvement in the field facilitate the process of understanding these relationships between text and context?

The participants’ perspectives ‘on their own meaning-making practices’ (Starfield, 2010, p. 56) include both the respondents’ perspectives as well as the researcher’s. It is an inquiry conducted in order to elucidate experience of all those whose thinking has been shaped by the setting and the interactions occurring in that setting. Researchers enter into relationships with participants, as well as attend to their own experience of the research (Clandinin & Huber, 2010). Participation in the study provided respondents the opportunity to reflect and to spell out, clarify, explore their own thinking and practice in relation to prevailing practices in their own environment, in a way they may not have done before. The meaning of ethnographic research is thus co-constructed by participants and researcher, with the respondent ‘regarded as a collaborator rather than an informant guided by the agenda of the researcher’ (Moen, 2006, p. 61) while the researcher becomes a participant in the process of knowledge construction rather than a mere observer of the phenomenon under study (Patnaik, 2013).

# 2.2. Respondent profile

Participants in the study are established academics in various economics-related disciplinary areas (Table 2). With one exception, they are all graduates of the Academic Practice and Communication Masters programme and consequently have acquired new insights into the practice of writing and publishing in scholarly journals. Equally, participation in the programme has helped researchers develop confidence in their chances of getting published and some of them have undertaken publication attempts that have added to their learning experience.

As the observation data were collected systematically during academic years 2017e2018 and 2018e2019, the respondents were selected from among the 38 graduates of the two cohorts. As in many qualitative studies, this was an instance of ‘purposive sampling’ with the goal of identifying ‘the study units that will yield the most relevant and plentiful data, given your topic of study’. (Yin, 2011, p. 88). Similarly, Creswell (2009, p. 178) recommends purposefully selecting ‘participants or sites that will best help the researcher understand the problem and the research question.’ Those who had published in high profile scholarly journals, who were keen to improve their publication record or to continue trying despite occasional failure were regarded as the most suitable respondents and, through their interest for accessing high profile international journals, they form a homogeneous population. Nevertheless, the participants’ publication success and expertise were diverse and thus they were expected to provide a broad range of views, possibly divergent ones, that could only enrich the study (Yin, 2011). Including among respondents a researcher who had not participated in the training programme was meant to ensure diversity of opinion. The participants in this study have not been selected as a representative sample. The data collection units in this study are not ‘sampling units’ (Yin, 2011, p. 99) and no attempt has been made to extrapolate the findings to a wider population.

Table 1 Researcher and participant in ethnographic research.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Researcher&#x27;s role (Bryman, 2012, p. 432)</td><td>My role as a participant and researcher.</td></tr><tr><td>The researcher : is immersed in a social setting for an extended period of time; : makes regular observations of the behaviour of members of that setting;</td><td>My role can be described in terms of: : sustained engagement over time as both participant.</td></tr><tr><td>: listens to and engages in conversations; . interviews informants on issues that are not directly amenable to observation or that the  informal conversations;</td><td>and observer; . access to unsolicited accounts emerging from.</td></tr><tr><td>ethnographer is unclear about; : collects documents about the group;</td><td>. observation of behaviour that reveals tacit dis-.</td></tr><tr><td> develops an understanding of the cultur of the group and people&#x27;s behaviour withinthe  aces to participants&#x27; written work (artice,</td><td>courses/assumptions;</td></tr><tr><td>context of that culture; : and writes up a detailed account of that setting. (Bryman, 2012, p. 432)</td><td>dissertations); : reflection about the changes in members&#x27; beliefs and. practices:</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Profile of study respondents.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Respondent Career stage (Early career, Mid-career, Experienced)</td><td></td><td>Field</td><td>Data collection</td><td>Respondent validation</td></tr><tr><td>R1</td><td>MC</td><td>Tourism and Hospitality management</td><td>Interview</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>R2</td><td>MC</td><td>Tourism and Hospitality management</td><td>Interview</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>R3</td><td>Experienced</td><td>Marketing</td><td>Reflexion Guide (RG) + Follow-up interview</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>R4</td><td>Experienced</td><td>Accounting</td><td>RG</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>R5</td><td>Experienced</td><td> Information Systems</td><td> RG + Follow-up interview</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>R6</td><td>Experienced</td><td> Management</td><td>RG + Follow-up interview</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>R7</td><td>MC</td><td>Econometrics</td><td>RG + Follow-up interview</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>R8</td><td>Mc</td><td>Management</td><td>RG + Follow-up interview</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>R9</td><td>mC</td><td>Econometrics</td><td>RG + Follow-up interview</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>R10</td><td>Experienced</td><td> International Business</td><td>RG + Follow-up interview</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# 2.3. Data collection and analysis

The Reflection Guide as a data generation instrument (Appendix 1) was designed to encourage participants to reflect on their experience and thus bring forth thoughts, feelings and events they may not have had the chance to explore before. In the course of the MA programme, participants (the tutor-researcher included) investigated practices that are not necessarily shared by the academic community they belong to and that may in some cases contradict established local beliefs and practices. Therefore, the invitation to reflection was all the more relevant and likely to consolidate the learning experience. While interviews have an immediacy that captures reflection occurring during the interviewing process, a reflection guide offers the opportunity to reflect over a longer period, to revisit and refine the outcome of reflection in the form of a narrative. Providing a response in writing may yield more depth as the respondents are free to explore their own thinking at the pace they feel comfortable with. Two of the participants chose to be interviewed. The collected data consist in eight completed Reflection Guides, two interviews with participants who preferred to be interviewed, seven follow-up clarification interviews and my own teaching diary combining field notes with entries in the form of questions/reflection. In his discussion of qualitative data collection procedures, Creswell (2009, p. 182) identifies various relationships between observation and participation; my own position was primarily participant as observer, which involved gathering fieldnotes while ‘spending more time as a participant than as an observer’. Extracts from the teaching diary are provided in Appendix 2.

The reflection guides and interview transcripts were analysed through a recursive process of category identification and open coding, aiming to capture the respondents’ ideas and the meanings they attach to experience. The process followed the general pattern of inductive data analysis described by Creswell (2009, p. 175) who advises researchers to move from the specific to the general and to cover several levels of analysis by providing codes, developing themes and their descriptions, connecting themes and interpreting their meaning:

‘Qualitative researchers build their patterns, categories, and themes from the bottom up, by organizing the data into increasingly more abstract units of information.’

Appendix 3 provides an example of theme development moving from the specific code to wider categories and fuller themes. Codes were given to descriptive subcategories that illustrated the topics tackled by the respondents. These subcategories, that were checked across the whole set of reflection guides and interviews, were then grouped into categories, in their turn assembled under wider themes.

Teaching diary analysis proceeded both inductively and deductively (Creswell, 2009) whereby codes were assigned to specific ideas and subsequently grouped into larger units. Then, these categories and themes were compared to the themes derived from reflection guides and interviews and to the initial set of codes to check if more data could be linked to specific themes. In order to increase trustworthiness of the findings, the resulting analysis and interpretation were submitted to respondent validation whereby one participant was asked to read my account of the findings and to decide if I provided an appropriate understanding of the meanings she assigned to her reported experience, of the group experience as a participant in the programme and of the professional context we all share.

# 3. Findings and discussion e main themes

The analysis is organised by themes and the interpretation of each theme will take into account the categories in the whole corpus of data. Each theme combines several categories as, for example, Establish relevance and contribution that combines categories initially identified in relation to topic choice and later regrouped to highlight the respondents’ quest for relevance. The findings and their interpretation inevitably highlight relationships among themes and categories as it is virtually impossible to separate ideas completely despite the effort to identify all issues mentioned by respondents and to give each an appropriate code.

As this particular group of researchers have taken considerable strides towards high quality publication, the findings will highlight the strategies respondents have identified and put into practice.

# 3.1. Strategies e establish relevance and contribution

Researchers strive to identify topics that increase chances of acceptance and they do so by using various approaches that highlight their concern for wide relevance, methodological soundness or harmonisation with trends in the field. Their attitudes indicate a concern for quality rather than for easy access to quick publication. Establishing contribution and relevance is a main concern of researchers. Such relevance may come from interdisciplinary approaches, dialogue with other studies in the field or from adoption of research findings by business professionals. Relevance is often connected to methodological choices and respondents are concerned about their approaches, striving for originality or paying more attention to methods dominant in their respective fields. Similar concerns are reported in recent studies (Fazel, 2019) whose participants find it challenging to frame their research in a way that makes it interesting to other people.

Table 3 provides the categories identified within the theme of Relevance and Contribution and a selection of relevant quotes .

Such diverse attitudes and real concern for methodological adequacy may indicate a contradiction with my observation that participants on the MA programme need more awareness of and ability to use a diverse range of research methodologies.

Participants need awareness of and ability to use a more diverse range of research methodologies. Many are not familiar with qualitative methodologies and I think they need to be able to choose from a wider set of methodological options and explain their choice. (Field notes)

Table 3 Relevance and Contribution categories with quotes.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Relevance and contribution</td><td>Quotes</td></tr><tr><td>Wide relevance - challenging limits.</td><td>I tend to choose research topics &#x27;emotionally rather then recommended ones. I am also interested in the exploration of new, less conventional methodologies. By challenging limits I try to make my research more widely relevant. (R1) Is a topic that matters to us locally and in the neighbouring area relevant for a wider audience? An example is Urban political ecology based on a study of Bucharest parks - in order to make it more pertinent I have given the study an</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>interdisciplinary dimension by collaborating with a geographer from another university. (R1) ethdch-drie y fef rh  ey  jos d  itiy perr mte n my specific field. Large statistically representative populations are not required but rather developing valid measurement scales.(R3) Articles published in good jounals are a source of methodologies - we believe that certain research methods are validated by the publication itself. We replicate methodologies at a different scale or we combine various methods</td></tr><tr><td>Methodology choices -- professional. progress</td><td>and create a new approach. (R4) I am interested in experimenting with several research methods that I have not used before. This gives me a sense of professional progress. For instance, learned how to analyse qualitative data on the MA and I have published a study integrating survey and interview data. (R5) I have not been extremely creative in terms of methodology choice but I am concerned about choosing the most</td></tr><tr><td>research abilities</td><td>appropriate methodologies for my research objectives or questions. (R6) ethdolog ches - drien y w  hve lael use serl quanttive medgie - sis, tion nd impt meement i risk monitoring - as required by my work in the labour market research institute. The use of such complex quantitative methodologies can generate valuable analyses and hence increase chances of publication in good journals.(R7)</td></tr><tr><td>Relevance for business professionals. Local character</td><td>I prefer interviews to questionnaires or the latter delivered face to face. Otherwise, I have no control over the way they respond. Qualitative approaches offer a certain depth which cannot be obtained otherwise. (R2). Professionals in the field validate research if they adopt and integrate research results in their practice. (R6) We are more credible when we report findings about Romania and specific regions in Romania. We have more interesting things to say by being specific rather than wide-ranging.(R2) My contribution usually resides in analysing several variables that operate in the Romanian context rather than be innovative in terms of methodology. I constantly relate my work to other studies on similar topics and this helps me identify my research questions and specific contribution. (R3)</td></tr></table></body></html>

My observation was based primarily on the general lack of familiarity with qualitative methodologies, to be expected to a certain extent from researchers in economics concerned with creating mathematical models. Moreover, there is the widespread belief that a paper will not get published ‘unless there are some numbers involved’ (informal account, field notes). The concern for using and justifying methodologies may have been generated by extensive discussion during the MA programme and by the publication attempts in high level outlets.

Concern for wider relevance can be linked to the concept of parochialism that emerged from the study of Flowerdew (2001) of journal editors and reviewers’ perceptions about non-native English speakers submissions. Excessive localness and ‘failure to show the relevance of the study to the international community’ (2001:135) was regarded as a serious impediment to publication. My finding shows that multilingual researchers understand the need for wider relevance and constantly refine their strategies for addressing this issue.

# 3.2. Text drafting strategies - rhetorical/communicative level

Research evidence (Muresan & Perez-Llantada, 2014 ) suggests that Romanian researchers do make efforts to familiarise themselves with internationally-accepted research practices and to develop their writing expertise. One way of doing this is by giving more attention to making their stance and argument clear and by articulating rhetorical functions beyond the professional, ideational content. The rhetorical elements that pose most hindrances, as identified in the whole data set, are those that require researchers to:

Indicate main argument and expected contribution;   
Situate research in the field;   
Evaluate critically the theory discussed.   
Justify approach and highlight value of findings;   
Interpret findings in relation to those of other studies;   
Interpret findings in a way that highlights own contribution;   
Support and justify claims and conclusions;   
Use conclusions to reinforce contribution;   
Show research relevance for practice;   
Decide how the research can be carried on.

Many of these concerns show an awareness of the need to construct ‘a wellargued story within the conventional article sections’ (Cargill, 2017, p. 173), in line with the views of Indonesian researchers who participated in research writing training. Similarly, Bosnian researchers in the study of Jahic (2016) believe that the rhetorical organization of an article is more difficult to address than language aspects and less likely to be remedied with language brokers’ support.

# 3.2.1. Supporting claims

Explanations are provided by respondents of the reasons why some of these aspects generate difficulties:

We do not properly justify and support our claims and conclusions as a central element of our article. We have not been taught how to do it and we are not rigorous in that respect. How do we link them to the rest of the text? Nobody has taught us, I only learned how to report empirical data. I have been learning through experience, trial and error and engaging with international scholars. (R1)

Such opinions reveal cultural practices and are in complete agreement with my own observation that argument construction is usually feeble and the relationship between intended contribution and the path taken to accomplish it is insufficiently explained. Indeed, findings are reported but their significance and meaning is seldom highlighted. This tends to be a matter stemming from local knowledge construction practices which in their turn are possibly generated by a view of knowledge as information rather than argument-based. In research dissemination practice terms, it means delivering a certain content with little concern for explanation, evaluation, justification. This points out one of the difficulties for the tutor who has to explain the rationale behind practices in place in other academic cultures and also to expand and refine writing advice and instructions. One such guideline may be that given by Cargill et al. (2017: 175) to their Indonesian trainees, to start writing from the results and identify take home messages and in doing so to reflect on the significance of findings.

Respondents with a good publication record, as is the case of R4 quoted below, are aware of the need to build strong arguments:

Our findings may integrate with other researcher findings but not necessarily, in which case a stronger argument is needed to support our stance. (R4)

Indeed, attempts to publish in high-ranking journals and publication success is a considerable source of learning, similar to the case of Spanish postdoctoral researchers reported in the study of Moreno et al. (2012).

3.2.2. Interpret findings significance

For several respondents the Discussion and Conclusions sections of research articles generate most difficulties.

I cannot properly report and interpret findings in the way those journals expect …. Their Discussion sections are long and detailed and move between the findings of the study and those of previous studies. (R2)

Such data indicate understanding of text rhetoric and clearly the difficulties are not linguistic but related to communicative strategy. My field notes have also captured this issue through observation and class discussion about the role of reference to other studies when reporting our own research.

They seemed surprised when we talked about reference to literature occuring twice in the space of an article and for two different reasons e in the introduction and dedicated section to situate our research and in the discussion part to compare findings.(FN)

Respondents explain their struggle and identify structural and linguistic reasons why the Discussion section can be challenging:

I am not aware of a standard format, it can vary according to topic. It also requires referring to the literature and I tend to borrow text from my lit rev section. It requires more refined linguistic expression and I do not have that level of sophistication. (R5)

# 3.2.3. Highlight study contribution

The need to highlight study contribution in the Discussion and/or Conclusions sections creates further challenges. Re spondents 3 finds it ‘difficult to interpret results in a way that highlights the contribution of the study’ while respondent 4 finds Conclusions difficult to write for precisely the same reason.

Conclusions is a difficult section to draft because ‘it requires pulling the strings together.‘ (R7). Moreover, in the case of business-oriented research, ‘conclusions may be the first section to be read so relevance for practice has to be clear.’ (R6). R7 finds it difficult to separate Discussion from Conclusions and prefers to merge the sections. The data indicate awareness of rhetorical implications and it should be noted that respondents tend to accept the requirements rather than complain about the challenges.

Proficient international researchers (Mur-Duenas, 2019) also find it challenging to draft the Discussion section in terms of establishing connections between data and previous work. The same researcher mentions her own difficulties in concluding a study in a way that brings out its contribution.

# 3.2.4. Create a research space

Drafting the literature review section poses challenges as well.

‘We need to integrate our own research in the field more clearly. Sometimes the literature review which should express our positioning in the literature seems to be detached from the rest of the article.’ (R6)

What the respondent refers to here is a local academic culture practice whereby literature review sections tend to be written in order to demonstrate the familiarity of the researcher with the field. While this is certainly one element, many researchers overlook the need to use their knowledge of the field to position their research and justify their approach/choice of topic. R6 notices that the section seems to have little connection with the research being communicated:

‘We need to integrate our own research in the field more clearly. Sometimes the literature review seems to be detached from the rest of the article’.

My field notes have also captured this aspect in an entry about the need for the tutor to ‘find additional sources of information about using this section not to demonstrate knowledge of the field but to show the potential contribution of the study.’ (FN). Progress has been made as regards increased awareness of the connections among different sections of an article, most probably through publication experience.

I look at specific models (not mathematical models but taxonomies, categories, etc) and try to replicate them in my context or change and improve existing models. I noticed that this is what successful articles do, they relate their work to accepted taxonomies and thus they build their conceptual framework and integrate their findings with the dominant theoretical approaches.(R2)

The English native speaker researchers interviewed by Fazel (2019) also find challenges with drafting the literature review section because of the selection of sources and the relationship of this section with the interpretation, discussion and conclusions to be reached.

# 3.2.5. Justify methodology

Justification of methodology also contributes to coherence of the written report. For example, matching methods with research objectives and justification of methodology as providing findings credibility are issues primarily connected to text generic features.

Most journals require justification of methodology. I sometimes have to find a research partner who is more familiar with certain methodologies than myself if the topic invites methods I am not good at. (R8).

Quite clearly, participants in this study realise that research rigour matters more than language (Hyland, 2016a, 2016b; Lillis & Curry, 2015). They may not have shared this belief when they joined the programme and my field notes capture a change of attitude during the sessions, with moving away from the belief that their English is the main obstacle to publication towards realising the need for more convincing justification of their research choices. The pedagogy practised in the programme is broadly in line with the critical-pragmatic approach (Flowerdew, 2007; Harwood & Hadley, 2004) whereby participants receive support in order to accomplish their publication objectives while are made aware of the changes that have occurred in the accepted standards. More specifically, exemplars of prevailing genres are used to highlight macro and micro-rhetoric textual practices in a way similar to the approach of Cadman (2017).

# 3.3. Linguistic strategies

Several problem areas were identified together with strategies for improvement. The former range from the use of discrete language items to issues of connecting ideas and writing fluency.

Clear and concise expression e both a strength and a weakness;   
Use of synonyms;   
 Redundant expression - using too many words;   
Finding the most appropriate word/phrase.   
Refined linguistic expression (in the Discussion section) Connection between limitations between mother tongue and English;   
Connecting ideas.

Table 4 provides a selection of data quotes related to identification of language problems and corresponding strategies to remedy those.

For most respondents, reading and paying attention to language used by other researchers is a trustworthy strategy. Not surprisingly, collaboration with language professionals in conducting and drafting research is another source of linguistic refinement (R.9).

# 3.3.1. Writing fluency

Several findings deserve special attention as they indicate a certain sophistication of perception that can be regarded as unusual for non-linguists. One respondent mentions fluency in writing as a problem area:

Table 4 Strategies to address language challenges.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Language aspects</td><td>Problem area - quotes</td><td> Strategies - quotes</td><td>Field notes</td></tr><tr><td>Find the most appropriate word/phrase</td><td rowspan="2">I cannot always express ideas in a catchy, memorable manner. (R1) I need to write more concisely, to reduce the number of words and eliminate expressions that are</td><td rowspan="2">I search for synonyms to ensure variety of expression. I read and imitate, I analyse linguistic expression, connection of ideas and I. apply to my own writing. (R10)</td><td rowspan="2">Many complain about insufficient linguistic sophistication that prevents them from expressing the complexity of their thinking. Thinking of language as a resource may help them approach the process of writing more creatively, with more</td></tr><tr><td>Express complex ideas briefly</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Vocabulary and accuracy</td><td rowspan="2">not really necessary.(R 10) It matters a lot to be able to express yourself accurately with the most appropriate vocabulary. Also, to read quickly articles written with native-like competence. (R7)</td><td rowspan="2">I write in a team and we can ensure a good linguistic quality of our writing despite limitations. We seek the best wording together and we look at templates of other articles. (R4) I write in English and give the article. to a language expert. (R9)</td><td>confidence and understand that they have a certain level of freedom rather than having to follow conventions slavishly. I always try to explain the reason</td></tr><tr><td>why certain linguistic features occur and how choice of language depends on the meanings to be expressed. The focus on meaning was most probably. neglected in their previous language education. However proficient in English some may be, there are language and meaning aspects they cannot work out on their own and it is unfair to expect them to do so. A linguist can do it for them.</td></tr></table></body></html>

I lack fluency in writing the Lit Rev section, I do not know how to link information. Maybe it is easier for researchers with a background in humanities than in more technical fields. The challenges are connected with drafting not with logical thinking - linking words, linking ideas, writing fluently.(R2)

The linguistic challenges identified by respondents relate to issues of syntactic complexity studied comparatively in the article of Wu et al. (2020). The concern for avoiding redundancy, for clear and concise expression and fluent writing relate to issues of clear and effective writing. Similarly to the ELF researchers in the above mentioned study, Romanian researchers write long sentences and use coordination excessively. In contrast with the ELF researchers, they do not naturally use complex noun phrases unless they purposefully concentrate on producing such phrases preferred in academic writing.

# 3.3.2. Language use and professional identity

The connection between language use and professional background is also identified by respondent 5 whose narrative seems to be performing a clarification purpose for herself in the first place.

Language expresses our mindset. In my case, my mindset was framed by my technological background e IT and artificial intelligence. I usually express myself simply and concisely (much information in a limited number of words) and this is probably the main quality of my writing. Equally, I try to link ideas in a clear, logical manner. Such features are not always sufficient or beneficial. I have noticed that research texts need a sort of controlled redundancy that facilitates content comprehension.

The response indicates a rather unique depth of understanding as well as the interest in a process of self-clarification. As an example, identifying ‘controlled redundancy’ as a feature of science discourse is surprising coming from a non-linguist. In the follow-up interview the respondent explained the concept in terms of researchers stating their contribution several times in the course of the article and repeatedly reminding the reader about the value of their work. Their discourse, as R5 noticed, does not seem redundant. Such data indicate profound understanding of discourse construction. Comparison with my observation suggests that explicit engagement with characteristics of science discourse during classroom discussion may have contributed to a more nuanced grasp of text rhetoric.

# 3.3.3. Mother tongue interference

Another example is the same respondents’ reflection on the parallel between mother tongue and foreign language use prompted by the activity that the respondent was carrying out at the time when she answered my reflection guide, ie translation of project management standards and competences.

I write my research straight into English but there are limitations of expression that derive from mother tongue limitations. One such limitation is the use of synonyms. I generally do not mind repetition of the same words or monotony in a text so I have not developed such competence in the mother tongue. This may be the reason why I do not handle synonyms very well in English either. Moreover, my vocabulary is not structured in such a way to enable me to pick different words or expressions and avoid monotony. This applies to Romanian in the first place and extends to English. (R5)

Such data show the respondents’ willingness to engage in reflection that helps themselves explore and clarify their own practices. Moreover, deep reflection shows the value of researcher’ participation in the setting, of trust built during the two years of classroom time and occasional social interaction, of the close relationship generated by constant dialogue about issues of interest to all participants. It may be more difficult for an outsider to maintain such a relationship and to capture the dynamic nature of awareness building over time and in relation to specific events in the respondent’s life.

Research has shown that language use is seldom a reason for article rejection. Lillis and Curry, for example, have expressed a central concern with ‘whether English or language figures at all as a significant issue’ in a journal’s uptake of an article (2015:133). Their text history data reveal that gatekeepers’ critical comments focus on ‘concerns about methodology, analytical tools used, and forms of analysis’, or on ‘epistemological and methodological issues’ (p. 140); they finally assess that ‘language by itself does not act as a warrant for dismissal or rejection’. Such findings are further supported by the reflections of Casanave (2019, p. 141) that ‘complex ideas do not need to be written in complex inaccessible language.’

# 3.3.4. Refining research writing abilities

What is to be done in terms of refining research writing abilities? Training is one response:

‘The role of writing courses should not be underestimated. They have given me self-awareness and self-assessment tools and clear guidelines e examples, range of vocabulary, rules, connection between structures and meaning.‘(R5)

‘I am aware that it is quite unlikely to access large-scale projects and be part of international teams so I need to improve ability to conduct small-scale coherent research’. (R2)

A rather different perspective, with much wider-ranging implications, is worth taking into account.

# 3.4. Isolation

Participation in international teams and involvement in large-scale projects have considerable learning potential and would increase multiliterate researchers’ self-confidence and facilitate their endeavours towards greater visibility. Unfortunately, such participation is rare. Isolation is one cause of poor publication record and institutional efforts are required to consolidate integration in international networks, as Curry and Lillis (2010, p. 282) have convincingly shown. They emphasise participation in research networks as a key element of constructing improved international publication record. Participation in virtual and/or in-person networks of ‘compatible colleagues’ has been also identified by Casanave (2019, p. 141) as one method of facilitating publication.

Reducing isolation is one area where personal and institutional agendas need to merge and personal efforts must be complemented with comprehensive research capacity building and networking efforts. Likely improvement can also come from increased solidarity among Romanian researchers in country and abroad, similar to the situation described by one of the respondents participating in the life-history study of Burgess (2017) among Spanish researchers who value joint contributions to books produced by reputable publishers. Promoting such solidarity is one area where institutions can be more active. Greater flexibility on the part of reviewers and editors may be necessary regarding the use of uncommon linguistic expression that does not prevent meaning communication, or, as Mur-Duenas (2019:102) puts it, regarding the discrepancies between a writer’s ‘natural’ way of expressing meaning in English academic discourse and the likely expectations of gatekeepers of international publications. Similarly, Mauranen et al. (2010) find that English as an academic lingua franca is used by more non-native than native researchers and wonder if expectations of clarity and effective communication might be adjusted to the perspective of the majority.

# 4. Concluding remarks

This study was undertaken in order to further investigate and illuminate processes of text construction among the members of an academic community that have refined their awareness of internationally accepted knowledge creation practices and have compared such practices with those at play in the local academic environment. This process of clarification has hopefully increased the researchers’ confidence in their chances of accessing prestigious journals. Equally, this research endeavour builds on prolongued involvement of the researcher in the research setting, involvement that can bring to light insights difficult to capture in a different research setup. An understanding of the multiple layers of beliefs, awareness and expertise involved in successful research communication requires prolongued involvement and participation of the researcher as a full member of the community as opposed to just observation and/or interviewing. While I am not claiming that this is a new or innovative idea, it was indeed the suitable approach to take in order to highlight the role of knowledge creation beliefs in shaping research and communication processes in the community under investigation. This close relationship between underlying beliefs about knowledge and how it is created on the one hand and knowledge communication on the other may contribute to revealing the kind of challenges researchers encounter in the process of communicating their research results. One of my conclusions, therefore, reinforces those of Mur- Duenas (2019) \~ that ‘L2 academics need to leave behind some enduring writing traditions in their cultural contexts when writing in the L2.’ In other words, they need to ‘unlearn’ certain practices before learning new ones. Such a task is more difficult than it may seem because the practices to be discarded are rooted in the deep-seated beliefs in the community they belong to.

While the Native e Non-native speaker division is no longer accepted and assumptions of native speaker advantage have been challenged (Habibie, 2019; Hyland, 2016a,b, 2019), multiliterate researchers still encounter frequent requests to have their papers revised by native speakers. Therefore, it is sometimes difficult for these researchers to believe that they are not discriminated against and that they should confidently target the highest ranking journals. This kind of shyness is one of the main non-linguistic obstacles among the members of the community investigated in this study and understanding the roots of such perceptions requires exploration of individual publication experiences. The training programme undertaken by participants in this study has provided a forum for researchers to share such experiences and for the participant researcher to understand the underpinnings of perceptions and attitudes.

The limitations of this study are generated by the context - dependent nature of the exploration that investigates a situated reality. The findings are necessarily specific to that context but the significance of such findings can claim a wider relevance. The potential contribution may reside in confirming previous findings about the wide range of linguistic and non-linguistic barriers that multiliterate scholars encounter and in highlighting the close connection between content, rhetorical functions and appropriate language that makes successful research communication. In addition, undertaking this study has generated further issues to be investigated - Who can train these researchers and what kind of expertise is needed? Implications of multiliterate researcher needs are wide-ranging and can address teacher training provision. Moreover, pre-service and inservice training is not enough and ERPP trainers need publication experience themselves, as shown recently by Li and Cargill (2019).

In terms of research methodology, the study has helped me realise the collaborative character of my ethnographic approach, another feature that can best be understood by direct experience. The research is thus generated throughout the extended period of researcher involvement in the setting rather than during the time dedicated to one particular study. A limitation of this study, therefore, is the time-limited recording of field-notes over a period of two years only rather than throughout my ten-year involvement with the programme. The collection of field-notes was perceived as a need when I became interested in expanding my role as a researcher in this particular setting rather than a teacher only. Acknowledging the co-created character of this piece of research requires recognition that it is quite unfair that only one member of the research team should take the credit.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Mirela Bardi: Conceptualization.

# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to all the graduates and students of the EDURES Masters programme who have helped me, along the years, improve my teaching and research work and strengthen my professional identity. I hope I was able to give them something in return.

# Appendix 1. Reflection Guide

$\eqslantgtr$ Strategies for selecting research topics   
$\eqslantgtr$ Integration of topics with specific methodologies   
$\eqslantgtr$ Interest for exploring potential of methodologies and widening the range of methodological options   
$\eqslantgtr$ Attention dedicated to any of the following aspects: - Relevance e Are topic and approach relevant for the wider community? - Contribution e How does my research contribute to deeper understanding of the researched phenomena? - Situating the research in the field e What does my study sit in relation with studies on similar topics? - Selecting methodology e What are my epistemological assumptions? How do I justify my research choices? - Relationship between data and conclusions e Do my conclusions derive from my data? - Study coherence e Do my conclusions provide answers to my research questions/verify my hypotheses?   
$\eqslantgtr$ Challenges in drafting article sections e Which aspects are difficult to address/communicate in my article?   
$\eqslantgtr$ Monitoring the linguistic quality of the text e How do you make sure your text expresses your ideas clearly and correctly in English?

# Appendix 2. Teaching diary extracts

At the end of the second session of the module M commented on their (M and L’s) recent experience of interacting with reviewers e they did not always understand what was required and expected of them but after attending these two sessions they are beginning to realise the rationale of those requirements. I fear that they have already given up on revising and resubmitting their article.   
 Every generation (as far as I can remember) reiterates the same idea e a programme such as this would have been extremely useful when they were working on PhD completion. It would have spared much effort and provided a richer understanding of what good research involves.   
 One of the obstacles to greater visibility and participation is their own reluctance to engage at higher levels and aim for elite journals.   
Participants need awareness of and ability to use a more diverse range of research methodologies. Many of them seem surprised when we discuss various paradigms and the research choices they can make but also justify. Class discussion appears to indicate that researchers use a set of familiar methodologies and ignore other options.   
There is little awareness of the need to explain epistemological assumptions and of how to do it. This may be connected with the lack of awareness of more diverse methodological options e they tend to use the same methodology and may regard it as the only option.   
Writing is too descriptive. Researchers announce topic and fail to justify the choice or explain why that topic is worth researching. They do not see the need to do it.   
 Poor argument construction is the consequence of descriptive writing. The findings are presented as if they sort of speak for themselves rather than tell a story.   
Awareness of communicative functions and the need to address and express those clearly generate most difficulties. This is the intermediate level between the content/information to be communicated and linguistic expression.   
Language is secondary although many complain about insufficient linguistic sophistication that prevents them from expressing the complexity of their thinking.   
 They expect recipes, patterns, models, short-cuts. R put this quite bluntly to the amusement of the other participants. They may have struggled on their own and now they have lost patience and want to be given clear steps to follow.   
There was some resistance regarding the use of hedging and softening claims. F.I. said that making soft claims means diminishing the value of our research. There was some discussion about that and the idea that softening claims indicates

participation in a wide conversation seemed new for most people. They were clearly reflecting on such issues and I am not sure if all of them were convinced.

 I always try to explain the reason why certain linguistic features occur and I think that is a necessary connection. Many language features derive from beliefs about knowledge and knowledge creation. I am sure that pointing out the connection between language elements and the deep rationale is useful and can help people understand practices that do not exist in our culture. It also helps them approach the process of writing more creatively and understand that they have a certain level of freedom rather than having to follow conventions slavishly.

I feel there is a need for a more hands-on approach to developing research skills whereby we actually take part in international research teams and learn by doing and interacting with peers.

Appendix 3. Data analysis e from codes to themes   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Theme</td><td>Category</td><td>Code</td></tr><tr><td>Experimenting with methodology</td><td>Use new methods</td><td>Diversify</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Diversify range of methods</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Match methods with research objectives</td><td>Match (objectives)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Explore new paradigms</td><td>Explore</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Match trends in the field and own abilities</td><td> Match (abilities)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Justify methodology to make findings credible</td><td> Justify</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>No methodological innovation, variables in local context</td><td> Preserve</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Professional progress through new abilities</td><td>Progress</td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Bardi, M. (2015). Learning the practice of scholarly publication in English e a Romanian perspective. English for Specific Purposes, 37, 98e111. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.esp.2014.08.002   
Bardi, M., & Muresan, L. (2014). Changing academic writing practices in Romania: Perceptions and attitudes. In K. Bennett (Ed.), The semiperiphery of academic writing: Discourse, communities and practices. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Blommaert, J. (2018). Dialogues with ethnography e notes on classics and how I read them. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.   
Bryman, A. (2012). Social research methods (4th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Buckingham, L. (2014). Building a career in English: Users of English as an additional language in academia in the Arabian Gulf. Tesol Quarterly, 48(1), 6e33.   
Burgess, S. (2017). Accept or contest: A life-history study of humanities scholars’ responses to research publication policies in Spain. In M. Cargill, & S. Burgess (Eds.), Publishing research in English as an additional language: Practices, pathways and potentials (pp. 13e32). Adelaide: University of Adelaide Press.   
Cadman, K. (2017). Introducing research rigour in the social sciences: Transcultural strategies for teaching ERPP writing, research design, and resistance to epistemic erasure. In M. Cargill, & S. Burgess (Eds.), Publishing research in English as an additional language: Practices, pathways and potentials (pp. 33e54). Adelaide: University of Adelaide Press.   
Cargill, M., O’Connor, P., Raffiudin, R., Sukarno, N., Juliandi, B., & Rusmana, I. (2017). Scientists publishing research in English from Indonesia: Analysing outcomes of a training intervention to inform institutional action. In M. Cargill, & S. Burgess (Eds.), Publishing research in English as an additional language: Practices, pathways and potentials (pp. 169e186). Adelaide: University of Adelaide Press.   
Casanave, C. P. (2019). Does writing for publication ever get easier? Some reflections from an experienced scholar. In P. Habibie, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Novice writers and scholarly publication - authors. Mentors, Gatekeepers, Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Clandinin, D. J., & Huber, J. (2010). Narrative inquiry. In B. McGaw, E. Baker, & P. Peterson (Eds.), International encyclopedia of education (3rd ed.). New York: Elsevier.   
Pedagogies and policies for publishing research in English. In Corcoran, J. N., Englander, K., & Muresan, L.-M. (Eds.), Local initiatives supporting international scholars, (2019). New York & London: Routledge.   
Creswell, J. W. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design choosing among five traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.   
Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research design e quantitative, qualitative and mixed methods approaches (3rd ed.). Los Angeles, London: Sage.   
Curry, M. J., & Lillis, T. M. (2010). Academic research networks: Accessing resources for English-medium publishing. English for Specific Purposes, 29, 281e295.   
Curry, M. J., & Lillis, T. (2017). Foreword. In M. Cargill, & S. Burgess (Eds.), Publishing research in English as an additional language: Practices, pathways and potentials. Adelaide: University of Adelaide Press. xv-xviii.   
Dressen-Hamouda, D. (2012). Ethnographic approaches in ESP. In B. Paltridge, & S. Starfield (Eds.), The handbook of English for specific purposes. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.   
Fazel, I. (2019). Writing for publication as a native speaker: The experiences of two Anglophone novice scholars. In P. Habibie, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Novice writers and scholarly publication - authors, mentors, gatekeepers. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Flowerdew, J. (1999). Problems in writing for scholarly publication in English: The case of Hong Kong. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8(3), 243e264.   
Flowerdew, J. (2001). Attitudes of Journal Editors to Nonnative Speaker Contributions. Tesol Quarterly, 35. No. 1.   
Flowerdew, J. (2007). The non-Anglophone scholar on the periphery of scholarly publication. AILA Review, 20, 14e27.   
Flowerdew, J. (2015). Some thoughts on English for research publication purposes (ERPP) and related issues. Language Teaching, 48(2), 250e262.   
Flowerdew, J. (2017). Critical discourse studies and context. In J. Flowerdew, & E. J. Richardson (Eds.), Routledge handbook of critical discourse studies. London and New York: Routledge.   
Flowerdew, L. (2019). The academic Literacies approach to scholarly writing: A view through the lens of the ESP/genre approach, studies in higher education. London and New York: Routledge.   
Habibie, P. (2019). To Be native or not to Be native: That is not the question. In P. Habibie, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Novice writers and scholarly publication - authors. Mentors, Gatekeepers, Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Hammersley, M. (1990). What’s wrong with ethnography? The myth of theoretical description. Sociology, 24(4), 597e615.   
Hammersley, M. (2006). Ethnography: Problems and prospects. In Ethnography and education (Vol. 1, pp. 3e14). No. 1, March 2006.   
Hammersley, M., & Atkinson, P. (1995). Ethnography e principles in practice. London: Routledge.   
Harwood, N., & Hadley, G. (2004). Demystifying institutional practices: Critical pragmatism and the teaching of academic writing. English for Specific Purposes, 23, 355e377.   
Hyland, K. (2016a). Methods and methodologies in second language writing research. System, 59, 116e125.   
Hyland, K. (2016b). Academic publishing and the myth of linguistic injustice. Journal of Second Language Writing, 31, 58e69.   
Hyland, K. (2019). Participation in publishing: The demoralizing discourse of disadvantage. In P. Habibie, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Novice writers and scholarly publication - authors. Mentors, Gatekeepers, Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Jahic, A. (2016). Achieving visibility in the international scientific community: Experiences of Bosnian scholars presenting and publishing research in English. In L. Buckingham (Ed.), The status of English in bosnia and hertzegovina (pp. 115e137). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.   
Li, Y. (2007). Apprentice scholarly writing in a community of practice: An interview of an NNES graduate student writing a research article. Tesol Quarterly, 41/1, 55e79.   
Li, Y., & Cargill, M. (2019). Observing and Reflecting in an ERPP “Master Class”: Learning and Thinking About Application. In J. N. Corcoran, K. Englander, & L. M. Muresan (Eds.), Pedagogies and policies for publishing research in English. Local initiatives supporting international scholars (pp. 19e35). New York & London: Routledge.   
Lillis, T. (2008). Ethnography as method, methodology, and "deep theorizing":closing the gap between text and context in academic writing research. Written Communication, 25(number 3), 353e388.   
Lillis, T., & Curry, M. J. (2015). The politics of English, language and uptake: The case of international academic journal article reviews. AILA Review, 28(1), 127e150.   
Mauranen, A., Hynninen, N., & Ranta, E. (2010). English as an academic lingua franca: The ELFA project. English for Specific Purposes, 29, 183e190, 2010.   
Moen, T. (2006). Reflections on the narrative research approach. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 5(4), 56e68.   
Moreno, A. I., Rey-Rocha, J., Burgess, S., Lopez-Navarro, I., & Sachdev, I. (2012). Spanish researchers  ’ perceived difficulty writing research articles for English medium journals: The impact of proficiency in English versus publication experience. Iberica, 24, 157e184.   
Mur-Duenas, P. (2012). Getting research published internationally in English: An Ethnographic Account of a team of Finance Spanish scholars’ struggles. Iberica, 24, 139e156.   
Mur-Duenas, P. (2019). The experience of a NNES outer circle novice scholar in scholarly publication. In P. Habibie, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Novice writers and scholarly publication - authors. Mentors, Gatekeepers, Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Muresan, L.-M., & Perez-Llantada, C. (2014). English for research publication and dissemination in bi-/multiliterate environments: The case of Romanian  academics. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 13, 53e64.   
Muresan, L.-M., & Perez-Llantada, C. (2019). Research Writing in English in a Romanian Academic Ecosystem: A Case Study of an Experienced Multiliterate Researcher. In J. N. Corcoran, K. Englander, & L. M. Muresan (Eds.), Pedagogies and policies for publishing research in English. Local initiatives supporting international scholars (pp. 109e127). New York & London: Routledge.   
Paltridge, B., Starfield, S., & Tardy, C. M. (2016). Ethnographic perspectives on academic writing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Patnaik, E. (2013). Reflexivity: Situating the researcher in qualitative research (Vol. 2, pp. 98e106). Humanities and Social Science Studies, 2.   
Perez-Llantada, C., Plo, R., & Ferguson, G. R. (2011).  ‘You don’t say what you know, only what you can’: The perceptions and practices of senior Spanish academics regarding research dissemination in English. English for Specific Purposes, 30, 18e30.   
Robson, C. (2002). Real world research e a resource for social scientists and practitioner-researchers (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.   
Starfield, S. (2010). Ethnographies. In B. Paltridge, & A. Phakiti (Eds.), Continuum companion to research methods in applied linguistics. London: Continuum International Publishing Group.   
Starfield, S. (2015). Ethnographic research. In B. Paltridge, & A. Phakiti (Eds.), Research methods in applied linguistics. London: Bloomsbury Academic.   
Tusting, K., McCulloch, S., Bhatt, I., Hamilton, M., & Barton, D. (2019). Academics writing. The dynamics of knowledge creation. London & New York: Routledge.   
Wei, L. (2019). Ethnography e origins, features, accountability and criticality. In G. McKinley, & H. Rose (Eds.), The routledge handbook of research methods in applied linguistics. London: Routledge.   
Wu, X., Mauranen, A., & Lei, L. (2020). Syntactic complexity in English as a lingua franca academic writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 43, 2e13.   
Yin, R. K. (2011). Qualitative research from start to finish. New York, London: The Guildford Press.