# The citational practice of social science research articles: An analysis by part-genres

Genggeng Zhang

Department of Applied Linguistics, The Pennsylvania State University, 312 Sparks Building, University Park, PA, 16802, USA

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Citations   
Academic research writing Research article part-genres

Citational practice has been an important feature of academic writing. This study analyzed the intext citations of 30 social science research articles (RAs) by part-genres. The citations identified in their rhetorical contexts were analyzed for densities, surface forms, roles of cited authors, reporting verbs (RVs), and functions. This multi-perspective analysis shows substantial differences of citation patterns across the Introduction-Method-Result-Discussion (IMRD) part-genres, which illustrates how forms and functions of citations are connected to various rhetorical purposes of RA part-genres. Findings contribute to a better understanding of the citational practice in social science RAs and provide useful implications for research writing pedagogy.

# 1. Introduction

As a defining feature of academic discourse (Swales & Feak, 2004), citation has been acknowledged as an intertextual link (Fairclough, 1992) and a genre-specific practice (Swales, 2014) in academic writing that allows writers to establish a research context, attribute credit and recognition to previous works, justif findings and claims, and thereby gather peer recognition of the research (Harwood, 2009; Petric, 2007; Thompson & Tribble, 2001). However, the complexity of citation has challnged novice writers (Charles, 2006a; Jalilifar, 2012). With the goal to inform material and curriculum development on academic writig, previous studies analyzd the cittional practice of reearch artices for their frequencies and densities (., Hu et al., 2013; Swale, 2014), forms and functions (eg., Coffin, 2009; Harwo0d, 209; Petric, 2007; Samraj, 2013; Swales, 1986; Thompson, 2001), and also features of the reporting verbs (e.g., Charles, 2006a, 2006b; Hyland, 1999; Thompson & Tribble, 2001; Thompson & Ye, 1991). The form- and function-based typologies developed from these studies allowed citational practices to be analyzed across various disciplines (e.g, Hyland, 199), writer's linguistic backgrounds (e.g., Hu & Wang, 2014), and academic expertise (e.g., Jallifar, 2012) for various research goals.

Although each RA section serves diffrent rhetorical purpose (Swales & Feak, 2004; Yang & Allison, 2003), much citation research has een done on a single RA part-genre (e.g., inroductions of RAs; hompson & Ye, 1991; discssons of master theses; Samraj, 2013) or RAs as a whole (e.g., Charles, 2006a; Petic, 2007). Very few studies have explored the forms and functions of citations across rhetorical stages (i.e., part-genres) of research article writing. Therefore, with the goal to understand how citations are structured to realize various rhtorical purposes of dfferent reech article part-gres, this study examines the densities surface forms, reorting verbs, as well as the functions of citations in the IMRD sections of social science RAs.

# 1.1. Citational practice of research articles

Citation studies in English for Academic Purposes (EAP) have widely adopted Swales' (1986; 1990) seminal framework to cate. gorize in-text citations with the integral and nonintegral dichotomy. Integral citations are those that include the author's name in the cited sentence with the name taking a grammatical role in the sentence (e.g., some suggestive evidence constent with this hypothesis was reported by Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz (2013). Nonintegral citations present the cited author in parentheses or footnote and require no grammatical role of the author's name (e.g., surveys show that a large majority of Americans would prefer a more equal dis tribution of wealth (Norton & Ariely, 2011). With the author's name explicitly incorporated in the sentence, integral citations emphasize the role of the researcher, thus are person-based. In contrast, non-integral citations are concept-oriented citations that foreground the cited content rather than the agent of the previous research (Swales, 2014).

While most form-based analysis examined the surface forms of citations with the integral-nonintegral typology, Thompson and Ye (1991) and Hyland (199; 2002, pp. 115-130) were among the firsts to investigate citation forms on a more fine-grained level. Thompson and Ye's (1991) work examined the introduction sections of RAs from five social science and natural science domains and developed a taxonomy for reporting verbs based on their denotative, evaluative, and interpretive meanings. Considering that Thompson and Ye's (1991) typology derived from only introduction sections, Hyland's research (199; 2002) examined RAs as a whole and developed a layered categorization system that expanded Thompson and Ye's (1991) categorization framework to include both writers and authors stance expressed in reporting verbs. Adapting from the writer evaluation framework in Thompson and Ye (1991), Hylands (199; 2002, p. 115-130) typology expanded the non-factive category into four types of stances (positive, tentaive, critical, and neutral) that captured the views writers ascribed to the cited claims. This way, the evaluative meanings in RVs are placed into (a) writers accept the cited work as true (i.e., factive), (b) writers disagree with the cited work and claim the work as counter-factive, or () writers ascribe evaluations to the source work, reporting the work with positive, neutral, tentative, or critical stance. Based on the rearch activity a reporting ver denotes, Hyland (1999 classifies reporting verbs into (a) reearch vers, which inform procedures of the reearch, such as find, show, and anayze; (b) contive verbs that delineatthe metal proesses,, conser, decipher, and focus, or (c) discourse verbs that take verbal expressions as objects, e.g., discuss, argue, and suggest.

Although the identification of citations' functions was argued to be problematic without direct accessto authors' intentions or knowledge of the fied (Swales, 2014) studies have attempted to assign functions to citations based on writr interviews (e.g., Har. wood, 2009), textual evidence (e.g, Coffin, 2009; Petri, 2007), or a combination of interview- and text-based approaches (e.g, Hyland, 1999; Samraj, 2013). Although these fine-grained frameworks subsumed multiple categories that well captured the subtle differences of the rhetorical functions of citations, from a edagogical perspective, these frameworks helped raise students awareness on the variety of citation functions more than facilitate them to make writing decisions.

Since introduced to applied linguists by Swales in 1986, citation analysis in EAP studies has aimed at describing the forms and functions of citations in research articles to inform academic writing intructions. While these wellgrounded functional typologies have taken the rhetorical, pragmatic, and evaluative functions of citations into analysis, bibliometric studies offred a different perspective: Citations are of different importance to the citing article based on their number of occurrences and semantics of the citation context (Smith, 1981). This argument has been endorsed by scholars who questioned previous functional categorizations for treatingall citations with equal value and weight to an RA. In support of White's (2004) callfor interdisciplinary ties of discourse analysis, sociology f science, and information science for citation research, Valenzuela t al. (2015) developed a two-lel functional category with the evaluation of itations value and weight. At a lower importance level, which Valenzuelat al. (2015, p.1) refer to as \*incidental, authors cite sources to present related works or make comparisons. At a higher importance level, which Valenzuela et al. identify as important, cited works are used in the author's research or being used to extend the author's work. Following this scheme, Valenzuela et al. (2015) annotated a corpus of 20,527 published papers in computational linguistics and found that only $1 4 . 6 \%$ of the citations are considered as important (i.e., indicating the current researchis using or extending the ited work). The association be. tween the importance f cited works and their locations in an article isaso identified in their tudy: Acitation in the literatre review section is likely to indicate an incidental citatio, but cited works in Methods often indicate that the source is being used or extended in the current reeach, which suggests importance.Valenzuelat al.'s weighed functional typology has not only inluenced later research (e., Cai et al., 2019) but also been applied in search engines for acadmic publications to help readrs idnify releant rerch that are also important. The four-item functional typology allows citations to be examined for the lingustic realizations of various rhetorical functions, and such findings can be pedagogically applicable to facilitate students to choose appropriate forms that realize specific functions.

# 1.2. Research article part-genres

Each section in a research article constitutes a part-genre, as each of them serves different communicative functions and varies in their rhetorical and inguisic choices (Martinez, 2005; Parkinson, 2011; Swales, 1990). Inroductions outline the context, motivation, and rationale of a study; Methods contextualize, describe, and justify the methodological choices; Results report and comment on the findings; and Discussions go beyond the factual exposition of the results by interpretig, justifying, and discussing the implications of the results (Cotos et al, 2017; Swale & Feak, 2004; Yang & Allison, 2003). In relation to the rhetorical functions, the information flow of each reearch article ection also differ. Charactrized by an hourglass model (Hillet al., 1982), Inoductions fllow a eneal to specific flow, Methods and Results are "narrower (ie., more specific) in the research article, and discussions follow a specific to general flow (Swales & Feak, 2004, p.285). To this end, Introductions and Discussions ae sociall riented and interpretive in nature (Casal et al., 2021; Samraj, 2002, 2005; Yang & Allison, 2003) and often contain a greater number of citations to establish an intertextual ink that situates the citing research in a broader context (Hu et al., 2013; Kuo et al., 2011). In contrast, Methods and Results are descriptive in nature and oriented toward research practices (Casal et al., 2021; Cotos et al, 2017), and therefore, tend to include fewer citations (Hu et al., 2013; Kuo et al., 2011).

Although the IMRD sections in research articles have been acknowledged as part-genres with diffrent rhetorical goals, most citation studie targeted either the entire research article or one specificsection. While Thompson and Trible (2001) and Thompson's (2001) studies were the firsts to explore the density and function of citations by IMRD sections, their analysis focused on the macro form features of citations, and the findings were derived from Ph.D. theses in two agricultural disciplines, which could affect the representativeness and generalizabilit of the findings to some extent. Using Thompson's (2001) functional typology, Petric (2007) investigated the citational practices of MA theses in relation to the scores the theses received. The study found that the atribution function was overused across all partgenres in low-rated esays, but more distinct variations of functions across sections were identified in high-rated essays, suggesting that instructions on how citation forms and functions ae asociated with each MRD section could be helpful to novice writers. Kuo et al. (2011) continued this line of research by analyzing citations in each IMRD section of applied linguisics RAs. Considerable variations in the surface forms and rhetorical functions of citations were identified across the IMRD sections, and such variations were accounted for by the communicative purposes of the part-genres. Although this study situated the form-function relation within RA part-genres, its form-based analysis only examined citations within the integral-nonintegral dichotomy. A more fine-grained form and function analysis could potentially complement the patterns identified.

# 1.3. The present study

In sum, previous studies attempted to examine the forms and functions of citations in various rhetorical contexts. The findings showed insightul and substantial dfferences of citations across IMRD sections, which suggest the worthiness of exploring citation variations in relation to the part-gres they occurred. However, past studies ften targeted a single discipline ., Kuo et a., 2011; Petric, 2007; Thompson, 2001; Thompson & Tribble, 2001) adopted previous typologies that were oriented toward macro features but did not account for the rporting verbs (e.g., Petric, 2007; Thompson, 2001), or were restricted to certain groups of writers for specific research goals (e.g., Petric, 2007). To uncover the fine-grained mapping between citation forms and functions, this study takes a multi-perspective analytical approach that investigates the citational practices of research article part-genres for their densities, surface forms, roles of cited authors, reporting verbs, as well as functions.

In particular, this study aims to answer the following research questions:

1. What are the form-based features of citations in the entire research articles and their part-genres?   
2. What are the function-based features of citations in the entire research articles and their part-genres!

# 2. Materials and methods

# 2.1. The corpus

The corpus used in this study is sourced from the Corpus of ocial Science Research Artices (CossA), compiled by Lu et al. (2018) COSSRA encompases 600 RAs published between 2012 and 2016 in six social sience domains, including Anthropology (AN), Applied Linguistics (AL), Economics (Econ), Political Science (PS), Psychology (PSY), and Sociology (SC). Each social science domain contains five journals, with each journal featuring 20 articles. To reducethe influence of jounal conventions, this study randomly selected one RA from each journal in CossRA and ended up with five RAs from each of the ix disciplines. This way, the corpus compiled for this study contains a total of 30 RAs acrosix social science isciplines. The selected RAs were uploaded into ATLAS.ti, and then coded manually by the researcher.

# 2.2. Part-genre identification

In order to connect the forms and functions of itations with their rhetorical contexts, four reearch article part-gnres (i.., MRD) were identified based on the headings and content of aparagraph. Due to the structural variations, not al RAs contain the exact IMRD sections. As can be seen in Table 1 below, none of the anthropology articles have separate results sections, but to maintain the representativenessof the corpus to social science As, RAs from al dicilines are included for the citation analysis. f an RA had more than one missing sections, the article was replaced with a randomly sampled article from the same journal that contained no more than one absent part-genre. One Anthropology RA with only I-D sections was therefore being replaced. When an article had a combined results and diussion section . a sction tited as disussion f reults), the section was coded as Disussion. For the slected RAs that lacked one IMRD section, the number of itations in that section was counted as zero .g., for an article without method section, the citation count of its method section was zero).

Table 1 Word counts of RAs across six social science disciplines..   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Part-Genres</td><td>AL</td><td>AN</td><td>ECON</td><td>PS</td><td>PSY</td><td>sc</td><td>Per RA</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>2677.00 (772.31)</td><td>679.40 (271.55)</td><td>2226.40 (1136.64)</td><td>1966.00 (883.72)</td><td>3321.60 (2056.41)</td><td>2735.40 (424.55)</td><td>2267.6 (906.9)</td></tr><tr><td>Method</td><td>1385.00 (523.38)</td><td>407.40 (631.49)</td><td>2288.00 (2733.25)</td><td>1657.80 (607.94)</td><td>2057.40 (1660.72)</td><td>1697.60 (929.39)</td><td>1582.2 (657.6)</td></tr><tr><td>Results</td><td>1937.40 (502.71)</td><td>0.00 (0.00)</td><td>2703.20 (1873.73)</td><td>1380.40 (870.82)</td><td>2496.40 (841.55)</td><td>2767.00 (1126.67)</td><td>1880.7 (1061.3)</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>1994.2 (769.36)</td><td>5575.20 (2599.66)</td><td>2205.00 (2858.93)</td><td>1351.40 (1030.28)</td><td>2272.40 (1887.09)</td><td>1008.80 (465.69)</td><td>2401.2 (1633.1)</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>9992.00 (2846.53)</td><td>8327.50 (13106.89)</td><td>11778.25 (1171.78)</td><td>7944.50 (1434.20)</td><td>12684.75 (2764.77)</td><td>10261.00 (4274.07)</td><td>10164.7 (1860.0)</td></tr></table></body></html>

ote. mer n the ell indateean ) othe word ounts. mber in thoea ow indicate aeage word counts perRrtionalized as the combination of IMRD sections) in each discipline.

# 2.3. Citation identification

Each txt file was manually examined for citations and references. In this study, citations refer to in-text citations, which are operationalized as sentences in the text body of a research article that contain cited author(s) name(s) and year(s) of the publication (e.g., Studes show that .. (Smith, 2010).) or a number tht leads readers to the refernce ection (e., Studes show that .. 121.) Following Thompson and Ye's(1991) definition, the writer of a citing article i referred to s \*writer," and the cited person i referred to as "author n this study. dtionall, articles being analyzd in this study are trated as the citin reearch, and the cited sources in these articles are the "cited works."

# 2.4. Form-based analysis

In-text itations were first categorized into integral or nonintegral itations based on Swales's (1986) typology. An integral citation with one resource ited was counted as one citation. For nonintegral citations, the number of works cited in the parenthesis counted as the number of citations. While most RAs used author-date citation systems (e.g., APA and MLA), one article in political science used a number system (Vancouver). However, the integralnonintegral distinction of in-text citations can stil be idntified in the articl e, Smith arge . [1] (integral) Stdies show . 12]. (nonntegal), hence, thearticle was included for the analysis. Then, integral citations were categorized by the grammatical functions of author names. Swales (2014) typology was chosen over Thompson's (2001) becausethe former provides more fine-grained roles of author name use based on its grammatical function, while the lattr oly accounts for whether author names functioned as the agent of a verb or not. Based on Swales (2014) typology, integral citations were put into the five categories in Table 2 below.

All citations were then securitized for the reporting verbs, which were identified as the lexical verbs associated with cited authors (e.g., Hofman (2010) arge ..) or cited wor ., A stdy (Hffmn, 2010) hs shown that . in the cittions. yland's (199; 2002, pp. 115-130) reporting verb typology was used to categorize reporting verbs based on their denotative meaning (i.e., research, cognition, or discourse verbs) and evaluative potentials (i.e., factive, counter-factive, and non-factive).

# 2.5. Function-based analysis

Function-based typologies in EAP studies wellcaptured the rhetorical and communicative purposes of citations. However, these widely adopted functional typologies were derived from diffrent genres of academic writing than published research artices (e.g., master's theses in Petric, 2007 and Samraj, 2013) or from writer interviews (e.g., Harwood, 2009), which could render the categorization framework incompatible with the research artices to be analyzed inthis study. Moreover, from a bibliometric perspective (e. g, Smith, 1981 alzulat al. 2015),cite works are f diffet imrtne  ciig rarh basd ntheir syctic es ., at what location and in which pattern a citation is integrated to an article) and rhetorical levels (i., the functions of cited work). However, EAP studies on citations often treated citations with equal value to the citing research, which did not llow analysis on how forms and functions reflected the importance of citations. For these reasons, the current study adopted the functional framework from Valenzuela et al. (2015) to analyze the functions of citations and the connection between forms and functions. This four-category functional typology is more transparent and les likely to be affected by reliability problems due to personal udgments because the categorization mainly relies on textual cues. Adapted fromValenzuela et al.'s (2015) framework, the functions of citations in this study were classified into the fllowing categories: (a) identifying related work, (b) making comparison and contrast, c) using the cited work, and (d) extending the cited work (see Table 3 for definition and examples).Citations that serve only functions (a) or (b) are incidental itations to the citing research, and citations with functions (c) or (d) are considered important citations to the research. These categories are not watertight, and one citation could be put into more than one category based on the lexical grammatical cues in the citation sentence. For example, in the sentence \*We take a modified symbolic interactionist approach, drawing from Erving Goffman (1959), Philip Manning (2008), and Robin Smith (2011) to explore community-police meetings .." the underlined words signal that the cited works are being used and also being extended upon in the citing study.

Table 2 Integral citation sub-types.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Functions of Author Names</td><td>Definitions and Examples</td></tr><tr><td>Sentence subject</td><td>Author name(s) control(s) a lexical verb. e.g., Paribakht and Wesche (1999: 205-7) report a rate of almost 80 per cent for the use of inference.</td></tr><tr><td>Agent</td><td>Author name(s) function(s) as the agent of a passive verb. e.g., The procedure was used by Wesche and Paribakht (1996: 30), ...</td></tr><tr><td>Adjunct</td><td>Author name(s) locate(s) in a prepositional phrase or subordinate clause. e.g., For students of French, the textsn extract from Albert Camus&#x27;s novel L Peste (1947) and a newspaper article n eltroni bok ..</td></tr><tr><td>In Noun Phrase</td><td>(prepositional phrase); As Smith (1990) suggests, the complexity was derived from .. (subordinate clause). Author names are a part of a noun phrase and presented with possessive or agentive constructions</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>e.g., Smith&#x27;s (1990) argument was supportd by . (posessive); The argument made by Smith (1990) was supported by . (agentive) Author name(s) in other positions e.g., In comparison to Oxford (1990), the author argues that ...</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Functional typology.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Functions</td><td>Definition and Examples</td></tr><tr><td>Identifying related works</td><td>Providing views, examples, explanations, further references, or background information of a topic. e.g., .. for a full-length study of this transatlantic contrast in environmental thought, see Hall (2005)].</td></tr><tr><td>Making comparison and contrast</td><td>e.g., Our findings are bolstered by, and dovetail nicely with, recent promising research by Pardos (2011) that tests .. Providing comparisons among studies. e.g., This finding is consistent with the result in Lusardi and Mitchll (2007) that more financial literacy leads to better financidl outcomes.</td></tr><tr><td>Using cited works.</td><td>e.g., These results are once again analogous to those of Van Petten and Kutas (1991), who reported ... Identifying the source of a method, approach, or theory adopted by the citing research. e.g., Resuls from tes of the first path, based on predictions from i-deals theory (Rouseau, 2005), indicate that telecommuting&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>Extending cited works.</td><td>effects are positive overall. e.g., Measured using Coh-Metrix (McNamara et al. 2005) ... Extending upon an existing method, approach, or theory. e.g., In this study, we used a modified theory of social learning (Bandura 1971) to guide empirical analysis.</td></tr></table></body></html>

The researcher independently coded the part-genres, in-text citations, and surface forms, since the categories are clearly defined and easily rcognizable through textual evidence. The denotative and evaluative meanings of the reporting vers and the functions of citations were coded by asecond rater who isa Ph.D.candidate in Applied Linguistcs and has conducted corpus- and discourse-based writing research. The categorization frameworks were explained to the second rater with examples, and the second rater independently coded one article from each of the six disciplines (i.e., six articles in total and $2 0 \%$ of the corpus). The interrater reliability was measured as high for the denotative (Cohen's Kappa coefficient .90) and evaluativecategorizations (Cohen's Kappa .81) f reporting verbs and high for citatios functions (Cohen's Kappa 84), ollowing Landis and Koch's (1977) criteria. l coding discrepancies were resolved through discussion.

Table 4 Frequency of citations.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Disciplines</td><td>Average per RA</td><td>Per 1000 words</td></tr><tr><td>This Study</td><td>Social Science</td><td>86.0</td><td>8.5</td></tr><tr><td>Hyland (1999)</td><td>Applied Linguistics</td><td>75.3</td><td>10.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Philosophy</td><td>85.2</td><td>10.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Sociology</td><td>104.0</td><td>12.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Electrical Engineering</td><td>42.8</td><td>8.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Mechanical Engineering</td><td>27.5</td><td>7.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Physics</td><td>24.8</td><td>7.4</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. Hyland's (1999) study included more disciplines than presented here.

# 3. Results

# 3.1. Form-based analysis

# 3.1.1. The frequency and density of citations

Table 4 indicates the prevalence of citations in social science article. While the density of citations slightly differ from articles in the three ocial science and humanities disciplines in Hyland's (199) study, the overall trend is consistent: softdisciplines (terminologies drawn from Becher (1989) tend to contain more ctations than hard science disciplines (e.g., physics and engineering) Such distinction potentially reflects the nature of arment btween soft cience and hard science disciplines (Hyland, 2004). Without direct evidence to support or negate an argument, sof sciences and humanities tend to strengthen the persuasiveness of argument through analyzing and synthesizing information from credible works, but hard science disciplines make arguments based on presenting rationales, procedures, and experimental data of the research. To this end, soft science disciplines tend to rely more heavily on inter. textual interactions, whil hard science disciplines are more oriented toward presenting the research, which i likely the reason why more citations are identified in soft disciplines.

Table 5 below presents the density of citations by part-genres. In social science RAs, the most common location for citations to occur is Introduction, followed by Discussion. Method and Results are rare locations to find cited works. This ranking of citation density across part-genres aligns with previous studies (e.g., Hu et al. (2013) on Informetric RAs; Kuo et al. (2011) on Applied Linguistic RA; Thompson and Tribble (2001) on Agricultural theses). In specific, Kuo et al. (2011) also found the highest citation density in Introduction sections and the lowest in Results.

The distinctions in citation density can be atributed to the rhetorical purposes f each part-genre. The two most common rhetorical moves in Introductions are to establish a research territory and to establish a niche, which demand references to a vast array of literature to create connections to the field, claim limitations of previous works, highlight research gaps, raise questions, or show importance of the study (Swales, 1990). In a similar vein, the communicative needs to compare results with literature, account for results, and indicate advantage of the study in Discsions cal for citations. However, without the critical needs to comprehensively review studies, Discussions carry fewer citations than introduction sections. In comparison, Methods largely focus on the factual description of data, rearch desins, and analytical procedures (Cotos e al., 2017), and the main rhtorical purpose of the section is to present and justify the methodological choices (Lim, 2006). Thus, citations are often used to demonstrate the appropriateness of a research design and strengthen the credibility of the results and the interpretations of the findings. In results sections, while com menting on the results is a common practice, the rhetorical focus f the section leans more toward reporting the findings (Kuo et al., 2011; Yang & Alison, 2003), which leads to the scant use of citations in the section. For these likely reasons, citations are less commonly found in Methods and Results than the more socially oriented sections (i.e., Introductions and Discussions).

# 3.1.2. The surface form of citations

Table 6 below reveals a strong preference for nonintegral citations in RAs as a whole and acros allpart-genres, which indicates writers inclination toward foregrounding the cited propositions rather than the researchers of a cited study. While this pervasivenes of nonintegral citations has also been found in previous studies (e.g., Applied Linguistics in Dobakhti & Zohrabi, 2018; Bology in Swales, 2014; Chemical Engineering in Zaid et al., 2018), Table 6 shows that the deviation between nonintegral and integral itations is larger in Introductions and Results.

Comparing to integral citations in which source authors are specified, nonintegral citations alow writers to use the cited infor. mation more flexibly for various communicative purposes. For instance in Inroductions, writers ofte synthesiz from a wide arra of literature to establish aresearch territory and a niche (wales, 1990). Example (1) below shows that nonintegral citations allow writers to reference studies that support a statement, which then serves as the foundation of the citing reearch. Example (2) exemplifies how writers reference studies in the nonintegral format in gap statements to convince the readers that previous studies are limited, problematic, or unclear in some way, which then motivates the writers' study. On the other hand, integral citations in Introductions often supply more details by summarizing studies or highlighting findings that are important and highly relevant to the citing study (see Examples (3) and (4) which tend to be a es common practice than generalizing from a wide range of studies in the section.

(1) At every stage in the life cycle, health is robustly associated with various markers for socioeconomic status (SEs), such as in. come, educational attainment, and occupational prestige (Smith 1999; Currie 2009; Cutler, Leras-Muney, and Vogl 2012) (Econ_QJE_2016_04_Introduction)   
(2) Although some scholars have advocated for the use of multidimensional theories of race relations like C. Kim's racial triangulation perspective (e.g., Gold 2004; Song 2004; Ng, Lee and Pak 2007; N. Kim 2009), there has ben relatively littl research devoted to a systematic assessment of its applicability to racial attitudes toward Asian Americans. (SC_SF_2013_04_Introduction)   
(3) In seminal work on hypercorrection in sociolinguistics, Labov (1963, 1966) distinguished the phenomenon into two types: statistical and structural ... (AL_SL_2013_01_Introduction)   
(4) In his brilliant essay "Ideas of Nature, Williams (1980) suggested that the Industrial Revolution strengthened an abstract .. (AN_AR_2012_04_Introduction)

Table 5 Density of citations by section.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sections</td><td>Per 10,000 words</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>54.6</td><td>51.9</td></tr><tr><td>Method</td><td>14.3</td><td>13.6</td></tr><tr><td>Results</td><td>6.0</td><td>5.7</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>30.3</td><td>28.8</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 Surface forms of citations.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">RA Total</td><td colspan="2">Introduction</td><td colspan="2">Method</td><td colspan="2">Results</td><td colspan="2">Discussion</td></tr><tr><td>Form</td><td>N</td><td>1</td><td>N</td><td></td><td>N</td><td></td><td>N</td><td>1</td><td>N</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>n</td><td>76.2</td><td>30.9</td><td>43.9</td><td>11.9</td><td>9.1</td><td>5.6</td><td>4.6</td><td>1.5</td><td>18.7</td><td>12.0</td></tr><tr><td>%</td><td>70.5</td><td>29.5</td><td>78.7</td><td>21.3</td><td>61.7</td><td>38.2</td><td>75.5</td><td>24.5</td><td>61.0</td><td>39.0</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. I and  stand for inteal and noninteral itations, respectively. n indicates frequency of occurrence normalized at per 10,0o word.

In Results, nonintegral citations are often presented as a collction of studies that ustify the findings and their interpretations. As shown in example (5), citing multiple studies in a nonintegral format allows writers to make a straightorward comment on the findings without going into a detailed discusion, and these comments are often to persuade readers the credibility of the findings by seeking support from a sufficient range of previous studies. Nonintegral citations also allow writersto make comparisons among studies, wherein writers compare and contrast their findings with results synthesized from multiple studies (see Example (6). n comparison to Discussions which are oriented toward interpretations of the indings, Results are mainly designated for an objective description of findings (Yang & Allison, 2003), and nonintegal citations seem to be a more common choice to make simple remarks about the findings.

(5) The fact that students ignore a substantial proportion of unknown vocabulary during a comprehension task has also been confirmed in other studies on related topics (Fraser 1999; Paribakht and Wesche 1999), where students ignored approximately half the words they identified as unknown. (AL_AL_2016_02_Results)   
(6) Our estimates are also smaller than the positive efects found for some child health and development outcomes in quasi. experimental studies in Canada and Norway, two countries that share many institutional features with Sweden (Milligan and Stabile 2011; Loken, Mogstad, and Wiswall 2012). (Econ_QJE_2016_04_Results)

# 3.1.3. Integral citation subtypes

As shown in Table 7, cite authors' names primarily occurred in subject locations or in noun phrases, with the "author as subject" pattern covering almost half f al inteal citations. Simila pate has been idntified in preious studies (Swales, 2014; hompson & Tribble, 2001), wherein the majorit of integral citations are presented in the verb-controllin format (i., author names as subjects), followed by the naming format (i.e., author name as/within a noun phrase). This preference shows that when cited authors are foregrounded, writers are more likely to assgn the agency to cited authors than nominalizing the cited work (see Examples (7) and (9)).

(7) Cited author as the subject: Griliches and Mairese (1998) noted that Assumption Four places strong implicit rstrictions on .. (Econ_E_2015_5_Method)   
(8) Cited author as the agent: As pointed out by Griliches and Mairesse (1998), a natural extension of the above \*first order condition" approaches involved ... (Econ_E_2015_5_Method)

Examples (7) and (8) present how writers use cited authors as the agent of a research and thereby giving credits to the cited authors. To compare, when writers nominalize the reporting act, author names often appear as a modifier within a noun phrase (see Example (9)), and the cited information, rather than the author, is highlighted in the research.

(9) Cited Author in NP: The other data source often used to measure democratization, Cheibub, Gandhi, and Vreeland's (CGV) dichotomous regime type measure, also ignores autocracy-to-autocracy transitions .. (Ps_BJ_2015_03_Method)

Table 7 Sub-types of integral citations.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Author Names</td><td>Per 10,000 Words</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Subject</td><td>13.2</td><td>42.8</td></tr><tr><td>Agent</td><td>2.7</td><td>8.6</td></tr><tr><td>Adjunct</td><td>3.9</td><td>12.5</td></tr><tr><td>NP</td><td>9.0</td><td>29.1</td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>2.2</td><td>7.2</td></tr></table></body></html>

Additionally, in example (9), writers intend to point out the limitation of the cited research. Instead of foregrounding the authors of the work, writers choose to use author names as a premodifier of a complex noun phrase, which to some extent reduces the sense of direct confrontation provoked by the disagreement while still leaves some attention to the source authors.

Turning to the variations by part-genre, Table 8 below shows that integral citations in Introductions and Discussions prefer having cited authors' names used as the subjects of citing sentences. In Methods and Results, author names are more likely to appear in noun phrases. This distinction indicates that, when writers include author names in the citation in Introductions and Discussions, they are more likely to assgn the agency and credit of a research act to its authors, but in Methods and Results, cited authors tend to be backgrounded to make space for the cited information.

The patterns of cited authors' grammatical locations can be connected to the rhetorical contexts in a part-genre. As shown in example (10), in an inroduction sectin, writers lis several studies in awho finds what format, which allows writersto zoom in to a few directly relevant studies to complement the highly generalized propositions presented in the establishing research territory and niche moves. Smilrl, in adisussion section (example (11), writers addressthe limitation ofther study with a condnsed synthesis firs, and then elaborate the point with an integral-author-as-subject format ciation. As the two part-genres that are more argument based and more abstract, in introduction and discusion sections, positing author names as the subject f a sentence highlights the source of findings and arguments. By clearly presenting the human agents behind a proposition, writers can either distance themselves from a source and moderate ther commitment to the arguments or endorse the cited propositions as eminent works by well-established authors to support their points.

(10) Levav et al. (2010) find that German car buyers customizing an Audi are more likely to rely on defaults after making more complicated decisions; Danziger et al.(2011) find that judges make harsher decisions as the number of cases since a break increases; and Iyengar and Kamenica (2010) find that employees at firms with more investment options in their 401(k) plan allocate more money to bond funds and less money to equity funds. (ECON_RES_2016_02_Introduction)   
(11) Another limitation of our study i that the cofficient alpha for several measures .. did not exceed 0.80, a matter of concern especially for established scales (Lance, Butts & Michels, 2006; Nunnally, 1978). As Lance e al. (2006) highlight, although it is possible to corrct for attenuation when using low reliability measures,it is not a substitute for low-quality measures. (PSY_PERSP_2015_02_Discussion)

In Methods and Results, the writing is oriented around an objective presentation of the data curation processand the findings, and therefore, the role of a source author becomes les relevant than the cited content in these two sections. For example, in sentences 12) and (13), author names help identify the measure and the rearch design, but the emphass s stll on the methodological choice tself rather than its developers. In example (13), despite presented in an integral format of citation, the cited author plays a secondary role than the cited research.

(12) The third measure was Kay and Jost's (2003) eight-item (Cronbach's $\alpha = 0 . 8 8 \mathrm { ^ { \circ } }$ system-justification scale, which measures the. extent to which the American political and economic system is perceived as just. (PSY_Ps_2015_01_Methods)   
(13) The meta-analysis of Duncan, Morris and Rodrigues (2011) was restricted to welfare-to-work experiments and reported an effect size range of 0.04-0.05 for cognitive skills. (Econ_QJE_2016_4_Results)

Table 8 Integral citation sub-types by section.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sections</td><td>Author Names</td><td>Per 100,000 Words</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>Subject</td><td>66.4</td><td>51.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Agent</td><td>8.6</td><td>6.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Adjunct</td><td>12.3</td><td>9.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>NP</td><td>31.2</td><td>23.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Other</td><td>11.9</td><td>9.1</td></tr><tr><td>Method</td><td>Subject</td><td>10.7</td><td>22.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Agent</td><td>8.2</td><td>17.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Adjunct</td><td>8.6</td><td>17.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>NP</td><td>17.2</td><td>35.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Other</td><td>3.7</td><td>7.6</td></tr><tr><td>Results</td><td>Subject</td><td>2.5</td><td>17.7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Agent</td><td>2.0</td><td>14.7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Adjunct</td><td>2.0</td><td>14.7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>NP</td><td>4.9</td><td>35.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Other</td><td>2.5</td><td>17.7</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>Subject</td><td>51.2</td><td>46.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Agent</td><td>8.2</td><td>7.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Adjunct</td><td>13.9</td><td>12.7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>NP</td><td>33.2</td><td>30.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Other</td><td>2.9</td><td>2.6</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.1.4. Reporting verb analysis

Examining research articles as a whole, findings on the denotative meanings of reporting verbs (Table 9) corroborate previous studies in that the majority of rporting verbs are either research or discourse verbs (e.g., Hyland, 199), indicating that writers are more likely to refer to previous studie as research act or arguments rather than thinking processes. Breaking down the reporting verb types by part-genres, Table 10 shows that most reporting verbs ocur in Introductions and Discussions. Introductions and Methods prefer research verbs over discourse or cognition verbs, but Discussions and Results include more discourse verbs than research or cognition verbs.

In Introductions, the preference for research-oriented verbs indicates that when reporting acited study in detail, writers are more likely to foreground the research actions rather than the ideas or arguments proposed by the cited authors, llowing the methodology of the cite research to be reviewed without an explict ealuative stance. As shown in sentence (14), writers review a previous work by demonstrating how an analytical tool was used for certain research goal. The research-based reporting verb allows writers to review the research design of the cited work in a stance-free manner.

(14) Using the metaphor of drama as an analytic tool, sociologist Erving Goffman (1959) studied people in various settings as they attempted to create mutually satisfactory interactions in fulfllment of specific personal and organizational goals .. (SC_SP_2014_02_Introduction)

Similar patterns are found in method sections. The dominance of research-oriented reporting verbs shows that, when citing an external work in Methods, writers care more about the procedures, materials, or tols developed or adopted by the cited research, rather than it indings or results. In example (15), the "'seven-item scale" mentioned in the method section is cited as a measurement developed by previous researchers, and this citation allows writers to identify the source of their methodological choice. Ultimately, the research-oriented verbs enable writers t focus more on what the cited authors did than what they argued, which, in Introductions, allows writers to recount the research processof a previos study, and in Methods, reveals the methodological design sourced to a cited study.

(15) Because of the study's focus on managers' provision of resources to employees s a basis for social exchange, we measured LMX from the supervisor's perspective using a seven-item scale developed by Graen and Uhl-Bien (1995). (PSY_PERSP_2015_02_Method)

In contrast,dicourseoriented vers are preferred over research or cogntion verbs in Reults and Discussions. This pattn suggests that, when framed with reporting verbs, citations in these two sections tend to focus on the interpretations and arguments made by previous scholars rather than ther rarch deins, reflecting writr neds t interpret, justify, or compar findings using citations in results and discussion sections (Yang & Allson, 2003). For example, sentences (16) and (17) exemplify how writers use discourse-based reporting verbs to present arguments made by other scholars. Using discourse-oriented reporting verbs, the cited propositions allow writers to offer explanations or advise cautious interpretations of the findings.

(16) Andersen and Ross point out that a wave of oil industry nationalizations in the 1960s and 1970s may have changed the way oil wealth influences political development in autocracies by vastly increasing the revenues they could use. (PS_BJ_2015_03_Results)   
(17) Jansen (2015) argues that, besides attempting to evade the state, its grids and its gaze, people also yearn for certainty and predictability that the state can provide. (AN_SA_2015_02_Discussion)

Regarding the evaluative denotations of reporting verbs, Table 11 illstrates that, in a whole-article dimension, most reporting verbs are non-factive, which means rather than explicitly judging the factual status of acited work, it is more common for writers to ascribe cited authors an evaluatie role, and his evaluation ofe leans more toward neutral, if not positive stances. This pater aligns with Hyland's (1999 findings in that writers are more likely to indirectl assign attitudes t the cited works using non-factive verbs rather than directly incorporate their judgments into the cited research with factive or counter-factive verbs.

Table 12 below shows the variation of evaluative meanings carried by reporting verbs in IMRD sections. In Introductions, most reporting vers are either factive or ascribe a non-factive neutral view to the ited authors. This pattern shows that, when summarizing cited rearch in detail, witer are more likely to endorse or acknowledge the ited propositions rather than discaming (i.e, counterfactive or critical) or moderating the trength of acited clam (i., tentative). Situating such pattern in rhetorical contexts, sentence (18) reveals how factive reporting verbs allow writers to endorse findings of cited works and thereby pointing to a research gap: Following an evaluative judgment on the mechanisms shared by some experiments, the results of these experiments are cited as truthful with the factual reorting verbs. The contradictory indings in thestruthful studies elaborates and justifies writers arument that the conclusions of the studie are "ambiguous." With the help of citations, this argument plays a crucial role to highlight the gap in the establish a niche move (Swales, 1990).

Table 9 Denotation of reporting verbs.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Type</td><td>Per 10,000 Words</td><td>%</td><td>Most Frequent Forms</td></tr><tr><td> Research</td><td>7.1</td><td>53.3</td><td>show, examine, report.</td></tr><tr><td>Cognition</td><td>0.4</td><td>3.1</td><td>propose, view, recognize</td></tr><tr><td>Discourse</td><td>5.8</td><td>43.6</td><td>suggest, note, argue</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 10 Denotation of reporting verbs by section.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sections</td><td>Research</td><td>Cognition</td><td>Discourse</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>43.0</td><td>1.6</td><td>26.2</td><td>70.9</td></tr><tr><td>Method</td><td>7.4</td><td>0</td><td>1.6</td><td>9.0</td></tr><tr><td>Results</td><td>1.2</td><td>0</td><td>2.9</td><td>4.1</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>22.1</td><td>2.5</td><td>27.9</td><td>52.5</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. Numbers indicate frequencies normalized at per 100,o00 words.

Table 11 Evaluation of reporting verbs.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Types</td><td></td><td>Per 100,000 Words</td><td>Examples</td></tr><tr><td>Factive</td><td></td><td>36.9</td><td>Guth et al. (2o07) report that installing a leader leads to significantly higher levels ... (PS_JC_2013_01_Introduction)</td></tr><tr><td>Counter-Factivee</td><td></td><td>0.4</td><td>Ruddiman (2003, 2005) countered that humans, in fact, began to affect global atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations ... (AN_AR_2012_04_Discussion)</td></tr><tr><td>Non-Factive</td><td>Positive</td><td>32.4</td><td>Although some scholars have advocated for the use of multidimensional theories of race relations. ..</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Neutral</td><td>41.4</td><td>(SC_SF_2013_04_Introduction) In Asylums, Goffman (1962) discusses the regulation of behavior through role .. (SC_SP_2013_02_ Introduction)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Tentativee</td><td>23.8</td><td>Farrell and Fuchs (1982) proposed this as the primary explanation for the observed association ... (SC_Ss_2014_01_Introduction)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Critical</td><td>1.6</td><td>Iyengar and Lepper (2o00) spearheaded the literature in choice overload, finding that reductions in ... (Econ_RES_2016_02_Introduction)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 12 Evaluation of reporting verbs by section.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Type</td><td>Factive</td><td>Counter-Factive</td><td colspan="4">Non-Factive</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>NF-positive</td><td>NF-neutral</td><td>NF-tentative</td><td>NF-critical</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>23.4</td><td>0</td><td>16.0</td><td>21.3</td><td>9.8</td><td>0.4</td></tr><tr><td>Method</td><td>3.3</td><td>0</td><td>2.9</td><td>2.9</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.0</td></tr><tr><td>Results</td><td>0.8</td><td>0</td><td>1.6</td><td>1.2</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.0</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>9.4</td><td>0.4</td><td>11.9</td><td>16.0</td><td>13.5</td><td>1.2</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. Numbers indicate frequencies normalized at per 100,o00 words.

(18) Conclusions from these experiments are somewhat ambiguous. For instance, Guth et al. (2007) report that installing a leader leads to significantly higher levels of cooperation (which we will cll the leadership efect) in a public good game, whereas Gachter and Renner (2003) find no significant diffrence between treatments with and without a lead. (PS_JC_2013_O1_Introduction)

The pattern slightly differs in Discussions, where writers include a variety of stances instead of simply acknowledging the cited propositions. The distinct evaluative meanings carried by reporting verbs could be connected to the manifold communicative goals writers can convey in discussion sections. For example, by ascriing the source authors a positive view, writers in example (19) use the cited proposition as acondition to understand their findings. In examples (20) and (21) neutral and tentative views areassigned to the source authors. Whilethe cited arguments are both used to justify the results, more certainty comes with the proposition made in (20) than in (21), allowing writers to use cited propositions with different levels of commitment.

(19) If we believe that such intitutions take time to develop, as Andersen and Ross have argued, and are characterized by substantial inertia, we would not expect institutional changes in short time periods. (NF-Positive; PS_BJ_2015_03_Discussion)   
(20) As Vetters (2014) indicates, clientelism in BiH was a mode ofrelating to the state that reflected such a desire . (NF-Neutral; AN_SA_2015_02_Discussion)   
(21) Contemporary research also suggests that people may legitimize ther actions spontaneously (Shu & Gino, 2012). (NF-Tentative; PSY_PS_2015_01_Discussion)

In Methods and Results, reporting verbs areseldomly used, as these two sections concentrate more on describing methodology and presenting findings, and therefore, very few citations are presented in the reporting structure. In the few occasions where reporting verbs are resent, writers use cited works to justify their methodological choices (as in (22) or explain the findings (see Example (23), both assigning a neutral to positive view to the source authors.

(22) As pointed out by Griliches and Mairess (1998), a natural extension of the above \*firs order condition" approaches involves using input prices as ... (EcON_E_2015_05_Methods) (23) Our answers to these questions are inspired by Radner (1986), who shows that .. (Econ_AER_2012_1_ Results)

# 3.2. Function-based analysis

The function-based analysis (see Table 13) shows that, at a whole-article level, most citations are used to identify related works followed by compare and contrast with cited works. On the other hand, the important citations (i.e., \*using the cited work" and "extending the cited work") account for less than $^ { 1 5 \% }$ of the citation functions, which resonates with Valenzuela et al.'s (2015) findings on computational linguistics papers.

Taking the rhetorical stages of an article into consideration, Table 14 shows that itations used for identifying related works most frequently occur in Introductions (e.g., example (24) in Table 13), which aligns with the goal of presenting relevant literature in Introductions. Citations that are used to make comparison and contrast are most likely to occur in Discussions (e., example (25) but are also frequently used in Introductions. As a common place for comparing research findings, the communicative purposes of Dis. cussions tightly connect with the functions that citations serve in the section. For source works that are used by the citing research, Methods are the most common location (see Example (26), since works cited in thsection are most likely related to the materials tools, or theoretical frameworks used in the citing research. Regarding previous works that are extended by the citing research, the most common location is Introductions (ee Example (27), followed by Discussions. To be classfied into this functional category, citations often contain words that specify how the citing study is extended upon the referenced works, which likely suggests that the cited works pave the way for the citing research. Thus citations with the "extending' function are more likely to be found in Introductions to be connected with the rationale of the research, or in Discussions to account for the findings.

Regarding the form-function connections, both integral and nonintegral citations are found to perform the four citation functions. However, for citations that ser importan functions to the citing rearch, writers are more likely to choose nonintral citations with cited authors excluded from the citing sentence. That is, when acited work is used or being extended by the citing research, writers tend to emphasize the cited information over the authors behind the cited source. Examples (28) and (29) ilustrate how the writers identified the important citations in nonintegral format.

(28) In this study, we used a modified theory of social learning (Bandura 1971) to guide empirical analysis. (SC_JS_2015_02_Introduction)   
(29) First, I describe age trajectories of smoking intiation using a discrete-time hazard model estimated with a logistic regression (Allison, 1984). (SC_SS_2014_01_Method)

Since citations that carry important functions are those that the citing research uses or is extended upon, writers are more likel to perform research actions with the cited information. Thus, reporting structures are rarely seen in these citations. When source authors are explicitly mentioned, their names are likelyto be backgrounded in noun phrases (see Example (30) and (31), showing the weight writers assigned to the cited procedures and models that are important to their study.

Table 13 Functions of citations.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Functions</td><td>n</td><td>%</td><td>Examples</td><td>Frequently Occurring Linguistic Cues</td></tr><tr><td>Related</td><td>77.2</td><td>74.0</td><td>(24) The goal is not to ., but rather to derive equations (3-4) of the text and to tighten connections to the theoretical work of Simon and Stinchcombe (1989) and Radner (1986). (Econ_AER_2012_1_Results)</td><td>see, for example, related to, in. relation to, connect</td></tr><tr><td>Comparing</td><td>12.7</td><td>12.2</td><td>(25) This finding is consistent with the theoretical notion that .., but is less critical where electoral forms of sanctioning political leaders are available (see Hollyer, Rosendorff, and Vreeland 2013a). (PS_PA_2014_04_Discussion)</td><td>compare, similar, consistent, align, in line with</td></tr><tr><td>Using</td><td>9.2</td><td>8.8</td><td>(26) Seven items were drawn from the American National Election Studies (2008) .. (PSY- PS_2015_01_Methods)</td><td>use, adopt, follow, draw from, based on</td></tr><tr><td>Extending</td><td>5.1</td><td>4.9</td><td>(27) To examine telecommuting&#x27;s potential influence on ..., we draw together theorizing about idiosyncratic deals (i-deals; Rousseau, 2005) with insights from the job demands-resources (JD-R) model (Bakker &amp; Demerouti, 2007; Demerouti, Bakker, Nachreiner, &amp; Schaufeli, 2001) and the social information processing model (Salancik &amp; Pfeffer, 1978) to build our theoretical framework. (PSY_PERSP_2015_02_Introduction)</td><td>extend, modify, develop from,. build upon, inspired by</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. n indicates frequency of occurrence normalized at per 10,o00 words.

Table 14 Citation functions by section.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Incidental</td><td colspan="2">Important</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Related</td><td>Comparing</td><td>Using</td><td>Extending</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>46.0</td><td>4.2</td><td>1.9</td><td>1.9</td></tr><tr><td>Method</td><td>8.3</td><td>1.5</td><td>4.5</td><td>0.7</td></tr><tr><td>Results</td><td>3.7</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.7</td><td>0.4</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>18.0</td><td>5.5</td><td>0.9</td><td>1.3</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. Numbers indicate frequencies normalized at per 10,o00 words.

(30) Examination of the conditional indirect ffects using Edward and Lambert's (2007) analytic procedures at low and high levels of telecommuting normativeness sheds more light on the nature of this first-stage interactive effect (see Table 7. (PSY_PERSP_2015_02_Results)   
(31) We compared the proposed dynamic mediation model with two methods: the stationary multilevel mediation model given by Equations (1)-(4) and the exponential decay mediation model proposed by Fritz (2014). (PSY PM_2016_03_Results)

# 4. Discussions and conclusions

Overall, the analysis shows shared patterns of citations acros the part-geres and substantial cross-sectional variations. The form based analysis reveals a strong preference for nonintegral over integral citations in RAs as a whole and across al part-genres, which aligns with the findings of RAs in other soft and hard science disciplines (e.g., Dobakhti & Zohrabi, 2018; Swales, 2014; Zaid et al., 2018). The rporting verb analys shows a preferece for neutral and positive stances ascribed to the cited authors and reflects writers inclinations toward withholding judgments on the factual status of the cited work. The function-based analysis reveals that most citations are chosen to identif related works acros al part-genres. The dominance of related works ilustrates the foundational feature of citational practice in academic writings, that is, to draw intertextual links with established works in the field.

Considerable variations are identified across the four part-genres. As a socially oriented section that creates the value of the research by showing is connctions to the field, Intoductions hevily rely oncittions to creat reearh contex, ientif gaps inthe literature, and therey motivate the study. These communicative needs necesstate the strong preferences for citations that identify related works and are presented in the nonintegral format. Comparing with integral citations wherein author names take a grammatical part in the sentence, nonintegral citations allow writer to foreground the cited information and blend the useful information taken from various sources with their own style and purpose of writing. This way, using statements synthesized in nonintegral citations, writers introduce a promising research area and highlight gaps in previous works. Although integral citations are les commonly seen in Introductions, writers do rely on integral citations with a reporting structure (i.e., X did Y and found Z) to recount the methodology and findings of studies that are closely related to their work, which often complements the condensed generalizations presented in nonintegral citations. To this end, citations in Introductions ofen feature source authors functioning as the subject and factive and research-oriented reporting verbs functioning as the main verb.

The main rhetorical purpose of Methods is to provide an objective description of the data, the research design, and the analytical framework; thus, the writing largely focus on the citing study itelf rather than the intertextual conections. When citations are used they often appear in the nonintegral format to contextualize, identify, and justify the methodological decisions writers made, which could explain why cited works that are being used or extended upon are most likely to be found in Methods. In the rare ocasions where integal citations are used, names of the source authors are likely to be presented in a noun phrase, which allows writers t foreground both the methodological frameworks and their developers. When framed in a reporting structure, the reporting verbs are often research-oriented and carr ositive or neutral stance, which resonates with writers goalsto use minent works to justify their choice of method.

Similar to Methods, the rhetorical purposes of Results also tend tobe more factual than social. In Results, writers primary goal is to present an objective exposition of the findings, but simple comments on the results are also common. Accordingly, citations are often used as synthesized information presented in nonintegral format to explain, justify, and compare the findings. In the few cases where integral citations are used, author names tend to be part of a noun phrase, and the emphasis is sill on the research rather than the uthors. In the eve rarr ces whre orting structure s idtfied, th ctation is ofen used  support writrs interprettions of the findings, and therefore, the reporting verb is likely to be discourse-based with a neutral or positive view assgned to the source authors.

Finally, when writers wrap up an article with a comprehensive iscussion of results, nonintegral itations are the preferred choice as they allow writers to draw upon a range of literature to make interpretations and external comparisons of the findings and highligt and explain discreancies in the findings. These rhetorical needs callfor ctations that serve to "compare and contrast' in Discussions. When authors of the cited propositions are made explicit with integral citations, they are often highlighted in a subject position, which gives writers the option to distance from the source authors arguments to protect themselve from the potential flaws of the cited work. In other situations, the "athors' name as subject"structure allows writrsto identify renown scholars important works, which lend strong support to the writers interpretations of the finding. Due to the argument-based nature of the section, reorting vers tend to be discourse-oriented, and for various evaluative purposes, writers are found to assgn positive, neutral, or tentative stances to the cited propositions.

The implication of this study is largely pedagogical. The itation analysis by part-genres presents a clear picture of how citation patterns vary in rhetorical contexts t serve the communicative purposes f RA sections, however, many EAP textboos do not situate citations within their rhetorical contexts. Pedagogical materials that are sensitive to the rhetorical ontexts could help raise students awarenes of the connections among th forms and functions of citations and their discourse contexts and build stronger arguments in their academic writing. Second, although the identified patterns in this study may be discipline-specific, a close examination of RAs in the target discipline could familiarize students with the prefernces of cition forms and functions across part-genres in their fields f study. As Clugston (2008) and Cofin (2009) stated, students, as novice writers, are often more concerned about varying their ex. pressions to earn scores or avoid plagarism; however, it i also important for novice writers to be aware of the writing style of their discourse community and signal their engagement in the community. By examining the surface forms, reporting verbs, and functions of citations in research articles, this study provides a citation profile' that characterizes the citational features of RAs in the social science domain, which could be used to diagnose novice writers' weakness in citational practice, such as the overuse or underuse of certain forms or functions. Findings in this study inform the design of pedagogical materials that help raise the genre-specific "rhetorical consciousness" (Dobakhti & Zohrabi, 2018, p. 215) to ESL students and novice writers.

In conclusion, this study draws the connection between the variations of citation forms and functions and the rhetorical purposes of research article part-genres. While the study examines a particular genre (i.., published rearch artice) in one particular domain (i. e., six social science disciline) findings are likely to be relevant to all reearch article writigs, and the analytical framework in this study could be applied to articles in other disciplines to compare and contrast the citation paterns. Ultimately, indings from this line of research could enrich our understanding of academic research writing and contribute to the design of materials for EAP instruction.

# Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

# Author statement

Genggeng Zhang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Data Curation, Formal Analysis, Writing - Original Draft, Writing Review & Editing.

# Acknowledgement

I would like to thank Dr. Xiaofei Lu and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on the earlier versions of this paper. All errors are mine.

# References

Becher, A. (1989). Academic tribes and territories. Milton Keynes, UK: Open University Press.   
Cai , ia   J,    ,    01     n .ri, 182) 453-478. of English for Academic Purposes, 52, 100996.   
Char   3) 310-331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2005.05.003   
Char   .0.93 applin/aml021   
Clugston, M. F. (2008). An analysis of citation forms in health science journals. Journdl of Academic Language and Leaning, 2(1), A11-A2   
Coffin, c. . (2009. ting ad tin v   im st thi. g  y, (2, 163-193./.og/.1/.1i2.163   
tos  mn  in . 017 moe/t mdl or t cii rir an crt. gish r ic e, 46, 90-106.   
bakt a8 f  n tf  d gsh 2, 215-236.   
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change (Vol. 10). Cambridge: Polity press. doi.org/10.1016/j.pragma.2008.06.001 10.2307/3586633 7(4), 887-896. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2013.08.005   
Hu G.  0 ich   4/ org/10.1016/j.jeap.2013.11.001   
Hyland  (19. i ion a th iof i  ld nic, 203 341-6. /i.10.1093 applin/20.3.3411   
Hyland, K. (2002). Activity and evaluation: Reporting practices in academic writing (pp. 115-130). Academic discourse.   
Hyland, K. (2004). Disciplinary discourses, Michigan classcs. In Social ineractions in academic writing. Universty of Michigan Press. applied linguistics. International Journal of Applie Linguisics 22(1), 23-41. https://doi.org/10.111/j.1473-4192.2011.00291.x   
Kuo, C. W. Chg, .W. & o . H. (2011). ions in h ticl tions Intg fs and futios.  ol of 0l, 1), 67-94.   
Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data (pp. 159-174). Biometrics.   
Lm . 0       m tie .s  i e 3 82309   
Lu,  o  e,018 -m ist o s   ie ti.  of sh for  e, 36, 76-85.   
Mare,   f     i. f Language Writing, 14(3), 174-190.   
Parkinson, J.(01). The Disson secion a arument: The language used to prove knowedge clams. Egish for Spcic poses 303), 164-175.   
Pei, . 200. l fti cii hig- a - ters t.  of ish c P, 63, 353. /i.g 10.1016/j.jeap.2007.09.002   
Samraj, B. (2002). Introductions in research articles: Variations acros disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 21, 1-17.   
Samraj, B. (2005). An exploration of agere set: Rearch articleintroductions in two disciplines. English for Specific Purposes 24(2), 141-156.   
Samraj, 013.   i cn i sni  ers t  i. f gsh  , (4) 299-310. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2013.09.001   
Sealey, A., & Carter, B. (2004). Applied linguistics as social science. A&C Black.   
Smith, L. C. (1981). Citation analysis. Library Trends, 30(1), 83-106.   
Swales, J. (1986). Citation analysis and discourse analysis. Applied Linguistics, 7(1), 39-56. htps:/doi.org/10.1093/applin/7.1.39   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge University Press.   
wales, J..014).i citto prctic sf d  er m il pokin  sttlgren Communication, 31(1), 118-141. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741088313515166   
Swales, J.M ak, .. 2004).  ing o    s an kis (ol. 1.  ror, : rt f Mh Pre.   
Tmpson1lf  ti    er.g, U University of Reading.   
Thompson, , ible,C. (200) oing at citins: sin rra in English for amc puro. Lge, ng nd Tcgy, 53), 9105.   
hompson, .,  . (191). n n the ing ve u n a pr.  sic (4, 6532. /.g/1093/api 12.4.365   
Valenzuela, M., Ha, V., & Etzioni, O. (2015). Identifying meaningful citations. In AAAI workshop: Scholarly big data (Vol. 15, p. 13).   
White, H. D. (2004). Cittion analysis and dicoure anlysis revisited. Aplild Lingusics, 25(1), 89-116. htp://doi.rg/10.1093/alin/25.1.89   
Yng, R lio 003h i n e sti:g rs  sn. ish or iic , (4, 365-385.   
Zaid, Y.H hms, .,  ai, H. 018) p ciions in chl ig ii.  Il l, 41) //.g 10.11113/lspi.v4n1.46