# Academic oral communication needs of East Asian international graduate students in non-science and non-engineering fields

Soonhyang Kim

260 Younkin Success Center, 1640 Neil Avenue, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43201-2333, United States

# Abstract

East Asian students, the largest international student group in US higher education, are as a group typically known to be silent or reticent in class. This survey examined views of East Asian international graduate students concerning required academic listening and speaking skill levels in their university courses, their own difficulties in meeting these expectations, and their suggestions as to the ways in which English for Academic Purposes (EAP) teachers might better prepare them through listening and speaking activities. Students reported that, in their graduate courses, the three most common academic oral classroom activities were participating in whole-class discussions, raising questions during class, and engaging in small-group discussions. They were most concerned about leading class discussions and participating in whole-class discussions. They considered formal oral presentations and listening comprehension the most important skills for academic success in graduate courses, and pronunciation of English and note-taking skills the least important. Several important issues and specific pedagogical suggestions for EAP instructions, curriculum planning and material development emerged from the current study.

$©$ 2005 The American University. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: English as a second language; East Asian students; English for academic purposes; Academic listening; Academic speaking; Oral classroom participation

# Introduction

To achieve academic success, it is most important for students in higher education in English-speaking countries to have a good command of English in general and of the discourse of their individual disciplines in particular (Ferris, 1998; Less, 2003). Many international ESL students in university content classrooms in English-speaking countries report feelings of inadequacy and frustration while participating in oral classroom activities such as whole-class discussions and formal oral presentations (Leki, 2001; Liu, 2001; Morita, 2002, 2004). However, in spite of ESL students- concerns and the difficulties they face in university content classrooms, little research has been devoted to the experiences of matriculated ESL students beyond the language classroom (Liu, 2001). We, as English for Academic Purposes (EAP) professionals, need to expand the scope of our research and consider our educational responsibility to matriculated ESL students as they enter content classrooms in order to assist their smooth transition from general English language learners to subject-specific English users (Leki, 2001; Murphy, Mendelsohn, Folse, & Goodwin, 2005; Ostler, 1980).

Most previous studies of ESL students have focused heavily on writing, without paying much attention to speaking (e.g., Ferris, 1998; Ferris & Tagg, 1996a, 1996b; Morita, 2002, 2004). The importance of active oral participation in US higher education has increased with the shift in university practice in the early 1980s from a lecture format to an interactive discussion format (Lucas & Murray, 2002; Mason, 1994; Meyers & Jones, 1993). We need to direct our efforts toward conducting more research on academic oral communication skills, in order to meet the academic listening and speaking needs of ESL students in regular university classrooms.

East Asian students, the largest international student group in US higher education, are as a group typically known to be silent or reticent in class. The current research seeks to examine both East Asian international graduate students- (hereafter, EAGS) perceptions of the required skill levels for academic oral communication in their graduate courses and of their own difficulties in meeting these expectations. It will also explore their suggestions for EAP teaching practices that they believe would better furnish them with academic oral communication speaking skills required in content classes. It is important to examine students- own perspectives and experiences and to incorporate their views into the development of the EAP curriculum because ‘‘instructors do not always know with what tasks their students are struggling, and, importantly, why they are having difficulties’’ (Ferris, 1998, p. 292–293) and ‘‘the students themselves are the best sources of information on their own difficulties’’ (p. 312).

# 1. Background

Several survey studies have been conducted to identify listening- and speaking-related classroom activities faced by university ESL students and the relative importance of those tasks to their academic success.

# 1.1. Survey of academic listening/speaking tasks: teachers- view

Ferris and Tagg (1996b) provided teachers- perspectives on listening and speaking skills required in university classrooms. They surveyed over 900 professors at various institutions and across academic disciplines to identify mainstream university instructors- listening/speaking skills expectations of college/university students in university content classrooms. The study indicated that US university classrooms have tended to become less formal and more interactive, but that instructors- requirements varied across academic disciplines, types of institutions, class level, and class size. In Ferris and Tagg-s subsequent article (1996a), which dealt with the same survey, content-area professors reported that ESL students- inability or unwillingness to participate in class discussions and to ask or respond to questions were the main problems of ESL students in university classrooms. The professors advised ESL teachers to provide content-based instruction, make ESL students aware of the importance of classroom interactions, and teach effective communication skills.

# 1.2. Survey of academic listening/speaking tasks: ESL students- view

Ferris (1998) and Ostler (1980) examined university ESL students- own views of required listening/speaking skills and their perceptions of the importance of academic oral communication skills. Ferris (1998) examined the views of 768 ESL students, primarily undergraduate immigrant students, at three different higher education institutions in various contexts. The ESL students- responses varied considerably across different contexts, but in general, ESL students were most concerned with oral presentations, wholeclass discussions, and note-taking, and they perceived little difficulty with small-group discussions.

According to Ostler-s (1980) survey of advanced ESL students at one university, while ESL students showed confidence in using formulaic English for casual daily conversation, they felt that they did not have enough listening/speaking proficiency to be able to communicate effectively in an academic setting, such as communicating with professors and classmates.

# 2. Research questions

The current survey project regarding listening/speaking tasks in content courses was guided by three research questions adapted from Ferris (1998).

1. What are East Asian international graduate students- perceptions of the listening/ speaking skill requirements for their university courses?   
2. What are East Asian international graduate students- own descriptions of their difficulties in meeting these expectations?   
3. What specific listening/speaking skills do East Asian international graduate students identify as important to their academic success?

# 3. Method

# 3.1. Context and survey participants

The research participants were restricted to EAGS in non-science and non-engineering disciplines, such as arts and humanities, social and behavioral sciences, business, and education, at a major US research-oriented university. The study is limited to these academic disciplines because non-science and non-engineering fields usually require more oral classroom participation and thus may require more advanced English listening and speaking skills (Ferris, 1998; Ferris & Tagg, 1996a, 1996b). Survey respondents were exclusively international students from East Asia, specifically from China, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. They are, as a group, typically perceived by instructors as reticent in class (Cheng, 2000; Liu & Littlewood, 1997; Robinson, 2005). They are also the largest international student group in US higher education. Graduate students were surveyed because academic oral communication needs are significant at the graduate level in multiple contexts: in the classroom, in teaching, and in giving conference presentations (Johns, 1981; Mason, 1994; Morita, 2002).

# 3.2. Survey development and administration

The present survey asked about: (1) EAGS- own views on academic listening and speaking activities required and expected by instructors in academic settings; (2) their own difficulties in meeting those requirements/expectations; and (3) their perceptions of academic listening and speaking skills needed to succeed in graduate courses.

The office of the registrar at the institution was contacted and asked to provide a list of international students. A web-format questionnaire was sent out to all 280 EAGS in the selected disciplines at the university using the Zoomerang survey tool. Reminders were sent out three times to non-respondents. A $2 5 \%$ response rate was achieved, with 70 usable surveys.

Sixty-three percent of the respondents were doctoral students, $65 \%$ were female, and $3 5 \%$ were male. The average age of the respondents was 29. The average length of their residence in the US was 3 years, and they had been learning English for an average of 13 years. The respondents came from China $( 4 6 \% )$ , Korea $( 2 9 \% )$ , Taiwan $( 1 5 \% )$ , and Japan $( 1 0 \% )$ . The largest L1 group represented was Chinese $( 6 1 \% )$ , followed by Korean $( 2 9 \% )$ and Japanese $( 1 0 \% )$ .

Because the response rate was fairly low, it should be emphasized that the results of this study do not reflect the opinions of all EAGS in the academic departments surveyed. Since the survey was rather long, it is likely that the respondents were primarily those who had strong interest in academic listening/speaking tasks and may thus not be representative of all EAGS.

# 3.3. Data analysis

The statistical software package SPSS for Windows (Version 12.5) was used for all data analysis. Information from the survey was coded for statistical analyses, downloaded into a database, and analyzed. Statistical procedures employed include descriptive statistics for the various items on the survey to examine overall frequencies (totals, percentages, means, and standard deviations). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied to examine whether there were significant mean differences across different demographic factors such as academic disciplines, academic level, gender, country of origin, age, duration in the US, and language proficiency.

# 4. Results and discussion

# 4.1. Expected academic listening/speaking skills in graduate courses

The survey asked EAGS about expectations and requirements of academic listening/ speaking skills by university instructors in their selected graduate courses. The overall frequencies in response to these items indicate that approximately $80 \%$ of respondents felt strong listening skills were always or frequently required by their instructors. Over $78 \%$ reported that they were always or frequently expected to participate in whole-class discussions. Participating in small-group discussions and raising questions during class were also reported as commonly-required classroom activities in graduate courses, with $6 9 \%$ of respondents reporting that students were always or frequently required to discuss class reading materials or to participate in activities in small-groups during class time and $65 \%$ claiming that students were always or frequently expected to ask instructors questions during class. Student-led discussions were reported as rarely used: $69 \%$ of respondents reported that students were never, rarely, or sometimes expected to lead class discussions or activities in class $32 \%$ never or rarely and $3 7 \%$ sometimes). There were no significant mean differences by academic disciplines and academic level. However, when participation is graded, more oral engagement tends to be required by instructors.

In contrast to frequent use of in-class activities, students were not frequently required to interact with classmates or non-classmates outside of class to complete a course requirement. Over $58 \%$ of respondents said that students were never, rarely, or sometimes required to work with other classmates outside of class to complete group projects $41 \%$ never or rarely and $1 6 \%$ sometimes). Students were also rarely asked to complete out-of-class assignments which required talking with non-classmate, native English speakers $58 \%$ never or rarely and $1 6 \%$ sometimes). As Ferris and Tagg (1996a) found in their study, these findings indicate that university ESL students are not given many opportunities related to course work to interact with native English speakers beyond the classroom.

EAGS perceived that their instructors expected them to have strong listening skills. The results may indicate that graduate students are expected to have strong listening skills to understand instructors or classmates and to be able to participate in class discussion.

The finding that note-taking skills are not important contradicted Ferris- (1998) finding. Ferris found that note-taking skills were identified as one of the most essential skills required by teachers. The contradiction may result from different demographic profiles. While the present study surveyed graduate-level students, $7 6 \%$ of Ferris- study respondents were undergraduate ESL students in lower-division or general education courses, which utilize tests heavily dependent upon lecture notes. Another explanation for the disparity in findings may be that the graduate students in the present study believe that they already know how to take notes.

Another discrepancy between Ferris- (1998) findings and that of the present study is of the emphasis on small-group discussions during class. While the current study identified small-group discussions as one of the most frequently required oral classroom tasks, following whole-class discussions, Ferris reported that students were rarely asked to participate in small-group activities. These findings may indicate that graduate-level classes tend to be smaller than undergraduate classes, so it is easier for graduate course instructors to set up discussion in small-groups followed by group reports to the whole class. It may also come from instructors- changing instructional preferences. As US classrooms become informal and more interactive, students are expected to be more actively involved in class discussions (Ferris, 1998; McKeachie, 2002; Meyers & Jones, 1993; Murphy, 2005). This finding may also result from the nature of the question. Whereas Ferris asked respondents to choose any course other than an ESL course, the current study asked students to select any course that requires a significant amount of verbal participation.

# 4.2. ESL students- difficulties with academic listening/speaking tasks in graduate courses

Among listening/speaking-related academic tasks, students reported that they were most concerned about leading class discussions. They reported participating in whole-class discussions as their second most difficult academic listening/speaking task. Participating in small-group discussions was their third most difficult task, followed by giving formal oral presentations. There were no significant mean differences by academic major, academic level, gender, country of origin, and duration of stay in the US. However, age and selfreported language proficiency did affect EAGS- reported difficulties with oral activities; if they were older and their language proficiency was lower, they tended to have more difficulty participating in academic oral activities.

Students reported that they felt less difficulty participating in small-groups than participating in whole-class discussions. Thirty percent of respondents claimed to have difficulty in whole-class discussions, whereas $1 7 \%$ reported having trouble in small-group discussions. On the other hand, out-of-class group work was reported to be less difficult than in-class academic oral classroom activities, with $9 5 \%$ of respondents reporting little difficulty working with other classmates outside of class to complete group projects (never and rarely: $78 \%$ , sometimes: $1 7 \%$ ). This finding is consistent with those for American students in general (McKeachie, 2002), as well as those for ESL students in other studies (Ferris, 1998; Ferris & Tagg, 1996a, 1996b).

Students rarely reported difficulties in asking instructors questions before or after class and in using instructors- office hours. Approximately $80 \%$ of respondents claimed to never or rarely have difficulty in those tasks. Students claimed that asking instructors questions during class was more difficult than asking questions before or after class, with $24 \%$ of respondents reporting that they sometimes or frequently had difficulty asking questions during class, as opposed to $1 1 \%$ reporting that they sometimes felt difficulty asking questions before or after class. These findings suggest that raising questions in front of the whole class is more anxiety-provoking than asking questions outside of class in one-onone situations, such as in office hours.

Interestingly, while $80 \%$ of ESL students in Ferris- (1998) study reported problems with note-taking skills, only $32 \%$ of respondents in the present study claimed to have difficulty. This result may indicate that undergraduate students need strong note-taking skills to do well in class. Undergraduate students tend to be evaluated by in-class written tests, which depend heavily on lecture notes, as opposed to graduate students, who are usually assessed using written research papers. Another possible reason is that international graduate students may have already acquired note-taking skills through previous academic experiences, while undergraduate students, the majority of Ferris- survey participants, are still developing note-taking skills.

# 4.3. Academic listening/speaking skills needed for academic success in graduate courses

In this section, EAGS were asked to rate the degree of importance of the eight skills needed for academic success (pronunciation, lecture understanding, general listening comprehension, note-taking skills, formal oral presentations, class participation, communication strategies with peers, and communication strategies with professors). Students ranked formal presentations as the most important skill and pronunciation the least important skill, though there was not a wide range of responses among the means across the eight skills. Overall, there were no significant mean differences across different demographic characteristics, such as age, language proficiency level, academic major, academic level, gender, country of origin and duration of stay in the US.

Eighty-six percent of respondents rated the ability to give formal oral presentations as extremely important $(44 \% )$ or very important $( 4 2 \% )$ . That students considered it the most important listening/speaking skill for their academic success in content classes is surprising, because they did not identify it as one of the most frequently required classroom tasks by instructors and further reported little difficulty giving oral presentations in the previous sections of the survey. The results may indicate that students perceive presentation skills to be important for their educational and professional life, applicable to their roles as conference presenters, teachers, and students (Morita, 2000, 2002).

Another noteworthy finding is that students rated the two listening-related skills (lecture understanding and general listening comprehension), as relatively high importance, compared to other speaking-related skills (class participation, communication with peers, and communication with professors). Lecture understanding was reported as the second most important skill for academic success $M = 4 . 1 4$ ), following formal oral presentation skill $M = 4 . 2 1$ ). General listening comprehension skills and class participation $M = 4 . 0 9$ ) were third, leaving communication strategies with peers $M = 4 . 0 1$ ) and communication strategies with professors $( M = 3 . 9 4$ ) fourth and fifth. At first, these results may seem surprising, in that EAGS reported more difficulty with speaking skills than listening skills. However, it is also an understandable disparity because the survey respondents perceived that strong listening skills was one of the most frequently expected aural/oral skill, along with participation in whole-class discussion. The findings may indicate that EAGS are aware that listening comprehension is important for understanding a lecture and/or participating in class discussions. EAGS may perceive that in-class verbal participation is not as important to their academic success as understanding instructors and class discussions, even though they felt that speaking was relatively more difficult than listening.

# 5. Conclusions

# 5.1. Summary of findings

This study investigated EAGS-s views on academic listening and speaking skills required in content courses, their difficulties in meeting these expectations, and the relative importance of specific listening and speaking skills and tasks in their academic settings. EAGS reported that participating in whole-class discussions, practicing strong listening skills, raising questions during class, and engaging in small-group discussions were the four most frequently required listening/speaking-related classroom tasks in graduate courses. They were most concerned about leading class discussions and participating in whole-class discussions.

They had little difficulty with out-of-class speech activities, such as asking instructors questions outside of class. EAGS considered formal oral presentations and strong listening skills the most important elements for academic success in graduate courses and pronunciation of English and note-taking skills the least important.

# 5.2. Implications for EAP pedagogy

Several important issues and specific pedagogical suggestions for EAP course planning and material development have emerged from the current study. These suggestions will help EAP teachers to better prepare ESL students with oral communication skills needed in university content classrooms during or after completion of an ESL program.

5.2.1. EAP teachers need to simulate academic oral communication tasks frequently used in university content courses

As the current study and previous studies demonstrated, students in US higher education are expected to be actively engaged in class discussions. EAP teachers need to apply diverse oral classroom activities in language classrooms to give ESL students opportunities to practice various listening/speaking activities that will be required in content courses. EAP teachers also need to explicitly teach what each task is about (meta-knowledge) prior to the implementation of each skill. Many international students may not be familiar with teaching methodology and academic oral classroom discourse patterns in the US, because of their different prior educational experiences in their home countries (Liu & Littlewood, 1997).

In particular, ESL students need to practice participating in whole-class discussions. The present study found that a whole-class discussion was the most common academic speaking task in graduate courses, and students reported it to be one of the most challenging classroom activities. It is not easy for instructors to lead whole-class discussions with language learners who are hesitant to speak up. Indeed, many ESL teachers expressed their difficulties in getting ESL students involved in whole-class discussions, and some teachers reported avoiding such discussions because of those difficulties (Ferris, 1998). However, it is imperative that EAP teachers frequently use this classroom activity to prepare students for active engagement in large-group discussions. ESL teachers should explicitly teach international students how to raise questions, when to interrupt others to express their own opinions, and how to effectively use non-verbal communication (Murphy et al., 2005). By practicing these skills in language classrooms, international students may be able to comfortably transfer them to their other university classes.

5.2.2. To succeed in university content classrooms, ESL students need to have a clear understanding about the value of and need for active oral participation

ESL students need to understand the value of, and need for, active oral classroom participation in content classrooms. Regardless of language issues, all students, not only ESL students, tend to avoid participation when they do not see the value of the discussion (McKeachie, 2002). Participation could be more problematic with international students who have different educational experiences that may have placed a lesser value on oral participation (Cheng, 2000; Jones, 1999; Liu & Littlewood, 1997). Therefore, EAP teachers need to raise ESL students- awareness of the value of active oral participation to help them succeed in US university classrooms (Ferris & Tagg, 1996a; Murphy, 2005).

Here, are several specific classroom activities that EAP teachers can implement to help ESL students understand the concept of active oral classroom participation, university instructors- expectations, and students- responsibilities as active participants. Providing an opportunity to discuss the nature of the regular content classroom and university instructors- expectations can be an effective way for ESL students to realize the importance of active classroom participation in university classes. We can do this in several ways. For example, it can be extremely beneficial to have an experienced international student who is already in the content courses share her/his experience with ESL students in language classes. Students are likely to be more persuaded about the demands and needs of active oral classroom participation in content courses when they hear about it from someone who has had these experiences, rather than from ESL teachers. University course instructors can be invited to language classrooms as guest speakers, so that ESL students have opportunities to hear university instructors- points of view. This opportunity would also help ESL students become familiar with the voices and speech patterns of native English speakers. Another effective way to give ESL students a first-hand experience is to arrange field trips to university classrooms, specifically focusing on observing oral classroom interaction (Murphy et al., 2005). If it is not possible to have a class observation, an adequate alternative could be viewing a video-tape of a regular class session.

# 5.2.3. ESL Students need to be provided with content-based instructions and tasks whenever possible

EAP teachers should attempt to engage in content-based instructions (CBI) whenever feasible (Ferris & Tagg, 1996a). In order to achieve academic success, ESL students need to have a higher proficiency of academic English and the discourse of specific disciplines. Although they appear to function well with informal, casual conversation in everyday life, this study and other studies reported that many international students have difficulties in formal/academic language communications, such as leading class discussions and participating in whole-class discussions (Johns, 1981; Kao & Gansneder, 1995; Leki, 2001; Liu, 2001; Morita, 2002, 2004; Ostler, 1980). Therefore, they need to practice their listening and speaking skills in an academic context to achieve a high enough level of academic and disciplinary English in order to be able to effectively lead or be actively involved in class discussions. ESL material for EAP learners should emphasize academic subject matters, instead of casual, conversational English.

# 5.2.4. EAP teachers need to familiarize themselves with evolving content classroom formats and teaching methods

Lastly, EAP teachers, need to make constant efforts to keep up to date with evolving university classroom formats and teaching methods. This allows EAP teachers to better serve ESL students who must make the transition from English language learners to subject-specific English users in university content classrooms. Having regular conversations with university teachers and matriculated ESL students and observing subject-matter classes are effective ways of making ESL students understand the particular challenges and needs of content-area classrooms (Murphy et al., 2005; Parkhurst & Bodwell, 2005). In order to learn to facilitate interactive classrooms, teachers can participate in workshops on techniques for discussion and active learning, facilitating classroom discussion, and the effective use of student groups (e.g., Kim & Kalish, 2004).

However, it may not be fair to push already overloaded EAP teachers to comply with these recommendations without appropriate institutional support, such as providing release time, credit, and funds for teachers to perform these tasks (Parkhurst & Bodwell, 2005). At the same time, however, all EAP teachers need to take the initiative to start doing what they can at the individual level to meet their ESL students- urgent needs.

# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Faculty and TA Development and the Graduate School of Ohio State, which partially funded this research. I also would like to thank Alan Kalish, Keiko Samimy, Anna Soter, and two anonymous ESPj reviewers for their insightful comments on earlier drafts of this article. Finally, I am especially thankful to my dear friend, Masataka Kasai who read multiple drafts and gave feedback and helped to shape up this article.

# References

Cheng, X. (2000). Asian students- reticence revisited. System, 28, 435–446.   
Ferris, D. (1998). Students- views of academic aural/oral skills: a comparative needs analysis. TESOL Quarterly, 32, 289–318.   
Ferris, D., & Tagg, T. (1996a). Academic listening/speaking tasks for ESL students: problems, suggestions, and implications. TESOL Quarterly, 30, 297–320.   
Ferris, D., & Tagg, T. (1996b). Academic oral communication needs for EAP learners: what subject-matter instructors actually require. TESOL Quarterly, 30, 31–58.   
Jones, J. F. (1999). From silence to talk: cross-cultural ideas on students- participation in academic group discussion. English for Specific Purposes, 18, 243–259.   
Johns, A. M. (1981). Necessary English: a faculty survey. TESOL Quarterly, 15, 51–57.   
Kao, C., & Gansneder, B. (1995). An assessment of class participation by international graduate students. Journal of College Student Development, 36, 132–140.   
Kim, S., & Kalish, A. (2004, November). Sharing mainstream teaching methods with ESL university teachers: how to facilitate classroom discussion. Paper presented at Ohio TESOL Conference, Columbus, OH.   
Leki, I. (2001). A narrow thinking system: nonnative-English-speaking students in group projects across the curriculum. TESOL Quarterly, 35, 39–67.   
Less, P. (2003). Academic and nonacademic skills needed for success by international students in a master-s of business administration program. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Arkansas, Little Rock.   
Liu, J. (2001). Asian students- classroom communication patterns in U.S. universities: an emic perspective. Westport, CT: Ablex.   
Liu, N. F., & Littlewood, W. (1997). Why do many students appear reluctant to participate in classroom learning discourse? System, 25, 371–384.   
Lucas, C. J., & Murray, J. M. (2002). New faculty: a practical guide for academic beginners. New York: MacMillan.   
Mason, A. (1994). By dint of: student and lecturer perceptions of lecture comprehension strategies in first-term graduate study. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: research perspectives (pp. 199–218). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
McKeachie, W. J. (2002). Teaching tips: strategies, research, and theory for college and university teachers. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.   
Meyers, C., & Jones, T. B. (1993). Promoting active learning: strategies for the college classroom. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.   
Morita, N. (2000). Discourse socialization through oral classroom activities in a TESL graduate classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 34, 279–310.   
Morita, N. (2002). Negotiating participation in second language academic communities: a study of identity, agency, and transformation. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.   
Morita, N. (2004). Negotiating participation and identity in second language academic communities. TESOL Quarterly, 38, 573–604.   
Murphy, J. M. (2005). Essentials in teaching academic oral communication. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.   
Murphy, J. M., Mendelsohn, D., Folse, K., & Goodwin, J. (2005, March). Strategies for EAP listening, speaking, and pronunciation. Paper presented at the 39th Annual TESOL Convention and Exhibit, San Antonio, Texas.   
Ostler, S. E. (1980). A survey of academic needs for advanced ESL. TESOL Quarterly, 14, 489–502.   
Parkhurst, C. A., & Bodwell, M. B. (2005, March). Making the ESL to ESP transition. Paper presented at the 39th Annual TESOL Convention and Exhibit, San Antonio, Texas.   
Robinson, J. (2005, June). Nunchi and communicative competence for East Asian students. Paper presented at The Korea Association of Teachers of English 2005 International Conference, Seoul, Korea.

Soonhyang Kim is a Ph.D. candidate in Foreign and Second Language Education at The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. She is an ESL professional working with university instructors through Ohio State-s teaching center to support international students. Her articles appear in International Education Report and The Teaching Professor.