# Beyond comprehension: Reading requirements in first-year undergraduate courses

Aynur Ismayilli Karakoc\*, Rachael Ruegg, Peter Gu

chool of Linguistics and Applied Language Studies, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Academic reading   
University reading   
Reading-based writing   
Undergraduate reading   
Reading skills

English for Academic Purposes (EAP) courses play an important role in preparing EAL (English as an Additional Language) learners for their university studies. Reading skills hold a significant place in such preparation courses because they are foundational skills. EAP pedagogy and research on reading have largely focused on reading comprehension skills. While these skills are necessary to include in instruction programs, at university more complex skills of reading are required (Enright et al., 2000; Grabe & Stoller, 2019). Our research was conducted at one New Zealand university to understand the reading types, reading load, and reading requirements in first-year courses in humanities and social sciences. Close analysis suggests that in addition to textbooks and textbook chapters, academic book chapters and journal articles take up a considerable proportion of university readings, and the reading load is also quite high. Interviews with lecturers suggest that reading comprehension is important but not sufficient for course writing assignments. Students need to critically engage with the readings, write their assignments based on the course readings, and reflect the readings in their written assignments. The study discusses implications for reading research and pedagogy. Further, suggestions are made for EAP reading instruction and reading assessment tasks.

# 1. Introduction

Reading comprehension is a foundational academic skill (Grabe & Stollr, 2019), and the scholarship on reading comprehension has been the main focus of EAP reading pedagogy and research (Hyland & Jiang, 2021). Diffrent approaches have been taken in defining and operationalizing reading comprehension. Urquhart and Weir (1998) suggest careful reading at global levels (under. standing main ideas and supporting detail, making inferences) and local levels identifying lexis, understanding syntax), and expeditious reading at global levels (skimming, search reading) and local levels (scanning). Khalifa and Weir (2009) operationalize comprehension abilities in terms of recognizing and understanding vocabulary, understanding the basic meaning of a word or sentence, understanding implied meaning, understanding information across sentences or a paragraph, understanding information across a whole text, and understanding and combining information across texts (p. 43). However, at university reading aility beyond general comprehension is required. Readers engage in morecognitively demanding proceses such as reading to lean from texts and reading to integrate information, write, and critique texts (Enright et al., 2000; Grabe & Stoller, 2019).

Needs analysis studies are helpful to identify academic requirements at university to better prepare EAL students for university courses. Different purposes of needs analysis exist, including investigating university reading requirements (Brown, 2016; Hyland 2006). Academic requirements may change according to different learning contexts, university ideologies of teaching, and student characteristics and needs (Hyland, 2006; Paltridge, 2004). Requirements in the target situation, e.g., EFL versus ESL setings, may differ as well. Because our research contex is in New Zealand, this review will only focus on the research on academic reading requirements in ESL settings.

While resarch into reading comprehension abilites is abundant, there has been relatively littl reearch into the nature of reading in university setings (Liu & Read, 2020; Porter, 2018). Some studies have employed questionnaires to examine university reading requirements (Anderson, 2015; Grat et al., 1998; Jackson et al., 006; Rosenfeld et al., 2001; Wambach, 1998; Weir et al., 2012), while others have applied qualitative tools such as document analysis and interviews (Carson, 2001; Liu & Read, 2020; Moore t l., 2012).

Research shows that in addition to general comprehension, higher-level reading skill are important for suces at undergraduate levels. Among them, the skill that were reported included answering reading-related writen questions, comparing and contrasting ideas in aext or acos texts, synthesising texs (Rosenfeld et al. 01), intating information from texts in assnments (Weir e al. 2012), applying the knowledge and preparing for lectures (Anderson, 2015), and critical reading (Gravatt e l., 1998; Moore e al., 2012). In some studies, however, differences were found among different discplines. For instance, the skill involving synthesising information and using texts as a resource which were reported to be highly important in previous research (Rosenfeld et al. 2001), were found to be les expected in Anderson's (2015) study. This finding could be due to the majors surveyed in Anderson's study, being largely from science fields (e.g., computer science, engineering, biology) which may be les demanding of reading and writing at first-year level. Wambach (1998) also found diffrences between lecturers' requirements in beginning courses at a US university. Wambach reported that mathematics science, and social sciences and speech communications lecturers believed that lecture content delivered orally is more central to the purposes of beginning courses. In contrast, lecturers from the humanitie (e.g, journalism, language arts) attached more importance to reading skills and believed that the purpose was to develop students' skill of critical thinking and analytical thinking. Nonetheles, both discipline groups also required critiquing skills Another ifference was reported by Moore et al. (2012) who found that tasks in undergraduate level humanities and social-science disciplines (e.g., media studies, history, management) at an Australian universty engaged more critical reading and writing skill, whil tasks intechnical disciplines (e.g., engineering, architecture, physics, biology) tended to require more general comprehension skills.

Jackson et al. (2006) explored university requirements to design a foundation year course for ESL students studying science at a South African university. The questionnaire analysis showed that the most common reading sources assigned for undergraduate students were textbooks, photocopied readings, and textbook chapters, while journal articles were assigned at higher levels.

In a different study at aNZ universty Liu and Read (2020) investigated language teachers opinions about undergraduate students skill needs for university academic reading. Frequency counts of interview statements showed that language teachers atached more importance to linguistic and discourse knowledge skills comprehension skills, and reading strategies and efficiency. On the other hand, higher-level skill of critical evaluation of information and integrating information from texts received les attntion. Ths finding may be due to differences between language teachers' and content lecturers' priorities for academic skill.

Academic reading research also indicates that undergraduate students face dificulties in meeting universty reading requirements. Among those dificultie are students problems with reading course texts, reading strategicall, handing the reading load (Anderson et al, 2001), reading journal atice (St Clair-Thompson et al., 2018), reading carefully and globall, and identifying problems and arguments in texts (Johns, 1991). In Gravatt et al. (198), undergraduate ecturers reported that \*ESL students see the purpose of reading as memorizing information, rather than applying, evaluating or synthesising it with other information'" (p. 82). Additionally, undergraduate students in that study reported ther struggle with reading academic texts and reading criticall. Students in Weir et al. (2012) reported their dfficultie when reading for assnments such as reading lengthy texts and the time available for readings. These studies show students' struggle with course readings and reading tasks that require complex skills.

The pedagogical purposes of reading tasks in undergraduate courses, however, is under-researched. Moore et al. (2012) analysed academic tasks across 12 disciplines and found that reading-based tasks were both local (for weekly exercises, exams, tests) and global (for essays). Although Moore et al.s study provided insights into reading activities, the analysis did not ffer details about course readings or the types of source. In a different study in the Us, aron (201) conducted overal analysis of universit redings from six courses in history, biology, and psychology disciplines. Carson found that reading tasks at the undergraduate level tended to focus more on retrieving and applying, while those at the graduate level tended to involve more interpretation and evaluation skill. While Carson's analysis presented important features of undergraduate tasks, the overall analysis was limited. The study briefly describedthe texts as \*primary" and \*secondary' texts. Also, the functions of the texts were grouped as highlighting relevant information', and "directing students' focus with review and study questions" (p. 59), with not enough details. Additionally, the reported functions related to both \*oral texts' (lectures) and written text (readings) collctively. These studies reported the importance of academic reading in different discilines and stud levels. Close investigation of the urpose of acadmic reding in a wider range of humanities and social sciences disciplines is crucial to shape our understanding of reading requirements in first-year courses.

Research on university writing requirements has also demonstrated the importance of reading. In order to complete university assignments, students are required to take notes, summarize and paraphrase textual sources, synthesize ideas, and write essays in response to readings (Hale et al., 1996; Zhu, 2004a, 2004b). Moreover, undergraduates reported that organizing arguments from several sources, and analysing ideas were important for their assgnments (Bridgeman & Carlson, 1984). According to Leki and Carson's (1994) survey on students perceptions of EAP writing instruction and writing needs, a majorit of students declared that success a their asignments depended on knowing the content, and selecting and using ideas from those sources in their assignments. These findings show the critical role of reading sils not only in reading academic texts but also completing written asignments.

Despite this, as Liu and Read (2020) point out, few of the writing studies have addressed the aspect of reading necessary for writing, \*probably due to the fact that it extends into the productive realm, and thus blurs the line between reading and writing" (p. 88)

Moreover, given that most university assignments are based on reading (Cumming, 2014), there is increasing attention to reading-based writing tass in EAP assessment. Although such tasks are practiced i different forms, having reading texs as sources of input is common. One of the justifications of these test tasks is task authenticity (Weigle, 2004). That is, teaching and asssing students' abilit to integrat reading sources in their writing are assumed to bettr prepare students for university. However, presenting source texts solely for "seting the scene for a task scenario (Knoch & Sitaalabhorn, 2013, p. 304) does not align with actual universt task demands. It s n lr why reding-as e inlude short texts, each preenting two different side of the same issue (e.g., Shin & Ewert, 2015; Weigle, 2004). For instance, in a test designed by Gebril and Plakans (2013), text A tell that global warming is undeniable, and text B opposes that with myths about global warming. Given that integrated assessment tass can also be used for high-stakes purposes to asess students academic readines for mainstream courses, exploring the reading requirements will be helpful to make suggestions for reading-based assessment tasks as well.

Overall reading requirements at universities are under-researched (Liu & Read, 2020; Porter, 2018). While studies utilising questionnaires have discovered important findings, the results may show main trends but not the subtle detail about those expectations. On the other hand, qualitative studies have provided insights into reading requirements and reading activities, but results may differ according to the perctions of stakeholders (g., lecturers, students, and language teachers, course levels, and disciplines. In exploring requirements, close analysis of course learning objectives, the types of course readings, overallfeatures of readings, pedagogical purposes of readings, and university lecturers' reading requirements willfurther shape our understanding of academic reading requirements in humanities and social sciences disciplines. Aditionally, investigating reading requirements in first-year undergraduate courses is crucial, as EAP pedagogy usually focuses on preparing EAL students for their first-year undergraduate courses. The questions examined in this study are:

1. What are the overall learning objectives of first-year undergraduate courses?   
2. What are the overall features of readings in first-year undergraduate courses?   
3. What is the pedagogical purpose of reading in first-year undergraduate courses?

# 2. Methodology

# 2.1. Context

The study was conducted at a major research university in New Zealand. The university offers bachelor's, master's and doctoral programs and enrolled over 2,00 students at the time of the study. The students come from a wide range of backgrounds. In addition to domestic students who are L1 English speakers, some are international students who have studied at the university's or an external EAP program, or directly come from overseas and entered the university having obtained the required international language proficiency test scores (e.g., IELTs, TOEFL). Other ESL students who have difficulty with academic reading and writing skill are from migrant and refugee backgrounds. These students are those who have obtained citizenship or permanent residency. Another group consists of intenational students from N secondary schools who are sill insuficiently prepared for academic studies at university.As Hyland (2006) points out conceptions in EAP now have become varied with rich diversity of contexts and students from \*non-traditional" backgrounds entering universities (p. 16). We did not aim at preparing a curriculum for a particula academic rogram or the needs of a specific group of leaners. Rather, we explored the requrements as a basis for addressing the needs of all the groups of ESL students. Additionall, AP has also played acitical role in shaping learning experiences ofL1 English-speakers who enter universties without enough knowledge of academic sils (Hyland, 206). We hope that our investigation will be useful forsuch L1 students as well.

# 2.2. Data and analysis

The data were obtained from firs-year courses offered in undergraduate degree programs in humanities and social sciences disciplines. These disciplines were chosen because they usuall involve high reading and writing oads. At this university, an un. dergaduate degree program usually lasts for three years. One academic year incudes thee trimesters, and each trimester i 12 weeks long. Full-time students take three to four courses per trimester.

Table 1 Data and analysis.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Research questions</td><td>Data</td><td>Data analysis</td></tr><tr><td>1. What are the overall learning objectives of first-year undergraduate courses?</td><td>Course outlines of 64 courses (from the university&#x27;s website)</td><td>Analysis of overall learning objectives</td></tr><tr><td>2. What are the overall features of readings in first-year undergraduate courses?</td><td>Reading lists for 35 courses (from Talis)</td><td>Types of input sources: frequency counts of required readings</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Reading lists for 35 courses (from Talis)</td><td>Overall features of assigned readings: analysis of books, book chapters, and journal articles.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Reading lists for 32 courses (from Talis)</td><td>Reading load: average number of required readings per week</td></tr><tr><td>3. What is the pedagogical purpose of reading in first- year undergraduate courses?</td><td>Interviews with 8 lecturers</td><td>Lecturers&#x27; views on pedagogical purposes of reading and expectations of reading skills</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 1 displays the research questions, data sources, and data analysis. Reading requirements in irst-year courses were obtained from two sources: documents and interviews with lecturers. The documents included course outlines collcted from the university's website and reading lists collcted from Talis Aspire, an online platorm (henceforth, Talis. To answer the first research question, learning objectives in thecourse outines were valuated. To answer the second question, the asigned readings were analysed for types of input sources, overall features, and the number of weekly readings. To answer the third research question, interviews about the lecturers' expectations of reading skills in first-year humanities and social sciences courses were analysed.

To investigate the first research question, overall learning objectives of 64 first-year courses from humanities and social science disciplines were analysed. Table 2 shows the number of courses grouped under their tudy areas such as anthropology, areastudies, and art history. Many universte aound the world design their coursesto align wth learning objectives or skill in Bloom's taxonomy (Hale et al., 1996; Zhu, 2004b), which is also recommended at our university. Bloom's taxonomy includes the cognitive skill of remembering, understanding, applying, analysing, evaluating, and creating, each comprising a set of thinking abilities. The courses in this university offer an overview of key priorities that students are expected to achieve upon sucessul completion of a course. The learning objectives were coded according to the revised version of Bloom's taxonomy (Anderson et l. 2001). Key action verbs in the objectives were counted and categorized into corrsponding cognitive skill groups following previous research (Carson, 2001; Hale et al., 1996; Zhu, 2004b). The objectives were categorized in the groups of remembering/understanding and applying/analysing/evaluating/creating.

To answer the second question, reading lis assigned in 35 courses were analysed. It was not possbl to obtain reading lists or all 64 course ecause Talis gave aces only to the students enrolled in those course. Only some course reading lis were on open access in Talis, whil ring list of some ther courses were obtained from the interviewes (lecturers participating in this study. We aimed to understand the generic and overal nature of redings but not isciplinary variations. To identify the discipline groups f 35 courses for which we had reading list, we fllowed Nesi and Gardner's (2012)clasificatio of discipline families. However, we made a slight change to this grouping. Checking the course outlines and previous reearch (Farhady et l., 2018), we included education in the social sciences group. Thus, the study areas in Arts and Humanities (AH) included art history, English litrature, history, humanities, and philosophy (14 courses). The study areas in Social Sciences () included anthropology, aea studies, business conomics, education, law, media studies, political science, religious studies, sociology, and tourism (21 courses). Each study area included a different number of courses. Table 3 shows the study areas and the number of courses corresponding to each study area for which reading lists were analysed.

Only required sources were counted because these materials were mandatory. Initial analysis revealed that the types of input sources were books, chapters, journal articles, and grey literature which included web pages, blogs, video materials, and documents. Books and chapters were further evaluated to understand if they were from textbooks or academic books. For this, a second coder's opinion was obtained for analysis f 31 selected chapters. Afer discussions, the first author analysed the rest of the texts. The first two and last two pages of book chapters wereread, and published book reviews and short book reviews on Amazon" website were also consulted. When this was not enough for making decisions, additional pages were also read. Thus, the books and book chapters were grouped into two categories: textbooks and textook chapters, and academic books and academic boo chapter. Several citeria were identified for classfying the book chapters. They included the readership of those texts, coverage of the content, and if the texts appeared in edited volumes or tertiary textboos. For evaluation of journal article, abstracts, headings, and conclusion parts were read. If journal articles included research questions and data collction and analysis, they were categorized as studies with data analysis. If articles were essay-type, they were grouped as academic essays.

Table 2 Study areas of course outlines.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Study areas</td><td>Number of courses</td></tr><tr><td>Anthropology</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Area studies</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Art history</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td> Business</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Economics</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Education</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>English literature</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Film studies</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>History</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Humanities</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Law</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Linguistics</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td> Media studies</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Philosophy</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Political science</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td> Religious studies</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Sociology studies</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Tourism</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>64</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Study areas of reading lists analysed.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Arts and Humanities</td><td colspan="2">Social Sciences</td></tr><tr><td>Study areas</td><td>Courses</td><td>Study areas</td><td>Courses</td></tr><tr><td>Art history</td><td>2</td><td>Anthropology</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>English literature</td><td>4</td><td>Area studies</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>History</td><td>3</td><td>Business</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Humanities</td><td>2</td><td>Economics</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Philosophy</td><td>3</td><td>Education</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Law</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td> Media studies</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Political science</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Religious studies</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td> Sociology studies</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Tourism</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>14</td><td></td><td>21</td></tr></table></body></html>

Furthermore, the weekly load of readings in the 35 available course reading lists was also analysed. Threecourses did not separate the readings per week and mentioned that afullit of materials would be shared in clas. Therefore, those courses were eliminated, resulting in reading lists of 32 courses.

For close examination of reading requirements, an interview request was sent to course coordinators (lecturers) teaching firs-year humanities and social sciences courses. Eight lecturers agreed to interviews. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with the lecturers to learn about heir views on pedagogical purposes of reading for courseassignments and lecturers' expectations of students reading skills in humanities and social sciences disciplines. Interview questions were prepared in advance, but follow-up questions were asked to make further clarifications or confirm the interviewer's understanding of the responses (Dornyei, 2007). The recorded interviews were transcribed and analysed to find themes, which were coded fllowing Miles et al. (2014). During the process of identifying themes, fforts were made to understand the insiders emic perspectives to inform the interviewer's etic interpretations of the data. Informal analysis started at the transcribing stage and notes were written during the coding explaining the themes. After the recursive analysis, the codes were revised, and some were combined.

# 3. Results

# 3.1. Course learning objectives

The course outines briefly listed overallearning objectives set by lecturers. The objectives were categorized into two major groups: a) remembering/understanding, and b) applying/analysing/evaluating/creating. Some example cognitive abilites in remembering/understanding were identfying key concepts, defining major principles, recognizing theories or concepts, understanding, explaining, and describing fundamental concepts and principle. Some objectives in applying/analysing/evaluating/creating were higher-level abilities of applyig the key concepts or principles from the readings to task objectives, engaging in criticl reading, analysing and evaluating the ideas, and distinguishing core ideas. Some course outlines also mentioned outcomes or products of applying the higher-lvel abilities through project or writing tasks such as essays. The objecties of remembering and understanding accounted for roughly $5 1 \%$ and, applying, analysing, evaluating and creating accounted for roughly $4 9 \%$ It can be inferred that in first-year courses, lecturers may attach importance equally to both lower and higher-level abilities.

# 3.2. Input sources

This section will report the results of the analysis explaining the types of required input sources and overall features of the assigned reading texts.

Table 4 Types of input sources.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Input sources</td><td colspan="3">Number of sources</td><td colspan="3">Average number of sources per course</td><td colspan="3"> Number of courses assigning the source</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>AH</td><td> ss</td><td>AH + SS</td><td>AH</td><td> ss</td><td>AH + SS</td><td>AH</td><td>ss</td><td>AH + SS</td></tr><tr><td>Textbooks</td><td>3</td><td>9</td><td>12</td><td>0.2</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.3</td><td>3 (22%)</td><td>8 (38%)</td><td>11 (31%)</td></tr><tr><td>Textbook chapters</td><td>42</td><td>81</td><td>123</td><td>3</td><td>3.9</td><td>3.5</td><td>10 (72%)</td><td>14 (67%)</td><td>24 (69%)</td></tr><tr><td>Academic books</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>7</td><td>0.2</td><td>0.2</td><td>0.2</td><td>3 (21%)</td><td>3 (14%)</td><td>6 (17%)</td></tr><tr><td>Academic book chapters</td><td>44</td><td>96</td><td>140</td><td>3.1</td><td>4.6</td><td>4</td><td>7 (50%)</td><td>17 (81%)</td><td>24 (69%)</td></tr><tr><td> Journal articles</td><td>32</td><td>118</td><td>150</td><td>2.3</td><td>5.6</td><td>4.3</td><td>8 (58%)</td><td>16 (76%)</td><td>24 (69%)</td></tr><tr><td>Other sources</td><td>36</td><td>128</td><td>164</td><td>2.6</td><td>6.1</td><td>4.7</td><td>9 (64%)</td><td>13 (62%)</td><td>22 (63%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Arts and Humanities (AH): (14 courses), Social Sciences (SS): (21 courses).

# 3.2.1. Types of input sources

Six types of input sources emerged through repeated examination of course reading list (Table 4). They were textbooks, textbook chapters, academic books, academic book chapters, journal articles, and other sources. The results showed that the average number of other sources (6.1) journal articles (5.6), academic book chapters (4.6), and textbook chapter (3.9) per course in SS was higher than those in AH. The average number of academic books per course was similar in AH (0.2) and Ss (0.2). In both discipline groups separately and together, textbooks and academic books had a lower average number per course compared to the other source types.

Furthermore, $2 1 \%$ of AH courses required academic books, while. $1 4 \%$ of SS courses required academic books. Nevertheless, compared to AH, the proportion of academic book chapters $( 8 1 \% )$ , and journal articles $( 7 6 \% )$ was large in SS. The results also suggested that in both discipline groups, academic-type texts (academic books, academic book chapters, and journal articles together) were as important a, if not more important than, textbook-type text (textooks, and textbook chapters. Analysis of AH and SS together showed that the proportion of courses assigning textbook chapters, academic boo chapters and journal articles was equally $6 9 \%$ . Additionally, the proportion of other sources in both discipline groups together was large $( 6 3 \% )$ . Thus, it can be understood that although discipline groups had some differences, they equally required sources from textbook chapter, academic book chapters, and journal articles $( 6 9 \% )$ . Additionally, academic-type texts were important in both AH and ss, although SS seemed to rely on academictype texts more than AH did.

# 3.2.2. Overall features of reading sources

Textbooks and textbook chapters covered topics at an introductory level. The texts were from books that are widely read at undergraduate-level courses, and the readership was mainly undergraduate students. The textbook chapters tended to be expository, reporting the ideas and explaining the concepts from a wide perspective.

On the other hand, academic-type texts from academic books and academic book chapters were narrowly focused and usual presented more specific concepts, methodological implications, and research trends. Some of these materials appeared in edited book volumes. The intended readership of such books was mainly researchers and academics in the discipline, and the text style tended to be argumentative.

Assigned journal articles had two general formats (Table 5). Journal articles from ten study areas were academic essays, and articles from four study ars were data-driven and included data collection and analys. Some articles in media studies, political science, and sociology were academic essays, and some were studies that included data collection and analysis.

In the academic essays, authors critically analysed discipline-specific texts or topics and presented thir arguments by referring to the literature and theories. For example, thearticle in one eligious studes course explored beliefs concerning religion and history and made claims by discussing, comparing, and explaining related isues and literature. A different article from the English literature course analysed a literary piece and presented an author's interpretations of the characters and plot.

Studies with data collection and analysis included analysis of data collected through surveys, interviews, social media posts, pictures, and discourse analysis For instance, one article from the political science course included data collected from social media posts about election campaigns and trends in populations choices on govenment decisions and presented the results of the analysis in tables. One article from the education course explored grit dimensions as predictors f educational achievement. The article included the results of an online survey and tables of regressions analysis, and discussion of results with concluding arguments.

In addition to the discipline-specific articles, some courses also assigned cross-disciplinary topics. Examples include a climate change topic in economics, sociology and political economy topics in media studies, a philosophy topic in political science, law and human rights topics in religous studies, a psychology topic in education, and a political cience topic in sociology. There were also some cross-disciplinary readings. For instance, a law course assigned two literature pieces.

# 3.2.3. Other types of sources

The rest of the materials were listed in the \*other sources" group. For example, some courses in economics required readings from the Reserve Bank of NZ, economic forum wesites, and Wikipedia pages. The law course assigned court cases, and readings from the NZ constitution, NZ parliament, and the Treaty of Waitangi. Businesscourses assigned readings from UN protocols, Business and Human

Table 5 Overall formats of journal articles.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Academic essays</td><td colspan="3">Studies with data collection and analysis</td></tr><tr><td>Study areas</td><td>Study areas</td><td></td><td>Data types</td></tr><tr><td> Art History</td><td>. Education</td><td></td><td>Survey</td></tr><tr><td>. Business</td><td>. Media studies</td><td></td><td>Interviews,</td></tr><tr><td>. Economics</td><td></td><td></td><td>Social media posts and comments, Pictures</td></tr><tr><td>: English literature</td><td></td><td>: Political science</td><td>Discourse analysis</td></tr><tr><td>. History</td><td></td><td> Sociology</td><td>Interviews</td></tr><tr><td>. Media studies</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>: Political science</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Religious studies</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Sociology</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>. Law</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Rights Resource Centre, and NZ legislation. Political cience assigned materials from the websites of NZ constitution, NZ parliament NZ history, Encyclopaedia of NZ, the NZ Defence Force, European Union security protocols, White House archives, National Security Archives, and the proceedings from civic media projects. Asia studies assigned sources from the AsiaNZ Foundation website and audiovisual documents. Some courses also assgned YouTube videos, blog posts, we news articles, dictionaries, Wikipedia pages, Ted Talks, case notes, protocols, and teacher-prepared study notes.

# 3.2.4. Reading load

The average number of weekly required readings revealed that, 11 courses required roughly one to two readings, seven courses required two, and six courses assigned three or more readings per week (Table 6). However, this table does not reveal information about the number of pages. Therefore, it is not possible to claim that coursesassigning one reading text per week are les readingdemanding or vice versa. Nevertheless it can be understood that, on average, students are required to read roughly two texts per week for each course.

# 3.3. Pedagogical purposes of reading

Exploring the lecturers' expectations of students' reading skils provided insights into the purposes of universty readings. The lecturers were teaching art history, anthropology, history, law, meda studie, political scince, and English literature (two lectrers). The major questions asked dealt with the pedagogical purpose of reading in assgnments and lecturers reading requirements.All the lecturers mentioned that reading is very important for students' succes in their courses and students should read the readings before lectures and tutorials. Students understanding of readings is usual gauged through quizzes, tests, exams, and exercises in l eight courses. Additionall, all the lecturers also assigned diffrent types of writing assignments to know students understanding of readings, and how students analyse and evaluate those theorie or concepts in their writing asignments. ll eight lecturer stated that essays take up a considerable proportion of students' writing assignments.

The data covering the lecturers expectations were grouped according to three themes which were mentioned by all eight lecturers. The themes were understanding, critical engagement with readings, and writing essays and building arguments by drawing on reading sources. All the lecturers emphasized that understanding is the core element of academic literacy and th foundation of reading skills According to the anthropology lecturer, reading isthe basis of writing, and students must understand the text and articulate the in. formation in their own words. The art history lecturer emphasized that students must be able to understand the text and see the relevance of that text to the essay question which requires a high-level of analysis. The English literature lecturer mentioned that students must understand the tex, red and re-read each time for ifferent purpose ike the general plot of a novel, imagry across the text, and attention to detail. Likewise, the law lecturer underlined that students must carefull read the documents and cases and remember the facts to solve problems in writing assignments. Also, the media studies lecturer emphasized the importance of comprehension and critical reading, sting that i their course, students are required to read sources at higher academic levels from academic books and journal articles, and not from textbooks:

.. we do expect our students in Media studies to read quite at a higher academic level. Here I find that the readings are much more challenging than they were in the Us. (Media Studies)

All the lecturers also emphasized the critical engagement with reading sources which is one of the successful features f academic literacy. Critical engagement with readings included two main sub-themes: criticall focused reading, and evidence of critical reading in writing. ccording to the lecturers critically focsed reding implied that while reading, students must be atetive to details, read carefull, and think and question. For instance, the political science letrer emphasizedthat whilereding, students must ealuate the uthor's ideas, think about what they have found persuasive about those arguments, and what the pitall are in the claims or theory. The law lecturer saw critical reading as standing back and questioning everything even if someone else has critiqued it. Similarl, the English liteture letrr defined critical reding as the ability to pay antion odetails and think about how the tex i writen, how the characters are characterized, how their speeches and thoughts are presented, and what words have been used to describe them.

Evidence of critical reading in assgnments meant that assgnments must show students' reactions with added thoughts. For example, the art history lecturer mentioned that a good essay must present the analysis and draw on the evidence in reading sources to build an arument. On the other hand, \* mediocre esy may draw upon one or two sources and lrgely just repeat what has be read. The media studies lecturer added that whiledrawing evidence from the sources, writers need to criticall reflect on \*different ways of thinking' and come up with their own perspectives. Likewise, the English lecturer 2 added that even though students are reading the same texts, and their analyses might arrive at similar conclusins, they would do that in different ways \*. but how you analyse [the texts] requires you to draw on your own reading skills and your own analysis".

Table 6 Average number of required readings per week.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Number of texts</td><td>Number of courses</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>1-2</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>2-3</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>3 or more</td><td>6</td></tr></table></body></html>

The history lecturer underlined that there are different ways of critically engaging with the text and it is dificult to anticipate all different ways of "ood' essays. Sucesful criticl engagement with the text would imply that the student has read the information, added comments, thoughts, and interpretation:.

if Engels says this thing, and the student says ".. that Engels would say this thing means that ., it is constructive interpretation. If the student says: Engels says this; Engels said that .., that is meaning comprehension. Reading comprehension only would get you aC, I gues. But we want some sort of reaction that the student is thinking about the text and has some sort of take on the text. (History)

The English literature lecturers stated they want to see the evidence that students have engaged with the texts:

.. they have reflected and generated insights that they have not merely reproduced the arguments from elsewhere or given us a summary of plots or found some other way of summarizing either the text or what others said about the text; but have themselves spent time and reflected on text operations .. That .. sems to be a sign of critical engagement with literary texts. (English literature 1)

Finall, the theme of writing the essays and building the arguments using the ideas in the readings entailed the abilitie of distilling nformation from sources and using suitable ideas to build arguments:

.. thesay does require a lot of reading . you would be expected to identify relevant sources, usually boos and scholarly articles read them, and be able to build your own argument in the essay. So, it is a question of being able to read first f ll understand what you're reading, and see how it s relevant to the essay question. So, it requires a quite high-level analysis. (Art History)

Similarly, the anthropology lecturer stated that students need to understand reading and articulate the interesting ideas in their wn words:

.. we ask them to read and pull out one or two important ideas from the text, and be able to restate it in their own words .. to say what is interesting and important about that reading in their own words. (Anthropology) The political science lecturer outlined three main purposes of reading.

..so, one i to gather evidence .. o support arguments .. The second one would be reading to understand authrs arguments. So, being able to understand the theories . and identify as their reading the specific arguments of dfferent authors, and then in their writing, being able to critically asses those arguments. And then .. being able to read and disil, summarize, and bring together arguments but also information in the literature. (Political science)

To engage students in relating the learned theorie or concepts to research trends and constructing the assgnments based on readings, all the lecturers, except for anthropology and English literature, assigned journal articles and other sources in addition to textbooks or chapters. For instance, the meda stdes and political science ecturers mentioned tht thy pcifically want th student to read journal articles or web news, notice current trends and apply the learned concepts or theories to those trends. However, the English literature lectrers highlighted that for their coures, they want the tudents to have their own interpretations about the noel, plot, and characters. Therefore, students are deliberately discouraged from reading others' analysis, as this would stop the students own creativity and interpretation. Likewise, the anthropology lecturer mentioned that they want students to read one book only and reflect on concepts in that book. This seems to be due to this lecturer's teaching style rather than to the discipline's, as a different lecturer teaching this course offered readings from multiple sources.

Some lecturers also brought up students' reading problems. The media studies lecturer stated that students do not read the texts completel. or instance, sometimes students cite the lecturer as the author of the ideas because they just refer to the lecture and not the readings. Because students do not read the texts carefull, they do not know the author of those ideas or they misunderstand the ideas. The law lecturer explicitly sad that many of their students do not read carefully, and the ones who do read carefully do not see the meanings. The art history lecturer said that their students do not read broadly. Finall, the English literature lecturers mentioned their students' problems coping with the amount of reading. Thus, the problems that were most concerning to these lecturers were their students' struggle with reading completely, reading carefully, reading broadly, and managing the readings.

# 4. Discussion and implications

This study explored first-year reading requirements in the humanities and social sciences disciplines at one major research university in New Zealand. Ths section will dscuss the types of reading sources, the reading load (reading amount), and the lecturers expectations of reading skils in first-year humanities and social sciences courses, which have important implications for EAP pedagogy. Additionally, the tensions between the findings of this study and practices in EAP testing will also be discussed.

# 4.1. Types of reading sources

Close analyses of academic reading materials suggest that the types of reading sources in first-year courses were diverse. The sources werefrom textbooks, textbook chapters, academic books, academic book chapter, journal articles, and grey literature such as web pages blogs, video materials, and documents. In general, the average number of academic book chapters and journal articles per course across 35 courses in both discipline groups was higher than that of textbook chapters. The lecturers might choose academic readings to engage students in critical thinking. This is in line with Colins-Dogrul and Saldana's (2019) interview research with universit lecturers which found that textbooks were assigned as course readings because textbooks provide content for readers in an organised manner, saving time for lesson preparation. However, these lecturers also mentioned that some textbooks did not engage students i critical thinking, but instead spoon-fed the materials to students" and promoted "content consumption (p. 95). To engage students in critial thinking and reading, the lecturers in Collns-Dogrul and Saldanas stdy aigned readings from journal artces as well. Textbooks are goo at transmitting the canon, but not cultivating critical reading skill (Swales, 1995). Some lecturers in our study reorted that they assig journal article and ther types of sources to engage students in applying concets or theories from their readings to current trends. Our finding was diferent from Jacson et al.(2006), who found textbooks, photocopied readings, and textbook chapters to be the major sources of readings in undergraduate science courses (e.g., mathematics, chemistry, biology) with journal articles assgned mainly in higher levels. This difference could be due to disciplinary variations, our courses being from humanities and social sciences.

Considering that EAP aims to develop students' competencies in the target situation (Basturkmen, 2006), the reading materials in EAP programs should be similar to the readings ssigned at university. One implication of these findings is that students should read authentic material from textbooks, academic books, and journal articles as readings before they enrol at universty. Whiletextbooks generally explain concepts at an introductory level from abroader perspective, academic books and journal articles tend to be more narrowly focused and more dfficult for students to read (Anderson, 2015; Gravatt et a., 1998). Also, because discourse features of genres vary, experiencing different types of texts can prepare students to cope with a range of reading materials at university. In fact the anthropology, English litrature, history, political science, and media studies lecturers in our research emphasized that reading a range of texs and being familiar wth different structures and styles of texts can be helpful before students enrol in a universt. As one lecturer noted, students may just focus on the dominant narrative and skip other pages, resulting in misinterpretation of ideas or confusing an author's ideas with other authors ideas in atext. Knowing the discourse and organizational features of texs and different formats of articles can be helpful for undergraduate students' reading success at university (Liu & Read, 2020).

While authentic readings are encouraged in EAP classes, such texts can be demotivating for students due to their language diffi culties. This can be facilitated with teachers' involvement in designing activities to help students with those challenges (Woodrow, 2018). Training students in reading different genres of texts such as academic book chapters and journal artices and teaching them relevant reading skill can help students handle their readings at university (Huang, 2006; Hyon, 2001). Programs that prepare students for univerity should engage them in reading authentic texts and in becoming familiar with organizational structures of academic texts.

# 4.2. Reading load

In addition to the varied types of reading sources, the number of readings assigned in the analysed courses was also large. On average, roughly two texts per week were required for each course. The large number of readings may cause problems in terms of completion of the reading requirements. In fact the English litrature lecturer stated that their students usually have problems with reading 300-400 pages of a novel, although being able to read a high volume of texts is important for their courses. Other lecturer also bemoaned the fact that thir students do not manage large amounts of readings or read the texts completel. Similar challenges have also been reported in previous studies (Anderson, 2015; Liu & Read, 2020; Weir et al., 2012).

The reading load i first-year courses suggests that EAP preparation courses should raise the bar in terms of reading preparation. Compared to authentic texts, simplified texts have more conferential cohesion, more common connectives, more frequent and familiar words, and es versty in parts of spech (Crossly et al, 007). Whilerding siplifid text s rsonablea ower-lel, at higher levels where students should be ready for their university courses, students need to read ful-length texts. Entire texs should be preferred to text excerpts whenever possible, to allow studentsto build formal schemata about the features of different texts, which would be challenging to achieve by reading just isolated pieces (Shih, 1992). Having enough experience in reading non-simplified full-length texts should be encouraged in EAP courses where this practice is not followed.

# 4.3. Lecturers' expectations

Interviews with lecturers provided insights into their expectations of reading skils in first-year humanities and social sciences courses. The findings support that universty students are required to engage in skill beyond basic comprehension. All the lecturers stated that in adition to understanding, students must have the skill in reading carefully and critically, showing evidence of critical reading in writing, and writing their assinments based on readings. Whilereading, students should take their time, pay atention to the structure of a text and authors' argument, be critical, weigh up authors' arguments, select the points relevant for their assignments, and make use of those ideas or theories in their aignments. As the history lecturer mentioned, evidence of reading comprehension would get a student only a C. For higher marks, all lecturers demanded understanding, reading carefull, critically engaging with texts, writing essays based on readings, and formulating their own arguments and interpretations by drawing on readings.

These findings, to some extent, were different from other studies. Although undergraduate students from different levels and language teachers in Liu and Read's (2020) study did accept that critical reading, intertextual model building, and information reconstruction skills were important, theyattached greater importance to language, discourse, and comprehension skill. However, our research offeed findings from content lecturers who are directly in charge of preparing courses, assgning readings, and setting expectations. Furthermore, unlike in Carson's (2001) research, the findings of our study suggest that in general, first-year courses required the skill of pplication and evaluation as well as the skillsof rtrieving, remembering, and understanding. This was found both in the analysi of coursjetives and interviews with lecturers. he rson for this dffernce could be that arson only analysed six courses from biology, history, and psychology, while our analysis included a wider coverage of humanities and social science disciplines. Moore et al. (2012) also found that unlike in technical disciplines, tasks in humanities and social-science disciplines engaged more critical reading and writing skills..

In line with previous research (Hale et al, 1996; Zhu, 2004a, b), the lecturers highlighted the importance of reading for course assignments, which shows one of the fundamental characteristics of a target situation in which students write based on academic readings (Grabe & Zhang, 2013). To prepare students for such assgnments, in higher-level EAP courses academic reading and writing should be taught together, which rarely happens in the instructional settings (Grabe & Zhang, 2013). Students can be asked to read lengthy academic texts at home, answer questions that activate their critical thinking, discuss the information in debates with their peers or i online discussion boards, and write a response or esay based on those arguments. Instructors can design scaffolded ativities to engage students in evaluating text authors arguments, selecting relevant points, and constructing texts based on readings. Similar activities have been reported to bettr prepare EAP students for coping with demanding requirements of their courses at university (Fitzsimmons-Doolan et al., 2012; Parkinson et al., 2007).

Our interviewees reported evaluating the learning objectives of their courses through quizzes, exercises, ests, exams, and essays which involve writing. In fact, at this university, it s recommended to evaluate students leaning through performance-based tasks, for example writing, rather than tes that only fous on multiple-choice questions. tudnts arealso require t attend tutria sessions which aim to motivate students to complete their readings, help them adopt acritical perspective on what they read, and discuss the lecture contents.

Nevertheles, the lecturers did not mention any specific guidance to help students with their course readings. Course materials that some lecturers shared with us contained information about course reading list, assessment tasks, asessment policie, and academic integrity (avoiding plagiarism). Aditionally all the lecturers mentioned that they recommend students to seek help from the student learning centre. English litrature, political science, and law lecturers mentioned that they require students to complete short as. signments that evaluate their understanding of readings. The anthropology lecturer gave a link from a different university's wesite, which focused on critical reading-writing techniques. The history lecturer noted that they recommend students to read Orwell's essays to improve their reading and writing. However, students are not given any specific guidance on academic reading, and they are generally let to sink or swim, as mentioned by the history lecturer. Students are required to fulfil the lecturers' expectations and succeed on their own efforts, which can be difficult not only for ESL but L1 students as well.

The findings suggest that in general, first-year students are not given specific guidance on academic reading, which can be chal. lenging for EAL as wellas L1 speakers. Although students are expected to attend tutorialsessions, the sessions do not focus on addressing reading problems. At the university in this study, the student learning centre offers support to students based on their specific requirements. The centre also conducts workshops in topics such as reading strategies. However, because the learning centre gives students feedback based on students' requirements, the feedback mostly focuses on their writing but not the reading. Even in English medium instruction (EMI) contexts, where the majority of students are EAL students, there is a lack of support for reading skills, with most universities providing support for writing only (Ruegg, 2021). Thus, students may not internalisethe core of their writing problems which actually may be due to reading problems (Hirvela 2001). Moreover, the lecturers may not have time to help students with their reading challenges or they may not seeit as their expertise (Zhu, 2004a). It could be helpful to create critical reading labs to rase university stdnts awarness of ther reding dfficulies and ades them. ddionll, while i is common for university writing centres to be predominantly writing-oriented, a focus on universty reading skill should be prioritized in writing centres as well (Jackson, 2009, Ruegg, 2021). t is therefore important to implement reading support activities in contexts where this practice is not followed.

# 4.4. Tensions between university reading requirements and EAP testing

Like in EAP teaching, where researchers investigate the needs of students, testing researchers also conduct needs analysis and aim to prepare authentic test tasks that reflect the requirements of the target situation (Douglas, 2013; Rosenfeld et al, 2001; Weir et al., 2012). One f the popular tes tass that isclaimed to be authentic is the reading-based assessment task which require test-takers to read texts and write based on those readings. However, there are tensions between these test tasks and university reading requirements. Practical constraints prevent lengthy texts from being included in test tasks. In addition, reading short texts, with opposing perspectives on the same issue, and using the texts mainly to generate ideas for writing rather than fostering critical engagement, do not seem to serve the authentic purpose of reading assessments at university. As a result, such test tasks may be les efective for evaluating academic readiness of students for mainstream courses.

EAP programs preparing their own reading assessments need to consider course requirements at their universities and design test tasks that reflct those requirements as closely as possible. While some tests may not have lengthy authentic texts due to test prac. ticality reasons, the use of reading texts of a reasonable length should be encouraged. More extended tasks should be implemented, and texts from different genes such as book chapters and journal artices should be included in test. Adtionally, source texts should not merely present opposing perspectives on the same topic as is commonly the case (e.g., Gebril & Plakans, 2013; Shin & Ewert, 2015; Weigle, 2004). Reading asessments should incorporate reading in writing tasks and elicit students critical reading skils and eval. uation of source ideas. Designing tasks that better reflect the target situation would help test designers, who are responsible for designing and conducting language tes, and test users, who are responsibl for admission of students, predict the students academic readiness to cope with similar reading asessments at universty. This would also help students not just pas the test ut internalise the actual reading requirements in first-year courses.

# 5. Conclusion

To prepare students for their university courses, t is important to understand universty reading requrements. This study explored the reading types, reading load, and lecturers reading requirements in first-year humanities and social sciences courses. It was found that in first-year courses, academic-type readings were crucial. herefore, in addition to textbook-type readings, where this practice is not followed, EAP programs should also encourage students to read academic book chapters and journal articles.

Moreover, first-year undergraduate courses required reading two texts per week, on average. In EAP courses, readings are often short and simplified which may not be strong enough to prepare students for university readings. Therefore, at high proficiency levels where EAP students should be ready for their university studies, multiple full-length texts should be read.

Finally, the lecturers emphasized that reading comprehension is important but not enough for university success Students are required to critically engage with text, reflect their critical thinking in their ssignments, and write thir essays and build their ar guments based on those readings. Both EAP pedagogy and research have predominantly focused on reading comprehension. The results of this study suggest that practitioners and researchers also need to focus on reading skills beyond comprehension.

The claims from this study are not without their limitations. All data were collected from humanities and social sciences courses at a single university in New Zealand. Therefore, the findings may not be generalizable to other institutions. Moreover, for analysis of source types, it was only possible to collectreading materials for 35 courses due to limited access to Talis. Additionally, only eight teachers agreed to voluntarily participate in the interviews.

The interviews with the lecturers provided their perceptions about the expected reading skills. Observation of lecturers might reveal the extent to which they actually explain their expectations tostudents. Lecturers may not elaborate on their expectations when they communicate them to students (Van der Mee, 2006). This could be due to lecturers assumptions that students are already aware of those expectations. Therefore, frs-year students could be interviewed about how they understand those expectations, how their pre-university experiences help them in terms of their course readings, and how they manage the course readings.

Another interesting point was that, while some academic boos and academic book chapters were linguistically challenging, other texts were not dificult. Ths could be due to writing style of different authors who might prefer writing in plain language. Exploring linguistic or difficulty levels of texts was beyond the scope of this study. Future research should also look into how textbooks and academic books differ in terms of reading difficulty.

EAP programs play a crucial role in preparing students for mainstream courses. In EAP instruction, we strive to align our activities to what students actually need afer they finish EAP programs. To be beter prepared for academic reading at university, students should experience reading lengthy texs from diffrent academic-type readings such as academic book chapters and journal articles. Additionall, reading activities should not only focus on general comprehension but on skls that ae beyond comprehension such as critical reading, evaluating the arguments in readings, distiling and selecting information from readings, and using those ideas in tasks. Some AP programs arealready implementing such activitie, but as an area of tudy, we should keep moving i this direction. Furthermore, eause APtts make inferences about students ailities in perfoing at universty asedon thr testreults, the tet tasks need to be designed to better capture the reading abilities required at university.

# Declaration of interest

None.

# Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Aynur Ismayilli Karakoc: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Rachael Rueg: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing. Peter Gu: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing.

# References

Andero J. 2015.  rg xios anc.  .  ,  J o W. .g .),L ds  w  hi education: Understanding challenges, providing support (pp. 95-109). Routledge.   
Andon1)     cin   
Basturkmen, H. (2006). Ideas and options in English for specific purposes. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Bridgeman, B., & Carlson, S. (1984). Survey of academic writing tasks. Written Communication, 1(2), 247-280.   
Brown, J. D. (2016). Introducing needs analysis and English for specific purposes. Routledge.   
C .1 connections (pp. 48-83). University of Michigan Press.   
Collin-  0  n t  n f Teaching and Learning, 19(2), 88-101.   
Crosey,  , h,  se  mar. 207).stic is si  i t. The  9, 15-30.   
umming, A. (2014). Asing ingratd sills In A J Kunnan (Ed.), The comanion to nguge ssment (p. 216-229).Wile-lackel.   
Douglas, (2013) P ant. n . ali .te (d.) Th hook of ish for i  . 67-383.Wee.   
Dornyei, Z. (2007). Research methods in applied linguistics. Oxford University Press.   
Ergt  Gra  l   , 0020 p, 17). Educational Testing Service. English for specific purposes in higher education (pp. 77-92). Springer.   
Fitsmonsooan, ., Davis J., toler, F L, & Crawford, W. (2012). Extended nonficion redrs for EAP programs. TE0L Jonal, 3(2), 256-279.   
Gebril,  kan  2013.   tf rit ts h inet  d ici. Assessment Quarterly, 10(1), 9-27.   
Grabe, W., & Stoller, F. (2019). In Teaching and researching reading (3rd ed.). Routledge.   
rabe .  03  h o a   ()924.   
Gravatt, B, Lewis, M., & Richards, J. C. (1998). A survey of the needs of ESL students at one universty. TEs0L Journal, 6, 75-88.   
Hale G.    ,   l   19   .4 Educational Testing Service.   
Hirela, 001)n n wing.  J.   ), h tie is  es . 330-346). Cambridge University Press.   
Huang, S. (2006). Reading Englis for academic purposes - what situational factors may motivate learners t read? System, 34(3, 371-383.   
Hyland, K. (2006). English for academic purposes: An advanced resource book. Routledge.   
Hyland, K Jiag, 201)iri sty f EAP rch:  i  what, whe, a e f Egish o c Pe, 49. tie 100929.   
Hyon, S.(201) Long-t ffects of re-basd inction:  fow-up stud f a P redn course. nglish for pic ses 20, 417-438.   
Jackson, 00/in ti  e ), okf     h , p. 145-173). Routledge.   
ackson  r   0.   t       irt. English for Specific Purposes, 25(3), 260-281.   
Khalifa, H, & Weir, C. J.(209). Examnng rding: Rearch and practice i assesig second lnguage reding, 29. Cambridge Universt Pres.   
ch,  .13  r s r  in 84) 300-308.   
Lei, I, & Cron, J.G. (1994) dts ptions of EAP witing nstrctin and wtingnes acros the ilines. l Quterl, 281, 1101.   
Li,     t a . Reading and Learning, 50(2), 70-93.   
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook. SAGE publications.   
More,    Pr . 02 al  t    if  r   it Press.   
Nesi, H., & Gardner, S. (2012). Genres across the disciplines. Student writig in higher education. Cambridge University Press.   
Paltridge, B. (2004). Academic writing. Language Teaching, 37(2), 87-105.   
Pako ,        . Purposes, 26(4), 443-461.   
Porter, . 018. ig  ddg f d iy   i   ch.  of  nd Learning, 48(1), 25-46.   
Roefed, 01)  w     r levels. TOEFL monograph, MS-21). Educational Testing Service.   
Ruegg, R. (2021). Supporting EMI students outside of the classroom: Evidence from Japan. Routledge.   
Shih, M. (1992). Beyond comprehension exercises in the ESL academic reading class. Tesol Quarterly, 26(2), 289-318.   
Shin, S. Y., & Ewert, D. (2015). What accounts for integrated reading-to-write task scores? Language Testing, 32(2), 259-281.   
St Clar-Thompson, H, Graham A, & Marsham s. (2018). Exploring he redng practices of undeadate stdents. Edction Inqury, 9(3), 284-298.   
Swales, J. M. (1995). The role of the textbook in EAP writing research. English for Specific Purposes, 14(1), 3-18.   
Urquhart, A. H., & Weir, C. J. (1998). Reading in a second language: Process, product and practice. Longman.   
Van der Mer, .(2006). n-feg or mid-reag rs-r studets n for explict omniatio f xpctions. nG. Grig, & . Bond (s) Sur  t  of t 0  o . 4-59. ATLAANZ.   
Wambach, C. A (1998). Reading and writing expectations at a research universty. Journal Of Developmental Education,22(2), 22-26.   
Weigle, s. (2004). Integrating reading and writing in a competency test for non-natie peakers of English. Assesing Writing 9(1), 27-55.   
Weir,  J., ky, , G, , A i, . (2012). The iosh  the a r o as rd y  a t reg exprie f t    of  t.  or  .  .), 34 n nd listening assessment (pp. 37-119). Cambridge University Press.   
Woodrow, L. (2018). Introducing course design in English for specific purposes. Routledge.   
Zhu, . (00 y vi on he  wig, thef  wtin, d ch anog wtin i the i. J Second Language Writing, 13(1), 29-48.

in instruction of reading and writing, integrated-writing assessment, language testing, and research methods.

are in instruction and assessment of writing, language testing and assessment, and English medium instruction.

are in language testing and assessment, learner autonomy, learning strategies, and vocabulary learning.