Book review

# Pronunciation Instruction in English for Academic Purposes: An Investigation of Attitudes, Beliefs and Practices, John Hodgetts. Springer Nature, Switzerland, (2020) 251 pp., ISBN 978-3-030-56115-4, \$US139.99, UK 99.99

Pronunciation Instruction in English for Academic Purposes by John Hodgett is a research-based volume that presents the current position of second language (L2) pronunciation instruction within the context of a 10-week pre-sessional English for Academic Purposes (EAP) course. It loos into how course goals, and teachers' cognition about these goals, shape pronunciation teaching and assesment, and its main interesti to explore whether tachrs give pririt to intlgbilit r natie speaker pech pattens Levis, 2005, 2020) in L2 pronunciation teaching and assessment. To determine the factors afecting teachers views and practices on the issue, Hodgetts examines teachers' selfreports and their observed practices with a special focus on the teaching of L2 supra-segmentals. An investigation of teacher and testing goals and thir alignment with those of the institution is another primary area of intrest in this volume Learner-riented topic inude self-onfidenc in pronunciation, lener views on theefftieness of pronunciation instruction, and their attitudes to nativeness in perception and production.

The volume reports the findings of a inglestudy carried out at an institution in the UK; however, the comprehensive nature of this study and the meticulous presentation of each section provide insights into the desired position of pronunciation, and especiall of suprasemental teaching and assessment, in the EAP syllabus. Hodgetts aims to give a better understanding of pronunciation teaching from a range of theoretical and methodological perspectives, although attempting to addressall these in a single volume perhaps makes some sections too broad and les cohesive and may have prevented the book from achieving a complete overlap between the theoretical background section and the rest of the volume. Probably because the book i originally based on dissertation work, there are places where it i not as succict as it could have been; however, reding each chapter inspires new ideas in pronunciation teaching research.

The booki organized into six chapters which follow asimilar pattern to that of a dissertation. A detailed appendix provides all the questionnaires and other materials such as marksheets or interview questions, which makes the book useful for teachers as well as researchers planning to undertake similar projects. The introduction (Chapter 1) presents the author's motivation for carring out the study and an overview of the contents. Chapter 2 is thorough description and discussion of the historical evolution of pronunciation instruction and language learning in general, beginning with Prendergast's mastery system and Marcel's rational method. Also included are brief discussins of audiolingualism, contrastive analysis, eror analysis, universal grammar, markedness theory, sociocultural theory, the natural and communicative approaches, as well as the post-method and humanistic approaches and world Englishes. The chapter ends with a presentation of relevant pronunciation techniques. These subsections, each of which is one to three pages long, are linked, and a theoretical foundation for each is included along with the critiques. Chapter 2 therefore provides a comprehensive overview of the history of wellknown approaches and methods, with a specific focus on pronunciation instruction It would be a valuable reference for anyone wanting to earn more about the historical overview and evolution of pronunciation teaching together with the recent related debates.

Chapter 3sets out the background to the study conducted by the author. I defines supra-segmentals and how they were previously researched for a better understanding of pronunciation instruction. Some of the issues raised are native-like speech patterns vs. intelligilit, comprehensibility, accentedness and lingua franca core. Previous studies on suprasemental instruction as well as pronunciation testing and assessment in EAP contexts are also discussed. This chapter is an invaluable resource for scholars seeking topics o research, as wellas syllabus and curriculum designers and practitioner looking for theory-based practical tip, especially for teaching supra-segmentals. It also yields useful for those who would like to become more familiar with subject-specific terminology. The following chapter (Chapter 4) describes the research design, context, reearch questions, procedures, and other related parts of the methodology. What makes this chapter differ from other mixed-methods research reports is the thorough descriptions of implementation along with the rationale for each method used. The way Hodgets presents the methods isaccessble for teacher reearchers Who may be hesitant about carrying out their own action research, and his inrospective and even at times quite self-critical evaluations of each step are helpful for researchers and practitioners alike.

Chapter 5 informs the reader about problems in situating pronunciation instruction and assessment within a course syllabus. Instead of simply precribing what needs to be done to improve intelligbility-based suprasegmental instruction, the book presents insights by a teacher-reearcher as to what was sucessul and leseffective due to factors such as lack of planning, course goals or differences in teachers cognitions and their estimatio of the value of pronunciation teaching. This i a valuable atribute of the book. as it helps the reader feel engaged as a teacher and a researcher. By giving an account of different teachers and their classroom practices, Hodgetts identifies some possile challenge f adopting an intellgibilit-ased pronunciation teaching and assesment programme. Lack of learning objectives and course goals regarding pronunciation instruction and asessment are reported as the key challenges, together with lack of guidance for teachers and information about how to integrate pronunciation teaching and asesment into the EAP classrom. Chapter 6 summarizes the findings of the study and provides some inspiring suggestions for future research.

However, the book inevitably has some shortcomings. In his introductory chapter, the author could have provided a quick overview of his rationale for chooing particular datacollection strategie. This would allow the reader to gain a more comprehensive synopsis of the content of the book and the approaches adopted. In addition, parts of Chapter 2 might be revised to include more information about pronunciation teaching in each approach and/or method reviewed. Readers might also be interested in reading the complete transcriptions of the interviews although space constraints may have prevented this. Another shortcoming is the extent to which learners attitudes are incorporated into the book. Although one of the four main research questions (p. 90) relates to leaners, the book does not include enough on this aspect of the topic. Teachers perspectives and practices dominate the narrtive, so readers who are primarily interested in learners' attitudes are advised to lower their expectations in this respect.

However, despite these limitations, the book's in-depth and multiple-method approach to investigate pronunciation teaching and assesment sets it apart from similar publications on the topic. The volume is a great resource for a number of reasons. It provides an up-to-date review of relevant research and gives a complete and authentic picture of the status of pronunciation instruction and assesment in a whole-course syllabus through the eyes of teachers. It also guides researchers designing similar projects by giving a thorough explanation of various methods and tools, making it a valuable resource for curriculum, course, and syllabus designers seeking critcal advice and guidance as well as those looking for new and inspiring fild of inquiry for developing reearch ideas. The most crucial findings reported in the book indicat that there is a general lack of understanding about intelligbility-based pronunciation instruction, and mismatches between sated course goals and the actual practice The contribution of the book is noteworthy in showing that i is high time for ad hoc approaches to pronunciation teaching to be rlaced by reerch-informed, intelligbility-based, yet realistic approaches to pronunciation teaching and assessment.

# Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

# Ethical procedure

N/A.

# Declaration of competing interest

None.

# References

Levis J.M (2005.n nt ad hiig pgms i pition hg 0rerl, 93), 369-37. hp/.g/0307/358485 lev