# 'This study is not without its limitations": Acknowledging. limitations and recommending future research in applied linguistics research articles

D. Philip Montgomery

Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Limitations   
Future directions   
Move/step analysis P-frame analysis

Acknowledging limitations and making recommendations for future research are often presented in thesis handbooks and rubrics as obligatory moves that demonstrate an author's critical selfevaluation and authority. Published research articles (RAs), however, reflect nuanced variation that challenges this interpretation. Based on two specialized corpora of 100 quantitative and 100 qualitative RAs from four applied linguistics journals, this mixed methods study combines genre analysis, which highlighted the relative prominence of these moves across methodological approaches and journals, and p-frame analysis, which generated a list of linguistic frames with one or more variable slots (e.g., it is important to \* (note/mention/realize) that emphasize flexibility within formulaic language structures. The results indicate that both moves are quasi-obligatory but vary considerably across methodologies and journals. EAP instructors might use genre analysis to evaluate rhetorical moves and steps together with students and to discuss ways to incorporate variety in academic writing using the list of p-frames identified in this study.

Move-step and corpus-based analyses have made the nuances of academic writing more visible (Biber, 2009; Hyland, 2008b, Swales, 2004), especially for multilingual (L2) and emerging scholars who have distinct challenges in gaining membership into academic discourse communities (Duff, 2010; illis & Curry, 2006). To make the case for their contribution, junior and senior scholars alike must demonstrate methodological rigor and a critical understanding of the field. One key place where authors do this is in acknowledging limittions and recommendin future rearch, often in the form f a two-step move in the discussion or coclusion section of research articles (RAs) and sometimes with a section header like Limitations and Future Directions (Lim, 2008)

Many genre analyses of RAs focus on one section of the manuscript. The introduction, literature review, and methodology sections of RAs have been investigated extensively and have been found to share move-step frameworks within a single discipline (e.g., Bruce, 2014; Cheng & Unsworth, 2016; Cortes, 2013; Cotos et al., 2017; Lu et l., 2018; Yang & Allison, 2003). Similarly, discussion and conclusion sections have been examined (e.g., Basturkmen, 2012; Hopkins & Dudley-Evans, 1988; Joseph & Lim, 2019; Kanoksilapatham, 2015; Peacock, 2002) and shown to be key places where authors rgue the significance of their work, situate it in relation to current rsearch trends, and draw implications for research and practice. In their analys of the discussion sections from 60 RAs in Forestry, Joseph and Lim (2019) found that nearly two-thirds included a recommendation for research, and four-fifths recommended practical applications. They found several linguistic mechanisms to be commonly used to recommend future research, such as using semantically emphatic verbs (e.g., warrants, merits) and predicator-object structures (e.g, provide valuable insight) to highlight neessity and foreground potential benefits. Together with recent research that has found important variation acros methodological paradigms (Kwan, 2021; Kwan et a., 2012) ths line f resarch has revealed how certan rhetorical moves and the linguistic resources used to accomplish them converge and diverge across text types or disciplines.

This study examines two specialized corpora of 100 quantitative and 100 qualitative RAs from four applied inguistics journals to explore variation among these moves, including their prevalence and prominence, across methodological approaches (qualitative vs. quantitatie research paradigms) and journals. A move-step analysis was used to identify the frequency of each move as an indicator of obligatoriness, where occurrence of the move in $1 0 0 \%$ of the RAs is considered "obligatory" and frequencies of $5 1 \% - 9 9 \%$ are considered "quasi-obligatory (Wong & Lim, 2014, p. 151; Yang & Allson, 2003, pp. 372-374). This scale highlights the view that "obligation' in genre analysis is not easily defined and that academic writing is as flexible as it is rigid. Additionally, a prominence scale was developed to quantify the extent to which move was used, whether included subtl or indirectly at the sentence level or emphasized as a paragraph-length description with a section header. These two genre analyses are combined with a p-frame analysis, which generated a list of linguistic frames with one or more variable slos (e. it i mortan t \* (note/mention/rize). A functional analysis of the most common frames ilustrae the multitude of approaches an author might employ to critically examine their work and provide readers with potential next steps. By combining genre and corpus methods of textual analysis, this sudy aims to holis tically examine these two moves in a way that EAP students, instructors, and researchers can apply to their work.

# . Limitations, recommending future research, and tacit knowledge

Acknowledging limitations is understood here as critically examining one's own methodology and avoiding misinterpretation, while recommending future research includes posing potential research questions, populations, methods, or approaches, thereby actively contributing to a dialogue between researchers and scholars. While typically considered two separate moves, they are often intertwined and play a complementary role in positioning an author and their writing in the field, thus requiring authorial voice, acrucial feature of strong academic writing (Hyland, 2008a; Yoon, 2017). The following excerpt from the corpus llustrate this relationship:

Admittedly, as with any study that aims to stake out new territory, the research reported here has limitations. Although sig. nificant results were found, the sample sizes of learners in both treatment and comparison groups were relatively small. For a more accurate measurement of the effcts of drama-based instruction on oral fluency, future studies would ideally obtain a larger number of participants. We note, however, that many classroom-based studies suffer from this limitation. (Quant limitation corpus, emphases added)

The author presents limitations (underlined) directly and unapologetically even though they are assciated with les "accurate measurement", perhaps in order to create a sense of transparency and critical reflection of the research. The recommendations in bold) are embedded between two sentences descriing the limitation and it relationship to methods and other similar studies. Joseph and Lim (2019) found that this combination of the two moves create a \*rhetorical shift' whereby \*possble future criticisms are forestalled' (p. 134). Their study revealed that such rhetorical shifts are common in Discussion sections and require varied comb. nations of inguistic mechanisms. Like the other strands of research about authorial evaluation, such as stance, metadiscourse, and appraisal (Xie, 2020), oice i a socially defined trit hat even expert PhDdsrtation avisers may struggle to identify consistently in their students' writing (Morton & Storch, 2019). Studies that describe and demystify the textual and functional elements contributing to authorial voice are therefore valuable for students and teachers alike.

Limitations sections, as Sun and Crosthwaite (2022) argue, allow writers to \*address caveats about their findings, methods or claims while counterbalancing any problems by justifying their choices and minimizing any impact f the limitations on the validit of the findings" (p. 2). The authors found that PhD thesis authors commonly co-articulate negation (e.g, no, not) with phrases of appraisel (e.g., expressing an attitude, counteringa previous idea, jstifying atance) in predictable ways across disciplines. Lim (2019) adds that acknowledging astudy's limitations can be a "tacit way of signalling the writer's caution' (p. 49) in the methods section as well as in other sections of the RA. Recommending futre rearch siilarl rpresents a way to pre-empt reiewer criticism and requires writers to engage directly with other scholars. Cheng and Unsworth (2016) found that scholars must strategically and diplomatically negotiate conflict as they make novel knowledge claims and cast doubt on the ideas of other scholars, primarily in the discussion sections. They argue that RA discusson sections reflect authors' tacit conflict resolution techniques as they choose to confer legitimacy on some findings while refuting others. Furthermore, genre conventions vary across cultures, meaning that both English proficiency and cultural values play a role in how authors navigat the proces of positioning their resarch in relation to others (Loi et al., 2016; Peacock 2002). Given the social and contextual backgrounds that writers bring to the task of writing, it is important to examine \*communi. ty-sensitive linguistic resources" (Hyland, 2008a, p. 20) from multiple perspectives..

To undersand the advice literature shaping graduate student writing in applied linguistics, I examined three thesis writing handbooks (Bitchener, 2010; Evans et al., 2014; Plridge & Starfield, 2020) which present both moves as ways to demonstrate critical self-evaluation and rior when writing discussion and conclusion section. Importantly, they are presented as obligatory move. In his handbook for thesis-writing in applied linguistics, Bitchener (2010) presents limitations as "a platform upon which to make recommendations for further research (p. 203), idell as a separate section with an extended discussin of thestudys shortcomings. Other handbook authors similarly recommend explicitly stating a study's limitations as a way to communicate thoughtfulnes and one's "abilit a a critical thinker (Eanst al., 2014, p. 114), or to demonstrat the abilit to anticipate and navigate problems Paltridge & Starfield, 2020). Limitations are thus primarily understood in the avice literature as shortcomings and flaws. How these moves are used and constructed in RAs, however, remains unclear and is therefore the focus of this study.

# 2. Rhetorical move-step analysis of limitations and recommendations for research

Swalesian genre analysis (Swales, 1990, 2004) greatly influenced the way rhetoric is researched and taught, especiall in applied linguistics. Particular attention has been paid to the concept of the rhetorical move, defined as a \*discoursal or rhetorical unit that performs a coherent communicative function in a written or spoken discourse" (Swales, 2004, p.228). Move-step analysis, as a systematic analysis of the rhetorical units and subunits that make up a text, has been widely applied in different disciplinary and geographical contexts to \*illuminate] the constraints of social contexts on language use" (Hyland, 2008b, p. 543). In other words, a move-step analysis can shed light on the oten-murky question of what exactly writers do to successull contribute t the creation of new knowledge. Genre analysis is commonly used to study RAs as gatekeeping macro-genres that play a central role in what knowledge is accepted, disseminate, and adopted by academic discourse communities (Yang & Allison, 2003). For example, analyses of RA introductions have identified the most commonly used lexical bundles (Cortes, 2013) and the ways authors communicate criticality (Bruce, 2014).

Genre analytical studies that have examined RA discussion and conclusion sections, where acknowledging imitations and recom mending future reearch are most common, alternately identify them as either a combined move (e.g., Kanoksilapatham, 2015), two discrete moves (Peacock, 2002, p. 492), or separate steps within different moves (Boonyuen & Tangkiengsirisin, 2018, p. 117, emphasis added):

Move 7 Evaluating the study. Step 1 Indicating limitations Step 2 Indicating significance/ advantage Step 3 Evaluating methodology   
Move 8 Deductions. Step 1 Making suggestions Step 2 Recommending further research Step 3 Drawing pedagogical implications

Importantly, no single move has been found consistently to be obligatory (that is, occurring in $1 0 0 \%$ of the samples). For example, Peacock's (2002) study examined 252 engineering RAs and found that acknowledging limitations appeared in $4 3 \%$ of the RAs, while recommending future research appeared in $5 9 \%$ Kanoksilapatham (2015) analyzed 92 RAs across three sub-fields of engineering and discovered that the combined move of stating limitations and future research ranged from 69 to $8 5 \%$ Similar to the present study,. Boonyuen and Tangkiengsirisin (2018) examined 103 article discussion sections from four applied linguisics journals from 2011 to 2015. Drawing on Yang and Allison (2003), their move-step framework separates limitations and recommendations as two steps that authors take to evaluate and make inferences from their research, respectively. In their analysis, which did not differentiate between quantitative and qualitative studies, the authors found that $3 6 \%$ of studies explicitly acknowledged limitations, $3 2 \%$ recommended future research, and that these two steps commonly appeared together. These results are summarized in Table 1.

These data paint an incomplete picture of how these two moves are used in RAs. Several considerations help justify the approach outined in the following section. First, the large differences across fields and even acros studies within the same field warran the continued rarch into these moves. Interestingly, none of the studies reviewed in this section indicate that these moves are required, Which contrasts the advice aimed at students reviewed in the previous section. Second, the studies reviewed here were limited to discussion sections, which did not capture the variet of ways that the two moves may be used in other parts of the paper, suggesting that frequencies of these moves may be more common than previously reported. Third, in addition to disciplinary variation, a text's research paradigm (qualitative vs. quantitative) has ben found to influence linguistic variation. For example, Gray (2013) docu. mented how in aplied linguistics and political science, quantitative RAs use nominalizations and passve voice more frequently than qualitative RAs, while Gao et al. (2022) found that qualitative RAs in applied inguistics use theories more extensively than quantitative RAs. By examining discusion and conclusion sections for paradigmatic differences, this study seeks to add an important aspect of these two moves not addressed in previous research.

# 3. Combining genre and corpus-based analysis

One way to understand genre features more holistically is to adopt a mixed methods approach to genre analysis by adding multiple layers of textual analysis (Polio & Friedman, 2016). For example,corpus-based analyses have ben combined with genre analysis to more "comprehensively [define] the conventional moves and steps' found in a text (Cotos et al., 2017, p. 91). Among others,

Table 1 Frequencies of moves by study.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Author</td><td>N</td><td>Discipline</td><td>Acknowledging limitations</td><td>Recommending future research</td></tr><tr><td>Peacock (2002)</td><td>252</td><td>Engineering</td><td>43%</td><td>59%</td></tr><tr><td>Kanoksilapatham (2015)</td><td>92</td><td>Engineering</td><td></td><td>69-85%a</td></tr><tr><td>Boonyuen and Tangkiengsirisin (2018)</td><td>103</td><td>Applied linguistics</td><td>36%</td><td>32%</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Acknowledging limitations and recommending future research were considered one move in this study.

Flowerdew (2005) has argued that combining genre and corpus analytical approaches can counteract some of the weakneses of each approach used by itself.

One such corpus analytic tol that can complement atextual gere analysis phrase frame (or p-frame) analysis. Defined as "multi word sequences in which words form aframe' around a variable slot (Lu et al, 2018, p. 78), p-frames occur prominently in academic writing (Biber, 209) and can be especiall useful in graduate instruction of emerging and multilingual cholars. P-frames have ben argued to have an advantage over lexical bundle, in that they account for the balance between formulaic language and variability in academic writing (Lu et al., 2018; Yoon & Casal, 2020). For example, Lu et al.'s (2018) p-frame analysis identified 454 pedagogically useful p-frames in social science RA introductions, confirmed with interviews with language teaching experts. The authors describe the utility of the frame the \*f thestuy, which can be filled b wors like urose, go, moiation and ationl, and arge that rather than providing lists of continuous frames (e.g, on the one hand), teachers of academic writing should provide explicit attention to such discontinuous variable frames.

Given the contrast between the advice literature about thesis writing and the practices revealed in published RAs, there is a need to explore the connection between acknowledging limitations, demonstrating criticlity, and recommending future research. An exploration of frequency, prominence, structure, and function of the two moves would ilustrate the multifaceted and contextdependent nature of the two moves. Guided by these concerns about how authors chose to acknowledge limitations and recommend future research, this study seeks to answer the following questions:

1. How are acknowledging limitations and recommending future research used in applied linguistics RAs? a. How prevalent are the two moves across methodological paradigms? b. How prominently featured are these two moves across publications and methodological paradigms?   
2. How are acknowledging limitations and recommending future research constructed? a. What linguistic features are most common? b. What communicative functions are associated with each move?

# 4. Methods

The study adopted a mixed methods design (Hashemi & Babai, 2013) involving two analytical approaches amed at approaching a single phenomenon from different perspective. In this study, multiple source of data were collcted and analyzed concurrently using methods appropriate to each approach, and data integration occurred at the interpretation stage. As Riazi (2017) has argued, this approach allows the researcher to draw on the well-established strengths of each method. The data included in the study come from a corpus of 577reearch article from 2013to 2019, which were collected, cleaned, and analyzed by Gao et al. (2022). Using a narrowed corpus of the 200 most recent RAs in that corpus, a genre analysis was conducted to determine the frequency and prominence with which authors acknowledged limitations and recommended future research. All exemplar moves, ranging from one sentence to several paragraphs in length, were collected into two specialized corpora, one for acknowledging limitations (31,653 words), and one for recommending future research (3,600 words). Second, a p-frame analysis identified the most salient linguistic structures and communicative functions reflected in these moves.

# 4.1. Genre analysis

The corpus of 200 RAs $( 2 0 1 6 - 2 0 1 9 ^ { \mathrm { 1 } } )$ ) was compiled from four applied linguistics journals: TEsoL Quarterly (TQ), Modern Language Journal (MLJ), Aplied Linguisic (AL), and Journal of Second Language Writing (JSLW). These journals were selected for both their prominence in the field and their inclusion of quantitatie and qualitative studies. To explore enre ifferences across methodological lines, the studies were divided into 100 qualitative studies and 100 quantitative studies to reveal paradigmatic variation i.e, across methodological paradigms) in the two moves. Within this collection of applied linguisics RAs, \*quantitative" studies were defined as those that tally, manipulate, or systematically aggregate quantities of data, while \*qualitative" studies were those that relied on ethnographic observations and interviews or text, narrative, discourse, or conversation analysis (Gao et al., 2022). Mixed methods studies were excluded from this analysis.2

Based on a close reading of $1 0 \%$ of the studies, 10 quantitative and 10 qualitative studies, I generated a list of common phrases to acknowledge limitations (e.g., limit, thi study, despite, though), which were used as keyword searches using AntConc (Anthony, 2019) to identify limitations throughout each articl. I also read the discussion and conclusion sections of each paper in the corpus to identify limitations presented in other ways. repeated the proces for each text using keywords associated with recommending future research (e.g, future, furthr, rearch, studie, need, should). These exmplar moves were collected and annotated in Microsoft Excel, with each article as a separate row.

Next, each article was assigned a prominence score from O to 4 for each move: $0 = { \mathfrak { n } } 0$ mention of a limitation or recommendation for research; ${ 1 = \mathsf { a n } }$ indirect mention at the clausal level; ${ \bf 2 } = { \bf a }$ single direct mention at the sentence level; $3 =$ multiple sentence-level mentions or the use of an explict referentil device (e.g., There were a number of limitations ..) across one or more paragraphs $4 =$ a dedicated section with limitations" or "future directions" included in a heading. A second rater coded 10 quantitative and 10 qualitative studies ( $1 0 \%$ of the dataset) for prominence, resulting in an agreement rate of 0.96. I then coded the remainder of the corpus using the two coding systems presented in Appendix A.

# 4.2. P-frame analysis

The text identified in the genre analysis as exemplar moves were moved into text ile, one per article resulting in two specialized corpora: acknowledging limitations (31,653 words) and recommending future research (33,600 words). Table 2 presents the word counts of each move by journal. Although large corpora are the standard in many corpus-based studies, specialized corpora are used to analyze narrower ub-genres of texts, as they exhibit more regular patterns and distributio than large corpora (Koester, 2010, p. 69) When texts in a corpus are representative of a subset of texts, genres, or participants (Flowerdew, 2004), they remain contextualized and therefore enable a more socially situated analysis..

Following Lu et al. (2018), I included five- and six-word frames, which tend to be the most semantically complete. I used AntGram (Anthony, 2019) to extract both one-slot and two-slot frames (e.g., the [results/findings/limitations/context] of the [curent/present] study). To be included, five-word p-frames needed to occur at least four times (97 per million words (Pmw) in the acknowledging limitations corpus, 118 PMW in the recommending futre reearch corpus), include at least two variant, and appear in at least three texts. Six-word p-frames required two occurrences (49 PMW for acknowledging limitations, 59 PMW for recommending future research) that included at least two variants and appeared in at least two texts. Although threshold limits are rather arbitrary (Biber et al., 2004; Candarli & Jones, 2019), these were set to identify the most salient p-frames to highlight their usefulness in teaching and writing. Furthermore, while these raw frequency minimums may be low compared to other corpus studies, they are well above PMw thresholds commonly se (e.g., Biber et al., 2004). The p-frames were manuall filtered to include those that acknowledged limitations or recommended future research, formed a complete linguistic constituent, and were not subsumed under larger frames. The limitations corpus included 45 five-word p-frames and 12 six-word p-frames. The recommending future research corpus included 27 five-word p-frames and 9 six-word p-frames.

Finally p-frames were analyzed using Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (2010) functional taxonomy to classfy p-frames into pedagogically useful groupings. The framework builds on the work of Biber et al. (2004) and includes thre categories of expressions: referential, stance, and discourse, each with secondary sub-level categories: A) referential expressions pecify atributes, ofen including prepositional phrases (eg., the \* of this study), ) stance expressions include hedges, suggestions of possbilit, and other expressions that make epistemic or evaluation claims (e.g. t would be \* to \*), and ) dicourse organizing expressions guide the reader's focus by seting or elaborating the topic, or by using metadiscourse (e.g., this study did not \*) (Simpson-Vlach & Ellis, 2010). Because p-frames are variable, some were labeled as multi-functional (see Lu e al., 2018 for adiscussion of this approach; se Appendix B for examples).

# 5. Results

The first two sections answer the first research question regarding the use of two moves-acknowledging limitations and recommending utre reearchn applied linguistics RAs. Specifially, how prevalent and how prominent are they?Thethird section presents the results of the corpus-based analysis aimed at answering the second research question about the linguistic features and communicative functions most commonly employed in constructing each move.

# 5.1. Obligation

Acknowledging limitations occurred with roughly the same frequency as recommending future research in each of the four journal. Table 3 presents the raw frequencies of RAs that include an acknowledgement of limitations or arecommendation for future research (i.e., those texts receiving a score of 1-4).

Overall, the qualitative studies appear to indicate that these moves are quasi-obligatory (Joseph & Lim, 2019), with frequencies i. e., the proportion of articles in the corpora that included the target move) ranging from 52 to $9 2 \%$ AL was the journal with the lowest frequency of the two moves, while MLJ had the highest. Both moves were on average more frequent in the quantitative studies $( 8 8 - 1 0 0 \%$ . AL again had the lowest frequencies, while TQ had the highest rate of inclusion. Recommending future research in this journal was the only instance where a move was obligatory (i.e, $1 0 0 \%$ , although the $9 6 \%$ found in the quantitative studies in other journals was approaching obligatory, with 24 out of 25 studies including the move. I conducted a two-way Pearson's Chi-square test which confrmed sigficant iffernes in frequency betweenthe qualitative and quantitative sub-corpora for acknowldging limitations (X-squared $= 1 1 . 3 3 3$ $\mathrm { d f } = 1$ p-value $=$ .0008) and recommending future research (X-squared $= 8 . 3 9 2 2$ 3 $\mathrm { d f } = 1$ p-value $= . 0 0 4 )$ . This suggests that the distribution of the moves is not independent of methodological paradigm. RAs reporting on quantitative analyses tend to include both moves more frequentl than RAs presenting qualitatie data. This dfference across methodological paradigms was not found in previous genre analyses.

Table 2 Corpus size by journal.   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Journal</td><td>Limitations</td><td>Recommending future research</td></tr><tr><td>Applied Linguistics</td><td>7932</td><td>7088</td></tr><tr><td> Journal of Second Language Writing</td><td>7226</td><td>7687</td></tr><tr><td>Modern Language Journal</td><td>7375</td><td>8724</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL Quarterly</td><td>9120</td><td>10101</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>31653</td><td>33600</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Move frequency by journal $( \% )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Journal</td><td>N</td><td colspan="2">Qualitative</td><td colspan="2">Quantitative</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Limitations</td><td>Recommending future research</td><td>Limitations</td><td>Recommending future research</td></tr><tr><td>AL</td><td>25</td><td>52%</td><td>64%</td><td>88%</td><td>92%</td></tr><tr><td>JSLW</td><td>25</td><td>84%</td><td>80%</td><td>96%</td><td>96%</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ</td><td>25</td><td>88%</td><td>92%</td><td>96%</td><td>96%</td></tr><tr><td>TQ</td><td>25</td><td>80%</td><td>80%</td><td>96%</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>100</td><td>76%+</td><td>79%</td><td>94%+</td><td>94%</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: $^ +$ (comparing the limitations sub-corpora across methodological approaches) $\mathbf { p } < . 0 0 1$ and^ (comparing the recommending future research subcorpora) $\mathbb { p } < . 0 1$

# 5.2. Prominence

The prominence cale revealed variation of the two moves across journals not captured in frequency data (Table 3). For example. authors concerned about highlighting to many weaknesses in their study may write about limitations in a sentence or two (1 or 2 on the prominence scale), while authors who view limitations as methodological challenges to be overcome in future studies may devote entire paragraphs or sections to discussing them (3 or 4). The mean scores and standard deviations are reported by journal and move in Table 4.

In addition to a tendency for both moves to occur more prominently in quantitative studies, recommending for future research on average occurs more prominently than acknowledging limitations. Using R Studio (R Team, 2022), I ran two ANOVAs to determine Whether the prominence of each move was significantly different between journals and paradigms. No significant interactions were found between journal and paradigm. Significant main effct for both ournal and paradigm were found for each move (Limitations: F $( 4 , 1 9 5 ) = 1 2 . 7 8$ $\mathbf { p } < . 0 0 1$ ; Recommending future research: $\mathrm { F } ( 4 , 1 9 5 ) = 1 1 . 5 5$ $\mathbf { p } < . 0 0 1 \mathrm { \AA }$ . Post-hoc comparisons were conducted using Tukey's HSD test. Results indicate that prominence scores were significantly higher for quantitative studies than qualitative studies. Significant differences in scores $( \mathbf { p } < . 0 1 )$ were found between Applied Linguistics and each of the other three journals, but not among any other pairs. For instance, qualitative studies in $A L$ on average include both moves briefly, indirectly, and limited to the length of a single clause, while similar studies in JSLw, MLJ and TQ are more likely to have more elaborate use of these moves, with the average around 2.0 reflecting asingle direct mention at the sentence level. In quantitatie studies, it i common to find longer paragraph-lel discussions of both moves in JSLW, MLJ and $T Q ,$ while studies in AL make less extensive use of these moves.

# 5.3. P-frames and their communicative functions

Turning from the general ways that acknowledging limitations and recommending future research vary by methodological approach or target journal, the functional classfication of p-frames reveals the specific communicative purpose performed by the linguistic structures in the corpora. Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (2010) framework was used to identify the functional categories of each p-frame. Several categories in that framework were not found in this study, perhaps due to the pecialized nature of the corpora, and have been omitted. Below, I present an overview the distribution of p-frames by functional categories summarized in Table 5 and provide examples of the most salient findings (see Appendix B for a complete list).

Stance frames were the largest primary functional group in both corpora, supporting the claim that both moves contribute to authorial voice. Referential and discourse frames in the acknowledging limitations corpus each constituted nearly a third of the uses, while in the recommending future research corpus stance frames occurred more frequently and with a much wider margin over referential and discourse frames. Examples from the most prominent sub-groups are discussed.

Referential p-frames. Specification of attributes was the most widely used referential function to acknowledge a study's limitations in RA writing. These are phrases that identify concrete ntities or abstract oncepts or categories. For example, the \* of this study was a popular frame to point out name and describe the study's limitations.

Table 4 Mean move prominence scores by journal and methodological paradigm.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Journal</td><td colspan="2">Qualitative</td><td colspan="2">Quantitative</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Limitations (SD)</td><td>RFR (SD)</td><td>Limitations (SD)</td><td>RFR (SD)</td></tr><tr><td>AL</td><td>1.0 (1.26)</td><td>1.3 (1.31)</td><td>2.2 (1.38)</td><td>2.6 (1.12)</td></tr><tr><td>JSLW</td><td>1.9 (1.26)</td><td>2.3 (1.33)</td><td>2.9 (0.95)</td><td>3.1 (0.88)</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ</td><td>2.1 (1.27)</td><td>2.4 (1.04)</td><td>2.8 (1.26)</td><td>2.9 (1.02)</td></tr><tr><td>TQ</td><td>1.8 (1.38)</td><td>2.3 (1.37)</td><td>3.0 (0.98)</td><td>3.1 (0.72)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Notes: RFR: recommending future research; $^ { 1 = }$ indirect or clausal mention, $4 =$ included in section header.

Table 5 Distribution of p-frames by communicative function.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Functional category</td><td>Exemplar</td><td>Acknowledging limitations</td><td>Recommending future research</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Group A. Referential</td></tr><tr><td>A1. Specification of attributes</td><td>the * * in this study (one/methods/program; used/utilized/ investigated)</td><td>13 (29.5%)</td><td>11 (22.0%)</td></tr><tr><td>A2. Identification and focus</td><td>* how and to what extent (examine/explore)</td><td>0 (0.0%)</td><td>2 (4.0%)</td></tr><tr><td>A3. Contrast and comparison</td><td>Clearer * of the relationship between (understanding/description)</td><td>1 (2.3%)</td><td>0 (0.0%)</td></tr><tr><td>Group subtotal</td><td></td><td>14 (31.8%)</td><td>13 (26.0%)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Group B. Stance</td></tr><tr><td>B1. Hedges</td><td>future research * also explore (could/might/may)</td><td>2 (4.5%)</td><td>2 (4.0%)</td></tr><tr><td>B2. Epistemic stance</td><td>be * in future research (addressed/developed)</td><td>5 (11.3%)</td><td>5 (10.0%)</td></tr><tr><td>B4. Evaluation</td><td>need to be * with * (interpreted/understood; caution/some)</td><td>9 (20.5%)</td><td>21 (42.0%)</td></tr><tr><td>Group subtotal</td><td></td><td>16 (36.3%)</td><td>28 (56.0%)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Group C. Discourse</td></tr><tr><td>C1. Metadiscourse and textual</td><td>the study did not * (allow/take/attempt)</td><td>14 (31.8%)</td><td>7 (14.0%)</td></tr><tr><td>reference</td><td>in order to * the (validate/test/explore)</td><td>0 (0.0%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C4. Topic elaboration Group subtotal</td><td></td><td>14 (31.8%)</td><td>2 (4.0%) 9 (18.0%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>44 (100%)</td><td>50 (100%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

(1) The limitations of this study need to be stressed ..   
(2) Future research would also benefit by including students' perspectives, a move which was beyond the scope of this stud. ..

These two excerpts reflect n important author choice. While excerpt 1 presents limitations together as a group, using this frame to introduce a list f concerns, excerpt 2 presets a limitation togeter with a sugestion for future research. This is acommon approach that reflects the close link between the two moves, as described in the literature and a point further discussed below.

Excerpts 3 and 4 recommend future research using the frame the \* of the \* study.

(3) The results of the current study highlight the need for increased research focus on ...   
(4) More research is needed ... to generalize the findings of the present study.

This frame exemplifies the various strategies for recommending future research. In excerpt 3, the author uses their results to further narrow research focus on a promising new area of research. In excerpt 4, the author recommends a simple shift i focus to include participants and contexts not ye studied. In ll four of these excerpts, the authors appear to adhere to Evans et al.s (2014) suggestion for authors to approach imitations in a straightforward and unapologetic way, and neither frame limitations as weaknesses.

Stance p-frames. Evaluation phrases were the most frequent sub-category of stance frames in both corpora. These are phrases that express judgement. Excerpts 5 and 6 demonstrate how the frame it is important to \* enables the author to make value claims.

(5) It is important to note that this study is limited to data ..   
(6) Additionally, it is important to acknowledge that the test scores from three measures ..

By claiming that something is important" and guiding the reader to note" or "acknowledge" thestudy's limitations, the author is taking on an authoritative role. Evaluation statements like these strengthen the author's voice at a point where they may appear the weakest. Together with similar frames like need to be \* with \* (inered/dersood/ddesed; caution,some, difeent) and this study did not \* (identify/control/consider), these excerpts demonstrate that, while limitations can be used as a platform from which to make recommen dations, authors can use evaluation phrases to project an authoritative voice while presenting the limitations thmselves. This point echoes the advice found in thesis writing handooks to approach littions in a straightforward and unalogtic manner (g., Evas e al., 2014), although this may e challenging for novice scholars who may have een taught that limitations are directl linked to the study's problems or flaws ., Paltdg & trfield, 2020). It sould also be notd that excrts 5 and6 come from concusion sections, higlighting th fact that these moves are not limited to the discussion section.

Although eistemc claims i.., those having to do with knowledge claims) were not prevalent, the surprisingly common frame i not without \* limitations is worth discussing.

(7) Despite the contributory findings, this study is not without its limitations.   
(8) In spite of its merits, this framework is not without limitations.

This somewhat poetic frame is nearly universally paired with a contrasting prepositional phrase that highlights the study's con. tributions or merit. This construction uses an uncommon double negative and serves to state limitations as a matter of fact rather than an unexpected outcome. By further linking this frame to a strength of the study, authors are able mitigate the damaging ffct acknowledging limitations might have on the reader's opinion of the study's credibility.

Turning to recommending future reserch, ealuatin frames predominated over the ther stance frames. The frame it would be \* to \*s an especially versatile frame to accomplish this move.

(9) It would be interesting to see how FSB and its consequences could affect ..   
(10) First, it would be worthwhile to investigate the extent to which deeper processing of feedback led to...

The broad range of variants in each of this frame's two slots make it an ideal frame to teach L2 scholars. Other related frames highlight the variable nature of the modal \*would", as noted n it [would/will] be intesting, and it [should/must] be noted. In this way, evaluation frames can be modulated stronger or weaker as the author so desires.

Discourse -frames. Mtadscourse and textu refeence frames (i.., those that explicitly pointo the study or the procees related to creating or reading it) were the only type of discourse frame identified. As llustrated by the following excerpt with thisudy did not \*, these frames state specific limitations while referring to the study itself.

(11) This study did not identify participants' socio-economic status criteria and so cannot extend ..   
(12) Last, this study did not control for participants' L1. Extending the previous ine of research . future research can ..

These excerpts llow the author to acknowledge a limitation more as a constraint than aflaw. Additionall, as in excerpt 2, excerpt 12 highlights the possibility of presenting a limitation coupled with an associated recommendation.

This coupling is further noted in the metadiscourse and textual reence frames found in the recommending future research corpus. Consider these excerpts with the frame the present study has \*.

(13) It is noted that the present study has some limitations to be addressed in future research. First .. (14) Finall, the present study has used cros-sectional data to stand in for change that is thought to occur over time, but longitudinal designs will help shed further light on ..

In both, the author esentiall combines the two moves, which supports Kanoksilapatham's (2015) defining them as a single move. As with excerpts 5 and 6, both of these samples come from conclusion sections.

# 6. Discussion

The textual analysis of 200 RAs drawing on both genre and corpus-based analyses revealed that acknowledging imitations and recommending future research 1) re two important moves often found in the discussion or conclusion sections of RAs, 2)show variation in obligation and prominence across journal and research paradigms, and 3) include a range of communicative functions achieved by versatile phrase frames in multiple sections of the RA. The findings diverge significantly from the advice literature on reearch writing (e.g., Bitchener, 2010; Evans et al., 2014), and extend previous research.

With regard to the first research question, both moves were more commonly found in quantitative studies compared to qualitative ones, a finding which supportsprevious reearch that sugests genre practices iffer acros both disciplines (Bruce, 2014; Hyland 2008b) and paradigms (Candarli & Jones, 2019; Gray, 2013). It i important to note that earlier studies (summarized in Table 1) only examined the discussion section, while the present study includes occurrences of the two moves at any point in the manuscript. Although ths study found considerably higher frequencies than Boonyuen and Tangkiengsirisin (2018), fr instance, that study would not have included occurrences i the methods or conclusion sections. This central finding contradicts reearch writig handbooks that present both moves as unequivocally obligatory. While this advice may hold true for quantitative studies, nearly a quarter of the qualitative studies examined did not explicitly acknowledge limitations or recommend future research. The two moves may occur more frequently than described in previous reearch, yet not as frequently as suggested in handboos about academic writig, which may lead to confusion when emerging scholars learn to adapt to the demands of publishing a journal article. Some of this difference may be a result of the identification and coding schemes developed for this study; however, emerging and multilingual scholars will do well to account for these differences when transitioning to writing RAs for publication. The differences in how prominently authors present these moves i a major finding that ads a level of nuance on previous genre studies about the dicussion and conclusions of RAs (e.g., Boonyuen & Tangkiengsirisin, 2018; Kanoksilapatham, 2015). Despite the fact that some journals tend to feature articles with these moves more thoroughly presented, the pattern of emphasizing the recommendation for future research more prominently than the limitations heldtrue for al four journals. Importantly, the journals and RAs include only a sliver of the multidisciplinary field of applied linguistics, and that therefore these findings cannot make wider claims about disciplinary practices. However, they do indicate a potential for more studies that examine research writing across methodological lines and sub-disciplinary borders, like target journal.

The p-frame analysis (summarized in Table 5) was aimed at answering the second reearch question and demonstrated how authors in the two specialized corpora relied heavily on stance p-frames, constituting $3 6 \%$ of all p-frames expressing limitations and $5 6 \%$ of those recommending future research. Evaluation phrases in particular, like it is important to \* and it would $b e ^ { \mathrm { ~ * ~ } } t o ^ { \mathrm { ~ * ~ } }$ were commonly used to both acknowledge limitations and recommend future reearch. Interestingly, hedges (as stance-making devices) did not feature prominently in either corpus. This is perhaps because hedges are useful to show modesty and reservation, [or] avoid personal accountability" (Lu et al., 2018, pp. 82-83), while authors including these moves are seeking to demonstrate authority and actively participating in dialogic rearch writing. Further evidence iustrates how authors present weaknesses and constraint of ther stud in an unapologetic or straightforward manner (Evans et a., 2014). For example, referential p-frames (e.g, the \* of this sudy), which constituted about a thrd ofall limitations p-frames and about a quarter of al recommendatios for fuure rerch, diret the reader's attention to the specifications of the study and to highlight what the study did or did not include or achieve. This appeared to be relevant more for acknowledging limitations than for recommending future research, as evidenced by the larger proportion of discourse (e.g., this study did not \*) p-frames that reference the present text $( 3 1 . 8 \%$ compared to $1 4 \%$ respectively). This finding aligns with Joseph and Lim's (2019) characterization of the acknowledging limitations move as part of acommonly used \*rhetorical shift" (Joseph & Lim, 2019, p. 134) that bridges discussion of the current study with an introduction of future possibilities.

In line with previous studies (Boonyuen & Tangkiengsirisin, 2018; Joseph & Lim, 2019; Lim, 2008), linking the two moves was found to be a common strategy used by authors. One possible explanation is that by making evaluation claims or balancing statements of limitations with claims of contribution or value of the study, authors can strategically navigate between demonstrating critical awarenes of their study and over-emphasizing its perceived weaknesses. What is clear is that these two moves involve creative combinations of linguistic resources to achieve interconnected communicative functions. The p-frames identified in this study may serve as a strateic resource for scholars and intructors t illustrate the balance between formulaic and flexible language in academic writing.

Taken together, these strategic approaches to acknowledging limitations and recommending future research resemble other strategies employed by scholars, such as the diplomatic ways scholars deal with critical evaluation of others in scholarly writing (Cheng & Unsworth, 2016) and the use of various rhetorical devices, lie attitude markers and conceson contraexpectations in expressing criticality in research writing (Bruce, 2014). The two moves offer insight into authors' construction of their work (and themselves) in relation to their field, which highlihts the interrelation betweenwriten texts and the social ontexts of their authors (Xie, 2020), and the need for continued methodological innovation in combining analytical methods.

In terms of pedagogical implications, the study sheds light on the challenging balance betwen formulaic language and flexibility in academic writing. Genre analysis is a helpful analytical method for both reearchers and EAP intructors to use as it makesvisible the rhetorical conventions and variety found in a given gere. However if pplied prescriptively, it may stiflecreativity and the del. opment of author voice. This study has demonstrated that acknowledging imitations and recommending future research does not occur uniformly across methodological approaches or journals, and so EAP instructors would benefit from exploring this nuance with their students. One way they might do this i to conduct their own smallscale analysis of RAs in the target journals in their discipline o see Whether and to what extent they might include these moves. Similarly, p-frames may have an advantage over lexical bundles as a teaching resource because of their ability to capture both formulaicness and flexibility. EAP instructors can use lists of $\mathbf { p } \mathrm { . }$ frames like those found in Appendix B to intentionally promote novice writers ownership and choice in manipulating the words in the variable slots.

# 7. Conclusion

This study combined genre and corpus-based methods to shed light on the various ways applied linguists include, omit, highlight, or downplay acknowledging limitations and recommending future research in RAs. Using the insights gained from a close examination of these two moves in applied linguistics RAs, I close with a discussion of this study's own limitations, followed by several suggestions to guide those interested in pursuing similar research in future.

First, this study is limited to the field of applied linguisics, and moreover, to a subset of journals and scholars in this interdisc. plinary field. As noted above, genre features are highly discipline-specific and therefore do not readily apply to scholars in different fields or certain sub-disciplines within applied linguistics. As a reviewer pointed out, this is the most commonly studied field in this discipline, which may restrict our knowledge relating to the English used for specific academic urposes in other important disciplines. Similar inquiries conducted into a variety of different disciplines would contribute to a better understanding of how the RA varies across disciplines. Second, the coding protocols in the genre and corpus analyses relied primarily on impressionistic identification of the two moves and their functions. While these were mitigated by detailed interrater reliabilit procedures and supported by approaches takn in preious studies, i is possble that anther reahr could intrrt th same dafferny. Furthmore, the low frequency and prominence scores in the qualitatie studies may be in part to nuanced ways of expressing these moves that went undetected. Future studies would benefit from extending the pre-analytical examination to include more studies upon which to base the coding scheme, employing a corpus-driven approach to identifying the two moves, as wellas demanding a higher interrater reliabilit score with multipl raers. Finall, it would be interesting to document the ways authors uses of these moves change with time and experience, perhaps by atextual analys of the same author's work over their career, acompanied by read-aloud protocols to capture their decision-making processes related to spefic texts. Despite these constraints, this study responds to Duffs (2010 call for applied linguis to illuminate the "actual discursive practices and requirements of various fields and the ways in which students, instructors, and scholars are positioned by academic discourse, by institutions, and by interactions within them' (p. 186). Continued work is nedd to reealdifficult-to-e ndencie in rearh writing that infom grduate intuction, espcill for 2 and emerging scholars.

# Author statement

I have no competing interests to declare.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2023.101291.

# References

Anthony, L (2019). AntGram. Tokyo, Japan: Waseda Univrst (Verion 1.2.1) [computer software] htt://w.urenceanthony.net/software.   
ask Purposes, 11(2), 134-144.   
Biber, D. (2009). A corpus-driven approach to formulaic language in English. International Joundl of Corpus Lingusics, 14, 275-311.   
Biber, ., nad, ., & Cre, . (2004. f ou ok a.: xicl ude i universit techg and textboos. pled ngstics 53), 371-405.   
Bither, 10  s ts   d l.   
Byen ki. 8t t  li  th  gae writing. Arab World English Jounal, 9(3), 11-128. htps://awej.org/images/Allssues/Volume9/Volume9Number3September2018/8.pdf. (1), 85-96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.06.004   
ndli,   . 019        th 763. . org/10.3366/cor.2019.0170   
Cheg        f Academic Purposes, 24, 43-57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.09.001   
Core. 3      e 1 (1), 33-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2012.11.002   
Cots  f ,  . 017 e/t m r  ci  ri an crt. gish r ic e, 46, 90-10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.01.001   
Duf, .010.  tin n e e. e f Adnsics 30 19-192. /.10.1017 S0267190510000048   
Evans, D., Gruba, P., & Zobel, J. (2014). How to write a better thesis. Springer. htps:/doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-04286-29   
Flowerdew,  004). The am fr using gish iaie radrsd i ad psioage  T Uon,  U. onr .) Discourse in the professions: Perspectives from corpus linguistics (pp. 11-33). John Benjamins.   
Flowerdew, L 2005). An inttion f cous-d and ge-d apcto txt aalysis in A/P: trig critici gas ous-ased methodologies. English for Specific Purposes, 24, 321-332. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2004.09.002   
Ga . t  t ti- . in Applied Linguistics, 1(2), 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmal.2022.100006   
Gray, B. (2013). More than discipine: Uncovering multi-dimensional patterns of variation inacademic rearch artices. Corpora, 8(2), 153-181.   
Hshem,  a,013  m  a     pd sic. Th  l, 97.h/o. 10.1111/j.1540-4781.2013.12049.x   
Hin  t   131 https://doi.org/10.1016/0889-4906(88)90029-4   
Hyland,  (2008a).Dcilinr oe: Intrction in ch writin. ngish xt onstrction 1), 5-2. hps:/o.og/10.1075/.1.1.03hl   
Hyland, K (2008b). Genre and acadic writing in the disciplines. Lnguge Teching, 41(4) 543-562. htps:/doi.rg/10.1017/026144808005235   
Josph, R  019i     tit  r  iti n Forestry. ESP Today: Journal of English for Specific Purposes at Tertiary Level, 7(2), 124-147. English for Specific Purposes, 37, 74-86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.06.008   
Koester, 10ng     .   o f s si .679..   
wan, B... (2021). tin he dtinf a std Vitions acrs the eistgl tion i fomatin sts. brica, 42, 191-218.   
an, ..  . 012)r    f  ti   pt  reh paradigms. English for Specific Purposes, 31, 188-201. Written Communication, 23(1), 3-35. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741088305283754   
Li .00    ntn u  .), and language integration in higher education (pp. 131-154). Maastricht University.   
Lim J019.xici d ici uiicati f eil p  ao l mion of ng et wers communicative resources. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 37, 34-51.   
Loi, .  E,  Li  kkko. 2016mprison ty d is h il ss  e ais  , 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244016652925. April-June 2016.   
Lu,   J e. 018 p-m ist o s   itio.  of h for  e 36,76-5.   
ron, J h  019 g  i   Pi t wtin  rs tv. f ng 3, 15-23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2018.02.004   
Paltridge, B., & Starfield, S. (2020). Thesis and dissertation writing in a second language (2nd ed.). Routledge.   
Peck  00.ti ti t 497/.016/346007   
Polio, C., & Friedman, D. (2016). Understanding evaluating, and conducting second language writing research. Routledge.   
Riazi, A. M. (2017). Mixed methods research in language teaching and learning. Equinox.   
Simpson-Vlach, R., & Ellis N. . (2010). An acadmic formulas list New methods in phraseology reearch. Applied Linguistics 31, 487-512.   
Sun, . t, ). in t n  iae ing  t itis ction f h t cie. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101155   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research setings. Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Exploration and applications. Cambridge University Press.   
ong,   J014 tit sic r i ht s ctio of rtie s or econd language writing instruction. System, 45, 147-162.   
Xie J. 0f  ia n  l ti  f s   47 Article 100892. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100892 org/10.1016/S0889-4906(02)00026-1   
Yon 17  a ti  272..016.07.02.00   
Yoon . l        . linguistics (Vol. 95, pp. 282-305). John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/scl.95.12yoo.