# A corpus-assisted analysis of grammatical metaphors in successful student writing

Darby McGratha,\*, Cassi Liardet b

Macquarie iversit Austali), Rumeikn Asi Pcific niverity (Jn), Ctr fo nguage cation, 11 Jonjru, Beu-shi, it   
ken, 874-8577, Japan   
b Macquarie University (Australia), Department of Linguistics, North Ryde, Nsw, 2109, Australia

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords: Grammatical metaphor Academic writing Nominalisation

Research has established the critical role grammatical metaphor (GM) plays in academic discourse and argues for its explicit instruction. However, despite a growing body of research investigating students' use of GM, there is as yet no reference tool to assist researchers or instructors examining or teaching this powerful resource. Although some automated analyses are enabled through corpus tools, these studies are limited to derivational GMs. To respond to these inefficiencies, the present study presents a profile of GMs used in a 164,925-word sample of the British Academic Written English Corpus (BAwE). Our aim in compiling this profile was to identify which GMs successful students most commonly use in the four disciplinary groupings provided in the BAwE. By doing so, we are able to provide an introductory list of 2702 experiential GMs instructors could use to inform their teaching of GM and researchers could use to inform further GM investigations in other corpora.

# 1. Introduction

One way corpus investigations have supported language research and instruction has been the compilation, development and testing of word lists. These profiles f language use allow for more rationally stuctured and efficient vocabulary instruction. However, without consideration of how these lexical items interact with the grammar, a user's ability to make meanings is limited. In other words, users need to understand the way those lexical items are realised in the grammar and how those meanings create registers.

In informal registers, such as in everyday contexts, language tends to be dynamic or verb-heavy, with events generall enacted by human actors (Halliday, 1989; Hyland, 2009). In written academic discourse, however, language is more static, or synoptic; more noun-heavy and lexicall dense, it foregrounds events existing in cause-and-effect networks rather than actors experiencing or acting upon a situation, reulting in more objective, imperonal voice (Martin, 193; Schleppegrel, 2004). This shift requires more than just a specialise or expanded vocabulary t require users to reconstrue ther grammar such that the typical relationship between semantic meaning and grammatical form is reconfigured. Research into academic and professional discourse has identfied a linguistic resource that allows the grammar to be condensed into the technical, abstract lexis privileged in these discourse communities: grammatical metaphor (GM).

GM enables higher frequency function words and even full clauses to be reorganised into nominal groups with extensive modification, replacing more \*wordy", grammaticall complex structures. Consider, for example, the two sentences below. Using the conventions of Systemic Functional Linguistics, we can describe Sentence 1 as a sequence comprising two clauses inked through a relator, because.

1. Because he wanted Amy to be successful, John mentored her for years.   
2. John's DESIRE for Amy's sUCCEss led to a years' long MENTORING RELATIONSHI!

The participants are realised as nominal groups (he, Amy, John, her) and the processes as verbal groups (wanted, mentored). In other words, the semantics and the grammar match; they occur in the natural relationship of realisation that we would expect. When the meanings in the discourse semantics and the lexicogrammar are aligned, or occur in a natural, expected or matching' relationship, they are considered to be congruent (Halliday, 1985).

In Sentence 2, however, these relationships become scrambled. The original processes are now realised as nominal groups (wanted DESIRE'; mentored MENTORING RELATIONSHIP), the adjective is realised as a noun (successful sUccEss) and the surrounding participants and circumstances become supportive nominal elements (e.g., John's, years' long). Finally, the relator, because, is reconstrued as a verbal group, LED ro, reducing the sequence to a single clause. These shifts in the grammar are referred to as grammatical metaphors (GMs).

The term 'metaphor' is used here in its conventional sense, whereby an entity or event is presented as some distinct, but comparable, entity or event. However, where we might define lexical or conceptual metaphor as "understanding one domain of experience . in terms of another" (Koveses, 2020, p. 13), GM realigns the congruent grammatical expression of experience; it is\*a resource for scrambling, within limits, the realisation relationship between semantics and grammar (Martin, 2008, p. 803). Using language in this way is "much more than a vocabulary-building exercise", as Martin (2008) argues:

It allows writers, and people who learn to speak writing, to mean more than one thing at once. Because of the tension between semantics and grammar there are two levels of meaning involved, not one, with one symbolising the other, in afigure to ground relation . Stratal tension of this kind is something we all have to lean to manage, if we are to become functionally literate members of post-colonial societies. (p. 803)

The use of GM is characteristic of written, and specifically academic, modes f expression. It alows for the construction of dense nd complex noun phrases that have the benefit of being succinct but ask a lot even of accomplished language users. Consider the :xample below, taken from an undergraduate textbook.

1. A completely different approach has recently emerged that postulates that the syntactic comprehension deficit results from an impairment of general memory (Harley, 2006, p. 271).

This sentence, which is typical of academic discourse, not only requires the reader to mentally realign the lexicogrammatical forms with their semantic asis, but requires that they infer the information which is sriped from the text by the useof GM. This would lead to a more congruent unpacking resembling Sentence 2. The inferences are presented in square brackets.

2. [Somebody] has started to approach [studying something] diffrently. [They] postulate that [some people] cannot understand syntax well because [something] has impaired how well [they] remember [things] generally.

This is a remarkably challenging task for EAP learners. Not only are they expected to comprehend this style of discourse, but they are also expected to reproduce it in their own writing. If learners are to communicate efectively in academic and discipline-specific contexts, vocabulary instruction must be supplemented by an understanding of its interplay with the grammar (i.e., GM). It fllows. then, that language reearch must involve the identification and analys of the s occurring in the texts that aners wl be required to understand and produce. The present study seeks to provide such a resource, identifying which GMs learners are most likely to require in English-medium-instruction contexts, enabling more eficient and rationallystructured instruction of GM in EAP contexts.

# 2. GM research

GM research has largely focussed on its occurrence in scientific texts and is emergence as an indicator of academic literacy. Halliday (1985) originally identified the use of GM in scientifictexts, where the transitory \*happenings" characteristic of spoken discourse are effectively nailed to the page, and reorganised as static, stable phenomena that can be taxonomised, measured, categorised, evaluated, and defined, creating "a new kind of knowledge: scientific knowledge; and a new way of learning" (1993a, p.118; 1993b, p.111. When examining the ontogenesis of GM, Hallday (1993b) observed how children first construe interpersonal meanings metaphorically, exchanging one speech act for another, such as the declarative, I wish you'd just kep quiet for a moment functioning for the command, Kep quiet! (p. 104). Christie (2002) then found that ideational GM emerges instudents writing in the upper-primary years, with considerablecontrol over the resource mostly observed in successul writers' texts in the mid-secondary years. In their study of childhood literacy, Christie and Derewianka (2008) confirmed that the forerunners of GM, such as embedded clauses, appear in the writing of young children, but mid-secondary students demonstrated greater control over these resources.

While these studies investigated children's language development as a whole, observing the emergence of GM alongside other lexicogrammatical resources, others have focussed specifically on learners' development of GM. For example, Derewianka (1995, 2003) conducted a ten-year study of GM development inchildhood language and confirmed Halliday's observation that interpersonal GM emerged in lat childhood; however, it was not until adolescence that more complex types emerged. In a study of Chinese EFL learners' development of academic literacy, Liadet (2013, 2016b) identified intermediate pattens of construal such as isAGREs and UNSTABLEMer. he argues that instructors should regard such instances as indicative of GM development rather than dismissing them as misspellings or lexical errors (i.e., incomplete and non-word reconstruals).

Despite these extensive descriptions of the usefulness and application of GM for achieving academic iteracy, there have been relatively few studies investigating the instruction of GM. In fact the metalanguage required to teach GM has been described as too \*complex and messy" (Bourke, 2005, p. 93) for the language learning classroom, and students have been left to tacitly acquire this language tool rather than being explicitly taught how to use it (Liardet & Black, 2020). While studies of the teaching and learning of GM are relatively rare, they do provide insight into the powerful potential of explicitly teaching this resource, as early as the primary years (Gebhard et al., 2014) through to tertiary instruction (Liardet & Black, 2020).

An important consideration in GM research is the criticism that GM studies are often limited to a smallnumber of texts. GM analysis is context-dependent and can require extensive manual analysis to identify individual instances and then examine those instances for their textual impact. As aresult, much of the research explores how GMs unfold acrossa single text or emerge in a small sampling of texts (se, for example, Christie, 2012; Cristie  Derewianka, 2008; Coffin, 1997; Egins et al. 993; Fang et al, 206; Martin, 1991, 1993; Schleppegrell 2002). These studies have been immensely valuable in understanding the role GM plays in achieving the cohesion, lexical density and objective, impersonal voice valued in academic discourse, but they have rarely been complemented by larger studies.

Some researchers, however, have examined GM across larger bodies of texts using corpus tools. For example, Liardet (2013, 2015, 2016b, 2016a) developed a corpus-assisted approach to analyse GM occurrence across 520 learner texts. She combined manual analysis of a sampling of texts with large concordance searches of the identified forms. Although this approach enables large-scale analysis, it requires a time investment that is difficult for many to replicate.

Other researchers have sought to scale GM analysis by using corpus tools such as grammatical tgging to identify all nouns ending in suffixes such as ity or -ness ., reonsibility, ikess, or -age y, -sion/-tion, ment, sis, and -sure, , storage, try, actvation, assessment, analysis, and pressure) as these are nouns that commonly occur as nominalisations, the most common realisation pattern of GM (i.., processas thing and quality as thing). While tagging can expedit textual analysis at scale, much of this research focusse onthe frequency f only a spcific range f nominlisations (i., those nominalisations that are amenabletohis aproach) e. g., Biber et al., 2002; Holtz, 2009). Other patterns of GM are ofte left unobserved (e.g., applaud as APpLause, compare as comPARISON). Additionally, taing of this ty i nt sensitive to non-noinlising Gs ., proes realied as quality, as in pear as AP).As a result researchers and instructors are constrained to investigate and teach only a small range of GMs. further problem with these approaches is that not ll instances of an identified GM willbe functioning metaphorically. Statement, for example, may occur metaphorically as a nominalised proces, o it may refer to a document, such as in the context of a bank statement. Automated analysis cannot account for this.

There are, then, two significant issues in GM research. The first is a question of scale. Much of the research into GM has been focussed on a small number of text. This research has been invaluable in providing a sense of how GM functions at a textual lel and has given a good indication of the value of GM as a inguistic resource. What we lack is empirical, quantitative research that offers a broader picture of the ways in which GM is used. The second issue is the challenges that GM presents as afocus of analysisa scale. Fully automated analysisis simultaneously to broad and too retrictive. It s too broad in the sense that it lacks sensitivity to whether or not an item is functioning metaphorically, and toorestrictive in the sense that it can identify a limited range of GMs. The current study was designed in response to these issues.

# 3. Methodology

# 3.1. Developing the profile

To respond to these methodological challenges, the present study set out to develop a more eficient tool researchers could use to expedite analysis, as wellas gather empirical data to identify which GMs are most prevalent in undergraduate and master's-level writing, providing instructors a type of GM "word list" to inform instruction. With this in mind, the present study explores the following research questions:

1. What are the most common GMs used by successful undergraduate and master's-level student writers?   
2. How do these patterns of GM use vary according to discipline?

To investigate these research questions, we set out to examine subsection of the ritish Academic Written English Corpus (BAWE) a corpus of around 6.5 million words, consisting of academic texts graded at the level of 'merit or distinction' from four British universities. In other words, thee texts are exemplars of sccesful student writing. Importantly, the texts are not exclusive to English L1 users (Nesi et al., 2004). For these reasons the BAWE presents an excelent model for EAP students it is both aspirational and

attainable.

The following sections outline our processfor developing and refining a typology of GM, followed by a detailed description of the processes we followed to compile a balanced sample corpus from the BAwE for purposes of this investigation. We then discuss the procedures we fllowed to examine this sample corpus, both manually and using the concordancing function in the WordSmith Tools 8.0 software package (Scott, 2020). We report on our results and our statisical analyses of these results when comparing our findings to the full BAwE and within and across the four disciplinary groups, or meta-disciplines (Silver, 2006).

# 3.2. Defining the typology

The first requirement was to establish a framework for the identification of elemental, experiential GMs in our analysis. We took as our starting poin Halliday and Matthiessen's (1999) and Derewianka's (1995 typologies ofelemental GMs. However, we reduced the scope of the typologies for our purposes (see Table 1). The most notable set of omissions were what we have classified emergent GMs. These are GMs that are only metaphorical to the extent that they co-occur with true' metaphorical choices as constituents of a "syndrome" a group of co-occurring GMs (Halliday, 1993b). One exmple of this is in Halliday and Matthiessen's terms, the shift from thing to extension of thing. For example, in the first sentence below, the participant He is realised congruently as a nominal group. In the GM syndrome, however, the participant is releated to the role of extension of the nominalised proces, isAcmer. It i in this nominalisation that the primary metaphorical choice resides; the shift from he to is is in a sense, a by-product of the primary GM.

1. He disagreed [with the group]   
2. His disagreement [with the group]

The decision to omit emergent metaphors was not based on their incidental nature; they are an important facet of syndromes of GM. Instead, it was based on two factors: brevity and likely congruence. Because emergent GMs co-occur with primary GMs, it willbe sufficient to target the latter in any automated analysis. dentification of any co-occurring emergent GMs becomes a relatiely trivial matter. More importantly, many emergent GMs are likely to occur more frequently in a congruent sense. Therefore, an automated search of a corpus for GMs which included emergent forms would be likely to return a very large number of false positives. For example, had we included the shift from thing to extension of thing in our typology, the following sentence alone would return three false positives (his, his, and Lombroso's):

Gray also comments that if a wretched man has a vice it shows iself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids'- Lombroso's theory exactly. [0012b]

Logical GMs were also considered beyond the scope of the current study. A logical GM occurs when a conjunctive element, congrueny ied as latr . se), is instlisd y oun ase), ve    stion, e . Such GMs only co-occur with experiential GMs (Martin & Rose, 2007, p. 148) and so can be identified where experiential GMs are detected in the automated analysis. For this reason, from the perspective of using the data from the current study as a too for textual analysis, i will be suficient to use experiential GMs as search nodes for the identification of posibl logical GMs. For example, in the invented sentences below, the logical GM, RAson, can be unpacked into a congruent relator, because. In this instance, the relator as thing (because as RAsoN) co-occurs with the experiential GMs es and ABce (i.e., unpacked as she was sick and she was absent for a long time).

1. Her ILLNESS was the REASON for her EXTENDED ABSENCE.   
2. Because she was sick, she was absent for a long time.

For the identification of GMs, we applied two basic criteria. irst, instances should be broadly unpackable'. This was primarily established by applying Ravell's (1988) tests of derivation and agnation. The test of derivation examines whether a word can be unpacked morphlogically e., ssr unpacked as acesible. The es of agnation examines whether a word can be unpacked to its etymological agnate (e.g, ABurry unpacked as can). If a word could be unpacked in either of these ways, it was considered a candidate for GM.

The second criterion was that instances should include an inherent sense of semantic junction (Hallday, 1985) or stratal tension (Martin, 1992). In other words, there should be a sense in which the lexicogrammatical realisation is incongruent with is semantic meaning, such as when a procesis realised as a thing. It is relatively commonplace that a nominalisation willbe unpackable, as per Ravell's tests, but will not satisfy the requirement for semantic junction. This becomes clear if we compare the fllowing two BAWE sentences.

1. Inefficient supply chain mAnAGEMnr from Sainsbury left Tesco to pick up extra market share. [6021c] 2. The underpinnings of any successful E-Commerce stems are cases where technology has been used to support business functions, norms, processes, and allow the management to concentrate on what they do best. [6108 g]

Table 1 Typology of GM used in the current study (adapted from Halliday & Matthiessen, 1999; Derewianka, 1995).   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2" colspan="3">Semantic Shift</td><td colspan="4">Grammatical Shift</td><td rowspan="2">Example</td></tr><tr><td>Grammatical class</td><td></td><td>Grammatical function</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">Shift to thing</td><td>quality &gt;</td><td>thing</td><td>adjective &gt;</td><td>noun</td><td>Epithet/Attribute &gt;</td><td>Thing</td><td>good &gt; GOODNESS</td></tr><tr><td>process &gt;</td><td>thing</td><td>verb &gt;</td><td>noun</td><td>Event &gt;</td><td>Thing</td><td>guide &gt; GUIDANCE</td></tr><tr><td>modality of process &gt;</td><td>thing</td><td>auxiliary &gt;</td><td>noun</td><td>Auxiliary</td><td>Thing</td><td>can &gt; ABILITY</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">circumstance/minor</td><td rowspan="3">thing</td><td rowspan="3">aux + process &gt; preposition &gt;</td><td>noun</td><td>(+Process) &gt;</td><td rowspan="3">Thing</td><td rowspan="3">cannot see &gt; BLINDNESS how high &gt; ALTITUDE</td></tr><tr><td>noun adverbial group</td><td>Minor Process&gt; Loc/Ext/C&gt;</td></tr><tr><td>noun</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Shift to quality</td><td rowspan="4"> process &gt;</td><td rowspan="4"> quality</td><td rowspan="4">&gt; verb &gt;</td><td rowspan="4">adjective</td><td rowspan="4">Event&gt;</td><td rowspan="4"></td><td rowspan="4">inspire &gt; INSPIRING</td></tr><tr><td>Epithet/ Classifier</td></tr><tr><td>adjective Auxiliary&gt;</td></tr><tr><td>Epithet/ Auxiliary + Event&gt; Classifier Epithet/</td></tr></table></body></html>

In sentence 1, MaNAGemeN is a metaphorical realisation of the process manage. The nominalisation here is a processrealised as a thing in the lexicogrammar. In sentence 2, on the other hand, management refers to a person or group of people. There is n element of processto this nominalisation (people who manage), but the head of the phrase i nominal. In this case management istherefore a thing expressed congruently as thing. There is no tension between the semantic and lexicogrammatical strata, and so there is no grammatical metaphor. This is a key point at which the notions of nominalisation and GM diverge. There is substantial overlap, but they are not synonymous.

A further consideration with regard to semantic junction was the treatment of faded metaphors. The question of whether a met aphor is considered faded or dead rather than instantial or alive is essentially one of purpose or perspective (Derewianka, 2003; Halliday, 1998; Ryshina-Pankova, 2010). From the perspective of a proficient language user, it i clear that some instances of GM have been deployed so frequently that they have become systemic (Halliday, 1998, p. 39),instittiondlised (Derewianka, 2003, p. 192), or technicalised (Martin, 1993). These forms can be said to constitute dead or faded metaphors that are metaphorical in origin but have lost their sense of semantic junction as they have gradually been absorbed into congruent expression over time (Halliday offers the example of the quality hot functioning metaphorically as the thing heat, (1998). The current study took a liberal approach to the inclusion of these borderline categories of GM. The rationale for this approach follows previous researchers who have examined GM use by learners (Derewianka, 1995; Liardet, 2013; Ryshina-Pankova, 2010). Given that our intention was to inform EAL instruction, we made no assumptions about what would be metaphorical to learners. In other words, the fact that the thing heat has lost is sense of semantic junction for proficient language users says nothing of how it will present to learners.

# 3.3. Compiling the subcorpus

The texts in the BAWE realise 13 genre families derived from four academic meta-disciplines: Arts and Humanities, Life Sciences, Physical Sciences and Social Sciences. The corpus i further subdivided into four levels, which represent the year of study of the writer of a text, from first-year undergraduate students (Level 1) to master's-level students (Level 4) (Nesi & Gardner, 2012.

Because a focus of the current study was variation between disciplines, we tried, as far as was possible, to limit other sources of variation. One significant source of variation is communicative function and text type (Gray, 2013). For this reason, we took the decision to collect data from only one of the BAwE's genre families essays. For the purposes of the current study, we adopted the BAWE's broad clasifications of genre family, based primarily on generic staging and social purpose. Nesi and Gardner's (2012) breakdown of the 'Essay' genre family is reproduced in Table 2.

Essay i the most commonly represented genre family within the BAWE I constitutes 1237 of the 2858 texts in thecorpus (Nesi & Gardner, 2012). This i to be expected in the BAWE as essays are one of the most preferred pedagogic genres (Gardner & Nesi, 2013; Hale et al., 1996; Nesi & Gardner, 2012). Nesi and Gardner (2012, p. 257) characterise essays as the most "occluded genres because they are written to be asessed and then discarded'. In fact, some students may never read an essay beyond those they writ them selves. I follows, then, that essays are even more opaque to EAP learners, given the lack of exposure and the linguistc barers to grasping the language patterns common in essay writing. The opacity of essays, combined with the frequency with which students are expected to write them, make this genre family an appropriate focus for this study.

From the BAWE, we developed a subcorpus of 80 texts totalling 164,925 words. Thirty-two of these essays were written during the first year of undergraduate study, 20 in the second year, 15 in the third, and 13 were written during the first year of master's-level study. Although sampling was random, the final few texts for each meta-discipline were chosen from a more limited pol in order to ensure that the total word count for each discipline was roughly equal (Table 3).

Table 2 Characteristics of the 'Essay' genre family (Nesi & Gardner, 2012, p. 38).   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Social Purpose</td><td>Stages</td><td>Networks</td><td>Examples</td></tr><tr><td>to demonstrate/develop the ability toconstruct a coherent argument and employ critical thinking skills.</td><td>introduction, series of arguments, conclusion</td><td>may correspond to a published academic/specialist paper</td><td>challenge commentary consequential</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 BAWE subcorpus text description.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Disciplinary Grouping</td><td># of Texts</td><td>Total Words</td><td>Avg. Words/Text</td></tr><tr><td>Arts &amp; Humanities</td><td>20</td><td>42,193</td><td>2110</td></tr><tr><td>Social Sciences</td><td>20</td><td>42,757</td><td>2138</td></tr><tr><td>Life Sciences</td><td>20</td><td>41,597</td><td>2098</td></tr><tr><td>Physical Sciences</td><td>20</td><td>38,378</td><td>1919</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>80</td><td>164,925</td><td>2062</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4. Analysis & findings

# 4.1. Analysing and calculating GM frequency and dispersion across the subcorpus and the BAWE

Each text in the subcorpus was divided into clause complexes (in this case, sentences) and analysed manually by the authors for instances of GM using the typology detailed in Table 1. In total, our analysis of the 80-text subcorpus of BAWE essays produced a list of 2702 experiential GMs, which occurred 16,155 times. In other words, the manual analysis revealed that these 2702 unique GM types constituted $9 . 8 0 \%$ of the total number of words in the subcorpus. Notably, some of these GM types were found in the subcorpus also to be functioning congruently, as in the example of management i section 3.2. However, for purposes of our investigation, we were only interested in the number of times the GM occurred in the subcorpus and was functioning metaphoriclly. The fullist i reproduced in Supplement 2.

While an extensive list of GMs is helpful to the researcher analysing large corpora for the practitioner or student studying GM it is also helpful to know which GMs occur most frequently. We approached the notion of frequency from thee perspectives: normalised frequency, range, and dispersion. The firs of these, frequency, is direct measure of the number f times a GM occurs, normalised to occurrences per 1000 words to account for the differing lengths of essays in the subcorpus. Range is a straighforward measure of the number of texts in which a GM occurs, although for clarity we chose to present this as ercentage of total texs rather than raw range. Dispersion sits somewhere between frequency and range in that it measures the evennessof istribution across a corpus, while also accounting for the number of times an item occurs within a text.

There are several possible approaches to measuring dispersion (see Gries, 2020 for an overview). Juilland's $D$ (Juilland & Chang-Rodriguez, 1964) has en a standard for measures of dispersion in corpus linguistics for some time (Gardner & Davies, 2014, for example). However, it has been found to lack reliability in the analysis of corpora consisting of a large number of parts. Biber et al.

Table 4 The ten most frequently occurring GMs across the BAwE subcorpus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Freqnorm</td><td>Range: %</td><td>b DPnorm</td></tr><tr><td>1.</td><td>development</td><td>1.33</td><td>43.75</td><td>.71</td></tr><tr><td>2.</td><td>use</td><td>0.84</td><td>56.25</td><td>.51</td></tr><tr><td>3.</td><td>control</td><td>0.84</td><td>37.50</td><td>.65</td></tr><tr><td>4.</td><td>power</td><td>0.76</td><td>41.25</td><td>.59</td></tr><tr><td>5.</td><td>change</td><td>0.74</td><td>35.00</td><td>.69</td></tr><tr><td>6.</td><td>relationship</td><td>0.65</td><td>31.25</td><td>.68</td></tr><tr><td>7.</td><td>behaviour</td><td>0.61</td><td>33.75</td><td>.65</td></tr><tr><td>8.</td><td>rate</td><td>0.61</td><td>26.25</td><td>.78</td></tr><tr><td>9.</td><td>health</td><td>0.56</td><td>15.00</td><td>.84</td></tr><tr><td>10.</td><td>performance</td><td>0.55</td><td>8.75</td><td>.90</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Normalised frequency (per 1000 words). b Normalised deviation of proportions (distribution).

(2016) found thatthis was particularly true of lower frequency items, which includes most GMs. They also found Gries (2008; Lijfijt & Gries, 2012) normalised deviation of proportions $( D P _ { n o r m } )$ to be reliable for corpora of any size, and so it was used for the current study.. This is less because Juilland's $D$ would have been likely to cause problems for the current study, and more in the interests of 'future proofing' for any subsequent related studies. Gries' $D P _ { n o r m }$ is a value between 0 and 1, representing a perfectly even dispersion and an extremely uneven dispersion, respectively.

Using the findings from the manual analysis, we calculated normalised frequency, range, and dispersion across the subcorpus. The ten most frequent GMs, based on normalised frequency, are shown fo llustration in Table 4. We can appreciate the value of the three different mu  frqny  reerring to th table.  is fi on th ist  vrt o it higher vra frqueny, bu E has considerably greater range and is more evenly distributed. PerroRmance occurs quite frequently, but has relatively high $D P _ { n o r m }$ and low range, suggesting its occurrence is packed into a small number of texts.

Having established the frequency, dispersion, and range of GMs in essays, we elected to determine which, if any, of the three measures of frequency could be generalised to the BAWE as a whole. In other words, we aimed to establish whether the subcorpus results for any of these three metrics could reliably predict the occurrence of GMs across the full BAWE.

In order to do this, we manually analysed every occurrence of the 52 most frequent GMs in the subcorpus, based on normalised frequency, acros the entire BAwE. Our rationale for this was t explore whether the patterns of GM deployment found in the 80-text sample corpus were consistent with the dispersions of GM acrossthe BAWE. I other words, we sought to examine whether our findings in the sample corpus might be further generalisable to other genre families.

The process of calculating frequency, range, and dispersion for lexical word lists is relatively straightforward; however, it is important to note that calculating the ocurrence of GMs is complicated by the fact that not all instances of a GM type function metaphorically. Specificl, some instances highlighted in the automated concordances were found to be functioning congruently. This was especiall true of GM types in which the morphological form of the metaphor is identical to the congruent agnate (e.g., use as use). Therefore, when examining the concordances for each of the 52 highest frequency GMs, we needed to manually check each occurrence and classify it as either a fals positive or a positive. Instances of GM types that featured in the list but were functioning congruently in the text were classfied as false positives and removed from GM counts. Positives are those instances in which the GMs were correctly identified in the automated analysis and were functioning metaphorically. Our aim in doing this was to provide a more uanced harctritionf how itms fromth ittpically function., a thy more likely ocr mhoricall, a  oiive, or congruently, as a false positive).

Once these manual analyses were completed, the resulting data were compared with the results of the subcorpus analysis. The results were correlated using Pearson's $r ,$ significance testing was performed by way of T-tests $\stackrel { \prime } { a } = 0 . 0 5$ , and Cohen's d was used to interpret effect ize. Table 5 demonstrates how mixed the results were with respect to the predictive value of the subcorpus frequency data for the BAWE as a whole.

As Table 5 shows, the normalised frequency data had the weakest predictive power. Here, the datasets correlated moderately $( r =$ 0.53), but iffered substantially in terms of raw value. The fact the difference was statistically ignficant is not particularly germane here. Much more important for the value of the subcorpus data was the scale of the difference, which was substantial. $\stackrel { \cdot } { \boldsymbol { d } } = 0 . 9 0 \dot { \mathrm { ~ } }$ . In other words, the subcorpus data for normalised frequency had no real predictive power; we can infer very littl about the frequency of a term throughout the BAwE based on these data.

The data for range fared somewhat better, with a strong correlation between the subcorpus and full-corpus results $( r = 0 . 9 4 )$ , and only a small effect size ( $\stackrel { \cdot } { d } = 0 . 2 8 $ . However, dispersion was the measure of frequency that most accurately predicted the BAWE proper. Not only did the data for the subcorpus and the full BAwE correlate strongly $\left( r = 0 . 9 4 \right)$ , but the effect size was trivially small $\stackrel { \cdot } { d } = 0 . 0 9 )$ What this means is that the dispersion data for the 52 GMs analysed were very similar in our sample subcorpus and the BAwE. Given a sample size of 52, we can infer that much of the remainder of the list i likely o follow a similar paern. In other words, it is probable that the dispersion measure for a GM in the subcorpus will align quite closely with its dispersion throughout the corpus as a whole.

This is a positive result for the usefulness of the profile. While normalised frequency can be an important measure of the use of a lexical item, dispersion is arguably of more utility in language instruction because it gives a better indication of how likely a leaner is to encounter that itm. If we revisit the example of EVELOMEr and us diussed earlier, it beomes cler why. EVELOPME occurred with a greater aggregate frequency, but s was more evenly dispersed. This means that over series of texts, alearner is more likely to encounter use than DevELoPmeNr. A further example taken from the analysis of the subcorpus shows that reliance on normalised fre quency can present n inaccurate pictre of the utilit of a word. waLnc, which was analysed as a proces-as-thing GM, was the second most frequently occurring GM in the Life Sciences, and the 31st most frquently ocurring GM overall in the subcorpus,but it had dispersion of 0.98, which gives it a ranking of 1602. Range data showed that although there are 63 tokens of wALinc in the subcorpus, all of these occurred in a single text. In fact, the full-corpus data showed that whalnc only occurred three more times in the entire BAWE, and all of those occurrences were in one text.

The volume of data extracted from large-scale analysis will tend to drown out outliers such as waLng, but when the aim is to use smalle-cale analysis to make inferences about larger collctions of text, such outliers can be hugely problematic. Measures of dispersion are especially important for GM, because it requires manual analysis, and therefore tends to be limited to a comparatively small number of texts. Small or moderately sized manual analyses that focus on normalised frequency are suscetible to ifluence by highly specific items used in a small number of texts, or even a single text, as was the case with wHALING.

Table 5 Inferential statistics comparing GMs across the subcorpus and BAWE   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>r</td><td>p</td><td>d</td></tr><tr><td>Normalised frequency</td><td>.53</td><td>&lt;.01</td><td>0.90</td></tr><tr><td>Range</td><td>.94</td><td>.05</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><td>Dispersion</td><td>.94</td><td>.50</td><td>0.09</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 The top 60 GMs calculated by dispersion.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>DPnorma</td><td>Freqnom</td><td></td><td>DPnorma</td><td>Freqnorm b</td></tr><tr><td> possible</td><td>.48</td><td>0.46</td><td>combination</td><td>.73</td><td>0.15</td></tr><tr><td> use</td><td>.51</td><td>0.84</td><td>support</td><td>.73</td><td>0.25</td></tr><tr><td>changes</td><td>.58</td><td>0.45</td><td>relation</td><td>.74</td><td>0.33</td></tr><tr><td>power</td><td>.59</td><td>0.76</td><td>increased</td><td>.74</td><td>0.26</td></tr><tr><td>analysis</td><td>.62</td><td>0.45</td><td> necessary</td><td>.74</td><td>0.15</td></tr><tr><td> impact</td><td>.62</td><td>0.32</td><td>following</td><td>.75</td><td>0.27</td></tr><tr><td>influence</td><td>.63</td><td>0.23</td><td>contrast</td><td>.75</td><td>0.13</td></tr><tr><td>need</td><td>.63</td><td>0.28</td><td>end</td><td>.75</td><td>0.16</td></tr><tr><td>effect</td><td>.63</td><td>0.30</td><td>conclusion</td><td>.76</td><td>0.12</td></tr><tr><td> importance</td><td>.64</td><td>0.24</td><td>differences</td><td>.76</td><td>0.27</td></tr><tr><td>work</td><td>.64</td><td>0.34</td><td>order</td><td>.76</td><td>0.18</td></tr><tr><td>structure</td><td>.64</td><td>0.44</td><td>dependent</td><td>.76</td><td>0.12</td></tr><tr><td> behaviour</td><td>.65</td><td>0.61</td><td> research</td><td>.77</td><td>0.22</td></tr><tr><td>control</td><td>.65</td><td>0.84</td><td> interesting</td><td>.77</td><td>0.15</td></tr><tr><td>available</td><td>.65</td><td>0.25</td><td>reference</td><td>.77</td><td>0.16</td></tr><tr><td>ability</td><td>.66</td><td>0.35</td><td>pressure</td><td>.77</td><td>0.29</td></tr><tr><td>interest</td><td>.66</td><td>0.26</td><td>definition</td><td>.77</td><td>0.13</td></tr><tr><td>relationship</td><td>.68</td><td>0.65</td><td>costs</td><td>.77</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><td>whole</td><td>.68</td><td>0.20</td><td>empirical</td><td>.77</td><td>0.21</td></tr><tr><td> change</td><td>.69</td><td>0.74</td><td>competition</td><td>.77</td><td>0.23</td></tr><tr><td> likely</td><td>.69</td><td>0.25</td><td>emphasis</td><td>.78</td><td>0.16</td></tr><tr><td>lack</td><td>.69</td><td>0.19</td><td>growth</td><td>.78</td><td>0.25</td></tr><tr><td> understanding</td><td>.70</td><td>0.30</td><td>rise</td><td>.78</td><td>0.15</td></tr><tr><td> potential</td><td>.70</td><td>0.31</td><td>cost</td><td>.78</td><td>0.31</td></tr><tr><td> involved</td><td>.70</td><td>0.21</td><td>employment</td><td>.78</td><td>0.25</td></tr><tr><td> basis</td><td>.71</td><td>0.24</td><td>increase</td><td>.78</td><td>0.52</td></tr><tr><td>development</td><td>.71</td><td>1.33</td><td>interaction</td><td>.78</td><td>0.19</td></tr><tr><td>action</td><td>.72</td><td>0.24</td><td>rate</td><td>.78</td><td>0.61</td></tr><tr><td>sense value</td><td>.73 .73</td><td>0.30 0.33</td><td>related aim</td><td>.78 .78</td><td>0.15 0.12</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Normalised deviation of proportions (distribution). b Normalised frequency (per 1o00 words).

We were, then, able to establish that the dispersion data in the BAWE subcorpus were strong predictors of the dispersion of high. frequency GMs in the total BAWE, and that this was likely the case also for moderately frequent GMs. This enhances the utilit of the profil in language learning because it enables instructors to make decisions about what to teach based on the likelihood that leaners will encounter a given GM. Specficall, from the analysis of the subcorpus, we can reasonably argue that the GMs liste in Table 6 are those that students are most likely to encounter when studying and willneed to produce when writing Englis texts for academic purposes.

# 4.2. Interdisciplinary variation

We were interested not just in the frequency and distribution of GMs in the profile, but also how these frequencies varied across the meta-disciplines. This is an important consideration for EAP instruction because it speaks to concerns that an English for general academic purposes (EGAP) approach may be inappropriate, and that a more discipline-specific (English for specific academic purposes; ESAP) approach may be preferable (see, for example, Hyland & Tse, 2007).

As Table 7 shows, the overall normalised frequency for GM in the subcorpus was $9 7 . 8 0 \mathrm { p e r } 1 0 0 0$ words, or just under $1 0 \%$ of the total subcorpus. Acros the meta-disciplines there is a clear split between SS and LS on the one hand, with each having aGM frequency of a little over $1 0 \%$ , and AH and PS on the other, which both had a GM rate below $9 \%$ Interestingly, this split is not along the so-called. 'soft and hard subject divide. This accords with Gardner et al. (2019), whose multidimensional study of the BAwE found that the Social Sciences and Life Sciences scored positively on the dimension of Informational Density, while the Physical Sciences and the Arts and Humanities were negative. The salient features of this dimension in Gardner et al. (2019) were long words, nominalisations, attributive adjectives, and abstract nouns, all of which are characteristic of the use of GM.

Table 7 Overall frequency of GM by meta-discipline.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Meta-Discipline</td><td>Normalised Frequency (/1000 words)</td></tr><tr><td>Social Sciences</td><td>107.56</td></tr><tr><td>Life Sciences</td><td>105.44</td></tr><tr><td>Arts and Humanities.</td><td>88.74</td></tr><tr><td>Physical Sciences</td><td>85.80</td></tr><tr><td>All</td><td>97.80</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 8 Post-hoc analysis of GM frequency by group.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Pairwise Comparison</td><td>q</td><td>p</td><td>d</td><td>Cohen&#x27;s benchmarks</td></tr><tr><td>SS x PS</td><td>4.11</td><td>.02</td><td>0.89</td><td> large</td></tr><tr><td>LS x PS</td><td>4.05</td><td>.03</td><td>1.02</td><td> large</td></tr><tr><td>SS x AH</td><td>3.50</td><td>.07</td><td>0.71</td><td>medium</td></tr><tr><td>LS  AH</td><td>3.44</td><td>.08</td><td>0.79</td><td>medium</td></tr><tr><td>AH  PS</td><td>0.61</td><td>.90</td><td>0.12</td><td>trivial/no effect</td></tr><tr><td>SS  LS</td><td>0.06</td><td>.90</td><td>0.02</td><td>trivial/no effect</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 9 Pairwise comparison of GM overlap.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Groups</td><td>Overlap</td></tr><tr><td>AH x SS</td><td>47.56%</td></tr><tr><td>LS  PS</td><td>44.02%</td></tr><tr><td>SS x LS</td><td>46.34%</td></tr><tr><td>SS x PS</td><td>45.87%</td></tr><tr><td>AH  LS</td><td>42.77%</td></tr><tr><td>AH x PS</td><td>40.00%</td></tr></table></body></html>

An ANOVA comparing the text means for normalised frequency found that there was statistically significant variation in these results, $( F ( 3 , 7 6 ) = 4 . 8 1$ 3 $p < . 0 1 \AA$ . Table 8 offers the results of the post-hoc analysis using Tukey's HSD. Two of the pairwise comparisons were statistically significant, and in each case the effect ize was large, based on Cohen's (1988) benchmarks: $S S \times \mathrm { P S }$ and LS $\times \mathrm { { \bf ~ P S } }$ While these results are interesting from a theoretical perspective, it is important to consider their real-world implications. The fact is that the PS texts featured around 8.5 GMs per 100 words. In the Social Sciences, this rose to just under 11 GMs per 100 words

Table 10 GMs common in only one meta-discipline.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>GM Type</td><td>Gp.</td><td>GM Type</td><td>Gp.</td><td>GM Type</td><td>Gp.</td><td>GM Type</td><td>Gp.</td></tr><tr><td>account</td><td>LS</td><td>consideration</td><td>PS</td><td>growth</td><td>ss</td><td>related</td><td>ss</td></tr><tr><td>action</td><td>ss</td><td>cost</td><td>PS</td><td> improved</td><td>ss</td><td>relation</td><td>LS</td></tr><tr><td> active</td><td>LS</td><td>costs</td><td>PS</td><td> increase</td><td>ss</td><td>relationships</td><td>ss</td></tr><tr><td>activities</td><td>LS</td><td> damage</td><td>PS</td><td> increasing</td><td>ss</td><td>relative</td><td>LS</td></tr><tr><td> age</td><td>LS</td><td> decision</td><td>LS</td><td> influential</td><td>ss</td><td> required</td><td>PS</td></tr><tr><td>application</td><td>PS</td><td>decisions</td><td>LS</td><td> interaction</td><td>AH</td><td>research</td><td>LS</td></tr><tr><td>attempt</td><td>AH</td><td>dependent</td><td>ss</td><td> interesting</td><td>AH</td><td>response</td><td>PS</td></tr><tr><td>attitude</td><td>ss</td><td>design</td><td>PS</td><td> investment</td><td>ss</td><td>return</td><td>PS</td></tr><tr><td>attitudes</td><td>LS</td><td>desire</td><td>AH</td><td> labour</td><td>ss</td><td>rise</td><td>AH</td></tr><tr><td> balance</td><td>LS</td><td> difference</td><td>LS</td><td> learning</td><td>PS</td><td>shift</td><td>LS</td></tr><tr><td>based</td><td>LS</td><td>differences</td><td>LS</td><td> likely</td><td>LS</td><td> significance</td><td>ss</td></tr><tr><td>belief</td><td>AH</td><td>ease</td><td>Ps</td><td> management</td><td>ss</td><td>size</td><td>PS</td></tr><tr><td> beneficial</td><td>LS</td><td>education</td><td>ss</td><td> meaning</td><td>AH</td><td>step</td><td>PS</td></tr><tr><td>care</td><td>LS</td><td>emphasis</td><td>ss</td><td> necessary</td><td>LS</td><td>success</td><td>LS</td></tr><tr><td>choice</td><td>AH</td><td>empirical</td><td>ss</td><td> opinion</td><td>LS</td><td>successful</td><td> PS.</td></tr><tr><td>cognitive</td><td>LS</td><td>employment</td><td>ss</td><td>output</td><td>PS.</td><td> tendency</td><td>AH</td></tr><tr><td>combination</td><td>PS</td><td>end</td><td>AH</td><td>perspective</td><td>AH</td><td>thought</td><td>AH</td></tr><tr><td>communication</td><td>PS</td><td>evident</td><td>AH</td><td> production</td><td>PS</td><td>truth</td><td>AH</td></tr><tr><td>comparison</td><td>AH</td><td> expansion</td><td>ss</td><td> profit</td><td>PS</td><td>value</td><td>LS</td></tr><tr><td>competition</td><td>PS</td><td>extent</td><td>AH</td><td> quality</td><td>LS</td><td>vision</td><td>AH</td></tr><tr><td>complexity</td><td>AH</td><td>focus</td><td>ss</td><td>rate</td><td>LS</td><td>will</td><td>AH</td></tr><tr><td>concern</td><td>PS</td><td>foundation</td><td>ss</td><td>rates</td><td>ss</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>conflicting</td><td>AH</td><td>freedom</td><td>AH</td><td> reality</td><td>AH</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 11 GMs common in more than one meta-discipline.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>GM Type</td><td>4 Groups</td><td>GM Type</td><td>3 Groups</td><td>GM Type</td><td>2 Groups</td></tr><tr><td>analysis</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td>ability</td><td>AH, LS, PS</td><td>aim</td><td> LS, PS</td></tr><tr><td> behaviour</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td>available</td><td>SS, LS, PS</td><td> basis</td><td>AH, SS</td></tr><tr><td>change</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td> conclusion</td><td>AH, SS, PS</td><td>contrast</td><td>AH, PS</td></tr><tr><td>changes</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td>effect</td><td>SS, LS, PS</td><td>creation</td><td>AH, SS</td></tr><tr><td>control</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td> importance</td><td>SS, LS, PS</td><td>distribution</td><td>LS, PS</td></tr><tr><td> development</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td> influence</td><td>AH, SS, LS</td><td>following</td><td>AH, PS</td></tr><tr><td>need</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td> interest</td><td>AH, SS, PS</td><td>impact</td><td>SS, LS</td></tr><tr><td> possible</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td> involved</td><td> SS, LS, PS</td><td> increased</td><td>SS, LS</td></tr><tr><td>relations</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td>lack</td><td>AH, SS, LS</td><td> potential</td><td> LS, PS</td></tr><tr><td> relationship</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td> order</td><td>AH, SS, PS</td><td>practice</td><td>LS, PS</td></tr><tr><td>use</td><td>AH, SS, LS, PS</td><td>power</td><td>AH, SS, LS</td><td>pressure</td><td>SS, LS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>structure</td><td>AH, SS, PS</td><td>reference</td><td>AH, LS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>support</td><td>SS, LS, PS</td><td> sense</td><td>AH, SS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td> understanding</td><td>AH, LS, PS</td><td>whole</td><td>AH, PS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>work</td><td>AH, SS, PS</td><td>working</td><td>SS, PS</td></tr></table></body></html>

While these reults are statistically significant itis ifficult to base any pedagogical rcommendations n them. There is nothing hee to suggest that an EGAP approach to GM instruction is inappropriate.6

We next looked at variation in the specific GM types between each of the disciplines. To do this, we first employed Durrant's (2014) measure of overlap. As Table 9 indicates, none of the pairwise comparisons attain an overlap of $5 0 \%$ , which means that none of the four meta-disciplines shared more than half of their GM types with any other meta-discipline.

Because it included the entire profile, the measure f overlap was influenced by very low-frequency GMs towards the bottom of the distribution list (se Supplement 2). We therefore opted to look more closely at the higher-frequency GMs. An analys of the 50 bestdistributed GMs from each meta-discipline showed that of the 127 GM types in the combined list, 86 were unique to one metadiscipline (i.e,occurred in the top 50 for only one meta-discipline; see Table 10), whil 41 were shared. Of those that were shared, 16 occurred in two groups, 14 in three, and 11 were common in all four meta-disciplines (see Table 11).

The results here are suficiently flexible that an EGAP approach to GM instruction is justifiable. Table 10 shows a high degree of variation between metadisciplines, but much of this varation reies ath low-requency end of the list and somef it i ikely due to accidents of samplig. At the high-frequency end there is sill variation (Table 10). Thisaid, there is also commonality among the high-frequency GMs (Table 11), and even further down the lis. In total, 267 of the GMs identified are generic in the sense that they occur in all four meta-disciplines (see Supplement 1). This only comprises around $1 0 \%$ of the total profile, but in the context of syllabus development represents a substantial amount of language to work with.

# 5. Conclusion

The present study has aimed to provide an empirical account of the most commonlyoccurring GMs in successful university-level student writing through an examination of their us inthe BAwE. This systematic analysi of a subcorpus of eighty texts, fllowed by a manual analysi of the most frequently occurring 52 GMs from the initial investigation, has demonstrated comparable rates of dispersion from the subcorpus to the full BAWE. Specifically, based on Gries' (2008; Liffijt & Gries, 2012) normalised deviation of proportions, the data for the subcorpus and the full BAWE align strongly, suggesting that the dispersion measures revealed in the subcorpus analysis are a strong predictor of the dispersion of GMs acros the full BAWE, and thus offer a good indication of the use of GM in successful undergraduate writing.

The description is not exhaustive. A more complete picture would also include an analys of the use of logical GMs in academic writing. This was beyond the scope of the current study, but it is something to which we plan to return in a future study of GM syndromes in academic discourse. Further, whil the present study was limited to the occurrence of experiential GMs in a sample corpus of sucesful undergraduate and masters-level essays, further investigation would benefit from broader comparative analyses of GM use across larger corpora of disciplinary texts or between student levels.

Given the labour-intensive nature of identifying GMs, we hope that the procedures in the present study can serve as a protocol for researchers aiming to understand the nature of GM use in their own students' texts and perhaps to collect models of expert usage. For example, practitioners may choose to compile a small corpus of their own students writing and use this profil of GMs as the search nodes to apply a corpus-assted analysis. Comparing the dispersion and normalised frequency of GMs used in those learner texts against the BAWE, a corpus of successul student writing, will provide insight into learner usage, perhaps providing a baseline for measuring ongoing development. Another important direction for future research is applying the profile across expert corpora to identify how GMs are used in these exemplars. Excerpts of effective GM use in context are a valuable tol for helping students refine their own GM deployment.

This profile also offers the means to tailor instruction to either ESAP or EGAP teaching of GM. Analysis f the profil shows some ariation in the frequency of GM between some meta-discipline, but not to the extent that it might shift pedagogy. However, the GM types appear to differ substantially between meta-disciplines. For instructors whose circumstances require a more specific approach, the Appendi offers the 50 bestdispersed GMs by meta-discipline For a more generalised approach, Supplement 1 lists 267 generic GM types. The entire rofile (Supplement 2) can also be used as a means to search reading materials for likely GMs, whichis suited to either approach.

In conclusion, the present study has identified the most frequently used experiential GMs in sucessul student writig as found in a subcorpus of BAWE essays. The frequency, range, and dispersion of a subset of these GMs has been tested across the full 6.5 million. word BAWE corpus, with results suggesting that the rates of dispersion found across the subcorpus are broadly generalisable to the full corpus. While the resent study cannot make clams asto the use of GM in contexts beyond student writing, it has collated and tested an extensive range of GMs to be used as a resource for teaching this powerfl linguistc tol and facilitating more eficient reearch into its usage. As such, it is our hope that the identification of these GMs will motivate further investgation into GM, both in its abilit to characterise and measure learner development and critically, to inform more rationallystructured GM instruction in the EAP classroom.

# Declaration of interest

None.

# Author contributions

Darby McGrath: Conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, methodology, validation, formal analysis, investigation, data curation, writing - original draft/review and editing, visualisation, project administration. Cassi Liardet: Investigation, writing - original draft/review and editing, supervision.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101090.

# References

Biber . ad, ., Re, , Bd, ., el, . 2002. aig and wtig in the univesity  mdiminl corison. eol ely, 361) . https://doi.org/10.2307/3588359   
Biber, D.   ,    016.  it f Jln  e exs  coo J Corpus Linguistics, 21(4), 439-464. https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.21.4.01bib   
Bourke, J. M. (2005). The grammar we teach. Reflections on English Language Teaching, 4, 85-97.   
hrti  a   . and second languages: Meaning with power (pp. 45-66). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Christie, F. (2012). Language Education throughout the school years: A functional perspective. Wiley-Blackwell.   
Christie, F., & Derewianka, B. (2008). School discourse: Learning to write across the years of schooling. Continuum.   
Coffi . .n  t t .riti  . Social processes in the workplace and school (pp. 196-230). Continuum.   
Cohen, J. (1988). In Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). L. Erlbaum Associates.   
ewika 5.     T    shauare University.   
Derwiaka, . 203.al mhr in th ttionoce  n-adne,  ars  Rvell d.) mt metaphor: Views from systemic functional linguistics (pp. 185-220). John Benjamins.   
Durnt . 014     .  3 23569/ amt016 75-109). Pinter Publishers. 247-273. https:/doi.org/10.1207/s15548430jlr3803_1   
Gardner, D., & Davies, M. (2014). A new academic vocabulary list Applie Linguisic, 35(3), 305-327. htp:/doi.rg/10.1093/applin/amt015   
adr,  ,  (013   t winsics 31, 52. /g/9/in ams024   
dr, , B01 ,   itd Linguistics, 40(4), 646-674. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amy005   
d  Ch 01.  h r   i practices. Linguistics and Education, 26, 106-125. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.linged.2014.01.003   
Gra,  03)  iin  m f n   . , 53-11./. 10.3366/cor.2013.0039   
Gries, S. T. (2020). Analyzing dispersion. In S. T. Gries, & M. Paquot (Eds.), Practical handbook of corpus linguistics. Springer.   
Hl       ,   r  (19    s Series, 54, i-61.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985). In An introduction to functional grammar (1st ed.). E. Arnold.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1989). Spoken and written language. Oxford University Press.   
Hallday, (1)   r  i    ie   06-123) The Falmer Press.   
Hallday,  1993 th f ng sic  i  3-11 /.1018893900267   
Hallday,  (198n  ioiciin   i   ia nd functional perspectives on discourses of science (pp. 185-236). Routledge.   
Hallday, M K hee, .I (99. I ngrie toh g ech o ion (d e.ntinum.   
Harley, T. A. (2006). In The psychology of language: From data to theory (2nd ed.). Psychology Press.   
Holz,    -  .) Proceedings of the 5th corpus linguistics Conference Liverpool (UK).   
Hyland  209).s dysis Th cf a met  hre,  ri . sto s.)  wing te interface of corpus and discourse (pp. 110-128). Continuum.   
Hyland, K, se, . (2007).I the n adi voabuly. el Qrterl, 4(2) 235-253 hp/i.r/0.1002/.1545-7249.2007.b00058.x   
Juilland, A., & Chang-Rodriguez, E. (1964). Frequency Dictionary of Spanish words. De Gruyter.   
Koee,  (020  thr.   .,  f m   . 1327). e aor Francis Group.   
Lid 13  tar of Linguistics.   
Liardet, C. L. (2015). Academic literacy and grammatical metaphor: Mapping development. TES0L Intenational Jounal, 10(1), 29-46.   
Liardet, C. L. (2016a). Grammatical metaphor: Distinguishing succes. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 22, 109-118.   
Liardet, C. L. (2016b). Nominalization and grammatical metaphor: Elaborating the theory. English for Specific Purpose,44, 16-29.   
Liardet, C.L, lack, . 2020). rmp s. da poig he ower f grmatical metapor for caic conctio. Jounl f Egih for Acd Purposes, 45, Article 100843. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100843   
Liffjt, J, e, .. 012. rrtion h. iesion ad ustd   ra Io  of s sic. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 17(1), 147-149. https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.17.1.08lij   
arn, J. 1991izatin cie  sil  an ffin t  d.),ti   isic Approaches and uses (pp. 307-337). Mouton de Gruyter.   
Martin, J. R. (1992). English text: System and structure. John Benjamins.   
Mar .99. tt .    i power (Falmer).   
Marin, J.R. 2008) n and pd: -viliyingizatio  St, 196) 01-10. /./0.177/0957926508095895   
Martin, J. R., & Rose, D. (2007). In Working with discourse: Meaning beyond the clause (2nd ed.). Continuum.   
Nesi, H., & Gardner, S. (2012). Genres across the disciplines: Student writing in higher education. Cambridge University Press.   
ei , Shing ik-liams,  200t p ao the cric ng d deg a cos fBiis s wting Computers and Composition, 21(4), 439-450. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compcom.2004.08.003   
Raveli      i  . (pp. 133-147). Ablex.   
shna-Pana,.010 d msrh r f n   r  aad  fg gstio e Modern Language Journal, 94(2), 181-197. https:/doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2010.01016.x   
Sh  . 00.  t   for L   kn    ., g advanced literacy in first and second languages: Meaning with power (pp. 119-142). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Sh  0 n    a   a,   ., n w Contextualized frameworks (pp. 172-189). Continuum.   
Scott, M. (2020). Wordsmith tools (Version 8) [Computer software]. Stroud: Lexical Analysis Software.   
Siler,  06 f   r  ai.  d .due across disciplines (pp. 75-101). P. Lang.