# Bundles to beat the band in high-stakes tests: Pedagogical applications of an exploratory investigation of lexical bundles across band scores of the IELTS writing component

Ali Saadataraa, Gholamreza Kianya, Hossein Talebzadeh b,\*

a Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran Department of Foreign Languages, Faculty of Literature and Humanities, Kharazmi University, Tehran and Karaj, Iran

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Genre   
High-stakes tests   
IELTS   
Lexical bundles   
Mock exams   
Writing component

Lexical bundles (LBs) in ESL/EFL examinees' writings and the effectiveness of their instruction on the learners' performance are under-researched as far as international high-stakes examinations, particularly IELTS (International English Language Testing System) writing genre(s), are concerned. To fill these gaps, the present two-phased study, in its exploratory phase, aimed at investigating the form, functions, and distribution of LBs in approximately 1000 mock academic IELTS writing tasks across three levels of writing competence. For the next phase, a pedagogical intervention was implemented and its impact on improving the performance of the IELTS candidates was evaluated. The results demonstrated that the higher the proficiency of the examinees, the higher the frequency and range and the more varied the structures and functions of deployed LBs. Additionally, the majority of the LBs were equally dispersed in all parts of the texts although there were some instances which characterized introduction, body, or conclusion sub-sections. Finally, the adopted explicit functional pedagogical approach was found to be effective, especially in boosting cohesion and coherence and lexical resources scores. Highlighting the nature of IELTS texts as distinct genres, we conclude with the implications of studying (and teaching) LBs for writing instruction and examination.

# 1. Introduction

The last decade has witnessed an accumulating body of research in EAP/ESP writing studies on lexical bundles, which has been supported by continued refinements in computer-assisted methods of iscourse analysis. Also called clusters (Hyland, 2008; Schmit, 2004), n-grams (Banerjee & Pedersen, 2003), phrasal lexemes (Moon, 1998), formulaic sequences (Li & Schmitt, 2009; Schmitt & Carter, 2004), recurrent word combinations (Altenberg, 1998; De Cock, 2000), chunks, multiword expressions (such as collocations and idiomatic expressions), prefabricated chunks, ready-made utterance, multiword constructions, formulas (Wood & Appel, 2014; Wray, 2002), sentence stems (Syder & Pawley, 2014), chains and bundles, these structures appear to occur in discourseboth spoken and written-- more frequently than has been previously understood (Biber et a., 199; Hyland, 2008; Shirazizadeh & Amirfazlian, 2021; Simpson-Vlach & Ellis 2010; Stubbs & Barth, 2003). Wray (2002, p. 9) defines a formulaic sequence as \*a sequence, continuous or discontinuous, of words or other elements, which is, or appears to be, prefabricated: that is, stored and retrieved whole from memory at the time of use, rather than being subject generation or analysis by the language grammar. The hypothes concerning the holistic storage and retrieval of formulaic sequences is claimed to be supported by mixed and inconclusive evidence, which questions the psycholinguistic validity of formulaic sequences as single wholes (e.g. Biber et al. 199; Elli et al., 2008; Jiang & Nekrasova, 2007; Nekrasova, 2009; Tremblay et al., 2007; Tremblay et al., 2011, among others) nevertheles, it i argued that 1 users of English process these structures faster than 2 users of English due to the ample exposure they have to iput a compared to L users impoverished input (Ellis et al., 2008).

As Staples et al. (2013) argue, a notable proportion of the available literature has focused on the differences between (English) L1 and L2 users aplication of LBs, while only few studies have explored LBs across proficiency levels (e.g., Vo, 2019). Furthermore, even the findings of such few studies appear to be contradictory, with some concluding that learners with lower proficiency use more LBs than those with higher proficiency and vice versa (Boers et al, 2006; Forsberg, 2010; Myles et al., 1998; Vo, 2019). Additionall, despite their significant consequences for language learners' future, international high-stakes examinations (including IELTS and TOEFL) are not aply inestigated in the iterature, and they remain to be what Hyland (2003) call inderellagnres (one exception can be Staples t al., 2013; se earson, 2019 on the incrsing power and impact f E as ate-king intittions well s its being a distinct written genre). inall, many studies conducted on lexical bundles have been predominantly descriptive in nature, without making ample eforts to be more explanatory or reveal the potential efects that instruction of LBs might have on the students' actual performance and writing development (e.g., Li & Schmitt, 2009).

To fill these gaps, the present two-phased study aimed at investigating LBs in a corpus of writing Tasks 1 and 2 of IELTs (Academic) mock exams in its first exploratory phase. Specifically, in the first phase, we intended to identify the most common Ls in the whole corpus, in each of the thre score categoriesbelow (yet not including) 5 5 to 7 (excluding7); above 7-of IS writing tasks; we also identified the most common Bs i relation to the scores received for the selected IES scoring criteria (i.e. Lexical Resource (LR) Grammatical Range and Accuracy (GRA), and Cohesion and Coherence (CC) (hence our frst research question). Additionally, we sought to examine the LBs acros the three score categories of mock ELTS writing tass in terms of their frequencies, structres, and functions (hence the second research question). Moreover, the distribution of the LBs, namely, where each LB with a particular function occurred in the written texts (i.e., Introduction, Body, and/or Conclusion) was investgated (namely, the third research question). In the second phase of the study, the researchers examined whether instruction has any significant effct on the participants' Tasks 1 and 2 texts. Particularl, we wanted to see whether the teaching of high achievers' LBs could have significant ffects on the lower achiever ovrall EAademic witin cores and ther setive critriai., C R, adGRA score thefore, r last research question).

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Lexical bundles: definition, processing, structure and function

The advancement of technology and developments in corpus-related studies have enabled researchers in language pedagogy and corpus linguistics to get a clearer grasp of both spoken and written discourse. The last decade has witnessed increased empirical research that attends to disciplinary, genre, population, and discourse variations of lexical bundles. As noted above (see 1. Introduction), exical bundles (LBs) have been defined and named differently in the literature. For Nattinger and DeCarrico (1992) lexical phrases are \*chunks of language of varying lengths (p.1) with remarkable formal, functional, and statistical atributes. Lexical bundes and formulaic sequences (most ofen used interchangeably) are regarded as fixed formulas procesing and retrieving of which have been argued to be holistic and top-down.

This formulaicity and holistic processing are best captured in Wray's definition of formulaic sequences (see1. Introduction above) as well as Palmer's definition of cllocations, centuating the holistic nature of LBs, as "sucesions of words . that (for various, different and overlapping reasons) ... must or should be learned, or is best, or most conveniently learned as an integal whole or independent entity, rather than by the proces of placing together their component parts' (Palmer, 1933, p.4). Consequently, their processing and rtrieval are much easier for both 1 and L2 users (Wray & Perkins, 2000) stil, 1 uers of a language are believed to have an advantage in comprehension and production over L2 users thanks to the ifferential quality and quantit of input Elliset al. 2008; ee also Adel & Erman, 2012; Karabacak & Qin, 2013). As noted above, there is nevertheless sill not a consensus on \*the question of whether formulaic sequences are stored and processed holisticall in the mind (Tremblay et al., 2007, p. 260), and there are some conflicting results (depending on the task and experiment types) which cast doubts on taking LBs as valid psycholinguistic units retrieved from memory as single wholes (se Jiang & Nekrasova, 2007; Nekrasova, 2009; Tremblay et al., 2007; Tremblay et al., 2011; for examples and reviews).

LBs play some structural and functional roles in discourse, so a number of taxonomies have been proposed to help researchers get a clearer grasp of those structures and their functions. Among the common taxonomies adopted for this purpose, we can refer to Biber et al.'s (1999) classfication of the structures of LBs as wellas Hyland's (2008) and Gozdz-Roszkowski's (2011) clasifications of functions of LBs. Biber and Conrad's (1999) taxonomy includes structures like, inter alia, $N P +$ of, prepositional phrase $^ +$ of, passive $^ +$ prepositional phrases, anticipatory it $^ +$ verb/adjective. The three functions of Hyland's (2008) taxonomy include research-oriented (including locatio, proceure, quaniation, decrition, and topic), text-riented (inluding transition signal, reutive sinals, structuring signal, and framing signals), and participant-riented functions (including stance fetres and engagement feture). Additionally, Biber et al.s(2004) study has a functional taxonomy including stance, discourse organizing, and referential functions with their own subpart.In fact, when it comes to investigating the structure and function of LBs, Biber and his colleagues (e.g., Biber et al., 1999,

Biber et al., 2003, 2004) have proposed highly influential structural and functional taxonomies of lexical bundles.

Biber et al. (2004) compared the functional use of LBs in university classroom teaching and in academic textbooks, finding that LBs appeared significantly more frequently in universty classrooms than in textbooks, since classroom discourse yielded four times as many LBs as textbooks did. More importantly, a significant aspect of Biber et al.'s (2004) study is using the above-mentioned taxonomy, i.. clasifying Bs in stance undes (which how attitudes), rfential bundes (which enote "hysicalor astract entities, ") and discourse LBs (which are conducive to the organization of discoursal moves). In general, the functional taxonomies differ considerably acrossgenres and registers where more fine-grained functional distinctions are recorded among the three broad cate. gories of referential, discourse-organizing and stance LBs (see Biber & Barbieri, 2007; Biber & Conrad, 2019; Biber et al., 2004).

Nattinger and DeCarrico (1992) suggest that there are four criteria characterizing prefabricated chunks. The first criterion they propose refers to their ength and grammatical level, o LBs can be of word level (e.g all i all or sentence level (e. CanI help you?) (as fr as the word level is concerned, it is worth noting that some s constitute neat form-to-meaning mapings; therefore, they act as if they were ingle words expressing a given sense in a particular context of use). The second criterion concerns whether the LBs have canonical (e.g., on the other hand) or non-canonical (e.g., by and large) shapes. The third criterion refers to whether an  is variable construction (e.g. this is an X) or a fixed one (e.g. what i this?). And the last one concerns whether the LB is continuous or discontinuous, i.e., whether they are adjacent or separated by other lexical fillrs (cited in Strunkyte & Jurkunaite, 2008).

Lexical bundles in the current study refer to bundles of words which are rarely complete structurally and are functionally complete and/or incomplete, with or without any idiomatic meaning, and with or without semantic transparency (see Biber & Barbieri, 2007; Biber & Conrad, 199for the finer distinctions between and among collocations, idioms, and LBs). In this study, three o ix-word Ls are analyzed on account of their prevalence in the literature and their high frequency (Appel & Wood, 2016; Li & Volkov, 2018). It should be emphasized that although we have initially identified both complete and incomplete bundes, the priority is given to either complete sequences or the most relevant, useful incomplet ones which could best align with our ultimate pedagogical incentives see also Section 3 below).

# 2.2. LBs and generic, disciplinary, register, and discourse variatior

Different situational contexts, production circumstances, and communicative purposes necesstate the use of certain words and LBs. This lingustc varition iscaptred in tems of th eratility in the use of lexica items indfer sittional ontxts as eult of the constraints these situations impose on the speakers or writers (Biber, 2006; Biber & Conrad, 2001, 2019) Hence, by gathering corpora from these diverse situational contexts, researchers have revealed the multiplicity and versatility of lexical items (Grabowski, 2015) The underlying assumption of variation of LBs has been scrutinized and substantiated through investigation of ifferent genres (like research artice, MA theses, Ph.D. disertations, universt textbooks, and EAP textbooks, among others),disciplines (e.g. biology, applied linguistics history, engineering), writing materias of L1 versus L2 users (of English), expert writers versus novice witers, spoken scourse vrsus written discourse, and aadmi discourse verus non-acdemic discourse e iber et al., 199, Brazl, 1995; Hyland, 2008; Leech, 2000; Shirazizadeh & Afzalian, 2021; Vo, 2019; Wood & Appel, 2014).

Biber et al. (1999) note that \*lexical bundles are identified empirically, as the combinations of words that in fact recur most commonly in a given register' (p. 184). So, the assumption is that LBs are theoretically linked to specific registers. For instance, Byrd and Coxhead (2010), using  3.6-million-word corus consisting of four academic disciplines, namely science, law, art, and commerce, analyzed the disciplinary variation existing among these disciplines. Thereby, they found 73 LBs common to alldisciplines and provided the frequency of each in all the disciplines.

Cortes (2004) compared student papers with published research articles, revealing that students' use of LBs were comparatively few and far between Likewise, Hyland (2008) compared LBs used in published academic discourse with postgraduate student papers the results of which indicated that todisplay their competence, postgraduate students went to extremes in using formulaic expressions compared to L1 user of English The inconclusive findings of such studies neesstate further rearch wth largr and different corpora to examine (and compare) different applications of LBs by student writers (and L1 writers).

Johnston (2017), with regard to the potential differences in the use of LBs by professional writers and leaners,attempted to find the differences of LBs in terms of frequency, structure, and function in the texts written by both professionals and learners in the two fields of aplied linguistics and literature. She concluded that professional writers in both disciplines used LBs with different frequencies and type/tokens due to the rhetorical requirements of each discipline. Also, leaners in both disciplines tended to use the same Bs retitively a compared to the wider range of LBs used by professonal writer of each disciline. In gneral, there is a myriad of studies which scrtinized Bs acos different genres, reisters or language users; neverthles as wil be noted later (Sub-section 2.4.), there are stil some major communities of practice -e.g., people like L2 leaners and teachers whose lif can be affected by high-stakes international language examinations (see Pearson, 2019)-who might quantitatively and qualitatively resort to LBs differently, for whom mastery and non-mastery of LBs might have significant implications, and whose needs and practices have been underrepresented in the existing literature on Bs (for more on communities of practice see Eckert & Mconnell-Ginet, 198 as well as Wenger et al., 2002).

# 2.3. LBs across proficiency levels

Studies which have specificll focused on LBs across proficiency levels are comparatively few. One study which delved into the analysis of LBs across proficiency levels was conducted by Li and Volkov (2018). Their corpus, which was a collction of email tasks written by L2 students across the proficiency lels, was divided into three subcorpora, asging each subcorpus to one proficiency level. Using AntConc software, they identified the pattens of two to six-word LBs in the emails and then manually coded the functions of each LB. They concluded that as proficiency level increased, the use of LBs interms of both types and tokens increased. Furthermore, the writing samples of those students at the highest level of proficiency shared a large number of common LBs.

Likewise, Chen and Baker (2016) studied four-word LBs in the writing samples of Chinese L2 learners of English derived from Longman Learner Corpus. Again, they categorized the corpora into three subcorpora across three proficiency levels according to Cambridge Universty Press (2019) (Common European Framework of Reference), namely B2, B1, and C1. They found that students with lower proficiency levels made use of spech-like LBs in their passages, while students with higher proficiency levels displayed a more academically sophisticated style. Furthermore, they proposed that some of the LBs used by lower-level students were not academically refined and lacked general appropriacy.

Among the few studies of LBs in a writing asessment context, Appel and Wood (2016) analyzed 4-to-7-word LBs from the written texts of lower-level students and higher-level ones in the Canadian Academic English Language Assessment. They explored the dif ferences of functional types of LBs, namely stance, referential, and discourse organizing in the sample of argumentative essays written by L2 learners of English. They postulated that referential LBs were used by higher evel students more than lower-level ones, while lower-level students used more of the other two functional types of LBs, namely stance and discourse organizing.

Another noteworthy study of LBs across proficiency levels is that of Staples et al. (2013) (seealso the next sub-section for the significance of this study) which examined the frequency and use of LBs using participants' writte responses of TOEFL iBT as the corpus. While it might be postulated therwise, they found that lower-level students generally used more bundes. Additionally, the use of stance and discourse organizing LBs was revealed to be the same among all the proficiency levels, while only a few instances of referenti Bs had been usedb leners acrossall poiciency leel. In eneal, the reuts prtaning to LBs across proficiency lels tend to be varied based on the genre and contex, apear to be les conclusive, and indicate the need for further studies of LBs in L2 texts across levels of (general language and writing) competence levels.

# 2.4. LBs and pedagogical approaches

As argued by Wray (2002) formulas can facilitate idiomatic production and also signal that a speaker or writer holds an insider status in a discourse communit see also Pearson, 2019 and Shirazizadeh & Afzalian, 2021). With this in mind, we should notice the paramount importance of focusing on teaching, learning, and researching LBs within the context of every discipline, genre, or discourse. So, the question raised here is what LBs students and L2 researchers ned in order to perform beter in the target language. Moreover, athough rearch on the register and disciplinry variation of LBs abounds (se ur brief review above), ther is a dearthof research assuming a pedagogical perspective for the teaching of LBs. In fact, as observed by Byrd and Coxhead (2010), thre til remains ittle empirical evidence as to thefficacy of different approaches of teaching LBs, leaving instructors with unclear guidance for exploiting this important component of language teaching (see Reppen, 2018 for a more recent review).

In her book, Salazar (2014) takes a step toward illing this gap by first providing the readers with a list of useful LBs, and the techniques which can be employed by teachers in the subsequent chapters. Like Biber et al. (1999), Salazar (2014) uses three-word four-word, and five-word LBs. Similarly, Nattinger and DeCarrico (1992) brought lexical bunde in language teaching into the fore, in fact, notwithstanding the ambiguity of their methodology in detecting formal and functional disparities among different registers, the results of their work have been significant and have atended to pedagogical dimensions of LBs with reference to the four kill. til another line of research which brought LBs into the forefront of language teaching was that of Lewis's (1993) Lexical Approach. Following Sinclair's (1991) idiom principle, the lexical approach was a reaction to traditional views on grammar and vocabulary and their appications in pedagogy. By allocating minimum attention to individual words, Lewis (1993) underscores th formulaicity and chunkedness of natural language.

Investigating the impact of explicit teaching of LBs on students papers in an intensive history class, Cortes (2006) incorporated into the history classome mini-lesons in order to raise the students awarenessof such Bs. Surprisingly, the results of pre- and post-ests of students' texts showed that there was not any remarkable improvement in the LBs frequency of use. Nevertheless Cortes argued that the mini-lessons augmented students awarenessof and motivation to use LBs i their futre writing assnments. Likewise, Spottl and McCarthy (2003) and O'Keefe et al. (2007) point to the necessity of conscious inguistic analysis during the processof learning. They argue that a language classroom is exactly the place that such kind of conscious analysis should be advocated. Similar to grammatical structures and single lexical items, they claim that phraseological knowledge should be acquired through repeated exposures.

Adopting a holistic approach to investigate teaching and learning of academic lexical phrases, Cai (2016) devised a genre-based intervention study of Chinese Masters students. The study results highlighted the efficacy of LB teaching in their appropriate receptive and productive mastery in tandem with the growth of genre knowledge and move-specific lexical phrases. Ghafarsamar et al. (2018), likewise, investigated the effct of teaching LBs on the writing performance in an EFL context (while teaching LBs to medical students). Their aim and criteria for the measurement of writing proficiency in their tudy were partially comparable to the ones utilized in the present study, i.e TR, CC, LR, and GRA However, their study differ from ours in terms of the gere of interest, not to mention being constrained by the limited number of participants and lack of a control group. Furthermore, only a limited number of four-word LBs were drawn upon in their principll implict intructions. Their results indicated that the effcts of instruction were mostly manifested in the scores participants achieved on the LR measure. Furthermore, statisticall sigficant ifferences were also observed for TR and CC while the participants did not show any improvement on GRA scores (which was putatively attributed to the short duration of the intervention).

Our brief rview of the pertinent studies divulging the disciplinary and register variations of LBs (2.2. above), their variation across proficiency lels (2.3. above), and the efectivenessof their instruction (2.4.) underlines that some disciline, reisters, and genres are under-represented or not represented in the literature. Among the neglected genres are the "genres of high-stakes writing as. sessments (Beck & Jeffery, 2007, p. 60) including the writing module of international language examinations across proficiency levels. This paucity is in spit of the burgeoning population of language learners whose personal, academic, and/or professional future can be contingent on their performance in important exams such as IELTS or TOEFL (Test of English as a Foreign Language) (Pearson, 2019). Apart from Apple and Wood (2016), another rare counterexample is Staples et al. (2013) which as explained above. examined the frequency and use of LBs across proficiency levels using participants' written responses of TOEFL iBT as the corpus. Notwithstanding, the gere of the writings of IELTS in relation to LBs (and their intruction) has been under-represented (for a review of formulaic language in other assesment contexts see Besten, 2017). Consequently, the present study attempts to fll this gap by investigating the frequency, type, and distribution of LBs dominant inacorpus of mock IELTS writing tasks written by EFL examinees. Moreover, the effect of LBs' instruction on a similar sample of learners is examined.

# 3. Methodology

The study was implemented in two major phases. The first phase, which delved into the features of the LBs characterizing EFL learners' IELTS writings across three levels of writing competence, was descriptive and exploratory in nature; however, the second phase, which employed the findingsof the first phase to assesste eficacy of teaching LBs to IELTS low achievers, was experimental and pedagogical in nature.

# 3.1. Corpus description

The corpus of IELTS writing tasks was obtained from the database of one of the locall-renowned IELTS teaching centers, which claims a consideraly high corrlation between the scores obtained by the students on its mock IELTS exams and their actual IELTS performance. Apart from the teaching approach, this corrlation is maintained to be due to their employing certified IELTS exexaminers in evaluating their mock examinations. Although there are some published actual ILTS writing answer sheets (e.g., Cambridge IELTS series), the available data was not sizeable enough to meet the requirements of the first exploratory phase of the study across three levels of writing competence. lus, given the demography of the trget participants of the second pedagogical phase of the study (who were Iranian IELTS candidates), it was decided to focus on the papers by writers who resembled the target learners; by so doing we were trying to control for as many extraneous variables as possible to gear the instruction accordingly. Consequently, the present stud tilized a corpus of 99S mock writing Tass 1 and 2 answer shets written y candidates with different levels of writing competence; they were scored by the institutions' qualified examiners (just one rating per each paper by one of the several anonymous raters of the institution who were required by the institutional policy to meet regularly to ensure scoring consistency) based on the four scoring criteria of Task Response/Task Achievement (TR), Cohesion and Coherence (CC) Lexical Resource (LR), and Grammatical Range and Accuracy (GRA) as well s an overall band score. The rubrics for Task 1 included a wide gamut of topics most of which contained graphs and chart, while the rubrics for Task 2 mostly encompassed essay questions that had required the can. didates to state their own personal opinion or argument on a given topic.

The corpus contains around 200,000 words, almost 66,00 words from each of the three band score categories of 7-9, 5-7 (excluding 7), and below 5 (excluding 5). One (practical) rationale for this categorization was that the desired overal (and writing) band score for most academic purposes the participants are pursuing is above 6.5. Moreover, it can be compared with the CEFR standards and distinguish basic users with extremely limited to limited competence (below 5 band-scores and roughly comparable to A1, A2, and preliminary B1 levels) from independent users with modest to competent abilit (5-6.5 band scores roughly comparable to B1 and B2 levels), and from proficient users with good to expert proficiency (7-9 band scores and comparable with C1 and C2 levels) (see Arefsadr, 2022; Cambridge Assessment English, 2022). Consequently, 33 written texts from each band score category were selected and analyzed to provide us with a balanced corpus (in terms of number of texts and not necesarily word count). Since Task 1 and Task 2 answer sheets are required to be restricted within an average of 150 and 250 word, respectively, there were no marked variations nesstating dat ormalization. As shown inable 1, i spite of the diffeential engthf texts across the th competence levels (i.e., lower proficiencies used fewer words), it can be generally observed that the word counts of the Task 1 and Task 2 texts included in the corpus (totaling around 75,000 and 125,000 words, respectively) reflect the proportionate recommended word count for each task type (i.e., Task 1: 150 words; Task 2: 250 words).

Table 1 Characteristics of the corpus based on task type and across band scores.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="4">TASK 1</td><td colspan="4">TASK 2</td></tr><tr><td>BAND SCORE</td><td>Number of Texts</td><td>Word Count (Mean)</td><td>Task 1 Total words</td><td>SD</td><td>Number of Texts</td><td>Word Count (Mean)</td><td>Task 2 Total words</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Below 5 (excluding 5)</td><td>167</td><td>117.1</td><td>19546</td><td>51.8</td><td>166</td><td>193.1</td><td>32058</td><td>70.6</td></tr><tr><td>5 to 7 (excluding 7)</td><td>167</td><td>157.9</td><td>26379</td><td>42.8</td><td>166</td><td>273.6</td><td>45421</td><td>58.3</td></tr><tr><td>7-9</td><td>167</td><td>173.1</td><td>28909</td><td>34.8</td><td>166</td><td>286.7</td><td>47596</td><td>47.3</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td> 501</td><td>149.4</td><td>74834</td><td></td><td>498</td><td>251.2</td><td>125075</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.2. Participants

The participants who took part in the second phase of the study were 60 Iranian EFL learners with varying (writing) proficiency levels, ages, and educational backgrounds. The participants were randomly assigned to either the experimental group or the control group. Based on their pretest scores (see 3.3. and 3.4. below), both groups were further divided into two groups: one group consisted of those participants who had gained an overall band score of 5-7 (excluding 7) and the other group had gained an overallband score of below 5 (excluding 5). Therefore, the participants wereassigned to two groups and four separate classes (each including 15 candidates) who received instruction either with or without a focus on lexical bundles (see 3.4.).

# 3.3. Instrumentation

The instruments (for phase 2) included a pretest and a posttes. Both the pretest and the postest were representative samples of IELTS writing task rubrics selected from IELTS Practice Test Series (2019). The questions in Task 1 in both exams consisted of a bar chart representing some statistics required to be compared, contrasted, and reported on, and those of Task 2 asked the participants to write an argumentative essay on a potentially controversial topic.

# 3.4. Data collection

In the exploratory phase of the study, the researchers transcribed the scored writing answer sheets one by one verbatim (as they were handwritte) fed them to the AntConc concordancing software (Anthony, 2006), and analyzed them (see 3.5 below). The results from the firt phase were used for instruction in the second phase of the study (which is elucidated step-by-step below). In particular, the preferred LBs for inclusion in the pedagogical intervention phase of the study were those frequent items and functions which had predominantly appeared in the texts of high-achievers (7-9 band score).

All the participants who took part in the instructional treatment designed for the second phase of the study were given the pretest. The pretests were collected, transcribed, and sent to a certified E ex-examiner to be scored in terms of the four criteri of TA, CC, LR, and GRA. In conjunction with the score, the examiner corrcted the grammatical, stylistic, lexical, and task-related erors and provided the participants with some insightful comments. As was the case with the first phase ratings, the logistic considerations made it impossible to recruit ratersto reexamine the text; however, it was ensured that the papers had been scored by qualified examiners (including certified IELTS ex-examiners) with relevant, extended job experience in a top-tier IELTS preparation intitution for phase one and were rated by an ex-examiner of a certified IELTS administration center for phase two.

The instructions for both groups (i.e, four classes) included a total of 10 essons with the duration of 30-45 minutes excet for an additional 2-hour session for the experimental group, in which an explicit functional focus was paid to the lexical bundle obtained from the first phase of the study. This explicit functional approach was adopted since, as Cortes (2004) argued, learners are lesslikly to accidently notice the functions LBs serve in diffrent contexts. As a consequence, in such situations where the functions are not elaborated on, leaners tend to resort to avoidance strategies when they are not familiar with the functions of LBs, which can lead to their written texts being peculiar and redundant. Also, working with the AntConc concordancing tool and learning to search for the common patterns of LBs in any sort of text input distinguished the two experimental classes from their counterparts.

The ten-session instructions were al asynchronous. Two online classrooms wer created on GoogleClassroom plaform and all the instructional videos together with the activitie for each group were uploaded on their respective classooms. The lessons encompassed a wide array of topics including some preliminary ones on general writing issues in the firs sessions prior to the teaching of the points related to IELTS writing techniques.

Table 2 Frequency of LBs in the Whole Corpus and in each Band Score.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="5">Frequency of LB tokens in corpus</td><td colspan="5">Frequency of LB types in corpus</td></tr><tr><td>3-word LBs</td><td>4-word LBs</td><td>5-word LBs</td><td>6-word LBs</td><td>TOTAL</td><td>3-word LBs</td><td>4-word LBs</td><td>5-word LBs</td><td>6-word LBs</td><td>TOTAL</td></tr><tr><td>3864</td><td>966</td><td>78</td><td>5</td><td>4913</td><td>291</td><td>106</td><td>13</td><td>1</td><td>411</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">Frequency of LB tokens across band scores</td><td colspan="3">5-word 6-word</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">BAND SCORE</td><td colspan="3" rowspan="2">3-word LBs</td><td rowspan="2" colspan="3">4-word LBs</td><td rowspan="2">LBs</td><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">TOTAL</td></tr><tr><td>LBs 12</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Below 5 (excluding 5)</td><td colspan="2">923</td><td colspan="2">213</td><td></td><td colspan="2">1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">5 to 7 (excluding 7)</td><td colspan="2">1342</td><td colspan="2">383</td><td>30</td><td colspan="2">3</td><td>1149 1757</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">7 to 9</td><td colspan="2">1599</td><td colspan="2">370</td><td>36</td><td colspan="2">1</td><td>2007</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Range and Frequency of Structures in the Whole Corpus and in each Band Score.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Structure</td><td>Example from the corpus</td><td>Frequency (i.e. number of items) in the whole corpus</td><td>Frequency in band scores below 5</td><td>Frequency in band scores between 5 and 7</td><td>Frequency in band scores between 7 and 9</td><td>Total Range (i.e. number of tasks containing LB) in the whole corpus</td></tr><tr><td>Other prepositional phrases</td><td>As we know, by developing the human knowledge and the technology since 1957 till 2007, the needs of people</td><td>1509</td><td>350</td><td>540</td><td>619</td><td>1410</td></tr><tr><td>Noun phrase + of</td><td>are changed. People migrate to other countries for a variety of incentives.</td><td>1086</td><td>246</td><td>411</td><td>429</td><td>928</td></tr><tr><td>Other noun phrases</td><td>The lowest percentage in the table is 1% which is for country C.</td><td>595</td><td>134</td><td>242</td><td>219</td><td>547</td></tr><tr><td>Anticipatory it + verb/adjective</td><td>It can be seen that almost one-third of income went on. food in 1957.</td><td>469</td><td>104</td><td>173</td><td>192</td><td>440</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>I strongly believe that the benefits of holding this event outweigh its shortcomings.</td><td>262</td><td>75</td><td>79</td><td>108</td><td>219</td></tr><tr><td>Be + noun/adjective phrase</td><td>One of them is related to sand filtering and the other is used to filter and store water in outdoor..</td><td>125</td><td>37</td><td>40</td><td>48</td><td>105</td></tr><tr><td>Prepositional phrase + of</td><td>Students mostly go home and sit in front of the TV, browse internet or play video games.</td><td>58</td><td>13</td><td>25</td><td>20</td><td>61</td></tr><tr><td>Passive + prep phrase fragment</td><td>More than 40% of household energy is used for heating.</td><td>9</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>7</td></tr></table></body></html>

To design pedagogical activities with the objective of rasing the participants' LBs awareness, the researchers predominantly drew from Salazar (2014), which proved to be a valuable resource that contained a wealth of useful learning activities. A compare-and-contrast activity was used for the experimental group which not only engaged the learners in the analysis of the LBs, but also prompted them to generate LBs in their own sentences, hence helping them improve the production of LBs in tandem with their comprehension. Besides, provision of metalinguistic knowledge to make the leaners cognizant of the nature of language formulaicty was another technique exploited. Moreover, while noticing plays an indispensable role in the teaching of LBs, the most common and useful LBs may not always be the most salient ones for the learners. Therefore, in line with the other studies which employed underlining, italics, highlighting, and boldface to draw the learners atention to the ess salient bundles (Meunier, 2012; OKeeffe et a., 2007), the present study underscored an explicit focus on such structures in the activities prepared for the experimental group After bringing the instructions to a conclusion and completing the activities, the learners were given one hour to do the postest. All the participants took the postest within a maximum period of two weeks after the completion of their instructions.

# 3.5. Data analysis

After preparing the corpus see 3.4. above), the transcriptions for every single writing in the three band score categorizations, i.e.,7 to 9, 5 to 7 (excluding 7), and below 5 (excluding 7), were analyzed in terms of their macro-structure (i., introduction, body, and conclusion) and were saved on aseparate word file Later,all the separate lain texs of the transcriptions of the thre band scores were entered into the concordancing too. nitiall, in order to lok for the pattens of lexical bundles in the wholecorpus, the Clusters/NGrams tool of the software was used. Being incentivized by pedagogical applications of the analyses, we started with qualitative exploration, sorting and purging of the bundles and reported them based on their frequency, function, structure, and range in each band score. For the instructional purposes of the second phase, we focused on the most frequent bundles utilized by high-achievers (consequently, disfavoring the semanticll and structurally meaningles, incomplete bundes or the essentially to context-specific sequences (see also Appel & Trofimovich, 2017; Grabowski, 2018). Additionally, the Concordance Plot Tool demonstrated the location of each LB in each band score separately; it should be mentioned that, as the macro-structural boundaries of each text were determined by the researchers in advance, the concordance results werevisually inspected to indicate whether each LB had appeared in the introduction, body, or conclusion sections of the text.

Table 4 Range and Frequency of Functions in the Whole Corpus and in each Band Score.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Function</td><td>Example from the corpus</td><td>LB Token Frequency in the whole corpus</td><td>Frequency in band scores below 5</td><td>Frequency in band scores 5 to 7</td><td>Frequency in band scores 7 to 9</td><td>Range in the whole corpus</td></tr><tr><td>(academic-) referential (quantification)</td><td>We can also see an increase in the proportion of second and third language speakers over the 10-year period.</td><td>768</td><td>154</td><td>329</td><td>285</td><td>650</td></tr><tr><td>Participant-oriented (stance features)</td><td>In my opinion, focusing on sports facilities is too narrow an approach and would not have the desired results.</td><td>694</td><td>198</td><td>256</td><td>240</td><td>674</td></tr><tr><td>Text-oriented (framing signals)</td><td>First of all the spread of modern. communication devices and people has led to less face-to-face contact.</td><td>674</td><td>135</td><td>250</td><td>289</td><td>634</td></tr><tr><td>Text-oriented (transition signals)</td><td>The tables compare the percentages of British university students who spoke different languages in addition to English in two separate years.</td><td>568</td><td>118</td><td>192</td><td>258</td><td>536</td></tr><tr><td>(academic-) referential (location)</td><td>You should open our eyes to the fact that. holding some International games makes people from all over the world get together as their teams&#x27; fans.</td><td>461</td><td>137</td><td>158</td><td>166</td><td>417</td></tr><tr><td>Participant-oriented (engagement features)</td><td>As can be seen food and transport are indicated as the most important priority of families to spend money in 1957 and 2007 respectively.</td><td>381</td><td>97</td><td>134</td><td>150</td><td>363</td></tr><tr><td>Text-oriented (resultative signals)</td><td>Some people claim that the colors used for painting might damage the environment due to the fact that the chemicals used to decrease the walls emit toxic gases to the air.</td><td>258</td><td>67</td><td>76</td><td>115</td><td>233</td></tr><tr><td>Text-oriented (structuring signals)</td><td>In this essay I try to give a balanced view on these inevitable consequences of this modern age tool.</td><td>155</td><td>38</td><td>57</td><td>60</td><td>148</td></tr><tr><td>(academic-) referential (procedure)</td><td>First of all, based on the &quot;Rich dad, poor dad&quot; book, I confess that parents have to teach their children how to use their money.</td><td>136</td><td>28</td><td>33</td><td>75</td><td>124</td></tr><tr><td>(academic-) referential</td><td>However, the importance of ancient monuments and constructions should not be overlooked.</td><td>128</td><td>27</td><td>49</td><td>52</td><td>104</td></tr><tr><td>(description) (academic-) referential (topic)</td><td>As an enthusiastic student I have initiated my education in the field of electrical engineering at an State University.</td><td>10</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>6</td><td>10</td></tr></table></body></html>

Given our concern with more varied LBs which could be applicable for teaching purposes, we followed the example of some of the previous studies (e.g., Appel & Wood, 2016; Li & Volkov, 2018) and set the N-Gram size for ths study to a minimum of 3 words and a maximum of 6 words. It should be noted here that we defined frequency as the number of items in the whole corpus, while range was defined as the number of tasks containing LB in the whole corpus (se Table 3 below). Therefore, fr astring of words to be calculated as an LB, the cut-offpoints for frequency and distribution range were set at 5 times per 200,000 words and 3 tasks, respectively; it means that once a chunk apeared five times or more in at least three texts or more, it was identified as afrequent B (compare with Biber et al., 2019 that would consider a combination of words which appeared 10 times per 1 million words and at least in 5 texts or more to qualify as an LB in their study).

When the concordance analysis was completed, drawing on Hyland's (2008) modified taxonomy of LBs' functions- derived from Biber (2006), and Biber et al. (2004 as well as Biber et al's (1999) revised taxonomy of structures of LBs by Hyland (2008), the researchers manuall labeled each LB accordingly, they were chosen since these two taxonomies are best suited to the analysis of written gre (e review section above). o achiee higher reliabilit, multiple discussion sessions were hld y the rearchers untl they could reach a consensus about the appropriate label for the LBs as wellas the accuracy of macro-structural categorizations; plus, the researcher labeled around 10 per cent of the dat n different occasins to ensure rater consistency t should be noted that in cases where more than one function could beattributed to an identified chunk, ust one of the discoursal unctions which was perceived to be the dominant function (e.g., acording to the placement of LB in the text) would be reported. For instance, upon exploration of the identified Bs, it was revealed that there xistd just thr s with two istinct unctions sarated with omma in the essays (namely In conclusion, I gee In conclusio I belie, and In concusion, I think) with the same frequency and range five instance of each LB in only 15 different essays, namely, each LB in 5 diffrent texts.Given their placement at the conclusion macro-move of the texts and their salient role in bringing the essay to an end, only the dominant perceived function (here, Text-oriented resultative signal) was reported for such LBs, and the Participant-Oriented (stance feature) function of the phrase after comma was not reported; instead it was reserved for the chunks that predominantly expressed tance and furthered the argumentation (e., Some people blie that, Some people think; I agree with this; etc.).

For functional analysis of the bundles, the principal classfications of research-oriented, text-oriented, and participant-oriented (Hyland, 2008) were initially adopted (see 2.1, 4.1. and Table 4 for details) nevertheless, in light of the nature of the academic texts in our dataset (IELTS writing esays) which are notstrictly-speakingresearch-based academic texts, instead of using the too restrictive label of reearch-oriented bundles, we opted for the (academic-referential label, primarily inspired by Biber et al.s (2004, p. 270) referential markers (while sticking to the sub-categories of location, procedure, quantification, description, and topic) Hyland, 2008). On the other hand, the principal classifications of structural LBs (Biber et al., 1999) included noun phrase $^ +$ of, other noun phrases, prepositional phrase $^ +$ of, other prepositional phrases, passive $^ +$ prep phrase fragment, anticipatory it + verb/adjective, $B e + n o u -$ n/adjectival phrase, and others, among others (see 2.1., 4.1. and Table 3 for details).

For the purpose of data analysis of the instructional intervention in the second phase of the study, an experienced IELTS exexaminer was asked to score the written texts of the participants in the pretest and the posttest. The examiner scored the texts with regard to the four criteria of TA (Task Achievement)/TR (Task Response), C (Cohesion/Coherence), LR (Lexical Resource), and GRA (Grammatical Range and Accuracy).

After calculating al the participants' scores on the measures of pretest and posttet, a (distribution) normality test was conducted The results indicated that the data were not normally distributed (see Table 1 in the appendix). Consequently, given the small number of participants and the lack of normality, the non-parametric equivalent of paired-sample t-test, i.e., Mann-Whitney $U$ Test was run to find the diference between the two control and experimental groups on the measures of TA, CC R, GRA, and Overall Band Score for the pretest and the posttest separately. Furthermore, in order to observe the within-group differences between the two control and experimental groups at Time 1 (pretest) and Time 2 (postest) on the same above-mentioned measures, the non-parametric Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test was conducted.

# 4. Results and discussion

# 4.1. First phase: lexical bundles in IELTS writings across the levels of competence

The initial research questions aimed at identifying and comparing the frequencies functions, and structures of the LBs. In this study, we had a balanced corpus of 99 ELS texts across three band scores (33 candidates in each band score), and all the written passages contained aproximately 75,000 and 125,00 words for Tasks 1 and 2, respectively(see Table 1). As noted above (3.5), for a string of words to becalculated as n B, the cut-ff points for frequency and distribution range were set at 5 times per 200,000 words and 3 texts, respectively. In terms of frequency, each B was investigated in the whole corpus and in each band score. LBs with various degrees f frequencies were found in the corpus ranging fromthe most frequently ocrrin item which was observed 132 times on the ther in the whole corpus, to the as frquentl currig ones wth an overall frequency f only 5 times (e, will e able to. o, the LBs with the highet lel f frequency were three-wordLBs, ollowed by four-word, five-word, and the rarely occurring expressions of six-word LBs (see Table 2).

As shown in Table 2,the three-word LBs appeared 3864 times in the whole corpus, followed by four-word LBs that occurred 966 times. These numbers dramatically diminished to 78 and 5 for five-word and six-word LBs, respectively. These tokens could be categorized in terms of 411 LB types (291 three-word; 106 four-word; 13 five-word; and one ix-word LB types). The most frequent three-word LB was on the other," astructurallyincomplete one which was embedded in the most frequentl occurring four-word LB of "on the other hand." Interestingly, "on the other hand the" was the five-word B with the highest frequency. Finally, the only six-word Ls that were discovered (i.e, as can be see from the) occurred quite infrequently in the whole corpus (predominantly used by more proficient writers). Therefore, a total number of 4913 LBs were found in the corpus, an observation which reinforces the argument in favor of their pervasiveness in discourse and the chunkedness f the language. Thus, IELTS teachers might be recommended to focus more on the most frequent s .., three and four-word Bs in their instruction, f course with an ee on the studies which disapprove of (solely) teaching highly frequent LBs. For example, Boers et al. (2010) have argued that medium-frequency LBs should be given more priority provided that they have les chances to be assimilated by learners. In this study, one criterion for inclusion in the instructional phase of the study, apart from LB frequency, was its representation in the wrtten texts of those with the highest band scores.

With reference to the LB itribution across band score categorie, three-word bundes had been used 1599 times i the writings of those who gained a band score between 7 and 9, fllowed by 1342 times in the texts of candidates with a band score between 5 and 7, and finally only 923 instances were observed in band scores below 5. Nevertheless the pattern was not the same for four-word LBs. Candidates with an overall band score of 5-7, with 383 instances, had used four-word bundles more frequently than those with band scores below 5 (213 instances) and between 7 and 9 (370 instances) (see Table 2).

Generally, regardless of the number of words in each LB, band scores between 7 and 9 had by far the largest proportion of LBs totaling 2007 in the whole corpus, followed by band scores between 5 and 7 and below 5 which had a total frequency of 1757 and 1149, respectively (Table 2). Therefore, these observations corroborate the assumptions underlying the first phase about the potential differences between the LBs in the three band score categories with respect to their frequencies. The pedagogical implication of this finding is that to help students achieve etter overall band scores, and particularlyCC and LR cores (se the findings below), IELTS teachers should encourage them to use more LBs in their written texts. This might have resulted in and/or contributed to the observation that the texts of more competent writers were generally longer than those of their es competent pers (compare the length of both Task1 and Task 2 texts across the three groups in Table 1 above). However,fequency should not be exclusively concentrated on to the detriment of LB types both structure- and function-wise. Upon detailed analysis f the items, it was ovious that some LBs were much more frequently used by candidates with the lowest band scores (e.g., \*a lot of' and \*all of the"). Hence, this finding indicates that not always the most frequent LBs are pedagogically useful and careful screening should take place prior to the selection of LBs.

With regards to the frequency and range of IELT lexical bundle structures acrossthe levels of writing competence, as ilustrated in Table 3, \*ther prepositional phrases" had the highet frequency and range f occurrence in the whole corpus. oun phrase + of with the total occurrence of 1086 time in the whole corpus and the range of appearance across 928 texts was ranked thesecond. ext, it can be observed that the rate of both frequency and range graduall diminished from 595 to 547 for the structure \*other noun phrases to the least frequent structure, i.e., "Passive $^ +$ prep phrase fragment' with an overall frequency of merely 9 and a meagre range of 7 calling for less prioitization compared to the more frequent structure types. In between, we can notice nticipatory it + verb/djective, \*thers" "be + noun/adjective phrase," and \*prepositional phrase $^ +$ of' ranging from the wide gamut of 469 and 440 to 58 and 61 for frequency and range, respectively.

It should be noted that since the adopted structural and functional taxonomies (Hyland, 2008) had been originally proposed for four-word LBs only, they accounted much better for four-word LBs compared to the three-word and five-word LBs (hence, the discrepancy between the observed tokens and types of LBs and their structural and functional categorizations in Tables 3 and 4).

Regarding the functions of LBs in IELTS writing texts, as can be seen from Table 4, text-oriented bundles (including all is sub. divisions) are predominantly higher in terms of the frequency and range of function types in comparison with (academic-Jreferential and participant-oriented bundles. A total of 1655 occurrences were observed for text-oriented bundles, with framing signals and transition signals at the top (674 and 568 occurrences respectively) followed by resultative and structuring signals (258 and 155 occurrences for each respectively). With 1503 and 1075 instances, (academic-referential and participant oriented are in the second and third place in terms of overal frequency in the whole corpus. Based on their higher frequencies and ranges, it is suggested that higher priorities be placed on the teaching of text-oriented, (academic-referential, and participant-oriented bundles, in that order. Since textual organization and conveying the underlying message are highly underscored in IELTS writing, we can see that texoriented bundles have been more frequently used to achieve this goal. Framing signals, whose purpose is to situate arguments within a text, are more likely to occur in Task 2, due to the fct that Task 2 rubric are more argumentative in nature. Not only framing signals, but als transition signals--whose goal is to connect elements in a text by ading to them or contrastig them-have been among the most frequent tex-oriented bundle used. On the contrary, the reason for the dearth of structuring signals in the corpus can be attributed to the short length of IELS writing tasks in which the opportunity to direct the reader elsewhere in the text may not arise. Not surprisingly, the same pattern can be observed for the range of function types across the writing answer sheets.

Notably, with the occurrence of text-oriented bundes (including the subdivisions) across 1551 texts, they areat the top in terms of range. With the rate of 1305 and 1037, (academic-referential and participant-oriented bundles were in the second and the last place when it came to range. Similarly, framing signals and transition signals (634 and 536 respectively) were more prevalent across candidates' texts than resultative and structuring signals (233 and 148 respectively). Although they are the subcategories of the same function type, there is an enormous gap between both the frequency and range of stance features and engagement features under the rubric of participant-rientd bundes. Additionall, rardes of (acdemic-refrential bundes of quantification and lcation (which were used with noticeable frequencies) the other three subcategories (i., procedure, description, and topic) are at the bottom of the table--with the excessvely sparing use of topic bundles with a mere frequency and range of 10. The rational for the high frequency of quantification and location bundes apears to be that in Task 1, the candidates are more likely to be required to writ a report on some given figure, graph, or diagram; therefore, familiarizing them with LBs to express quantification would be pedagogically advisable. Although there are task rubrics that present a process and ask the candidates to elaborate on the diffrent stages in the process requiring them to use procedure LBs, such LBs were les frequent in our corpus. The justification is that most of the Task 1 answer sheets transcribed were more of charts and tables and esof proces decrition type. Finll, the unexpectedly low frequency f opic LBs in the corpus can be aributed to their function best characterizing research artice (Cortes, 2004; Hyland, 2008) and not necessarily the genres of IELTS writings. Thus, one implication is that IELTS teachers do not need to exclusively and/or predominantly focus on such LB types inasmuch as the chances are slim the candidates would need them in their writing tasks.

Table 5 Text-part specific bundles prevalent in one or two text parts of IELTS writing texts.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Lexical Bundles</td><td>Example from the corpuse</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Body</td><td>Conclusi</td></tr><tr><td> In this essay</td><td>In this essay, I shall appeal to crime statistics to argue that a person is at a far greater risk being shot if there is a gun in a household. (T2-B9-Intro.)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>In recent years</td><td>In recent years we have seen great improvement in TV programs and fantastic visual achievement in TV industry. (T2-B7.5-Intro.)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Some people think</td><td>Although some people think educational centers should filterize the students by which ability they have, ...(T2-B4-Intro.).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>I strongly believe that</td><td>I strongly believe that the allowance should be paid to children in longer periods like on a weekly basis. (T2-B7-Intro.)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>One of the most important</td><td>Saving languages and cultures have become one of the most important issues if not the most important issue of human studies. (T2-B6.5-Intro.)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>The given table</td><td>[t] he given table shows that how much money is spent by students annually in universities of three different countries. (T1-B6-Beginning).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>In the following</td><td>In the following, we are going to give you some information about the average annual spending of universities in country A, country B and country C. (T1-B5.5-Beginning)</td><td>*</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>The chart below</td><td>The chart below illustrates information regarding materials used for the purpose of packaging in three parts of the world in 2002. (T1-B7-Beginning).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>I personally believe</td><td>I personally believe that paying money regularly to kids will be beneficial for their future. (T2- B7.5-Intro.)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>The chart illustrates</td><td>The chart illustrates the amount of money spent on five consumer goods (cars, computers, books, perfume and cameras) in France and the UK in 2010. (T1-B9-Beginning)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> As can be seen from</td><td>As can be seen from the pie charts, Mexico received a high percentage of exports which belong to</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>the Some people claim</td><td>USA with 87 percent. (T1-B5.5-Beginning) It is true that classified classes could have some advantages as some people claim that. (T2-B7-</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>that The diagram</td><td>Intro.) The diagram illustrates the amount of consumed materials for packaging per each person in USA</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>illustrates The table shows</td><td>Japan and Europe in 2002. (T1-B7-Beginning) The table shows information about University Students&#x27; expenditure in three different countries.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(T1-B6-Beginning) First of all, I will consider how a person&#x27;s choice of clothes reveals their culture. (T2-B7-Intro)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>First of all Some people</td><td>Some people believe that they shouldn&#x27;t squander their time on language learning. (T2-B3.5-</td><td>*</td><td>*</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>believe that It is believed that</td><td>Body) It is believed that paying for old people by authorities is just a way of losing the capital and cost of</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>According to the</td><td>living. (T2-B5.5-Body) According to the chart, glass has been another material consuming approximately in each</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>chart</td><td>country with high rates. (T1-B5.5-Middle) It is shown that Europe had the most exports in Chile with 26% whereas ... (T1-B5.5-Middle)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>It is shown</td><td>To begin with, everyone needs to learn how to manage their financial resources (T2-B7.5-Body)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>To begin with On the contrary</td><td>As grown up/adults we are not allowed to prevent the youngsters from experiencing these sports.</td><td></td><td>* *</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>As a result</td><td>On the contrary, it would be better to help them to play in safer conditions. (T2-B7 -Body) However, for other two countries would rise up to 21 percent for Chile and 41 percent for</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Argentina. As a result, USA has more shares of these three countries exports and Europe and other Latin American countries have less amount of imports from these three countries. (T1-B5.5-</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>On the other hand</td><td>Middle) For example, there is a chatting language which is produced by our smart phones. On the other hand, some languages are vanishing these days. (T2-B5-Body)</td><td></td><td>*</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Last but not least</td><td>And last but not least is that feeling the risk and excitement in the mentioned sports give the youth motivation to continue living a world full of stress. (T2-B7-Body).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>To sum up</td><td>To sum up, from all charts it is obvious that the major consumer of these three countries products was USA. (T1-B7-End)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>All in all</td><td>All in all, to put the issue in contrast, I am on the thought that it is better for all of us to choose</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>In conclusion</td><td>what we want to hear or see through the internet, .... (T2-B8-Conclusion) In conclusion, giving money to children regularly has a lot of advantages .. (T2-B7-Conclusion)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Can be concluded</td><td>By and large, it can be concluded that the family budget is going to be dedicates to other more than the past years. (T1-B4.5-End)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> In conclusion I</td><td>In conclusion, I agree that any child can be taught particular skills, but ... (T2-B9-Conclusion)</td><td></td><td></td><td>*</td></tr><tr><td>agree In conclusion I</td><td>In conclusion, I believe that people are suffering from the harmful impact of the social</td><td></td><td></td><td>*</td></tr><tr><td>believe</td><td>networking systems rather than the positive ones. ... (T2-B7.5-Conclusion).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> In conclusion I</td><td>In conclusion, I think this is a very good idea, and I hope this program will be put into action for</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: T refers to Task Number $ \mathrm { T 1 }$ : Task 1 & T2: Task 2). $\pmb { B }$ refers to the assigned Band Score e.g., B8: Band 8.

Furthermore, similar to the high-achievers' superior variety and frequency of employed LB structures, the most proficient applicants had the most functionally diverse texts as well. From among the 4233 occurrences of different types f functions in the whole corpus, the highest band scores had the lion's share of 1696 occurrences. Except for (academic-referential bundles of quantification and participant-oriented bundes of stance features, the writings of the third band score category (i., between 7 and 9) outnumbered those with lower band scores. Not only were candidates texts with the highest band scores more functionally varied, but they also had the largest number of function ranges across the texts (Table 4).

Similarly, the more frequent stance features were participant-oriented bundles as compared to engagement features; one explanation is that ES candidates are more likely to impart their ow personal atitudes and arguments (as they are required to do so most of the times in Task 2) than to directly address th reader in their txs, which is more typical of ltter writing in Task 1 f Is General (not Academic) Module. While our findings are characterized by notable instances of participant-oriented bundles, it is noted in the literature that L2 users of English use such bundles in their written texts much les than L1 users of English, notwithstanding the indispensable role the participant-oriented bundes play in academic discourse (Salazar, 2014). Hyland (2012) atributes this lck of participant-oriented bundles in the texts of L2 users of English, especially Asian EFL learners, to their cultural predilctions for a noninterventionist stance in argumentation. The use of hedging devices and depersonalized stance features are an indivisible part of academic writing (Salazar, 2014). As suggested by Hyland (1996), participant-oriented bundles are used to protect academic writers against unjustified generalizations and enable them to stay on the side of caution when there are no categorical indings. Based on these arguments and the findings of the corpus analysis in the present study, therefore, it can be recommended that participant-oriented bundles be given more attention and time in EFL (academic) contexts.

To address the third research question, we utilized the concordancing plot tool to determine the location in the text for each B with respect to its corresponding structure and function. Esentilly, the majorit of the Bs have been found to be rather equally dispersed in differet stions, ., inction, y, and oso hwer, the ar fe int th ocurred ny in si t like either in the introduction, bod, or conclusion or a combination of two of them. The fllowing table (Table 5) shows some of these LBs that were typical of only one or two text parts for a more elaborate list of such location-specific resources see Saadatara, 2020). It should be noted that the introductory and concluding sub-sections were noticeably shorter than the body part of both tass (with the beginning and ending of Task 1 texts generally even shorter than the introduction and conclusion of Task 2 essays.

# 4.2. Second phase: LB instruction and improvement of IELTS writing

To see thefect of instruction of LBs on the participants overall band scores as well as CC, R, and GRA mesures, their cores in the pretest and posttest were analyzed. First of all to see the between-group differences on the above-mentioned scoring criteria, a Mann-Whitney $U$ Test was conducted whose results are shown in Table 6. All the participants scores on TA, CC, LR, and GRA together with overall band scores in both Tasks 1 and 2 in the pretest and postest were compared separately. For instance, the overall band scores of Task 1 in pretest were compared between the two experimental and control groups. As shown in the table, the statistical significance is not below the significance level of 0.05 for any of the scoring criteria in Task 1 or 2, neither in the pretest nor in the posttest therefore, we can conclude that the distribution ofall the measures is quite similar acros the participants in both experimental and control groups as assessed in the pretest and posttest.

To get a more accurate picture f possible differences, Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test was conducted with the purpose of within-group comparisons and the resuls are presented in Tables 7 and 8. As llustrated in Table 7, there is a statisticall significant difference between the peformance of the control group participants in terms of overall band score in Task 1 when comparing their pretest and posttest scores $( { \mathrm { S i g } } 0 . 0 0 4 )$ . In contrast, there is no statistically significant difference for the same scoring criterion in the performance of the participants in Task 2 $( \mathrm { S i g } 0 . 0 6 0 )$ . The reason for such a lack of improvement on LR and GRA in Task 2 appears to be the absence of lexical and grammatical coverage in the treatment for the contol group. Also, the participants frequently reported that they found task 2 more difficult and challenging. Furthermore, this lack of eficiency in Task 2 can be linked to the observation made earlier as to the lack of participant-oriented bundle in the writing performance of the participants (which substantiated their difficulty with expressing their personal opinions and arguments).

Table 6 Mann-whitney $U$ test results (between-group comparison).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Scoring criteria</td><td>Task</td><td>Pretest</td><td>Posttest</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Overall band score</td><td>1</td><td>.387</td><td>.237</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>.423</td><td>.245</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Task Achievement</td><td>1</td><td>.319</td><td>.308</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>.401</td><td>.437</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Cohesion and Coherencee</td><td>1</td><td>.431</td><td>.074</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>.505</td><td>.067</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Lexical Resource</td><td>1</td><td>.325</td><td>.196</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>.526</td><td>.125</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Grammatical Range and Accuracy</td><td>1</td><td>.418</td><td>.324</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>.463</td><td>.363</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 Wilcoxon signed-rank test results for the control group (within-group comparison).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Scoring criteria</td><td>Task</td><td>Sig.</td></tr><tr><td>Overall band score</td><td>1</td><td>.004</td></tr><tr><td>Task Achievement</td><td>2 1</td><td>.060 .004</td></tr><tr><td>Cohesion and Coherence</td><td>2 1</td><td>.009 .026</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical Resource</td><td>2 1</td><td>.018 .004</td></tr><tr><td>Grammatical Range and Accuracy</td><td>2 1</td><td>.199 .017</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 8 Wilcoxon signed-rank test results for the experimental group (within-group comparison).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Scoring criteria</td><td>Task</td><td>Sig.</td></tr><tr><td>Overall band score</td><td>1</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Task Achievement</td><td>2 1</td><td>.001 .006</td></tr><tr><td>Cohesion and Coherence</td><td>2 1</td><td>.001 .000</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical Resource</td><td>2 1</td><td>.000 .000</td></tr><tr><td>Grammatical Range and Accuracy</td><td>2 1</td><td>.001 .005</td></tr></table></body></html>

Generall, it is clearly understood from the statistics that, despite lacking an explicit functional focus on LBs, the IELTS exam instruction provided for the control group was very effctive and helped the participants to achie relatively better post-test cores in all the four criteria in both tass except for lexical resource (LR) and grammatical accuracy (GRA) in Task 2, for which no significant difference s wsse.Fhemre t sms tht th nstction for th contr goup has be ffetienterms of tsk achivement. During the treatment, many of the key conventions of IELTS writing were covered and elaborated on, including points on how to enhance scores on the criterion of task achievement and explaining the expectations of IELTS examiners. Even though LBs were not the primary focus of instruction for the control group, the participants showed great improvements on scores of cohesion and coherence and lexical resource. The reason for such unexpected results could be the fact that, although they were not exclusively elaborated upon and their functions were not explicated as in the instructions for the experimental group, some linking words were touched upon in each session.

The results of the Wilcoxon test for the experimental group are provided in Table 8.It can be deduced from the table that the pedagogical intervention, the activitie, and the enhanced input presented to the participants have had a significant impact on their IELTS writing perfomance with repect to all the coring critri. s can e sen the most statisticly signficant difference between the scores of the pretest and postest can be found in the scores for cohesion and coherence, lexical resource, and overall band score.

Even though LB instruction has had positive impacts on all the scores in the experimental groups it impacts on CC and LR are the most noticeable. Aditionally, in contrast to Ghafarsamar et al. (2018) and Eidian et al. (2013), who found nostatisticall significant difference with respect toGRA after instruction on Bs (a finding attributed to the short duration of their interventions), we can notice meaningful improvements even on that measure in the present study. The authors of the afore-mentioned studies believe that more time is needed for participants to take in the grammar instruction through such a lexical collcational teaching approach. Therefore, we can contend that an explicit functional approach to the teaching of LBs which includes awarenes-rasing and metalinguistic information (along with other instructions provided during the course) can be pedagogicall effective especially for cohesion and coherence (CC) and lexical resource (LR).

Our findings are in line with Wray's (2002) argument that using LBs can help language users identify with a disciplinary community and reduce the burdens on production; likewise, we observed that the written texts of the participants in the experimental group were more typical of IELTS writing in terms of their LBs. In fact, it was noticed that LBs were more appropriately used in the postest texs with regard to the functions they serve and the place they should appear (compare also with Cai, 2016). For instance, amost allthe experimental group participants had used LBs typical of the conclusion paragraph in Task 2, like in conclusion, to sum up, to recapate, among others.

Cortes (2004) has suggested that mere exposure to LBs in reading passages alone could not result in learners' active use of such structures. She further posits that unlessa formal and explicit instructional component is involved, learners might not be able to actively use LBs in their text production. Therefore, the findings of the present study are aligned with and substantiate Cortes (2004,

2006) contentions concerning the need for explicit teaching of LBs and its superiority over exposure alone (which was somehow the case with our control group). On the contrary, the present study might question Cortes (2006) emphasis that for the acquisition and active use of LBs to take efect, learners need to be exposed to them and use them more as a long-term project compare also with Li & Schmitt, 2009; Vo, 2019).

# 5. Conclusion and implications

The present study consisted of two phases, a corpus analysis phase, with a focus on the frequency, structure, function, range, and location of LBs in the writing texts of IELT candidates, and an instructional phase where the efects of teaching of select s used by high achievers in the previous phase were investigated. One major outcome of the first exploratory phase of the study is it reiterating the assumption that (academic) IELTS writing module, as an instance of high-stakes writing examination genres, might be argued to be distinct from other written genres (Beck & Jeffery, 2007; Hyland, 2003; Pearson, 2019; Staples et al., 2013; Swales, 2004); in particular, we focused on the LBs (and their idiosyncratic sructure, frequency, function, and distribution) and suggested that, i spite of the similarities with ther comparable genre, IELTS writing texts differentially deployed these resources both quantitatively and qualitatively.

As the analysis of the LBs in the whole corpus and in each separate band score category revealed, three-word LBs were the most frequent ones both in the whole corpus and in the texts written by the most proficient candidates (Table 2).It was further shown that as the LBs' length incrased, their frequencies diminished. Overall the higher the writing proficiency of the candidates, the higher the frequency and range of LBs used in their writings (Table 5). It was not only in tems of frequency and range of LBs that the proficient candidates' texts were richer, but they also surpassed with regards to structural and functional variety and range. Considering their locations in the texts, the bulk of LBs had been used in allparts of the text. However, there were instances that were only found in either inroduction, body, or conclusion (Table 5). Consequently, IELTS teachers (and materials developers-not to mention the learners themselvesas instructed in our study) can identify such location-specific LBs using concordancing ools and elaborate on the structures and the functions they serve in those parts of the text for a more elaborate is of such resources see Saadatara, 2020) Overall, Meunier (2012) makes a distinction between authentic language as evidenced by corpus and the content learners may encounter in commercial textbooks (seealso Talebzadeh & Khazraie, 2021) in terms of their frequency and didactic value; therefore, corpora and corpus tols can greatly help al stake-holders (including IELTS and other high-stakes exam teachers, teachers of General English, EAP/ESP teachers high-stakes examination candidates, material writers, and textbook evaluators) in getting and providing snapshots of more natural language in use and the ensuing consequences.

The findings of phase two highlight the efftiveness of explicit IE instruction, in general, and teaching selcted lexical bundes in particular. Generall, the ffects of instruction of LBs to the experimental group were found to be much more noticeable across the board, although the control group showed signs of improvement on Task 1 in the posttest thanks to the beneficial efect of IELTS instruction. Al in ll it can be argued that the teaching of LBs with theapproach adopted and the actvities desined for the present study have had perceptible impacts on scores of C and LR. Therefore, notwithstanding the limitations of our study including the rather limited number of participants, we can conclude that an explicit functional awarenes-raising approach while providing metalinguisic information on LBs can be pedagogically beneficial. No doubt such instructional practices, if implemented judiciously, can utilize the exploratory and pedagogical findings of LB studies (like the current one) as a point of departure in sequencing and prioritizing a (syllabi) content, designing various courses, and even evaluating their efectivenes (see Harwood, 2010; Macalister Nation, 2020).

It appears that LBs can stil remain a thriving and promising research area given the constraints and untapped potentials of LBs investigation within the genres of high-stakes examinations. In particular, we should invite caution in making generalizations based solely on our findings inasmuch as our dataset was limited to mock IELTS writing tasks; although they were taken from a credible IELTS teaching center with a high succes rate and dependable scores reflecting the applicants' scores on actual IELTS session, future investigations can examine LBs either in mock exam data from a wealth of other sources/centers or in substantial numbers of general and/or academic tass wrten foractual EL. Due caution should be exercised in overgeneralizing current findings to similar writing tasks, as a diffeenti focus on each tas f IEL especialy Task 1 in the General and Academic modules), which can be different in organization, purpose, and word limit, might render comparatively different results and implications. Moreover, while we had to delimit our study to the exploration and instruction of LBs in the writing section of IELTS, other test modules (such as listening and speaking) are equally worth examination and the stake-holders can benefit from their identification and teaching.

Another research area which appears to deserve closer scrutiny in further studies of LBs and high-stakes exams instruction would be comparing the eficacy of a multitude of pedagogical techniques, strategies, and technological affordances (e.g. user-friendly online and offline concordance tools for both teachers and students) i particular, studies which can recruit a much larger and more diverse sample size while employing varied (i.e. qualitative, quantitative, and mixed) data collction and analysis methodologies are more likely to shed a better light on many of the unexamined dynamics of LB instruction. Finall, rather than being limited to IELTS and/or TOEFL, there are other national and international examinations whose results would affect the lives of countlessindividuals world. wide; they deserve to be adequately researched, too.

# Acknowledgement

We would like to express our gratitude to Dr Zak Lancaster, associate editor of Journal of English for Academic Pusrpose, and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful suggestions and comments. We also sincerely thank the study participants and the IELTS

center officials who went out of their way and provided us with the data we needed.

# Appendix

Table 1 Results of Normality Test   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Dependent Variables</td><td>Test</td><td>task</td><td>group</td><td>Sig.</td></tr><tr><td>Overall Band Score</td><td>Pretest</td><td>1</td><td>Control</td><td>.020</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Control</td><td>.093</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.007</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>1</td><td>Control</td><td>.042</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Control</td><td>.148</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.011</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.010</td></tr><tr><td>Task Achievement/Task Response</td><td>Pretest</td><td>1</td><td>Control</td><td>.176</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Control</td><td>.157</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.094</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>1</td><td>Control</td><td>.138</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Control</td><td>.158</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.011</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.070</td></tr><tr><td>Cohesion and Coherence</td><td>Pretest</td><td>1</td><td>Control</td><td>.039</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Control</td><td>.033</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.004</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.001</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>1</td><td>Control</td><td>.190</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Control</td><td>.200</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.052</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical Resource</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.038</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Pretest</td><td>1</td><td>Control</td><td>.037</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Control</td><td>.059</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.035</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.002</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>1</td><td>Control</td><td>.033</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Control</td><td>.081</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.031</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.021</td></tr><tr><td>Grammatical Range and Accuracy</td><td>Pretest</td><td>1</td><td>Control</td><td>.100</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Control</td><td>.088</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.005</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.006</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>1</td><td>Control</td><td>.090</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Control</td><td>.146</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.024</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>Experimental</td><td>.046</td></tr></table></body></html>

ppendix 2. the first 50 most frequent 3-word lexical bundles overlapping with four-, five, and six-word bundles   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>3-word bundles (frequency  10)</td><td>3-word bundles (frequency 10)</td><td>4-word bundles</td><td>4-word bundles</td><td>4-word bundles</td><td>4-word bundes</td><td>5-word bundles</td><td>5-word bundles</td><td>6-word bundles</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>On the other</td><td></td><td>On the other hand</td><td>On the other side</td><td></td><td></td><td>On the other hand the</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2 3</td><td>A lot of One of the</td><td></td><td>A lot of money Is one of the</td><td>A lot of time One of the</td><td></td><td>One of</td><td> One of the</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>most</td><td>One of the best</td><td>them is</td><td>most important</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>In my opinion</td><td></td><td>In my opinion it</td><td>In my opinion the</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>The amount of</td><td></td><td>The amount of money</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>It can be</td><td></td><td>It can be seen</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>It can be seen that</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

(continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>3-word bundles (frequency  10)</td><td>3-word bundles (frequency </td><td>4-word bundles</td><td>4-word bundles</td><td>4-word bundles</td><td>4-word 5-word bundles bundles</td><td></td><td>5-word bundles</td><td>6-word bundles</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>As a result</td><td>10)</td><td>As a result of</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>The fact that</td><td></td><td>To the fact that</td><td>Despite the fact that</td><td>The fact that the</td><td></td><td>Due to the fact that</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>Around the world</td><td></td><td>All around the world</td><td>People</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>It would be</td><td></td><td>It would be a</td><td>around the world It would be</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>It is clear</td><td></td><td>It is clear that</td><td>better</td><td></td><td></td><td>It is clear</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>Be able to</td><td></td><td>To be able to</td><td>Not be able</td><td>Will be</td><td></td><td>from the</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>As we can see</td><td>to We can see</td><td>able to We can</td><td>We can</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>We can see</td><td></td><td></td><td>that</td><td>see the</td><td>see a</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15 14</td><td>Due to the Point of view</td><td></td><td>My point of</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Due to the fact that In my point of</td><td>From my</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>view Most of the</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>view</td><td>point of view</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>16 17</td><td>Most of the The most</td><td></td><td>time</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>One of the</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18</td><td>important Would like to</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>most important</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>19</td><td></td><td></td><td>I am writing to Some People</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>I am writing to inform you</td></tr><tr><td>20</td><td>People believe that</td><td></td><td> believe that</td><td>Believe that it is</td><td></td><td>is</td><td>People believe that it</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>21</td><td>Can be seen</td><td></td><td>As Can be seen</td><td>It Can be seen</td><td>Can be seen that</td><td>Can be seen from</td><td>As can be seen from</td><td>It can be seen that</td><td>As can be seen from the</td></tr><tr><td>22</td><td>It is obvious</td><td></td><td>It is obvious that</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>It is obvious that the</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>23</td><td>In comparison with</td><td></td><td>In comparison with other</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>24</td><td>According to the</td><td></td><td>According to the chart</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25</td><td>At the end</td><td></td><td>And at the end</td><td>At the end</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>26</td><td>I agree with</td><td></td><td>I agree with</td><td>of</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>27</td><td>Learn how to</td><td></td><td>this to Learn how to</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>28</td><td>Of the most</td><td></td><td>One Of the most</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>One of the most</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>29</td><td>Over the world</td><td>All over the</td><td>All over the world</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td> important</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30</td><td> Some people</td><td></td><td>Some people</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 31</td><td>believe To the fact that</td><td></td><td>believe that Due to the fact</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>that As soon as</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 32</td><td>As soon as</td><td></td><td> possible</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>33</td><td>It seems that</td><td>Believe that the</td><td>It seems that the Believe that it</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>People</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>34</td><td>Believe that it</td><td></td><td>is</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>believe that it is</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>35</td><td>I think it</td><td></td><td>I think it is The end of the</td><td>At the end</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>36</td><td>The end of</td><td></td><td></td><td>of</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>37</td><td>All around the</td><td></td><td>All around the world</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 38</td><td></td><td></td><td>I am writing</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>I am writing</td><td></td><td>I am writing</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>this</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>this letter</td><td></td><td>this letter to</td></tr><tr><td>39</td><td>In touch with</td><td></td><td>Keep in touch with</td><td>Be in touch</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

(continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>3-word bundles (frequency  10)</td><td>3-word bundles (frequency 10)</td><td>4-word bundles</td><td>4-word bundles</td><td>4-word bundles</td><td>4-word bundles</td><td>5-word bundles</td><td>5-word bundles</td><td>6-word bundles</td></tr><tr><td>40</td><td>Looking forward to</td><td>Look forward to</td><td>I look forward to</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>I am looking forward to</td><td></td><td>Look forward to hearing</td></tr><tr><td>41</td><td>To know about</td><td></td><td>To know about the</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>from you</td></tr><tr><td>42</td><td>Be seen that</td><td></td><td>Can be seen that</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>It can be seen that</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>43</td><td>The highest amount.</td><td></td><td>The highest amount of</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>44</td><td>The highest percentage</td><td></td><td>The highest percentage of</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>45</td><td>The other side</td><td></td><td>On the other side</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>46</td><td>Huge amount of</td><td></td><td>Huge amount of money</td><td>A huge amount of</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>47</td><td>As we can</td><td></td><td>As we can see</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>48</td><td>Strongly believe that</td><td></td><td>I strongly believe that</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>49</td><td>To learn how</td><td></td><td>To learn how to</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>50</td><td>Vast majority of</td><td></td><td>The vast majority of</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Adel, A  . 2012. r od otion n a wtig y ive anonive af gish exa e c  r Specific Purposes, 31(2), 81-92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2011.08.004   
Alteberg, . (1998.thy f pke ngsh  idf rr dmtion. w d.) P , is nd applications (pp. 101-122). Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Anthony, L. (2006). AntConc 3.1.302 (windows). Freeware: Waseda University.   
Appel,  c 7i t  ti nti  f     ics 7 (1), 24-43. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijal.12100   
Appel, R .016  w mt   t-a wig f  ig d -ici l. es Quarterly, 13(1), 55-71. https://doi.org/10.1080/15434303.2015.1126718   
Aread. 22inth     ds tiis hara University.   
Banerjee, ., & Pedersen, T. (2003). Extended gloss overlap as a measure f semantic relatedness. In Proc. Of IJCAI-03 (pp. 805-810).   
Beck . fe,  0 h-t wn t  wng g (1)6. /. org/10.1016/j.asw.2007.05.001   
Bestgen, Y. (2017). Beyond single-word measures: L2 writing assesment, lexical richness and formulaic competence. System, 69, 65-78   
Biber, D. (2006). Universty language: A corpus-based study of spoken and written registers (Amsterdam: Benjamins).   
iber . r,  0.  n t   w .  for i , 26(, 23./.10.1016/. esp.2006.08.003   
Biber, D., & Conrad, S. (199). Lexical bundles in conversation and academic prose. Language and Computers, 26, 181-190.   
Biber, D., & Conrad, S. (2001). Register variation: A corpus approach. The handbook of discourse analysis.   
Biber, D., & Conrad, S. (2019). Register, genre, and style $2 ^ { n d }$ ed.). Cambridge University Press.   
Biber,   00 f   g n., by the lune: A festschrift for geoffrey Leech (pp. 71-92) (Frankfurt/Maine: Peter Lang).   
Biber D., na ., e, . (200).  you ook t  Lexical bundes in uivrt tehing and xtooks. pled Linusics 25(3, 371-405.   
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999. Grammar of spoken and writen Englis. Harlow: Longman.   
Boers ,  010i    .)g efficiency through cognitive linguistics (pp. 239-256). Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.   
Boers   ,    i test. Language Teaching Research, 10(3), 245-261. https://doi.org/10.1191/1362168806lr195oa   
Brazil, D. (1995). A grammar of speech. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Byrd P. d2010 n t t : xl d n a ig   th tg  . itf ey  0, 5() 3164   
Cai LJ (016An ey st  rae ch o the i f a l .  of sh or ad Purposes, 24, 58-74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.09.002   
ambride met Egish. (202). ing sor t . riee (Smer 16 2 fro h/mridgis.g/mg/461626 cambridge-english-qualifications-comparing-scores-to-ielts.pdf.   
Cambridge University Press. (2019). IELTS practice tests. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
he,  at    2 C1. Applied Linguistics, 37(6), 849-880. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amu065   
Cores, . 00l   i  ci win  r y  . s fr ic  34, 97-423 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2003.12.001 org/10.1016/j.linged.2007.02.001   
e Cock . 0ie p  h tin  r  ., s sic si r. 51-68). Amsterdam: Rodopi.   
Eert  e  . ie d  li n J    . Oxford: Blackwell.   
Eidin, i  13) t f i win  r. o J Learning and Applied Linguistics World, 4(3), 273-283.   
Eis,   -c    .   ti    stc  stcs  OL. Tesol Quarterly, 42(3), 375-396. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1545-7249.2008.tb00137.x   
Forerg  . 1)..1515 iral.2010.002 English Language, 12(2), 27-44.   
Gozdz-Roszkowski, S. (2011). Pattens of ingustic variation in American legal English: A corpus-based study. Frankfurt am Main: Lang.   
Gaowski, 15. ad l d wnish tr sitio. ish for i  38 23-3 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.10.004   
aeski018 i  t  . k, ..) Applications of pattern-driven methods in corpus linguistics (pp. 57-80). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Harwood, N. (Ed.). (2010). English language teaching materials: Theory and practice. Camridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Hyland, K. (1996). Nurturing hedges in the ESP currculum. System, 24(4), 477-490. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0346-251x(96)00043-7   
Hyland, K. (2003). Disertation acknowledgements: The anatomy of a Cinderella genre. Written Communication, 20(3), 242-268.   
Hyland, 00  e   a .s   e, 2711.//116/007.06.00   
Hyland, K. (2012). Bundes i aademic discourse. Anual Rvie of Aplied Lingustic, 32, 150-169. htps:/oi.g/10.1017/s0267190512000037   
Jig07    ar  93445./. org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2007.00589.x   
Jsto1   i  f     h. Dissertation, Portland State University.   
arabacak  3).  s ,  . 70, 622-628.   
Lech, G. 00.sof ke ish   ofcoind h  ng 50(4) 75-72. /.r0.11/0023 8333.00143   
Lewis, M. (1993). The lexical approach: The state of ELT and a way forward. Hove, England: Language Teaching Publications.   
Li J., chit . (209). heaqstin of xl phr i ac witing  ogdil ce tud. l f Sond Ln wing 18, 5-102.   
Li,  o 2  i m t n te  a ia win  aish oi et  ou. https://doi.org/10.18806/tesl.v34i3.1268   
Macalister, J., & Nation, P. I. S. (2020). Language curriculum design. New York and London: Routledge.   
Menir,  012.  d  g  R Apni, 2 119. /.g/01017/0719512000128   
Moon, R. (1998). Fixed expressions and ims in English. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Myle  oer,.,   19. r he  fc a c  nn 83, 323-364. https://doi.org/10.1111/0023-8333.00045   
Nattinger, J. R., & DeCarrico, J. (1992). Lexical phrases and language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Pres:   
Nekrasova (009). nglish 1 and L2 speakrs knwledg f xicl unde. Lnguage Ling 593, 647-686. htps/oi.g/10.111/j.1467- 9922.2009.00520.x   
O' Keeffe, A., McCarthy, M., & Carter, R. (2007). From corpus to classrom: Language use and language teaching. Cambridge: CUP.   
Palmer, H  (1933). Sod inerim reort on Eish olation. Suite to the tenth ual oneece of English techer. Toy: Ktakusha.   
Pearson, W. S. (2019). Critical perspectives on the IELTS test. ELT Journal, 73(2), 197-206. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/cz006   
Reppen, R. (2018). Teaching lexical bundles. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Teaching essential units of language. Routledge.   
Satara,  (2020  de as d ces of t wg nt of  mk xs. biss: t e nversit. Company.   
Schmitt, N. (2004). Formulaic sequences: Acquisition, processing, and use. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Schmi  r 00 q - a tio c .) i  q g s  -22) Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins Pub.   
Sh i1)   a  f si  it nd variation. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 49, 1-3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100946   
impn-h  Eli, . 2010) n   it m   .nic 1( 87-12. /i.g 10.1093/applin/amp058   
Sinclair, J. (1991). Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 133-151). Dordrecht: Kluwer.   
ale  , ie ,  13.  wn   t i English for Academic Purposes, 12(3), 214-225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2013.05.002   
t thesis   
tubbs,  &  (03).   p  tx-  ti m   inn. io  1), 65-08 https://doi.org/10.1075/fol.10.1.04stu   
Swales, J. (2004). Research genres: Exploration and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Syder, . H Pe,  (2014).  ue o istic hy ilike ecion d tivelk y. n  d in . 203-239) Routledge.   
ad1)tt   p  e Teaching Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688211029028, 0(0.   
bay 0 BC CDA, (feb. 17-19, 2007) (pp. 258-279).   
bay,  .1  l      . Language Learning, 61(2), 569-613. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2010.00622.x   
Vo, S. (2019). Use of lexical features in non-native academic writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 44, 1-12.   
Weger,   dr  00.  of i  .  ds.   
Wod, D.C., Apel,  (2014). tird constructins i irst year usines an ginerin uivrsit textook an AP xboos. Jon of ngis o Academic Purposes, 15, 1-13.   
Wray, A. (2002). Formulaic language and the lexicon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Wray, A., & Perkins, M. R. (200). The functions of formulaic language: An integrated model. Language & Communication, 20, 1-28.

A. Saadatara et al.

Ali ad tf  fr rt, n, . s m f i  s sic ad  witing

hla  t   i   rt   i19.   
research.

Hoi t  t. ints lie r in , A Wting d l) Ge Ayis,rial ain, d p Sciigstics and Socopragmatics.