# Teaching lecture comprehension skills through OpenCourseWare video-recorded lectures: A research-informed classroom application

Belinda Crawford Camiciottoli

Dipartimento di Filologia, Lettratura e Linguistica, Universita di Pisa, Via Santa Maria, 67, 56026, Pisa, PI, Italy

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords: Lecture comprehension Academic listening OpenCourseWare lectures Multimodal analysis Video resources

Lecture comprehension is a complex process that involves the decoding of meanings on various levels (e.g., phonological, lexical, syntactic, pragmatic, cultural), thus creating challenges for L2 learners. Moreover, there may be difficulties caused by unfamiliar prosodic patterns or accents of lecturers, as well as facial expressions and gesturing whose meanings may escape L2 students. To address all of these potential obstacles, lecture comprehension activities should implement materials prepared from authentic classroom lectures to provide L2 learners with realistic input, which may also vary according to instructional context.

The aim of this article is to illustrate how video-recorded lectures can be analysed to gain insights into their multifaceted nature and how the findings can be used to inform classroom activities to improve lecture comprehension. The article provides 1) a description of how video clips cut from OpenCourseWare lectures can be prepared for research and practice, 2) an overview of two case studies performed on video clips that highlight the use of multimodal ensembles integrating verbal and non-verbal features (e.g., idioms, humour, stance markers, culture-specific references, prosodic patterns, gesturing), and 3) a detailed lesson plan to exemplify how video clips from OCw lectures can be used to facilitate lecture comprehension.

# Author statement

Belinda Crawford Camiciotoli: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Resources, Investigation, Writing- Original drat preparation, Writing- Reviewing and Editing, Supervision, Project Administration, Funding Acquisition.

# 1. Introduction

Among the core skill addresse in EAP research, academic listening continues to receive les attention than reading, writing, and speaking, likely due to the complex nature of the listening proces itself which encompases a myriad of factors (Campoy-Cubillo, 2019; Lynch, 2011; Wang, 2018). In addition to the need to procespeech input on the phonological, lexical, and syntactic lvels, academic listening experiences may also encompass pragmatic and cultural meanings that are related to the interactional seting and the backgrounds of peakers (Flowerdew, 1994). On the extra-linguistic level, meanings expressed by non-verbal cues, such as speech prosody, facial expressions, and gesturing may be missed by both L1 and L2students (Mulligan & Kirkpatrick, 200. Moreover, as

Lynch (2011) pointed out, academic listeners are also faced with other isues over which they have litte control, such as temporary distractions and unfamiliar speaker acent. Similarly, Buck (2001) discussed more variable of listening input that may come into play during academic istening, such as non-linear organization of content, lack of explicitness complex pronoun reference, and multi faceted content that adreses divere aspect f topic. llof thee factors support the ntion tha isteing i not a passive process as it is ofte tradtionll viewed, bt rather an active one that requires considrale interpretive ffort byond simple dcoding Lynch & Mendelsohn, 2010).

Although academic listening may include events that Lynch (2011) clasified as one-way (i., lectures) or two-way (e.g., small group discussions, seminars, ofice hours), the largely monologic lectre continues to remain at the core f academic listening research in higher education contexts (Benson, 1994; Lee, 2009; Crawford Camiciottoli & Querol-Julian, 2016). For this reason, some large-scale projects have been undertaken to collct authentic lecture discourse for both research purposes and teaching applications, including the Michigan Corpus of Spoken Academic English/MICASE, the TOEFL 200 Spoken and Written Academic Language/T2K-swAL, and the British Academic Spoken English Corpus/BASE. As a result, there is now a considerable body of corpus-based research that has provided important insights into the verbal features of lecture discourse, with particular reference to those that may create dificultie for EAP learners and to which they should be exposed during training activities. Among these are evaluative adjectives (wales & Burke, 2003), hedging and vagueness indicators (Mauranen, 2004) discourse markers (Schlee, 2008) idioms (Simpson & Mendis, 2003), interactivity patterns (Csomay, 2002), humour (Nesi, 2012), markers of importance (Deroey, 2015), and phraal verbs (Aldohon, 2018) Studies based on smaller datasets of lecture discourse have also analysed key features such as cultural references (Crawford Camiciottoli, 2018), interactional patterns (O'Keffe & Walsh, 2012), phonological reductions (Crawford Camiciotoli, 007), and informal expressions including interjections, expletives, and slang (Crawford Camiciottoli, 2020a) Such studies that conduct in-depth analyes of authentic forms of language constitute an important component of a needs analysis for language teaching (Basturkmen, 2010; Dudley-Evans & St.John, 1998), and thus serve as the groundwork for research-informed teaching applications.

Thanks to research of the type discussed above, we now have a much better understanding of the linguistic features of English lecture discourse. However, generally speaking, lecture comprehension continues to remain a challenge for many L2 learners, as relatively recent studies based on surveys, questionnaires, and interviews with students indicate (Evans & Morrison, 2011; Helekjaer, 2010; Rahimirad & Moini, 2015; Tzoannopoulou, 2017; Wang, 2018). This is true even in light of the now well-consolidated trend of English Medium Instruction (EMI), which has greatly expanded opportunities for L2 learners to be exposed to lectures delivered in English (Querol-Julian & Crawford Camiciottoli, 2019).

To address the challenges of lecture comprehension in EAP/ESP and EMI setings, teaching activities should prioritie materials derived from authentic lectures (Deroey, 2018) that, in this case, represent \*the ultimate goal of listening intruction (Vandergrift, 2007, p. 199). The notion of authenticity of language was first addressed by Widdowson (1979) and described later by Litle et al. (1998, p. 21) in terms of a text that is "created to fulfil some social purpose in the language community in which it was produced." Authenticity is akey criterion in the election and use of materials to improve istening comprehension skils (MacDonald et al, 2000; Wang, 2018). In particular, authenticity should be reflected not oly in the guinenes of the text itef, but aso in the lrning task in which the text is used, in terms of its real-word purpose and target situation (Guariento & Morley, 2001).

Advances in technology have enabled growing access to authentic audio-visual materials that can be harnessed for use in EAP settings to improve istening comprehension, including new instructional genres that share common features with academic lectures. Among the most popular are TED Talks which are speeches given by experts on a range of subjects in non-institutional conference-like settings and then posted onlie. Likely due to their wide variety of choice interms of content and easy Internet acess, TED Talks are now frequently used in instructiona settings. With particular rfrenc to academic iting, it has e suggetd that D Talks are useful resources due to their short (maximum $1 8 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ ) and dynamic nature which enhances learner motivation, as well as the availability of corresponding speech transcripts (Takaesu, 2013) Hwever, when comparing academic vocabulary, lexcal density, and speech rate in a corpus of TED Talks vs. a corpus of Yale University lectures, Wingrove (2017) found that TED Talks were characterised by faster speech rate and les academic vocabulary, and therefore not always suitable for EAP istening activities. Thus, it could be argued that lectures delivered by academics in institutional settings would be preferable for developing academic istening skills Fortunately, in rcent yrs, there has be  stedy ris in the avalability of vid recordngs of lectures posted on the ope ducation platforms of many universties around the world.? A particularly rich source of authentic lctures is the Massachusets Institute of Technology (MIT). In 2002, this institution first pioneered the notion of OpenCourseWare (OC), which aims to provide free cces to high quality educational experiences to anyone who wishes to learn, with video-recorded lectures as it core component (Vladoiu, 2011). Thus, researchers and practitioners alike can now take advantage of these authentic multimodal resources which are more "representative of the real-world situations students face" (Salehzadeh, 2006, p. xix) with respect to the kind of cleaned-up, simplified and often audio-only input found in many EAP textbooks (Deroey, 2018).

The aim of this article is to llustrate how OpenCourseWare (Ocw) lectures can be used to improve lecture comprehension. The classroom application that is presented for this purpose is base on research conducted on video clis cut from complete OcW lectures that are freely available on open university platforms. The lecture clips are part of a corpus of video clips that was compiled for the development of multimodal materials across a variety of digital genres to be used in the context of EAP/ESP. Analysis of the lecture clips targeted not only the ingustic features that can create particular challenges for L2 listeners (e.g., idioms, humour, figurative anguage, phrasal verbs, markers of stance, culture-specificreerences, and speclizd tenology), but aonon-verl fetres e., gesturing, prosodic patterns). Such extra-linguistic elements have been shown to play an important role in listening comprehension through replication, reinforcement, and integration of the verbal message (Dahl & Ludvigsen, 2014; Querol-Julian & Arteaga-- Martinez, 2019; Sueyoshi & Hardison, 2005), and therefore also warrant attention.

The remaining sections of the articl willoffer 1) adetailed account of the process of collecting and preparing the Ocw lecture video clips for subsequent teaching applications; 2) a review of some preliminary research conducted on the clips; 3) an example of a classoom applicationwith Ow lecture video clips, complete with learnng objectives, activitie, and matrials to exemplify how they can be used to enhance lecture comprehension and; 4) some concluding remarks.

# 2. The Ocw lecture video clips

The OCw lectures that were utilized for this research-informed classoom application were collected within the framework of an interuniversty research project funded by the Itlian government. The research unit of the University of Pisa compiled and analysed a corpus of video clips representing a range of digitally available genres across diffrent discourse domains that were particularly relevant for EAP/ESP settings. The genres represented in the video clip corpus (a total of 203 clips for about $^ { 8 \mathrm { h } }$ of recorded material) cover a continuum in terms of formality, communicative mode (monologic/dialogic),scientificity, and authenticity. They include university OC lectures, Tals at Google, TED Talk, interviews, talk shows, documentaries, docu-tours, guided tours, films, and TV series. The discourse domains represented are business and economics, political science, law, science and technology, medicine and health, and tourism. The underlying rationale was not only to gain insights into their linguistic/extralinguistic features and to create innovative materials for teaching, but also to better engage with EAP/ESP learners who are now avid and expert consumers of multimodal digital resources (Street et al., 2011).

The video clip corpus was annotated with searchable descriptors, which renders them particularly useful for research and instructional purposes. These annotations (or tags) cover a range of potentiall chllenging verbal features of lectures as discussed in Section 1, including specialized vocabulary, informal register, figurative language, fixed expressions, humour, evaluative language, and cultural references. From this corpus, a set of OcW lectures was extracted and analysed for subsequent classroom applications. This process entailed the following steps:

1. Identification of suitable sources: the OpenCourseWare platforms of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Yale Un. versity, and Harvard University were selected as well-developed resources of video-recorded lectures from complet courses across multiple disciplinary areas. The lectures were alldelivered by L1 speakers of English. They are thus suitable for teaching lecture comprehension skills in EAP/ESP as proposed in this article, but also for preparing L2 learners for EMI. In today's globalized world of higher education, L2 learners may be exposed to both L1 and L2 speakers in EMI, and therefore can benefit from training with L1 lectures to help them acquire adequate listening skills that are often lacking (Richards & Pun, 2021). The platforms also provide various types of additional supporting instructional materials, pecifically orthographic speech transcripts of the lectures, which are particularly useful for both research and classroom use. Lectures representing the six previously mentioned disciplinary areas were collected for inclusion in the corpus.

2. Careful viewing of the selected lecture videos to identify segments relevant for teaching L2 istening comprehension, especialy those containing potentially challenging verbal features (i.e., idioms, humour, figurative language, phrasal verbs, markers of stance, culture-specific references, specialized terminology), as well asnon-verbal features such as gesturing and prosodic patterns. Following Kaiser's (2011) approach, it was decided to collect relatively short clips $( 2 { - } 4 \ \mathrm { m i n } )$ to render listening tasks more manageable. Short clips also offer the option of combining multiple clips to provide more extensive content and context where appropriate. Blomfield et al. (2011) pointed out that, in addition to length, there are other important factors at play in a listening passage that can also have an impact on comprehension, including speech rate, redundancy, and information density. Thus, a shorter passage, for example, is not necesarily asier for students to comprehend than a longer passage. Moreover, the literature on listening comprehension does not offer a clear consensus on what is considered to be an appropriate length of a passage; studies have mentioned lengths ranging from 2 to 25 min (Jeon, 2007).

3. Clipping of segments, preparation of corresponding speech transcripts into separate files, and formulation of teaching notes for each clip that describe its content and the relevant linguistic/extralinguistic features that emerged in Step 2.

4. Annotation of the spech transcripts with ad-hoc tags to identify releant inguisti eaure. As previously indicated, the possibility to search annotated transcripts by tag to identif features of interest for a classroom application is quite useful. Moreover, the same type of targeted tag query can be efectively implemented for research-oriented analyses. The complete tagset is shown in Appendix A.

# 3. Preliminary research based on the Ocw video lecture:

The lecture component of the video clip corpus has thus far served as the source of two studies to identify distinguishing verbal and non-verbal features. As preliminary explorations, they were undertaken in the form of case studies. However, the availbility of targeted collections of video-recorded lecture clips and corresponding transcripts has the potential for use in larger cale studies that also incorporate methods of corpus linguistics, in addition to multimodal analytical tols (Crawford Camiciotoli, 2019). Because both case studies relied on the multimodal annotation software ELAN (ELAN, 2020), this section begins with a description of the charac. teristics of the software that enabled the display and analysis of "multimodal ensembles" (Kress, 2011, p. 38), showing how the synergetic interaction of multiple semiotic resources (i.., speech, prosodic stres, gesturing, gaze direction, and body orientation) contributes to meaning. Specifically, the user can develop a customized framework in the software to analyse particular verbal and co-occurring non-verbal features in correspondence with the streaming video uploaded into the software. Table 1 ilustrates how a multimodal analytical framework could be set up for a lecture video clip, based on a series of tiers that enable the contemporaneous visualization of modes. In this example, the linguistic feature of interest is an evaluative expression (e.g., very biased), which is accompanied by prosodic stress gaze directed toward the audience a gesture (with physical and functional descriptors based on Kendon (2004) and Weinberg et al. (2013), respectively); and an open body position (Norris 2004). The particular non-verbal elements to be analysed depend on the filming characteristics in terms of distance from the lecturer. For example, a medium distance wil enable the systematic observation of gestures, body orientation and general gaze direction, but not detaild facial expressons that would require close-up filming.

The first study in Crawford Camiciotoli (2016) presents a multimodal analysis of lecture clips extracted from a political science lecture accessed from Yale Universt's open courses website. The research objective was to understand how non-verbal elements co-occur with interactional features of language and how they may reinforce meanings and thus enhance comprehension in the context of a lecture. The multimodal analysi focused on two episodes that had been identified inthe clips involving 1) humour in the form of an idiomatic expression followed by a pun and 2) persuasion encoded by a modal verb should, the inclusive pronoun we and the comprehension check right? These episodes reflect intances in which the lecturer interacts with the audience on a more interpersonal level beyond the topic at hand. In the first episode, the lecturer used gestures (hands open and extended towards the audience) and gaze directed outwards to callattention to the idom cart before the horse, but then prosodically tresed the word course in the pun cart before the course that fllowed dirctly, thus jokingly referring tothis firtlecture of the course to xplain its overall objectives. I the second episode, the lecturer engages in persuasion with the utterance one thing we should not do (i., consider the works of great political thinkers as solutios to modern-day problems), ollowed by a comprehension check right? This utterance is acompanied by his palms placed together in a praying-like formation, described by Kendon (1995) as a gesture that invokes the listener to believe something, and thus seems to strengthen the persuasive effct. The results of the multimodal analysis suggest that interactional meanings during a lecture can be effectively enhanced by the non-verbal cues that accompany speech.

The second study in Crawford Camiciottoli (2020b) is based on video clips from an economics lecture available on the MIT open course platform. The aim was to explore how the lecturer's stance on particular aspects of the lecture content may emerge both verbally and non-verbally. The multimodal analysis revealed the co-occurrence of verbal expressions f stance by means of language encoding positive/negative atitudes (e.g, sadly, really interesting) or positions (modal verbs such as should) and non-verbal cues involving prosody, gaze direction, gesture, and body orientation. Thus, the analysis was undertaken from the perspective of Multi. modal Critical Discourse Analysis (Machin, 2013), which extends traditional CDA by investigating how other semiotic modes beyond language contribute to the expression of ideologies. The multimodal ensembles (Kress, 2011) that were analysed showed how the lecturer was efective at engaging the students in a discussion of a controversial topic involving access t health care in the United States and related issues of economic inequality. He did so in a nuanced way that revealed aspects of his own expert viewpoint, which students naturall desire to know (Northcot, 2001), but without imposing it and encouraging them to reflect For example, he posed the questions "should they be able to do that?" and \*why shouldn't they?", which wereaccompanied by a multimodal ensemble displaying an attention-focusing gesture with palm inward moving up and down, and gaze and body orientation directed pointedly towards the audience.

The two studies reviewed above provide insights into the potential interplay between verbal and non-verbal elements during an academic lecture, as well as their integrated contribution to meanings. Such knowledge is an important first step to help L2 leaners better cope with challenging interactional and interpersonal features of lecturers speech (cf. Crawford Camiciottoli, 2007, 2018, 2020b; Csomay, 2002; Deroey, 2015; Nesi, 2012; Schle, 2008; Simpson & Mendis 2003; Swales & Burke, 2003), by alerting them to non-verbal cues that can claify and/or reinforce meanigs. In the following sectin, ilstrate how this type of reearch can serveas a basis for developing an EAP/ESP classroom application.

# 4. Using OCW lecture clips in the EAP/ESP classroom

One of the goals of the interuniverst project described in Section 2 was to produce teaching materials based on the colected video clips and transcripts for use inthe classroom Towards this aim, a lesson plan was developed around three video clips selected from the introductory lcture t a course entitled Principles of Microeconomics available on the MIT OpenCourseWare plaform. The cips were prepared and analysed according to the procedures described in Section 2, with special attention to the teaching notes that had identified linguistic/extralinguistic features of interest for instructional activitie. The lesson is designed for a class of $^ { 1 . 5 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ for undergraduate L2 students in integrated skills EAP/ESP courses in business/economics degree programs at the intermediate to upper intermediate level of general English competency (i.e., B1-B2 in the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages) It was assumed that the students have some knowledge of basic concepts of economics from concurrent or previous coursework in L1. Table 2 summarizes the characterisics of the leson in terms of its objectives, the equipment and materials to be used, patterns of classrom interaction, and various stages of the lesson. The pilot implementation of the lesson had actuall ben planned for the academic year 2020/2021, but it was prevented by the limiting circumstances that arose from the Covid-19 pandemic. It i hoped that a return to normal research and teaching activities will llow the lesson plan to be piloted in the academic year 2021/2022.

Table 1 Example of tier set-up in ELAN.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Analytical tier</td><td>Description</td><td>Annotation inserted in ELAN</td></tr><tr><td>Transcript</td><td>Words inserted under the extracted soundwave of streaming video</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Linguistic stance</td><td>Evaluative expression</td><td>Eval</td></tr><tr><td>Prosody</td><td> Paralinguistic stress on word/syllable</td><td>Stress</td></tr><tr><td>Gaze</td><td>Directed toward audience</td><td>Tow</td></tr><tr><td>Gesture_ description</td><td>Index fingers extended and pointing to the audience</td><td>InFingsEx</td></tr><tr><td>Gesture_function</td><td>Social gesture to emphasize message</td><td>Social</td></tr><tr><td>Body orientation</td><td>Open facing toward audience</td><td>Open tow</td></tr></table></body></html>

The proposed lesson plan describes activities for the students' first lecture listening experience. Although the activities address primarily listening comprehension, they also involve some reading and speaking, as wellas writing in a follow-up assinment. Moreover,following ynch andMendelson (2010), the lesson plan also includes post-listing activities. Table 3 provides examples of some activities that mainly addres listening comprehension, in line with the focus of this article. With reference to non-verbal elements (Communicative objective), due to the time constraints fa single leson, I fous only on gestures as the non-verbal resource that would be the most prominent to learners viewing the cips, and thus apropriate for an inroductory awarenes-rasing activity. ther resources such as gaze, body orientation, and prosody could be addressed in subsequent essons to help learners understand how non-verbal cues can co-occur and contribute to meaning synergistically as a more advanced activity. Whileit may not be feasible to address non-verbal communication in every academic listning activity, some space should be carved out whenever possible to include this important component of the lecture listening experience (Dahl & Ludvigsen, 2014; Querol-Julian & Arteaga-Martinez, 2019, Sueyoshi & Hardison, 2005).

The first of the two activities in the warm-up stage was designed to provide students with the context of the lecture seting and the overall lecture topic, while engaging them in discussion to activate revious experience and knowledge. The second activity aims to make them more aware of the particular challenges of istening to authentic content lectures in English (e.g., fast speech rate, dysfluencies, digresions, unknown ocabulary, use of humour), in order to better preparethem for upcoming lesson activities and future lecture experiences. The handout used here is adapted from Salehzadeh's (2006) textbook on lecture listening strategies see Appendix B).

The activities in the presentation, practice, production, and reflection stage for Clip 1 correspond to the first approximately $2 . 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ of the lecture (0:00 to 2:41), during which the lecturer begins his general introduction to the course by highlighting constrained optimization as one of the fundamental concepts that wil be covered. The first activity focuses on vocabulary related to economics asking students to note down such items while watching the video (firms, individuals, resources, tade-off scarcity, constrained optim zation), with follow-up discussion to create a mind map to facilitate learning. The second activity makes use of the clip transcript prepared as a handout to be used in pair work to identify potentially problematic features of the authentic lecture discourse: informality (what the heck, a pile of junk) and acultural reference to atraditional contest that takes place in a particular undergraduate MIT course (MIT 270). The handout can also be used to highlight the lecturer's enthusiastic attitude towards the subject of economics through the us f auative lgag omema ali dismal t li fu just ike 70i sm contest, micrmicsis not to me a dismal scence) (se Appendix C). The third actvity is dedicated to enhancing awareness of the contribution of non-verbal cues to meanings. While playing the clip again without the sound, students are asked to identify and note down a description of particularly prominent gestures and any co-occurring words. The cip is then played with the sound and students are asked to decide which of the identified gestures contributes to the meaning of the co-occurring words and explain how they do so. The clip contains several in. stances in which gestures appear to reinforce verbal meanings: hand clenched in fist moving rhythmically toward the audience (scarcity is key), open hand moving back and forth between audience and self you can't have everything you have to make a trade-ff. okay? you have to give up x to get y), hands horizontall-positioned and moving towards audience with a pushing motion (to move a ping-pong ball across a table).

The presentation, practice, production, and reflection activities for Clip 2 (6:44 to 9:09) refer to another fundamental topic of the course, namely, price and its role in the three fundamental questions in microconomics: what goods and services to produce, how to produce them, and who will buy them. The lectrer ilustrates this concept with the example f the purchase of an Ipod. The first activity is deigned to activate students prior experiences with making choices in relation to price as an inroduction to the content of the clip. The second activity focuses on helping students identify key concepts in the clip as well as economics-related terminology (goods, serices price comers stt ariable, marklace, using  handt wth a gap-illing exeise crtd from theci transcrit and a corresponding mind map. The third activity implements pair work to analyse informal and attitudinal features of the lecturer's speech. These include bucks instead of dollars, amazing to positively comment on how some fundamental concepts drive the whole economy, use of irony with the phrase cast our minds way back when referring to Apple's launchof the Ipod in 2001, so actually only about 10 years prior to 2011 when the lecture was delivered. The fourth activity highlights the use of co-occurring gestures to emphasize important meanings: hands open and sweeping widely apart (our entire conomy), thumb and index finger forming a ring and moving towards the audience (one key state variable), hands coming together with fingers intertwined (interact in a marketplace).

Table 2 Lesson overview.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Characteristics</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td> Linguistic objectives</td><td>To enhance listening comprehension competence with particular reference to lecture listening skils; to acquire speialized vocabulary for business and economics; to produce spoken and written discourse incorporating newly acquired specialized vocabulary</td></tr><tr><td>Communicative objectives</td><td>To help students learn to communicate in English in relation to key concepts of economics for both their current academic and future professional contexts; to raise awareness of the contribution of non-verbal elements (i.e., gestures) to meaning</td></tr><tr><td>Formative objectives</td><td>To encourage students to reflect on the ethical aspects of economic choices and how these choices ffect society; to foster critical listening skills in order to interpret and evaluate positions of speakers (in this case, the lecturer)</td></tr><tr><td>Cross-cultural objective</td><td>To help students understand particular cultural references used during a lecture at an American university</td></tr><tr><td>Materials and equipment</td><td>Equipment: blackboard, computer for projecting images and videos Materials: three video clips from an MIT economics lecture &quot;Introduction to Microeconomics&quot;; images for projection; complete</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>transcripts of clips; handouts prepared for classroom use (see examples in Appendices B and C)</td></tr><tr><td>Interaction patterns</td><td>Plenary, class discussion, individual, pair work, group work</td></tr><tr><td>Stages</td><td>Warm-up, presentation, practice, production, reflection, application</td></tr></table></body></html>

The activitie for Clip 3 (15:05 to 17:47) are not detailed in Table 3 for reasons of space and manageability, but they build on those of Clips 1 and 2 by introducing other fundamental oncepts that will be examined in the course, specifiall positive economics vs. normative economics, which the lecturer characterises "as the way things are' vs. \*the way things should be, respectively. The a. tivities involve similar types of tass as those in Clips 1 and 2 to complete while istening to/viewing the clips and follow-up tasks designed to raise awarenessof particularly challenging features, allowing students to explore various aspects of spoken language and the lecturer's delivery by using the clip transcripts for verification and analysis (Lynch, 2004). Clip transcripts were used to create a gap-filling exercise that allows students to practice listening and vocabulary skills while listening to/viewing the clips.

On the whole,following Guariento and Morley (2001), the activities and tasks developed for use with the three lcture video clips can be seen as reflecting both text authenticity (i.e., portions of a video-recorded lecture that was delivered in an actual university classrom) and task authenticit i.e, tass that have a real-world purpose and target the situation of preparing L2 students for listening to content lectures). To further enhance text and task authenticity, as follow-up to the lesson based on the three video clips, students can be provided with a link to the complete lecture (approximately $3 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ ) and corresponding transcript and encouraged to view it in its entiret as advanced extra practice (cf. Salehzadeh, 2006). In a lecture listening comprehension course or module, clips can be effctively used, but it would also e important for students to have the experienceof listening to/viewing an entire lecture, for example, as a final assignment (Salehzadeh, 2006).

Tasks that serve to develop skill other than listening that were integrated into the lesson plan include group discussions and oral reporting to the clas (speaking) on questions related to ethical isues in normative economics and a group assignment to prepare a PowerPoint presentation (speaking and writing). The asignment requires students to present examples of economic trade-off decisions regarding what goods will be produced, how they will be produced and who gets the goods; and positive vs. normative economics, thus satisfying the application stage of the lesson plan.

# 5. Concluding remarks

This article has discussed the ongoing challenges that L2 learners face during academic lectures and has offered a research. informed classoom application grounded in the notion that all semiotic modes (both verbal and non-verbal) can be exploited to improve listening comprehension (Dahl & Ludvigsen, 2014; Querol-Julian & Arteaga-Martinez, 2019; Sueyoshi & Hardison, 2005). Because an academic lecture i a multimodal event comprising both speech and is embodied delivery, regardless of whether it is experienced live and face-to-face or by means of a video recording, itis important to develop what Campoy-Cubillo and Querol-Julian (2015, p. 199) refer to as \*multimodal listening skills. Towards this aim, the lesson plan illstrated in Section 4 conriutes to pro moting such skills by showing how multimodal input can give L2 learners practice with thedifferent semiotic modes that may come into play during a lecture, while also aligning with the communicative approach through the use of authentic video-recorded lectures as the target language (Little et al., 2002). Fortunately, thanks to ongoing progress in educational technology, such multimodal resources are becoming more readily available for practitioners to access and then prepare for classroom use. An emphasi on multi modal listening is also a way to respond to calls to develop \*multimodal literacy" among learners, which entail the aility to construct meanings from the range of semiotic resources that characterise multimedia and digital texts (Walsh, 2010). Clearly, to help learners acquire these skills,clasroom practitioners need to first develop "semio-pedagogical competence, which refers to their own awarenes of the contribution of multiple semiotic modes to meanings, as wellas their ability to design effctive learning activities using multimodal and multimedia input (Guichon & Cohen, 2016, p. 518).

Table 3 Examples of activities.   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Stage</td><td>Activities</td><td>Skills</td><td>Objectives</td><td>Strategies</td></tr><tr><td>Warm up</td><td>1. Instructor shows images of MIT and asks students (hereafter Ss) to share what they know about it and the American university system. Instructor provides some basic information about MIT and tells Ss that they will hear parts of a lecture recorded at MIT in a course called &quot;Introduction to Microeconomics&quot;. Instructor asks Ss to share what they know about microeconomics. 2. Instructor asks Ss about previous experiences listening to lectures in English and what their challenges are, writing down their ideas on the blackboard. Instructor plays Clip 1 and then asks Ss to discuss difficulties experienced, comparing them with their previous ideas noted on the blackboard.. Instructor asks Ss to read a handout on challenges of lecture listening, and then leads a</td><td>Speaking Listening Reading</td><td>To familiarize Ss with the lecture setting and overall topic To raise awareness of challenges of lecture comprehension</td><td>Brainstorming and eliciting ideas Relating prior knowledge to establish background information Evaluating lecture listening challenges</td></tr><tr><td>Presentation, practice, production, reflection</td><td>the handout, and what they experienced from the clip. Clip 1: Course Introduction/Constraint Optimization 1. Instructor plays Clip 1 again and asks students to write down words that refer to concepts related to economics. Instructor writes words identified by Ss on the black board and asks them to create a mind map of the items and categorize them according to meanings (e.g. concepts, activities, actors) 2. Instructor plays Clip 1 again asks Ss write down instances of informal language, cultural references, and evidence of the professor&#x27;s attitudes. Instructor asks Ss to work in pairs to analyse these features in the transcript and report their results orally to the class, also including possible reasons for the professor&#x27;s language choices. 3. Instructor plays Clip 1 again without the sound and asks students to first identify and</td><td>Speaking Reading</td><td>To facilitate lecture comprehension To acquire specialized vocabulary for economics To raise awareness of informal features. of lecture discourse and cultural references To develop critical listening skills to</td><td>Listening for specialized terminology Connecting and categorizing meanings of specialized terminology Collaborating with peers to identify and interpret speaker stance and cultural references Utilizing non-verbal cues to facilitate understanding</td></tr><tr><td>Presentation, practice, production, reflection</td><td>can then identify the co-occurring words and discuss how the gestures contribute to meaning. Clip 2: The role of price/Ipod example 1. Instructor asks Ss to share their experiences as consumers of technology products, what role price plays, and what choices they make with expensive hi-tech products. Instructor tells Ss that they will hear the professor explain the important role of price using the IPod as an example. 2. Instructor plays Clip 2 and asks students to write down the main points addressed in the clip. Instructor asks students to report back and discuss their results. Instructor plays Clip 2 again and asks Ss to complete the gap-filling exercise on the handout while listening. Instructor reviews answers with Ss, explaining potentially unknown. vocabulary. Instructor solicits students to create a mind map of the items and categorize them according to meanings.</td><td>Speaking Listening Reading</td><td>To facilitate lecture comprehension To acquire specialized vocabulary for. economics To develop critical listening skills to interpret the lecturer&#x27;s stance To enhance awareness of non-verbal meanings</td><td>Relating prior experiences to introduce the topic Listening for specialized terminology Connecting and categorizing meanings of. specialized terminology Collaborating with peers to identify and interpret speaker stance and cultural references Utilizing non-verbal cues to facilitate understanding</td></tr></table></body></html>

The type of classroom application developed and presented in this article undoubtedly requires considerable initial efort and time on the part of instructors.I i likely to require long-term planning, with an initial phase necessarily dedicated to selecting and analysing the video clips,followed by a second phase to prepare the corrsponding eson plan. However, once that investment is made, the materials and leson plans could be rcycled or updated with minor adjustments. The lesson plan could also serve as a model for others that target listening comprehension. Although envisioned for a homogeneous EAP/ESP course for students of business/ economics, it could be adapted to more heterogeneous EAP setings with students from different disciplinary areas. However, i this case, the instructor may need to provide information about key concepts of economics that could be lacking.

Follow-up research could asses the reactions of sudents to the lsson plan by means of a post-lesson questionnaire to determine which components they found most useful and interesting. It would also be worthwhile to verify the potential benefical ffects of the learning strategies highlighting both verbal and non-verbal meanings through experimental methods, for example, evaluating performance on a listening task based on new authentic lecture video clips. The use of such resources to teach and assesslcture comprehension could be an effective way to engage with today's learners who expertly and routinely interact with multimodal forms of communication in their daily lives.

Appendix A. Tagset for the lecture clip transcripts   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Tag</td><td>Meaning</td></tr><tr><td>SVEC</td><td>Specialized Vocabulary/Business &amp; Economics</td></tr><tr><td>SVLW</td><td>Specialized Vocabulary/Law</td></tr><tr><td>SVMD</td><td>Specialized Vocabulary/Health &amp; Medicine.</td></tr><tr><td>SVPS</td><td>Specialized Vocabulary/Political Science</td></tr><tr><td>SVTE</td><td>Specialized Vocabulary/Technology</td></tr><tr><td>SVTO</td><td>Specialized Vocabulary/Tourism</td></tr><tr><td>IRCL</td><td>Informal Register/Clipping</td></tr><tr><td>IRCO</td><td>Informal Register/Colloquialism</td></tr><tr><td>IREL</td><td>Informal Register/Ellipsis</td></tr><tr><td>IREX</td><td>Informal Register/Expletives and taboo words</td></tr><tr><td>IRIN</td><td>Informal Register/Initialism</td></tr><tr><td>IRJA</td><td>Informal Register/Jargon</td></tr><tr><td>IRNC</td><td>Informal Register/Novel Constructions</td></tr><tr><td>IRNG</td><td>Informal Register/Non-Standard Grammar</td></tr><tr><td>IRPH</td><td>Informal Register/Phonological Reduction</td></tr><tr><td>IRPV</td><td>Informal Register/Phrasal Verb</td></tr><tr><td>IRSL</td><td>Informal Register/Slang</td></tr><tr><td>IRVL</td><td>Informal Register/Vague Language</td></tr><tr><td>FE</td><td>Fixed Expression (idioms, formulaic language)</td></tr><tr><td>ss</td><td>Speaker&#x27;s Stance (evaluative language)</td></tr><tr><td>FLHY</td><td>Figurative Language/Hyperbole</td></tr><tr><td>FLIN</td><td>Figurative Language/Insinuation</td></tr><tr><td>FLIR</td><td>Figurative Language/Irony</td></tr><tr><td>FLMT</td><td>Figurative Language/Metaphor</td></tr><tr><td>FLMTN</td><td>Figurative Language/Metonymy</td></tr><tr><td>FLPE</td><td>Figurative Language/Personification</td></tr><tr><td>FLSC</td><td>Figurative Language/Sarcasm</td></tr><tr><td>FLSM</td><td>Figurative Language/Simile</td></tr><tr><td>HU</td><td>Humour</td></tr><tr><td>WP</td><td>Word Play</td></tr><tr><td>CR</td><td>Cultural Reference</td></tr></table></body></html>

Sample of tagged text. All engineering is really SVEC_constrained optimization. How do you take the resources you're given and do the best job building something. And that's really what SVEC_microeconomics is. Just like CR_270 is SS_not a dismal contest, SVEC_microeconomics is SS_not_to_me_a_- dismal science. You could think of this course like CR_270. But instead of building robots, we're FE_running people's lives. Okay? That's, IRVL_kind of, the way I like to think about this course.

# Appendix B. Handout describing challenging features of lectures (adapted from Salehzadeh, 2006, p. 2)

Instructions: Read the list of the challenges of lecture listening. Did you experience any of these in the clip you just viewed? Report to the class. Some Unique Challenges of Lecture Listening.

1. Professors may speak quickly and with an accent with which you are unfamiliar.   
2. Professors may digress from the main topic and tell stories, anecdotes and jokes.   
3. Professors may use acronyms or abbreviations that you did not know.   
4. Professors' opinions may not be stated explicitly.   
5. Professors may change topics without clear signalling.   
6. Professors may use informal language that students do not expect to hear.   
7. You cannot \*re-hear" spoken language like you can re-read written language.   
8. Opportunities to get more explanation may not be immediate.   
9. There may be particular references to the local culture with which you are not familiar.   
O. Terms may be introduced that you don't know how to spell.

Appendix C. Example of handout with exercise produced from a video clip transcript.

Instructions: Working in pairs, read the transcript and underline features of' . informal language . the professor's attitude or opinions . reference to the American university culture

So what I want to do today is I want to talk about what the heck this course is. What is microeconomics? What are you going to be learning in this course? And just, sort of, set us up for the semester. Okay. So basical, microeconomics is ll about scarcity. Its all about how individuals and firms make decisions given that we live in a world of scarcity. Scarcity is key because basically what we're going to learn about this semester in various shapes and forms is a lot of diffrent types of constrained optimization. We're going to learn a lot about different ways that individuals make choices in a world of scarcity. Okay?

That is, this course is going to be about trade-off. Given scarce resources, how the individuals and firms trade off dfferent al. tenatives to make themselves as wellf as possibl. That's why economics iscalled the dismal science. Okay? It's alle the dismal science because we are not about everyone have everything. We're always the people who say, no, you can't have everything. You have to make a trade-off. Okay? You have to give up x to get y. And that's why people don't ike us. Okay? Because that's why we're called the dismal science, because we're always pointing out the trade-offs that people face.

Now, some may cal it dismal, but cal it fu. nd that may be beause of my M traing, as I aid I was an undergraduate hre. In fact, MIT is the perfect place to teach microeconomics because this whole institute is about engineering solutions which are really ultimately about constrained optimization. Indeed, what's the best example in the world we have of this? It'sthe 270 contest. Right? You're given a pil of junk, you've got to build something that does something else. That's an exercise in constrained optimization.

All engineering is really constrained optimization. How do you take the resources you're given and do the best job building something. And that's really what microeconomics is. Just like 270 is not a dismal ontest, microeconomics is not to me a dismal science. You could think of this course like 270. But instead of building robots, we're running people's lives. Okay?That's, ind of, the way I like to think about this course. Instead of trying to decide how we can build something to move a ping pong ball acrossa table, we're trying to decide how people make their decisions to consume, and firms make their decisions to produce. That's basically what's going to go on in this class.

# References

Ahn, H8      .rt https://curve.carleton.ca/system/files/etd/ee869c93-e19-4872-863a-6433c381f64/ed_pdf/9647e614178fa124bc316d5816adf1f/aldohonacorpusbasedinvestigationofacademicvocabulary.pdf.   
Basturkmen, H. (2010). Developing courses in English for specific purposes. Palgrave Macmillan.   
on, M J 199)  i n r ei.  J    is ti (. 181198).ide University Press.   
Bd     1   rs of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33, 2322-2327.   
Buck, G. (2001). Assessing listening. Cambridge University Press.   
Campoy-Cubill, M C. (2019). Fuctionaliversty and the mumodaistng construct. open Jonal fSpecil Neds tion 342), 204-219.   
ampy-15is .) From research to teaching (pp. 193-212). Routledge.   
Crawford Camiciottoli, B. (2007). the language of businestudies lectures: A corpus-assisted analysis. John Benjamins.   
Crawford ili, . (2016).  ml ai f itin n d t  tdy.  . igri, .  .) Multimodality across communicative setings, discourse domains and genres (pp. 65-92). Cambridge Scholars Publishing. vioJ. ncpicotuug cutut 1 Lv1pu3-vascu analyois. Luiguc c Luiguugg, ZU1U   
Crawfd li, 09  r  nn i.  .) Worlds of words: Cmplexty, crit n onvetionit in Egsh luage, ie d cue, Ipp. 47-52). Pi Universt Pes anguag.   
Crawfrd li,  (2020) Th rr    is n  d g  of ish r Adc Pe, 46113. ile 00870.   
Crawford Camiciotoli, . (2020). Detecting ideological stance in an conomics lecture: A multi-faceted aproach. berica, 40(2020), 35-58.   
Crawfrd  i 016).hr 24.. n l  .    h o ps (pp. 309-322). Routledge.   
Comay, 00 t    .) linguistic variation (pp. 203-224). John Benjamins.   
Dah, . 1 ie . 01)  w y g he   ive ao isg si hge Journal, 98(3), 813-833.   
Deroey, K. L. B. (2015). Marking importance in lectures: Interactive and textual orientation. Applied Lingusics 36(1), 51-72.   
Der    iv  i   ,      pe, 34, 57-67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.03.011   
Dudey-Evans, T., & St ohn, M. J. (1998). Dvelopments in English for pcic uposes. A mult-disipliny pproch. Cambridge Universit Pres.   
ELAN (Version 5.9) ([Computer software). (2020). Nijmegen: Max planck institute for sycholinguistics. htps://archive.mpi.nl/tla/elan.   
an, ri 1ito ge  i-  or e, 0 (3), 198-208.   
lowew  (199).  f ree 2 mrsi J. .),  is h i .79.mride University Press   
Guariento, W., & Morley, J. (2001). Text and task authenticity in the EFL classroom. ELT Jounal, 55(4), 347-353.   
Guchn h . 2016lty an . r r .), h   f    . 509-521) Routledge.   
Hellekjaer, .. 010 aa mr ssng lte comehsion in rwian ish-md higher etion. n . ln-ffe, . iula, & U. Smit (Eds.), Language use and language learning in CLIL classrooms (pp. 233-258). John Benjamins.   
Jen .00   is     t p/ citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.977.5106&rep=rep1&type=pdf.   
Kaiser, . (201.  ach toptig ilm in thef anag clsso. 2 Jol, 3(2) 32-249. htp/echship.orgc/it/65684f4   
Kendon, A (195. Gstre a iltioary and discourse strcture markers i outhen talia convertion. Jod of Pragmatic, 23), 247-279.   
Kendon, A. (2004). Gesture: Visible action as utterance. Cambridge University Press.   
Ki,   , , ,t   , 0 h    1,7-36.   
Kres, G. (201). imodl discourse analysi. In J. P.Gee & M. andford (Eds.), The Routege hndook of diorse anlysi (. 35-50). Routledge.   
Le J J. 2. ie m n er ionof nd iit  ni. i r i e 38, 142-156.   
Little, D., Devitt S., & Singleton, D. (1988). Authentic texts in foreign language teaching: Theory and practice. Authentik.   
Lit, D., , ., gn, . 2002. The caive arch ad thic txt. n wbric (., ehn d  (p. 43-47). Routledge.   
Lynch, T. (2004). Study listening: A course in listening to lectures and note taking. Cambridge University Press.   
Lynch, T. (2011). Academic listening in the 21st century: Reviewing a decade of reearch. Jounal of English for Academic Puposes, 10, 79-88.   
Lynch, T   (010.r  sng n  (., ti inic d. p. 1809 r in.   
MacDonald, M, Badger, R., & White, G. (200. The real thing?: Authenticity and acadic listnig. English for Secific Puposes, 19(3), 253-267.   
Machin, D. (2013). What is multimodal critical discourse studies? Critical Discourse Studies, 10, 347-355.   
Maane00).d     j .) written corpora (pp. 173-198). John Benjamins.   
Mulliga  rck  (200  cht , st an . g ih d , 93), 311-335.   
Nesi, H. (2012). Laughter in university lectures. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 11(2), 79-89.   
Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction: A methodological framework. Routledge.   
othcot, . 2001). owards a traphy for the MA clsso: conideraton f the rol f inractiv lectring styls wtinthe contet of ne BA programme. English for Specific Purposes, 20, 15-37.   
Oeeff, ,  Ws, . (2012. ing s stic d onrtion anysis the inetigatiof m up chn in gertio. ous Linguistics and Linguistic Theory, 8(1), 159-181.   
Quu 019    s vid  is in mathematics.In C. Sancho Guinda (Ed.), Engagement in profesional geres: Deference and disclosure (pp. 297-319). John Benjamins.   
Querl-Jui   li,  019. h t ofi te d ish m ntionit  oal learning contexts: A systematic review. ESP Today, 7(1), 2-23.   
m15     f   itg comprehension, 5. Sage Open. https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244015590609 (April-June), 1-19.   
Ricd .  1)  /38098icti   
Salehzadeh, J. (2006). Academic listening strategies. A guide to understanding lectures. The University of Michigan Press   
Schleef, . (2008). The lctrer's K rvisited: Chnging dcre oventions and th inlence of amic division. Arica peh, 31) 6284.   
Simpson, R C, Brigg, .L, Oves, J, & wale, J. M. 2002). The Michg cous of cdmic poken English. The Rnts of the Universty of Michigan.   
Simpson, R. C., & Mendis, D. (2003). A corpus-based study of idioms in academic speech. Tesol Quarterly, 37(3), 419-441.   
Street ., P, e, J 21)t  t  .  d, The  o f  i . 191-200) Routledge.   
Sueyoshi, A, & Hdison, D M (005). The role of gtures and facial cues in scond lnguage listeng comprehension. Lngg ng 55 661-699.   
wal, 00.    ti i  a    e .) Corpus analysis: Language structure and language use (pp. 1-18). Rodopi.   
a,13 i  i,2, 5. /./7/3/4/i2 05/takaest   
Tnnpou, . (2017) Lre mprension in nglish-me prgams.   poulo,  Daavass,  thidi (s., Seted Per on Theoretical and applied linguistics, 22 pp. 480-497). https://ejournals.lib.auth.gr/thal/article/view/6011.   
Vandergrift, L 2007). Reent developments in econd and foreig language listeng comprehension rearch Language Teaching, 40(3), 191-210.   
Vladiou, M. (2011). State-of-the-art in open courseware initiatives worldwide. Informatics in Education, 10, 271-294.   
Walsh, M. (2010). Multimodal literacy: What doe it mean for classoom practce? Australin Jounal of Languag and Litercy, 33(3), 211-223.   
ang,   .   
Winberg -y, , r,  2013 r  o- i . ,  .) Prod o 5 ti o  p  th   119 t Chicago Press.   
Widdowson, H. G. (1979). The authenticit of language data. Explorations in appied linguisic, Paper 12. Oxford University Pres.   
Wingrove, P. (2017). How suitable are TED talks for academic listening? Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 30, 79-95.