# Fine-grained measures of syntactic complexity in the discussion section of research articles: The effect of discipline and language background

Elahe Ziaeiana, Seyyed Ehsan Golparvar b,\*

a Azarbaijan Shahid Madani University, Iran b University of Bojnord, Iran

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords: Syntactic complexity Discussion section Disciplinary variation L1 vs. L2 writers

Previous research on syntactic complexity in academic writing has mostly examined traditional large-grained indices to capture this construct, measuring complexity at clause or sentence level. However, due to the heavier reliance of academic writing on complex noun phrases, these traditional indices of syntactic complexity are not adequate for operationalizing this linguistic feature in academic writing. Therefore, the present research used fine-grained phrasal and clausal indices to investigate syntactic complexity in the discussion section of research articles (RAs) in three disciplines, namely applied linguistics, chemistry, and economics. In addition, texts from two groups of writers, L1-English authors and L2-English authors, were compared with respect to clausal and phrasal indices. Nine indices of clausal complexity and thirteen indices of phrasal complexity were examined. The findings revealed significant disciplinary differences in both types of complexity. It was found that in clausal measures, applied linguistics and economics discussions were generally more complex than those of chemistry, while in phrasal measures chemistry texts were generally more complex than those of applied linguistics and economics. However, the picture related to L1 vs. L2 differences was not that clear. The results are discussed and theoretical and pedagogical implications are offered.

# 1. Introduction

Syntactic complexity, referring to the range and sophistication of grammatical structures used in language production (Lu, 2010; Ortega, 2003), is a construct of high importance in second language (L2) and academic writing cholarship. Its relationship with L2 writing quality (e.g, Kyle & Crossley, 2018; Zhang et al., 2021) and language development (e.g, Atak & Saricaoglu, 2021; Yoon & Polio, 2017) have been extensively researched. A growing number of studies are investigating this construct in RAs (Casal et a., 2021; Nasseri, 2020; Yin et al., 2021) and in specific sections of RAs, incuding abstract (Ansarifar et al., 2018), inroduction (Lu et a., 2020) and discussion (Khany & Kafshgar, 2016). The majorit of these studies have used traditional large-grained indices, which may not be sufficient to measure syntactic complexity because they cannot capture non-clausal elements embedded in noun phrases, which are a crucial aspect of complexity in academic writing (Biber et al., 2011). In addition, previous research has demonstrated that the discussion section of RAs tends to be among the most syntactically complex parts of RAs (Casal t l., 2021; Yin et al., 2021). This section of RAs has been examined from different perspectives such as overallorganization and move analysi (e.g., Peacock, 2002), phraseology (eg, Golparar & Barabadi, 2020), and knowledge claims (eg, Parkinson, 2011). However, there are few studie focusing on linguistic complexity inthis section with a cross-disciplinary approach (Khany & Kafshgar, 2016). Moreover, scant attention has been devoted to the comparison of syntactic complexity in RAs authored by writrsof ifferent proficiency or expertise level and language background (Ansarifar et al., 2018; Yin et al., 2021) and across RAs in different disciplines (Casal et al., 2021; Khany & Kafshgar, 2016). Therefore, the present study seeks to provide quantitative data on phrasal and clausal complexity measures in the iscussion section of RAs across three disciplines and the possible impact of language background on these measures.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Syntactic complexity and its development in L2/academic writing.

Syntactic complexity is generall defined as the range and sophistication of gammatical tools manifested in language production (Lu, 2010), offering a wide range of linguistic tols to reach different communicatie goals (Bulte & Housen, 2014; Ortega, 2003) Syntactic complexity was shown to effctively index L2 proficiency (Biber et al., 2020; Lu, 2011; Norris & Ortega, 2009), language development (Atak & Saricaoglu, 2021; Yoon & Polio, 2017), and L2 writing quality (Kyle & Crossley, 2018; Zhang et l., 2021) I has been operationalized asa multidimensional construct (Norris & Ortega, 2009) capturing global (e.g., mean length of sentence), clausal (e.g., subordinate or coordinate clauses per T-unit), and phrasal (e.g., mean length of clause, complex nominals per T-unit) sub-constructs (Lu, 2010). Length-based measures and ratio measures have been extensively used to gauge syntactic complexity in writing research (Lu, 2011; Wolfe-Quintero t al., 1998) Mean length of sentence, mean length of clause, and mean length of-unit are the three length-based measures. Previous research has revealed that length-based measures could predict L2 writing quality (Kyle & Crossley, 2018; Lu, 2010). Previous studies have also demonstrated that ratio measures, including subordination, cordination, and phrasal elaboration indices, could contribute to L2 writing quality (Casal & Lee, 2019; Lu, 2011; Yang et al., 2015).

The development of syntactic complexity over time or across proficiency levels has been a prominent isue in L2 writing schol. arship. Adopting a longitudinal approach, some studies have investigated the development f syntactic complexity in a group of L2 learners (Atak & Saricaoglu, 2021; Mazgutova & Kormos, 2015; Yoon & Polio, 2017). For instance, Mazgutova and Kormos (2015) examined the development of syntactic complexity in a short intensive EAP course, demonstrating development in some measures of syntactic complexity, more notably in the low-proficiency group. To be more precise, the argumentative essays written at theend of the course were higher with respect to phrasal complexity (modifiers per noun phrase and complex nominals as well as measures specific to the academic genre (conditional clauses, infinitive clauses, and complex postmodifiers). This led Mazgutova and Kormos to the conclusion that students' syntactic rpertoire could improve in EAP coures even without explicit intruction. On the other hand, some studies have compared syntactic complexity in the written output of L2 writers with different proficiency levels (Diez-Bedmar & Perez-Paredes, 2020; Jiang et al., 2019; Lu, 2011). For instance, Diez-Bedmar and Perez-Paredes (2020) explored noun phrase syntactic complexity in the writings of Spanish EFL learners across four proficiency levels. Overall thir findings revealed that more proficient writers tend to use a wider range of noun phrase types. While the use of determiner noun phrase types (e.g., this film) and postmodifier noun phrase types e.g, a man with bad luck) did not display any regular pattrn, premodifier noun phrase types (e.g, romantic films) and premodifiers and postmodifier noun phrase types (e.g,  fantastic ilm with three parts) demonstrated a steady increase. Moreover, noun modification of the noun phrase heads was more widely used by more proficient writers, while no significant difference was observed in adjectival pre-modification between the four proficiency groups.

More relevant to the present research are studies comparing syntactic complexity in RAs and theses authored by writers of different proficiency levels (Ansarifar e l., 2018; Nasseri, 2020) and between emerging and expert writers (Yin et al., 2021). Ansarifar et al. (2018) investigated phrasal modficatio features in the astract of MA and PhD theses and RAs of applied inguisic. They found that atributie adjectives and nouns were the most frequent form of premodifiers, while prepositional phrases were the most frequent type of postmodifiers in their thee corpora, voicing support for the considerablereliance on these three types of noun modifiers in written academic English (Staples & Reppen, 2016; Taguchi et al., 2013). In addition, thir findings revealed that thre was alinear increase in -ed participles as postmodifiers, nouns as pre-modifiers, adjective-noun combinations as premodifiers, and multiple prepositional phrases as postmodifiers; the significant difference were mostly between MA and expert writing levels. Finally, multiple prepositional phrases as postmodifiers was the only feature that PhD-level writers produced significantly lower than expert ones. Nasseri (2020) examined the type, amount, and distribution of yntactic structures on the basis of the rhetorical sections of MA dissertations and thir writers' language background (EFL, ESL, and L1). She demonstrated that the disertations written by English L1 students were predominantly phrasal, those written by EFL students exhibited a high level of subordination, and texts produced by ESL students showed similar levels of phrasal and subordination measures, sugesting a trajectory of syntactic development and proficiency from EFL to ESL, and to the English L1 groups. Interestingly, her findings also showed that the results and discussion sections were the most syntactically complex part-genre of the isertations investigated featuring a high level of phrasal, coordination, and subordination complexity. Comparing pattrns of syntactc complexity in RAs of applied linguisics between emerging and expert writers and across RA part-genres, in et al. (2021) found that the two groups of writers were comparable with respect to clause length and densit in all part-genres, but emerging writers used fewer verb phrases. In addition, subordination, and sentence complexity tend to be lower in emerging writers. Offring partil support for the findings of Nasseri (2020) with respect to the discussion section, Yin and colleagues showed that this section, along with litrature review, featured longer T-units and sentences and greater usage of subordinate clauses and verb phrases.

# 2.2. Cross-disciplinary look at syntactic complexity

There is limited empirical work on disciplinary variation in syntactic complexity in academic writing scholarship. Khany and Kafshgar (2016) examined yntactic complexity in the discussion section of RAs in thre iscipline, namely physics, life ciences, and humanities, focusing on only two indices of syntactic complexity, i. ratio of subordination and average sentence length. The results showed that the humanities discussions were significantly higher with respect to subordination, while no significant differences were observed between if sciences nd physics texts in any of the two measures. Moreover, discriminant function analys revealed that the ratio of subordination was the second strongest factor (following lexical density) to distinguish the three disciplines. These results indicated that soft sciences (humanities) RAs tend to feature a higher level of text complexty in comparison with those of hard sciences (physics and lif sciences), corroborating Hyland's (2009) claim that academic writing in soft sciences require a higher level of sophistication to get audience agreement. Lu et al. (2020) explored the rhetorical functions of complex syntactic structures in the introduction section of RAs of six social science disciplines. The findings revealed nonfinite dependent clauses and sentence length were not significantl different crossrhtorical functions. nnouncing present research was sinificantly lower in eft-embeddedness and higher in nonfinite dependent clauses, indicating expert writers' tendency in announcing their research in a direct but elaborate manner, and nominalization was significantly higher in mentioning the value of the present research. Focusing on large-grained measures of syntactic complexity, Casal t al. (2021) examined syntactic complexity in RA part-genres in three social science disciplines. It was found that applied inguisics RAs were the most complex in five of the indices (mean length of sentence, mean length of clause, mean length of T-unit, and complex noun phrases per clause), and economics RAs had the leas syntactic complexity in seven of the measures. In addition, psychology writing was significantly more complex than that of economics in two measures, .e. phrasal coordination and nonfinite subordination. The part-genre comparisons revealed that the introduction and discussons sections, which demand knowledge synthesis and argumentation, were more complex than other parts in overall sentence complexity, overall T-unit complexity, finite clause subordination, non-finite elements, and noun phrase complexity, while introductions were more complex than in noun phrase complexity and phrasal coordination. On the other hand, method and results sections, with their descriptive approach to outlining practices and outcomes, trended toward lower levels of complexity.

# 2.3. The current study

The majority of the studies reviewed above have utilized large-grained measures of syntactic complexity (Kyle & Crosey, 2018) or omnibus measures (Biber et al., 2020), reducing the analysis of multiple syntactic and structural distinctions into a single measure. There are only few studies that have examined fine-grained measures of syntactic complexity in academic writing (Ansarifar et al., 2018; Diez-Bedmar & Perez-Paredes, 2020; Staples et al., 2016). Mean length of T-unit and the average number of clauses per T-unit are instances of such omnibus measures widely used in applied inguisics and EAP research. Although these measures of syntactic complexity have predictive power, they aeot linuisticall nterpretable and fail to ofer a detaled inusti decription of aademic writing (Biber et al., 2020; Norris & Ortega, 2009). Since the major goal of EAP research is gaining insight into the linguistic char. acterisics of written academic texts, we need a more nuanced syntactic description paying attention to grammaticalstructures and functions. Moreover, the traditional large-grained measures of syntactic complexty used in previous analyses of RAs mostly capture global complexity (e.g., mean length of sentence/T-unit), clausal subordination (e.g, mean length of clause, dependent clause per T-unit), and coordination (g.,coordinate phrases per clause), and litle atention has been paid to phraal complexity (e.g., complex nominals per clause). However, it has been established that academic writing is distinctively characterized by phrasal complexty rather than clausal complexity, particularly featured by embedded noun phrases (Biber & Gray, 2010). Therefore, the traditional indices of syntactic complexity appear not to be adequate for measuring this construct in RAs because they do not capture non-clausal elements embedded in noun phrases, which are a salient aspect of complexity in academic writing (Biber et al., 2011).

The present research is an attempt to use linguistically valid measures of syntactic complexity in RA genre analysis, capturing multiplestuctural types syntactic functions, and systematic variations. In addition, it aims at investgating a wide range of deendent types for both clausal and phrasa structures, which would be a significant adition toprevious scholarship on syntactic complexity in RAs. It should be noted that although previous research has demonstrated that academic writing relies more on phrasal rather than clausal elaboration, analyzing clausal structures and their dependents would add to our understanding of the linguistic profile of RAs because phrasal indices do not capture all syntctic structures/functions. Finite complement clauses as well as non-finite complement and adverbial clauses are instances of dependents captured by clausal indices rather than phrasal ones. Thus, both phrasal and clausal complexity measures are examined to obtain a more comprehensive picture of syntactic complexity in academic writing. Finall, examining clausal and phrasal complexity in the writings of three isciplines and in two groups of writer is another novel aspet of this research. Thus, this study attempts to answer the following research questions:

1. What is the impact of disciplinary variation on phrasal and clausal complexity in the discusson sections of RAs?   
2. How does language background affect the measures of clausal and phrasal complexity in the discussion sections of RAs

# 3. Method

# 3.1. Corpus

The corpus used in this research consisted of 1120 RA discussion sections from three disciplines, namely applied linguistics, chemistry, and economics. Within each discipline, half of the articles were selected from local journals (written by Iranian writers) and the other half from international top tier journals. The authors whose manuscripts were examined in this research fel into two groups, Iranian authors for whom English was the second language (L2 writers) and L1 writers, for whom English was the first language. The first group was Iranian researchers with Persian names who were afiliated with local universitie. Articles with more than one author were checked to ensure that all f them were Iranians afiliated with local universties. The second group were English-L1 writers with English names and afiliated with Universities in the United States, Britain, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. This approach was preferred over the emerging-expert dichotomy adopted in in et al. (2021) because we needed a large number of publications for this analysis, and finding an adequate number of articles authored by emerging researchers - without multiple publications in top international journals was not possible. Therefore, language background with L1 and L2 levels was preferred over writing expertise with emerging and expert levels. Al the articles were published between 2010 and 2020. The Linguistics category of the Journal Citation Reports released in 2019 was consulted to select the top international journals in each discipline. The basis for selecting the local journals was the ranking released by the Ministry of Sciences, Research, and Technology. Discussion boundaries were primarily on heading labels and also on content when necessary. Moreover, care was taken to select only RAs with the IMRD organization: Introduction, Method, Results/Findings, Discussion, and Conclusion (altenative, but similar, headings, for the last section were also feasible). Further, RAs with an empirical methodology were considered, and the discussion sections of meta-analysis, review, and theoretical publications were not selected for analysis. Discussions were stored in plain text files (UTF-8) and cleaned of journal tags, parenthetical components of citation, and page numbers. The discussion sections written by L1 authors were 87228 words and those written by L2 researcher were 619747 words. Table 1 illustrates the make-up of the corpus.

# 3.2. Syntactic complexity indices

Before describing the clausal and phrasal indices investigated in this research, we would like to introduce the clausal and phrasal dependent types these indices deal with. They are introduced in Table 2 and Table 3 respectively. Some of these dependent types might be lessfamilia for the readership. Clausal complement i a dependent clause functioning as a complement, whereas a clausal subject is a clause that functions as the subject f another clause. Verb phrase accompanied by a coordinating conjunction is a conjunction, while clauses joined by a coordinating conjunction are also taken into account. A nominal complement is a noun or noun phrase that serves as a complement in a copular clause. Finally, open clausal complements are nonfinite clausal complements (Kyle & Crossley, 2018)

Among the phrase and dependent types examined in this study, prepositional objects, verbal modifiers, and nouns as modifiers might be les familiar. A verbal modifier is defined as a nonfinite verb or verb phrase modifying a noun or noun phrase, and a noun modifier is a noun which modifies anoun or noun phrase (Kyle & Crossley, 2018). It should be noted that a clause or phrase could include more than one dependent type.

# 3.2.1. Clausal indices

In this study 11 fine-grained indices of clausal complexity were considered from Tool for the Automatic Analysis of Syntactic Sophistication and Complexity (TAAssc) (Kyle, 2016). Alleleven indices deal with the average number of particular structures per clause. The clausal complexity indices contained in TAAssc diffe from the traditional indices of syntactic complexity (MLC, DC/C, CP/C, and CN/C) contained in Syntactic Complexity Analyzer (Lu, 2010). in three ways. First, TAAssC measures the length of clauses as the number of direct dependents per clause instead of the number of words. This prevents structures having more words (such as prepositional phrases) from being given greater weight than those that do not (such as adjectives). Second, TAAssc counts each type separately, rather than combining structures (such as dependent clauses or complex nominals). Finall, aclause is defined by TAASSC as a main verb and its surrounding structures (for example, arguments and adverbials), which may or may not comprisea finite verb (Kyle & Crossey, 2018). Although this operationalization dfers from Lu (2011) it i consistent with past studies (Wolfe-Quintero et al., 1998). Table 4 introduces the measures of clausal complexity used in this study.

# 3.2.2. Phrasal indices

Thirteen indices of phrasal complexity were obtained from Tol for the Automatic Analysis of Syntactic Sophistication and Complexity (TAAssc) (Kyle, 2016). Four indices are concerned with the average number of dependents per each phrase type and for all phrase types. Dependents per nominal subject, dependents per object of preposition, and dependents per nominal complement are of this type. In adition, dependents per nominal deal with the average frequency of dependents in all phrase types. Moreover, eight indices that capture the average incidence of specific deendent types in any type of noun phrase (for example relative clause modifiers per nominal) were also examined. Determiners, adjectival modifiers, prepositions, possessves, verbal modifier, nouns as nominal dependents, relative clause modifier, and non-clausal adverbial modifiers were the dependent types investigated inthis study. For the sake of simplicity, the average frequency of these dependent types were examined regardles of the type of noun phrase in which they appear. As in Kyle and Crossey (2018), dependents per nominal (standard deviation) was checked for measuring syntactic variety. Because pronouns as phrases have the potential to distort the frequency of dependents, TAAssC contains two versions of each index; one that counts pronoun noun phrases and one that does not. Therefore, as in Kyle and Crossey (2018), only the TAAssc indices excluding pronouns were used in this investigation.

Table 1 The make-up of the corpus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Applied Linguistics</td><td colspan="2">Chemistry</td><td colspan="2">Economics</td><td>Overall</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>L1</td><td>L2</td><td>L1</td><td>L2</td><td>L1</td><td>L2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>No. of texts</td><td>200</td><td>200</td><td>200</td><td>200</td><td>160</td><td>160</td><td>1120</td></tr><tr><td>No. of words</td><td>280,990</td><td>234,072</td><td>431,264</td><td>283,578</td><td>174,974</td><td>102,097</td><td>1,506,975</td></tr><tr><td>Mean words</td><td>1405</td><td>1170.36</td><td>2156.32</td><td>1417.89</td><td>1093.59</td><td>638.11</td><td>1345.52</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Clausal dependent types investigated in this research..   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Clausal dependent type</td><td>Abbreviation</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Adverb modifier</td><td>advmod</td><td>The dominance of native language speakers in the context of ELT pedagogy has been critically challenged</td></tr><tr><td>Adverbial clause</td><td>ccomp</td><td>Interactions with teachers were similar to those with peers in terms of their diversity, although task-focused</td></tr><tr><td>Clausal complement</td><td>ccomp</td><td>conversations were far more common than non-task ones. It is not inconceivable that this could have had an effect on student rating</td></tr><tr><td>Conjunctions</td><td>conj</td><td>Emma states that CR/CLA pedagogies *can complement and expand translingual writing pedagogies</td></tr><tr><td>Clausal subjects</td><td>csubj</td><td>What seems to be the cause of the participants&#x27; RP uses in different English RCs is that English pronouns are misanalysed as &quot;weak pronouns&#x27; by the learners</td></tr><tr><td>Nominal complement</td><td>ncomp</td><td>This was an improvement in this line of research</td></tr><tr><td>Open clausal</td><td>xcomp</td><td>In their model input tariff reductions provide incentives to upgrade product quality</td></tr><tr><td>complements Clausal coordination</td><td>cc</td><td>the domestic industry endogenously raises its productivity and is able to introduce new products</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Phrasal dependent types examined in this research.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Phrase and dependent types</td><td>Abbreviation</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Nominal complement</td><td>ncomp</td><td>There were numerous entrepreneurial opportunities that the participants referred to.</td></tr><tr><td>Determiner</td><td>det</td><td>The findings are also consistent with the results of some recent studies.</td></tr><tr><td>Adjectival modifier</td><td>amod</td><td>The kinetic parameters of the models were calculated for Pb(Il) adsorption.</td></tr><tr><td> Prepositional phrase</td><td>prep</td><td>There are several limitations to this study.</td></tr><tr><td>Possessive</td><td>poss</td><td> In this section, we note their insight applies beyond their parametric setting</td></tr><tr><td>Verbal modifier</td><td>vmod</td><td>Presenting a list of key p-frames for the discussion section of RAs in the field of higher education is an attempt to fill the gap related to the scarcity of p-frame lists.</td></tr><tr><td> Noun as modifier</td><td>nn</td><td>Our introduction uses the example of the market for catastrophe risk reinsurance.</td></tr><tr><td>Relative clause modifier</td><td>rcmod</td><td>This pedagogical mediation which can be carried out with convenience in classroom setting is suggested to be practiced to bring about better listening</td></tr><tr><td>Adverbial modifier</td><td>admod</td><td>A statistically significant difference was found between the two groups.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Clausal complexity variables investigated in this research.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Index name</td><td></td><td>In-text name</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>cl_av_deps</td><td>dependents per clause</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>advcl_per_cl</td><td>adverbial clauses per clause</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>ccomp_per_cl</td><td>clausal complements per clause</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>cc_per_cl</td><td>clausal coordinating conjunctions per clause</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>conj_per_clause</td><td>conjunctions per clause</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>csubj_per_cl</td><td>clausal subjects per clause</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>ncomp_per_cl</td><td>nominal complements per clause</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>xcomp_per_cl</td><td> open clausal complements per clause</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>advmod _per_cl</td><td> adverbial modifiers per clause</td></tr></table></body></html>

The clausal and phrasal structures, and the resulting indices, were compared with the taxonomy of grammatical structures and syntactic functions introduced in Biber et al. (2020) to ensure the systematicity of these indices. This framework incorporates major grammatical complexity features in English, which are classfied into general groups representing combinations of structural type and syntactic function. There are three tructural types: finite dependent clauses, non-finite dependent clauses, and dependent phrases. These structural types have three diferent syntactic functions; adverbial, complement, and phrase modifing functions. Finite adverbial clauses consist of a verity of adverbial clauses, such as temporal, concessive, and conditional clauses, measured by adverbial clauses per clause. Finite complement clauses, verb/noun/adjective-controlled that clauses and verb-controlled wh clauses, are captured by clausal complements per clause. Relative clause with that and wh-relativizers are representations of finite noun modifying clauses and are captured by relative clause modifiers per nominal.

Biber et al. (2020) regarded to-clauses indicating purpose as the primary structure in non-finite adverbial clauses, measured by adverbial clauses per clause. Non-finite complement clauses, verb/noun/adjective-controlled to clauses and verb-controlled ing clauses, are captured by open clausal complements per clause. Non-finite noun modifying clauses, noun $^ +$ ing-clauses and noun $^ +$ ed-clauses, can be measured by dependents per clause (aclausal index) as well as dependents per nominal (phrasal index). The thrd category of syntactic structures proposed in Biber et al. (2020) is dependent phrases, i.e. adverbial phrases and phrase modifiers. Adverbial phrases modify aclause and include adverb phrases as adverbial and prepositional phrases as adverbial, both captured by adverbial modifier per clause. Finally, modifiers f noun, adjective, and adverb phrases are measured by a variety of phrasal indices presented in Table 5. In addition, nominal complements (per clause) and clausal subjects (per clause) as well as some phrasal structures, such as possessives and verbal modifiers, were also examined to further complete this analysis. I is noteworthy that the use of clausal dependent types and the related indice is justified in light of the fact that phrasal indices do not capture allsyntactic structures/functions. To be more precise, finite adverbial clauses (e.g, temporal clauses), finite complement clauses (e.g, noun-controlled that clauses), non-finte adverbial clauses (to-clause indicating purpose), and non-finite complement clauses (e.g, verb-controlled ing clauses) are solely captured by clausal indices. Therefore, both phrasal and clausal indices should be examined to gain a comprehensive picture of syntactic complexity in academic writing.

# 3.3. Data analysis

Factorial multivariate analysis of variance (MAnovA) was run to explore the impact of discipline and language background and their interaction on the 22 syntactic complexity indices investigated in this research. A series of preliminary tests were conducted to confirm that the data met the assumptions of MANoVA. The Shapiro-Wilk test of normality was calculated, confirming that the dependent variables were normally distributed. There were no univariate outliers found when standard z scores for the indices were examined, and no multivariate outliers were found when the Mahalanobis distance was checked. As the indices were moderately correlated with each other, there was no concern for multicollinearity in the dependent variables. Levene's test and Mauchlys test were run to examine the homogeneity of between-group variances and the sphericity of within-group variances respectively. These tests afirmed that the data of the current study met the asumptions of factorial MANOVA. Follow-up univariate testsof variance were reported for all of the indices. Partial eta squared (n2) was used as effect size, which would be small if $\eta 2 = 0 . 0 1$ , medium if $\eta 2 = 0 . 6$ and large if $\eta 2 = 0 . 1 4$ , while Cohen's d was reported as effect size for pairwise comparisons tests (Cohen, 1988).

# 4. Results

4.1. The effect of discipline and language background on measures of clausal complexity

The results of factorial MANOVA showed a significant main effect of discipline (Wilks' $\Lambda = 0 . 6 7 1$ , F $( 1 8 , 2 2 1 2 ) = 2 7 . 0 8$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ partial $\begin{array} { r } { \eta 2 = 0 . 1 8 1 } \end{array}$ ) and a significant main effect of language background (Wilks' $\Lambda = 0 . 7 8 3$ , F $( 9 , 1 1 0 6 ) = 3 4 . 0 6$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ partial $\boldsymbol \eta 2 =$ 0.217) on clausal complexity. Moreover, the interaction effct between discipline and language background was also significant for clausal complexity measures (Wilks' $\Lambda = 0 . 8 9 5$ $( 1 8 , 2 2 1 2 ) = 7 . 0 1$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ partial $\eta 2 = 0 . 0 5 4 \AA$ . Due to the significance of MANOVA, univariate analyses were conducted to identify the precise impact of discipline and language background on each of the inguistic measures. Table 6 reports the descriptive statistics for the indices of clausal complexity for each discipline and for each language background group.

As shown in Table 7, discipline exerted a significant main effect on the majority of clausal complexity indices, such as dependent per clause $( \mathrm { F } = 1 8 . 2 6 8$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ $\boldsymbol { \eta } \mathbf { p } 2 = 0 . 0 3 2 )$ and clausal complements per clause $( \mathrm { F } = 8 0 . 6 7 5 $ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ $\boldsymbol { \eta } \mathbf { p } 2 = 0 . 1 2 7 )$ ; however, there was no difference among the disciplines regarding adverbial clauses per clause $( \mathrm { F } = 2 . 1 9 5 $ 3 $\mathbf { p } = . 1 1 2$ $\begin{array} { r } { \ \eta { \bf p } 2 = 0 . 0 0 4 , } \end{array}$ . There was also a significant main effect of language background on most indices in this area. Conjunctions per clause $\mathrm { \Delta } \mathrm { \cdot } \mathrm { \Delta } \mathrm { \bar { F } } = 2 0 . 2 9 8$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ np2 $= 0 . 0 1 8 )$ and open clausal complements per clause $( \mathrm { F } = 3 7 . 6 4 8$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ $\eta { \bf p } 2 = 0 . 0 3 3 $ were two instances. A significant interaction effect was also observed on the majority of clausal indices such as adverbial modifiers per clause $( \mathrm { F } = 1 1 . 8 1 1 $ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ $\begin{array} { r } { \boldsymbol \nabla \mathbf { p } 2 = 0 . 0 2 1 . } \end{array}$ and nominal complements per clause $( \mathrm { F } = 4 . 5 7 3 $ $\mathbf { p } \mathbf { = } . 0 1 1$ 3 $\begin{array} { r } { \ \Pi \mathbf { p } 2 = 0 . 0 0 8 , } \end{array}$ . Table 8 reports the results of post hoc analysis for measures of clausal complexity significantly affected by discipline.

Post hoc investigation revealed that the majority of significant differences were between applied linguisics and chemistry and chemistry and economics manuscripts. Eight of these measures were significantly diffrent between applied linguistcs and chemistry discussions. The general picture here was that these eght clausal measures were significantly lower in chemistry discussion sections, while some indice, like clausal cordinating conjunctions per clause, were higher in economics discussion section, and some others, such as adverbial modifiers per clause, were higher in applied linguistics discussion sections.

Table 5 Phrasal complexity indices examined in this study.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td> Index name</td><td> In-text name</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>av_nominal_deps_NN</td><td>dependents per nominal (no pronouns)</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>av_nsubj_deps_NN</td><td>dependents per nominal subject (no pronouns)</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>av_pobj_deps_NN</td><td>dependents per object of the preposition (no pronouns)</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>av_ncomp_deps_NN</td><td>dependents per nominal complement (no pronouns)</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>nominal_deps_stdev</td><td>dependents per nominal (standard deviation)</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>det_all_nominal_deps_NN_struct</td><td>determiners per nominal (no pronouns).</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>amod_all_nominal_deps_NN_struct</td><td>adjectival modifiers per nominal (no pronouns)</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>prep_all_nominal_deps_NN_struct</td><td>prepositions per nominal (no pronouns)</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>poss_all_nominal_deps_NN_struct</td><td>possessives per nominal (no pronouns)</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>vmod_all_nominal_deps_NN_struct</td><td>verbal modifiers per nominal (no pronouns)</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>nn_all_nominal_deps_NN_struct</td><td>nouns as a nominal dependent per nominal (no pronouns)</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>rcmod_all_nominal_deps_NN_struct</td><td>relative clause modifiers per nominal (no pronouns)</td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>advmod_all_nominal_deps_NN_struct</td><td>(non-clausal) adverbial modifiers per nominal (no pronouns)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 Descriptive statistics for measures of clausal complexity.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2" colspan="2">Variables</td><td colspan="2">Applied linguistics</td><td colspan="2">Chemistrye</td><td colspan="2">Economicse</td></tr><tr><td>mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Dependents per clause</td><td>L1</td><td>2.5441</td><td>.14794</td><td>2.4709</td><td>.15494</td><td>2.6249</td><td>.19810</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>2.5927</td><td>.15669</td><td>2.5541</td><td>.18659</td><td>2.5606</td><td>.26213</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Adverbial clauses per clause</td><td>L1</td><td>.0577</td><td>.2229</td><td>.0572</td><td>.02482</td><td>.0679</td><td>.03538</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.0573</td><td>.2817</td><td>.0494</td><td>.02882</td><td>.0450</td><td>.03773</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Clausal complements per clause</td><td>L1</td><td>.1071</td><td>.04152</td><td>.0756</td><td>.03440</td><td>.1171</td><td>.04555</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.1278</td><td>.05216</td><td>.0834</td><td>.04149</td><td>.1162</td><td>.06716</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Clausal coordinating conjunctions per clause</td><td>L1</td><td>.0043</td><td>.00755</td><td>.0010</td><td>.00257</td><td>.0045</td><td>.00941</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.0025</td><td>.00501</td><td>.0017</td><td>.00474</td><td>.0043</td><td>.01082</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Conjunctions per clause</td><td>L1</td><td>.0788</td><td>.03364</td><td>.0628</td><td>.02962</td><td>.0641</td><td>.03645</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>.0861</td><td>.04594</td><td>.0650</td><td>.03620</td><td>.0884</td><td>.06333</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Clausal subjects per clause</td><td>L1</td><td>.0115</td><td>.01134</td><td>.0073</td><td>.01020</td><td>.0118</td><td>.01344</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.0122</td><td>.01288</td><td>.0095</td><td>.01226</td><td>.0124</td><td>.02147</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Nominal complements per clause</td><td>L1</td><td>.0438</td><td>.02577</td><td>.0434</td><td>.02933</td><td>.0435</td><td>.03235</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>.0467</td><td>.03390</td><td>.0613</td><td>.03805</td><td>.0570</td><td>.05202</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Open clausal complements per clause</td><td>L1</td><td>.0792</td><td>.02955</td><td>.0684</td><td>.02724</td><td>.0590</td><td>.02893</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.0762</td><td>.03487</td><td>.0419</td><td>.02559</td><td>.0522</td><td>.04829</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Adverbial modifiers per clause</td><td>L1</td><td>.2093</td><td>.05175</td><td>.1871</td><td>.05945</td><td>.2054</td><td>.06352</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.1852</td><td>.05921</td><td>.1437</td><td>.05792</td><td>.1378</td><td>.06690</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 The results of univariate analyses for measures of clausal complexity.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variables</td><td>Sources of variance</td><td>Df</td><td>F</td><td>p</td><td> partialn2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Dependents per clause</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>18.268</td><td>.000</td><td>.032</td></tr><tr><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>4.099</td><td>.043</td><td>.004</td></tr><tr><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>15.018</td><td>.000</td><td>.026</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Adverbial clauses per clause</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>2.195</td><td>.112</td><td>.004</td></tr><tr><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>33.885</td><td>.000</td><td>.030</td></tr><tr><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>13.245</td><td>.000</td><td>.023</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Clausal complements per clause</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>80.675</td><td>.000</td><td>.127</td></tr><tr><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>10.492</td><td>.001</td><td>.009</td></tr><tr><td>discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>4.711</td><td>.009</td><td>.008</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Clausal coordinating conjunctions per clause</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>17.628</td><td>.000</td><td>.031</td></tr><tr><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>.971</td><td>.325</td><td>.001</td></tr><tr><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>3.065</td><td>.047</td><td>.005</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Conjunctions per clause</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>20.391</td><td>.000</td><td>.035</td></tr><tr><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>20.298</td><td>.000</td><td>.018</td></tr><tr><td>discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>6.668</td><td>.001</td><td>.012</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Clausal subjects per clause</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>8.658</td><td>.000</td><td>.015</td></tr><tr><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>2.114</td><td>.146</td><td>.002</td></tr><tr><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>.372</td><td>.690</td><td>.001</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Nominal complements per clause</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>4.118</td><td>.017</td><td>.007</td></tr><tr><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>28.471</td><td>.000</td><td>.025</td></tr><tr><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>4.573</td><td>.011</td><td>.008</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Open clausal complements per clause</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>59.715</td><td>.000</td><td>.097</td></tr><tr><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>37.648</td><td>.000</td><td>.033</td></tr><tr><td>discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>14.607</td><td>.000</td><td>.026</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Adverbial modifiers per clause</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>31.613</td><td>.000</td><td>.054</td></tr><tr><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>157.781</td><td>.000</td><td>.124</td></tr><tr><td>discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>11.811</td><td>.000</td><td>.021</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.2. The effect of discipline and language background on measures of phrasal complexity

There was a significant main effect of discipline (Wilks' $\Lambda = 0 . 4 2 4$ , F (28, $2 2 0 2 ) = 4 2 . 1 2 8$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ partial $\begin{array} { r } { \eta 2 = 0 . 3 4 9 \mathrm { , } } \end{array}$ and a significant main effect of language background (Wilks' $\Lambda = 0 . 6 6 9$ , F $( 1 4 , 1 1 0 1 ) = 3 8 . 8 6 3$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ , partial $\begin{array} { r } { \eta 2 = 0 . 3 3 1 . } \end{array}$ ) on phrasal complexity measures. There was also a significant interaction effct of discipline and language background on these indices (Wilks' $\Lambda$ $= 0 . 7 4 1$ , F $( 2 8 , 2 2 0 2 ) = 1 2 . 7 0 5$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0$ , partial $\begin{array} { r } { \eta 2 = 0 . 1 3 9 . } \end{array}$ . Table $9$ demonstrates the descriptive statistics for the indices of phrasal

Table 8 Post hoc comparison for disciplinary variation in clausal complexity.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variables</td><td colspan="2">Applied linguistics Chemistry</td><td colspan="2">Applied linguistics Economics</td><td colspan="2">Chemistry - Economics</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sig.</td><td>d</td><td>Sig.</td><td>d</td><td>Sig.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Dependents per clause</td><td>.000</td><td>.31</td><td>.186</td><td></td><td>.000</td><td>.36</td></tr><tr><td>Clausal complements per clause</td><td>.000</td><td>1.13</td><td>.971</td><td></td><td>.000</td><td>.97</td></tr><tr><td>Clausal coordinating conjunctions per clause</td><td>.000</td><td>.42</td><td>.150</td><td></td><td>.000</td><td>.40</td></tr><tr><td>Conjunctions per clause</td><td>.000</td><td>.56</td><td>.120</td><td></td><td>.000</td><td>.24</td></tr><tr><td>Clausal subjects per clause</td><td>.001</td><td>:26</td><td>.961</td><td></td><td>.001</td><td>.27</td></tr><tr><td>Nominal complements per clause</td><td>.014</td><td>1.22</td><td>.149</td><td></td><td>.719</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Open clausal complements per clause</td><td>.000</td><td>.72</td><td>.000</td><td>.61</td><td>.984</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Adverbial modifiers per clause</td><td>.000</td><td>.51</td><td>.000</td><td>.32</td><td>.348</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

complexity.

The results of univariate analyses reported in Table 10, indicated that discipline had significant impact on all phrasal indices. One important pattern was that in most of these measures, such as dependents per nominal, nounsas nominal dependent per nominal, and adjectival modifiers per nominal, the highest means were observed in chemistry discusion sections. However, in some ther measures, like relative clause modifiers per nominal and possessives per nominal, lowest means were found in chemistry discusion sections. Language background also significantly affected all phrasal indices, except for dependents per object of the prepositions $\left( \mathtt { p } = . 0 5 3 \right)$ and dependents per nominal (standard deviation) $\left( \mathbf { p } = . 8 6 9 \right)$

Post hoc comparisons, demonstrated in Table 11, indicated that the discussions written by chemistry researchers, particularly L1 authors, displayed higher means for a considerable number of phrasal indices. Dependents per nominal and nouns as a nominal dependent per nominal were instances of this pattern. In some other measures, such as relative clause modifiers per nominal and possessives per nominal, chemistry discussions displayed the lowest means. Moreover, in the majority of phrasal indices, L1 writers had higher means, whereas in some, such as dependents per nominal ubject and prepositions per nominal, L2 authors had significantly higher means in all the three disciplines.

# 5. Discussion

The results revealed significant diffrences in clausal and phraal indices of syntactic complexity in the discussion sections of the three disciplines. This means that some fine-grained indices of syntactic complexity investigated in this resarch could discriminate the discourse of soft (applied linguistics and economics) and hard science disciplines (chemistry). This provides support for crosdisciplinary differences in RAs with respect to syntactic complexity (Casal et al., 2021) and confirms the general assumption that different concetualization and argumentation pattens ae eflecte in the urfacestructure of academic texts in different disciplinary domains (Khany & Kafshgar, 2016). Previous research on linguistic complexity in the discusion section of RAs has demonstrated that humanities RAs tend to be more syntactically complex (Khany & Kafshgar, 2016), indicating a higher level of sophistication in these disciplines. The higher evel of some phrasal and clausal measures in applied ingustics and economics accords with this general assumption. It is noteworthy that the higher level of syntactic complexity in humanities RAs is mostly realized through clausal dependent types, ie., clausal complements, clausal subjects, and clausal coordinating conjunctions, and through some phrasal dependent types, .., nominal complements, posssives, relative clause modifiers and (non-clausal) adverbial modifier. On the other hand, chemistry texts, representing hard science discourse, featured a higher phrasal complexity in comparison with the other two disciplines. Most phrasal indices were higher in chemistry discussions, indicating the heavier reliance of chemistry discourse on phrasal dependent types, such as nouns as nominal modifiers, adjectival modifiers, and verbal modifier. These results voice support for Hyland' (Hyland, 200, 2009) conclusion that language, which is a device for expressng knowledge and ideas, has different behavior in various social and linguistic contexts.

Table 9 Descriptive statistics for measures of phrasal complexity.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Variables</td><td colspan="2">Applied linguistics</td><td colspan="2">Chemistry</td><td colspan="2">Economics</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td><td>mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">dependents per nominal</td><td>L1</td><td>1.4154</td><td>.13046</td><td>1.7396</td><td>.16582</td><td>1.4544</td><td>.12705</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>1.4919</td><td>.13680</td><td>1.6568</td><td>.15952</td><td>1.5696</td><td>.15034</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">dependents per nominal subject</td><td>L1</td><td>1.1817</td><td>.22427</td><td>1.5308</td><td>.26443</td><td>1.2592</td><td>.19164</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>1.2743</td><td>.23982</td><td>1.6178</td><td>.29400</td><td>1.5441</td><td>.41945</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">dependents per object of the preposition.</td><td>L1</td><td>1.3868</td><td>.14405</td><td>1.6776</td><td>.19349</td><td>1.3934</td><td>.15353</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>1.4620</td><td>.16117</td><td>1.5079</td><td>.17013</td><td>1.4297</td><td>.17205</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">dependents per nominal complement</td><td>L1</td><td>2.8606</td><td>.94184</td><td>2.8236</td><td>1.00566</td><td>2.8022</td><td>1.25020</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>2.6001</td><td>1.06742</td><td>2.4961</td><td>.98268</td><td>1.9280</td><td>1.40125</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">dependents per nominal (standard deviation)</td><td>L1</td><td>1.2349</td><td>.09081</td><td>1.3806</td><td>.12760</td><td>1.2204</td><td>.10894</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>1.2407</td><td>.11936</td><td>1.3411</td><td>.17484</td><td>1.2500</td><td>.17030</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">determiners per nominal</td><td>L1</td><td>.3142</td><td>.06133</td><td>.3782</td><td>.07480</td><td>.3211</td><td>.06591</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.3409</td><td>.07198</td><td>.3599</td><td>.07943</td><td>.3538</td><td>.09684</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">adjectival modifiers per nominal</td><td>L1</td><td>.3129</td><td>.06662</td><td>.3608</td><td>.08349</td><td>.3186</td><td>.07463</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.3027</td><td>.07477</td><td>.2991</td><td>.06392</td><td>.3098</td><td>.08882</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">prepositions per nominal</td><td>L1</td><td>.2721</td><td>.04656</td><td>.3007</td><td>.04615</td><td>.2531</td><td>.05478</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.2928</td><td>.05125</td><td>.3452</td><td>.04883</td><td>.3341</td><td>.08368</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"> possessives per nominal</td><td>L1</td><td>.0394</td><td>.02809</td><td>.0147</td><td>.01202</td><td>.0475</td><td>.02562</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>.0383</td><td>.02343</td><td>.0126</td><td>.01021</td><td>.0343</td><td>.03658</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">verbal modifiers per nominal</td><td>L1</td><td>.0386</td><td>.01386</td><td>.0444</td><td>.01618</td><td>.0312</td><td>.01667</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.0332</td><td>.01670</td><td>.0266</td><td>.01434</td><td>.0268</td><td>.02213</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"> nouns as a nominal dependent per nominal.</td><td>L1</td><td>.1781</td><td>.06459</td><td>.2985</td><td>.09058</td><td>.1929</td><td>.06795</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>.1740</td><td>.06248</td><td>.2872</td><td>.08378</td><td>.2397</td><td>.09026</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">relative clause modifiers per nominal</td><td>L1</td><td>.0382</td><td>.01438</td><td>.0315</td><td>.01270</td><td>.0374</td><td>.01544</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>.0366</td><td>.01548</td><td>.0196</td><td>.01038</td><td>.0207</td><td>.01688</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">(non-clausal) adverbial modifiers per nominal</td><td>L1</td><td>.0160</td><td>.01053 .00943</td><td>.0140 .0117</td><td>.00727 .00730</td><td>.0204</td><td>.01552</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>.0145</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>.0104</td><td>.01050</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 10 The results of univariate analyses for measures of phrasal complexity.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variables</td><td>Sources of variance</td><td>Df</td><td>F</td><td>P</td><td> partialn2</td></tr><tr><td>dependents per nominal</td><td>Discipline</td><td>2</td><td>301.734</td><td>.000</td><td>.351</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>17.060</td><td>.000</td><td>.015</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>48.397</td><td>.000</td><td>.080</td></tr><tr><td>dependents per nominal subject</td><td>Discipline</td><td>2</td><td>154.653</td><td>.000</td><td>.217</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>85.598</td><td>.000</td><td>.071</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>14.025</td><td>.000</td><td>.025</td></tr><tr><td>dependents per object of the preposition</td><td>Discipline</td><td>2</td><td>140.692</td><td>.000</td><td>.202</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>3.761</td><td>.053</td><td>.003</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * backgrounde</td><td>2</td><td>61.105</td><td>.000</td><td>.099</td></tr><tr><td>dependents per nominal complement</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>10.623</td><td>.000</td><td>.019</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>53.984</td><td>.000</td><td>.046</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * backgrounde</td><td>2</td><td>7.985</td><td>.000</td><td>.014</td></tr><tr><td>dependents per nominal (standard deviation)</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>108.876</td><td>.000</td><td>.164</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>.027</td><td>.869</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>6.203</td><td>.002</td><td>.011</td></tr><tr><td>determiners per nominal</td><td> discipline</td><td>2</td><td>32.716</td><td>.000</td><td>.055</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>9.241</td><td>.002</td><td>.008</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>13.009</td><td>.000</td><td>.023</td></tr><tr><td>adjectival modifiers per nominal</td><td> discipline</td><td>2</td><td>9.047</td><td>.000</td><td>.016</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> background</td><td>1</td><td>35.161</td><td>.000</td><td>.031</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>15.357</td><td>.000</td><td>.027</td></tr><tr><td>prepositions per nominal</td><td> discipline</td><td>2</td><td>56.048</td><td>.000</td><td>.091</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>212.568</td><td>.000</td><td>.160</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>26.131</td><td>.000</td><td>.045</td></tr><tr><td> possessives per nominal</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>154.744</td><td>.000</td><td>.217</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>14.539</td><td>.000</td><td>.013</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>6.840</td><td>.001</td><td>.012</td></tr><tr><td>verbal modifiers per nominal</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>18.692</td><td>.000</td><td>.032</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>1</td><td>84.376</td><td>.000</td><td>.070</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * background</td><td>2</td><td>19.194</td><td>.000</td><td>.033</td></tr><tr><td>nouns as a nominal dependent per nominal</td><td> discipline</td><td>2</td><td>234.397</td><td>.000</td><td>.296</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background discipline * background</td><td>1</td><td>5.048</td><td>.025</td><td>.005</td></tr><tr><td>relative clause modifiers per nominal</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>14.397</td><td>.000</td><td>.025</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>2 1</td><td>71.929</td><td>.000</td><td>.114</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * background</td><td></td><td>139.151</td><td>.000</td><td>.111</td></tr><tr><td>(non-clausal) adverbial modifiers per nominal</td><td>discipline</td><td>2</td><td>27.057</td><td>.000</td><td>.046</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>background</td><td>2 1</td><td>7.747 55.263</td><td>.000 .000</td><td>.014 .047</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>18.017</td><td>.000</td><td>.031</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> discipline * background</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 11 Post hoc comparison for disciplinary variation in phrasal complexity.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Variables</td><td colspan="2">Applied linguistics - Chemistry</td><td colspan="2">Applied linguistics - Economics</td><td colspan="2">Chemistry -Economics</td></tr><tr><td>Sig.</td><td>d</td><td>Sig.</td><td>d</td><td>Sig.</td><td>d</td></tr><tr><td>dependents per nominal</td><td>.000</td><td>1.64</td><td>.000</td><td>.42</td><td>.000</td><td>1.16</td></tr><tr><td>dependents per nominal subject</td><td>.000</td><td>1.36</td><td>.000</td><td>.60</td><td>.000</td><td>.56</td></tr><tr><td>dependents per object of the preposition</td><td>.000</td><td>.96</td><td>.560</td><td></td><td>.000</td><td>.99</td></tr><tr><td> dependents per nominal complement</td><td>.639</td><td></td><td>.000</td><td>.30</td><td>.001</td><td>.23</td></tr><tr><td>dependents per nominal (standard deviation)</td><td>.000</td><td>1.01</td><td>.964</td><td></td><td>.000</td><td>.89</td></tr><tr><td>determiners per nominal</td><td>.000</td><td>.61</td><td>.186</td><td></td><td>.000</td><td>.39</td></tr><tr><td>adjectival modifiers per nominal</td><td>.000</td><td>.26</td><td>.494</td><td></td><td>.015</td><td>.12</td></tr><tr><td> prepositions per nominal</td><td>.000</td><td>.88</td><td>.021</td><td>.15</td><td>.000</td><td>.44</td></tr><tr><td> possessives per nominal</td><td>.000</td><td>1.05</td><td>.478</td><td></td><td>.000</td><td>1.19</td></tr><tr><td>verbal modifiers per nominal.</td><td>.928</td><td></td><td>.000</td><td>.35</td><td>.000</td><td>.33</td></tr><tr><td> nouns as a nominal dependent per nominal</td><td>.000</td><td>1.66</td><td>.000</td><td>.56</td><td>.000</td><td>.89</td></tr><tr><td>relative clause modifiers per nominal</td><td>.000</td><td>.88</td><td>.000</td><td>.49</td><td>.003</td><td>.25</td></tr><tr><td>(non-clausal) adverbial modifiers per nominal</td><td>.002</td><td>.34</td><td>.977</td><td></td><td>.002</td><td>.27</td></tr></table></body></html>

As noted above, one general disciplinary pattern found in this reearch is that applied linguistics and economics tend to be higher in clausal complexity indices. Dependents per clause, clausal complements per clause, clausal coordinating conjunctions per clause, conjunctions per clause, and adverbial modifiers per clause tended to be higher in the discussions written in these two disciplines. Apart from this general pattern, some interesting indings were observed in other clausal indices. The use of (finite) adverbial clauses was specificall high only in the discussions written by L1 authors in economics, and it was remarkably low in the same discipline but among L2 writers. Open clausal complements were quite high in applied linguisics but much lower in chemistry and economics. It could also be observed that aplied linguistics and economics discussions were rather low in nominal complements per clause It should be noticed that possssves, rlative clause modifiers, and (non-causal) averbial modfiers were the phrasal dependent types that were generally more frequent in these two disciplines. One conclusion we can draw from these findings is that applied inguistics and economics have a heavier reliance on adverbial modifiers- both clausal and non-clausal types - as well as relative clause modfiers while chemistry discourse is essreliant on these dependent types. In some phrasal indice, such as verbal modifiers per nominal and dependents per nominal complement, the lowest values were observed in economics discussions. This offers partial support for the findings of Casal et al. (2021), in which economics RAs were found to have the lowest level of linguistic complexty. The higher level of syntactic complexity in applied linguistics discussions i also in line with Casal et al. (2021), demonstrating that applied inguistics RAs, particularly the discussion section, tend to be more syntactically complex.

The results of this study revealed that indices of phrasal complexity were generally higher in chemistry discussions. Among the indices of phrasal complexit, seven indices were higher in chemistry discussions regardessof the writers' language background. This is out of step with the lower complexity of academic texts in hard sciences reported in Khany and Kafshgar (2016). The higher level of dependents per nominal observed in chemistry discussions could support the prominence of extended noun phrases contributing to high information density in the discourse of science (Fang, 2006). Nouns as nominal modifiers as well as verbal and adjectival modifiers (only in L1 discussions) were more prominent dependent types in this disciplinary domain; however, relative clause modifiers and non-clausal adverbial modifiers were les frequently used in chemistry discussions. Another interesting inding was the higher level of dependents per nominal (standard deviation), indicating higher syntactic variety in chemistry in comparison with applied linguistics and economics.

The second research question dealt with the efect of writers' language background (L1 vs. L2) on the clausal and phrasal indices in the discussion sections f RAs regardessof thr discipline. Oerall the was not a clear picture with respect to language background differences in both clausal and phrasal complexity measures. Some clausal indices, namely clausal complements per clause, con. junctions per clause, nominal complements per clause, and dependents per clause were higher in the discussions written by L2 re searchers, while open clausal complements per clause and adverbial modifiers per clause were significantly higher in the discussions written by L1 authors. An interesing pattern here is the heavier reliance of 1 writer on open clausal complements that represent nonfinite complement clauses. This could ffr support for the later development of these structures in the developmental framework suggested by (Biber e al., 2011). Among phrasal indices, dependents per nominal subject and prepositions per nominal were higher in the discussions written by L2 researchers, while dependents per nominal complement, adjectival modifiers, verbal modifier, relative clause modifiers, and (non-clausal) adverbial modifier per nominal were higher in the texts written by L1 authors. This suggests that L2 writers were essreliant on phrasal dependent types in their academic writing in comparison with 1 writers. However, thedifferent status of clausal and phrasal measures of syntactic complexity i in contrast with the clear picture depicted in past research (Nasseri. 2020), demonstrating that texts written by L1 authors were more syntactically complex than those written by authors for whom English is a second or foreign language. The findings were also out of tep with Wu et al. (2020) showing that ELF writers used more coordinate phrases, more complex nominals, fewer subordinate clauses, and longer sentences and clauses in comparison with L1 English writers. The differences between lrge-grained indice, used in these two studies, and fine-rained indice, used in the present research, could be one possible reason underlying these contradictions.

The interaction effect between discipline and language background was also significant in both clausal and phrasal measures. In this respect, two pattrns were observed i clausal indices. Firs, dependents per clause and clausal complements per clause showed higher means in L2 texts in chemistry and applied linguistics and higher means in the discussions written by L1 authors in economics. Second, nominal subjects per clause was higher in the discussions written by L1 authors except for those written by L2 researchers in applied linguistics. This intraction effct ffers a more unified pictre in phrasal ind of yntctic complexty. Four indices, namely dependents per nominal, dependents per object of the preposition, dependents per nominal (standard deviation), and determiners per nominal, were higher in the iscussions written by L2 authors in applied linguistics and economics and L1 authors in chemistry. In addition, it was found that nouns as a nominal dependent per nominal was higher in aplied linguistics and chemistry discussions written by L1 authors and economics texts authored by L2 researchers. In conclusion, disciplinary conventions, particularly in writing the discussion section of RAs, can moderate the impact of language background on syntactic complexity in academic writing.

# 6. Conclusion

The results of this study could have significant implications for L2/academic writing research and pedagogy. The phrasal and clausal indices of syntactic complexity could significantly distinguish the discussion sections based on their disciplinary domain and their authors' language background, signaling the usefulness of these indices over traditional length-based measures to capture syntactic complexity in academic writing. This i particularly important i light of the two major criticisms leveled upon large-grained measures of syntactic complexity (Kyle & Crossley, 2018), i.e. they are dificult to interpret and have a disproportionat focus on clausal subordination. Therefore, future research on syntactic complexity in academic genres, such as RA and its part-genres as well as thesis and disertation, is recommended to utilize these indices instead of large-grained measures. It should be noted that the fine-grained indices of syntactic complexity used in this rearch behaved differently in comparison with the traditional measures, only partially supporting the clear-cut cross-disciplinary picture of syntactic complexity in disciplinary writing depicted by some earlier studies. The reults of ths study offer students and rearchers, as well as ESP instructors, a more in-deth understanding of yntactic complexity patterns in the academic writing of their discipline. This can inform genre-based pedagogical activities by tailoring instructional focus on more important syntactic features used in a disciplinary domain. For instance, special attention could be devoted to the use of relative clause modifiers, nominal complements, clausal subjects, and open clausal complements (and their dependent structures, which were particularly high in the discussion sections written by both L1 and L2 authors i applied linguistics. Similarly, such courses for economics researchers can speciall focus on adverbial clauses, nominal subject, and clausal complements. In addition, some clausal indices, such as adverbial modifiers per clause and open clausal complements per clause, as well as some phrasal indices, such as adjectival, adverbial, and verbal modifiers er nominal were higher in the txs written by L1 witers regardessfther disciplinary domain. This implies that if the goal of intruction is to make L2 researchers' academic writing approach that of native writers, particular attention can be devoted to adverbial, adjectival, and verbal modifiers.

This study is not without its limitations. irst, we only investigated the fine-grained measures of syntactic complexity in the dis cussion sections of RAs in three disciplinary domains. Future research could examine these indices of syntactic complexity in other sections of RAs and in different discilines. Further work could also compare different part-genres of RAs with respect to phrasal and clausal measures of syntactic complexity. In addition, this research compared the status of phrasal and clausal complexity L2 writers whose first language was Persian, and those of native speakers of English. Future research can profile syntactic complexity in the academic writing of authors with different language backgrounds. Finall, the RAs selected for this analysis tended to have the IMRD format, which is biased towards quantitative rather than qualitative studies.

# Author statement

Elahe Ziaeian - Project administration, Methodology, Writing and editing. Seyyed Ehsan Golparvar - Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing and editing.

# References

Ansra  ,   018 t  rf a    s writers in applied linguistics. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 31, 58-71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j jeap.2017.12.008   
Atak, . a1). tc xt r i w  stdh h eft g Writing, 47(September 2020), Article 100506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2020.100506   
Biber . ra  0.Ch stt c i xit, elao, . of is or e , 2-20.   
Biber D., Gra, ., & non,  11). Shuld we use chcrisic f coveraion  mere gatca compexit in2 wtin dme EOL Quarterly, 45(1), 5-35. https://doi.org/10.5054/tq.2011.244483   
er       0 t  tie measurement. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 46, Article 100869. https://doi.org/10.1016/j jeap.2020.100869   
Bule,  se 2014. n ig sht- chge i 2 wting mplxit. l of nd  wn 26,265.s/ doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2014.09.005   
Cl   019 tng   -n  f n018) 51-62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2019.03.005 for Academic Purposes, 52, Article 100996. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.100996   
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Erlbaum.   
Dez-Bemar,  P- .2020)  mplxt   h  r witi l   s sics 51) 4-35. https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.17058.die   
Fang  (206). h a d f sci  in e scl. o J f ci i 5), 491-50/o.10.1080 09500690500339092   
aar 0 30 1016/j.lingua.2020.102804.   
Hyland, K. (2o00). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. Longman.   
Hyland, K. (2009). Academic discourse. Continuum.   
Jig . ,    (0tc t  nthe    r   u. Journal of Second Language Writing, 46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2019.100666   
ay  , 6  t     i 384 https://doi.org/10.1080/09296174.2016.1169848 doctoral dissertation). Georgia State University.   
Kyle  se, 018 rig yic ct  win usin ind ls d h in.  d  102, 333-349. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12468   
Lu, X. (2010). utomatic analysis of syntactic complexity in second language writing. Inenatiol Jounal of opus Lingustic, 15(4), 474496.   
Lu,  (2011. in f ytc xt m  inf wier    ly, 451) 36-62. https://doi.org/10.5054/tq.2011.240859   
Lu     i     i Academic Purposes, 44, Article 100832. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2019.100832   
azta .5   is    g 29, 3-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2015.06.004   
Nasseri, 200 is  wting mres r prltic coxiicti  thcrr f  picy, and statistical modelling. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 49, Article 100940. http://doi.org/10.1016/j jeap.2020.100940   
Nors, J   00    a titin    f t sics 3 557. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amp044   
rtea 00    ic 4, 492-518.   
Parko 11 s  3, 675.. 10.1016/j.esp.2011.03.001   
Peacock, M. (2002). Communicative moves in the discussion section of research articles. System, 30, 479-497.   
tples , rt , Bie,  ra  06. wtin   t t ee l  lxty  eof st, discipline, and genre. Written Communication, 33(2), 149-183. https:/doi.org/10.1177/0741088316631527   
Stape .,   016 n rst- 2 win  iil s ars , a a ratg.  of econd Language Writing, 32, 17-35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2016.02.002   
Tach1 st  aig qi in program. TEs0L Quarterly, 47(2), 420-430. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.91   
Wle- k 9 , Curriculum Center, University of Hawai'i.   
Wu    0ic t  ish  i r  wi  f h  , 43 ie 100798. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2019.100798   
an  . f t   c,  c t, writing quality. Journal of Second Language Writing, 28, 53-67. https://doi.org/10.1016/jjslw.2015.02.002   
Yn, .,  1)c xt  r  f   x i. System, 97, Article 102427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102427   
Yon, . 017 sti  o      i n 0, 1501. doi.org/10.1002/tesq.296   
a,    sti   i 29 https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amab007