# A comparison between input modalities and languages in source-based multilingual argumentative writing

Roberto Arias-Hermoso\*, Ainara Imaz Agirre, Eneritz Garro Larranaga

Mondragon Unrstate, Darment of Ection (Fcuty of Hmnities and ction Science), Dorlta uzoa, , 20.540Eskoria, Spa

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords: Source-based writing Argumentation Source use strategies Multilingualism Secondary education

This paper examines secondary education students' multilingual writing based on two input modalities to understand the influence of input on argumentation and sourcing strategies. Participants produced texts in Basque, Spanish and English based on a video or a text, and texts were analysed to explore their production of argumentation elements and sourcing strategies. Differences were found between input modalities in the use of data and rebuttals, and in copying. Across-language differences were also found in the use of data and counterarguments, and in the use of original ideas and paraphrasing. Additionally, complex argumentation elements elicited more original ideas than simple ones. Findings suggest that different writing sub-processes might be activated when composing from different sources and that argumentation and sourcing might be transferable across languages. These results may have important implications for educators in multilingual programs who aim to support their students in acquiring academic writing skills in multiple languages.

# 1. Introduction

Writing is a highly academic practice fundamental to learning (Manchon & Polio, 2021; Manchon, 2011) and constructing knowledge in subject-specific ways (Shanahan & Shanahan, 2008, 2012). In contrast to everyday language, writing in academic contexts i a complex matter (alton-Puffr, 2007) that requires writers t activate various cognitive proceses such as formulation, execution and editing (Kellogg, 1999. These processes have been shown to be affected by a myriad of factors such as language proficiency, attentional resources or working memory (e.g., Michel et al., 2019). Furthermore, learners in multilingual education programmes do not only need to cope with the challenges of writing in their L1, but also in the other languages of the curriculum. Multilingual crricula and programmes thus need to explicitl ddres and focus on developing students multilingualacademic skill, including writing (Lorenzo & Trujillo, 2017).

Still, in line with Cummins Common Underlying Proficiency theory (CUP, see Cummins, 1980, 2021), some of the characteristics of student writing are shared acros anguages or transferred from one language to another (Rnert et al, 2016; Genesee et al., 2006, Forbes & Fisher, 2018). Rinnert and Kobayashi's (2016) multilingual writing model considers a writers whole linguisic repertoire, their repertoire of knowledge and social context as being influential on written outcomes, and assumes that the characteristics of writing in L1, L2 and L3 overlap to a certain extent. The model supports studies that have found similarities between students multilingual texts (e.g., Orcasitas-Vicandi, 2021; Sagasta, 2003; Arias-Hermoso & Imaz Agirre, 2023) and those that suggest similar development across one's languages (Granados et al., 2021).

In addition to the complexities of writing in L1, or L2/L3, learners are often asked to write in combination with other inguistic skill. In fact, the aility to use diffrent language modalities to shape new pieces of writing has been seen as a key indicator of information literacy (Cumming et al., 2018) and has been considered essential for academic suces (Chan, 2018). Tasks that integrate more than one linguistic skill are more similar to real-life situations, where linguistic skills are not normally elicited separately (Plakans & Gebril, 2013). This is the case of integrated writing, synthesis writing (see Spivey, 1984) or source-based writing tasks. These complex tasks (Zhu et al., 2021a) are increasingly being used in language testing (eg., TOEFL iBM or Goethe examinations) and require learners to comprehend a source, evaluate the information received, and use it to create original pieces of writing (Zhu et al., 2016). Tasks within the integrated writing umbrella include, for example, taking notes on a lecture for a subsequent writtenessay, evaluating texts with conflicting views about a topic, or interpreting and reporting data from figure, graphs or tables. Despite minor differences among integrated writing task typologie, integrating information from inputs into one's writing isat the core ofall these tasks. In this article, these will be referred to as source-based writing (henceforth sBw) tasks.

Although several studies have been conducted addressing SBW tasks and the processes involved in them, to our knowledge, limited research has addressed the inluence of ifferent input modalitie in multilingual SBW argumentatie writing. Previous studies have often focused on reading-to-write SBW tasks, or have used audiovisual inputs in combined listening-reading-to-write tasks, however, research focusing on comparing diverse input modalities in source based writing i scarce (but see Chan & May, 2022; Cai & Huang, 2023). This study, therefore, will focus on a SBW task in which two sources (a video and a written text and thre languages (Basque, Spanish and English) are involved, in order to explore possible input differences and cross-linguistic patterns.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Source-based writing

SBW elicit students to manage both productive and integratie proceses (fflerbach et al., 2015) where a leaners interactive and interdependent comprehension and productive skils are activated (Yang & Plakans, 2012). Some cognitive proceses activated by SBW are common to independent writing (Michel et al., 2020), since planning, writing, revising and editing ocur in both types of tasks (Cumming et a., 2016). However, they \*tap into" different aspects of writing (Guo et al., 2013:234). In contrast to independent writing, sBW tass require students to, irt, be ale to understand the original sources, and then construct their own piees of writing accordingly. Consequently, sBW tasks require more complex sub-processes in addition to the writing proceses proposed by Kellogg (1999): formulation, execution and editing. During the formulation proces, writers are expected to plan their texts by recalling information from long-term memory (Michel et a., 2019) and using languaging, i.e., putting thoughts into words (Swain, 2006) Execution consists of producing the actual writing, and editing consists of revising and corrcting. However, SBW contexts require specific consideration (Cheong et al., 2018), as other sub-processes are unique to the writing proces of SW tass. The sub-processes include both higher-order and lower-order processes (Plakans & Gebril 2013; Afflerbach et al., 2015), such as comprehension, eal evaluation, synthesis and interpretation of ideas (Zhu et al., 2016), as well a language-transforming or translation processes (Ye & Ren, 2023), i.e, the aility to put the ideas from the sources into one's own words. Sometimes writer ae required to take notes, which involves a specific series of subprocesses (Peverly et al., 2007): selecting, constructing and transforming the source.

# 2.1.1. Source use strategies

SBW tasks by definition require writers to complete the writing task based on information provided in reading, istening and/or speaking source materials (Chan & Yamashita, 2022:3), as comprehending and selecting information from the sources is at the chore of the type of task (Zhu et al, 2016; Peverly, 2007). Therefore, how writer use or integrate information from the source materials into their written production has been one of the main aspects examined in sBW research (e.g, Plakans & Gebril, 2013; Weigle & Parker. 2012; Crossley et al., 2021). Writer are normall able todifferentiate etwen relevant and irrelevant information in ources (Cheong et al., 2021), and use sources to support both the content and language of their compositions (Plakans & Gebril, 2012). In fact, inexperienced writers tend to use the sources as the core idea of their composition (Leki & Carston, 1997). Research highlights that students often go back and forth between their texts and the source materials or notes, mostly in argumentative SBw (Vandermeulen et al., 2020). The use of sources has shown to be very important in SBW tasks, accounting for $4 7 \%$ of the variance in quality scores (Crossley et al., 2021). Regarding source use strategies, paraphrasing has been highly correlated with text qualit (Watanabe, 2001), while copying has a negative effect (Plakans & Gebril, 2013).

Some studies (e.g., van Weijen et al., 2019, Chau et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2021b; Kato, 2018; Cheong et al., 2019) have examined whether strategies for integration of the sources are similar across languages. van Weijen et al. (2019) highlighted that source use strategies dffered between1 and L2, astudents tended to copy and patchwrite more in L2 than in L1, with longer and more frequent citations in L1. However, source integration strategies were strongly correlated across languages $( r = . 4 8 – . 8 5 )$ , suggesting that they are not language-dependent, but learner-specific. Chau e al. (2022) used a proces-oriented approach to examine strategies in more than two languages and showed that MA students consulted more sources per minute in L2 (English) and L3 (French) than in their L1 (Dutch). Kat 2018) found better use f source in 1 Japanes than in  English Still on the whole stdies (vanWijen t al., 2019, Chau et al., 2022; Kato, 2018; Cheong et al., 2019) have suggested strong similarities and crosslinguisti transfer across 1 and L2, indicating that academic litracy skill within the same skill domain (i.., SBW) might be transferable between languages (Zhu et al., 2021b; Cheong et al., 2019).

# 2.1.2. Argumentation in SBW

Argumentation can be understood as a cognitive discourse function (see Dalton-Puffer, 2013) which consists of taking a stance towards something and supportig one's position with evidence and previous knowledge (Dalton-Puffer 2016). Learning toeffectively produce arguments is fundamental for successul scientific and academic discourse (Polias, 2016). Toulmin's Argumentation Model (1958) has been \*recognized as a univeral system of norms to analyse the logical microstructure of arguments (Crossley et al., 2022: 3) and has ben used in numerous studies to examine argumentation features, as i provides a clear categorisation of the argumentation elements. oulmin proposed that every successul argument s composed of thee elements the claim, the supportig dat and warrants. In addition to these, Toulmin extended the original categorisation by adding secondary elements, such as qualifiers rebuttals and backings, which would further support the claim. Previous studies (Qin & Karaback, 2010; Crammond, 1998; Liu & Stapleton, 2014) have categorised these elements into simple argumentation elements, such as claims or data, and more complex elements such as rebuttals and warrants. The latter are normally used by experts, as they are secondary and optional (Qin & Karaback, 2010), ut data and claims are the basic elements of argumentation, and also simpler in nature (Toulmin, 1958).

Many SBW tass require students to produce argumentative writing pieces in which they are expected to build their own opinion and construct arguments based on sources (Cheong et al., 2021; hu et al. 2016; Nelson & King, 2022; Casado-Ledesma et al., 2021; Mateos et al., 2018) and, thus, they need to develop content knowledge analysis and evaluation skils, along with developing an opinion and presenting it coherently in their texts (Wingate, 2012). Consequently, writers, in addition to mastering the necessary writing skill and language proficiency, need to consider argumentation and source use practices (Ferrti & Fan, 2016).

In regards to producing arguments in multilingual SBW tasks, some differences have been found between L1 and L2. It has been suggested that, although armenttion patterns in BW are orrlated betwe languages (vanWeijen et al., 2019), 1 text end toe more complete, as writers include ll argumentation elements in their L1 compositions but normally do not in their L2 (Cheong et al. 2021). An interesting difference between 1 and L2 sBW argumentation found by van Weijen e al. (2019) was that L1 texts were more likely to include both arguments and counterarguments than L2 texs, while L2 texs tended to be more traightforward and contained clearer conclusions. Furthermore, Cheong et al. (2021) indicated that writers tended to use more relevant reasons in their L1, though argument quality was weak both in L1 and L2. In addition, students were found to direct more atention to relevant information that could be used to support their claim.

# 2.1.3. Input modality in SBW

As mentioned above, different types of input modalites may be used in SBW tasks (Chan & May, 2022; Cai & Huang, 2023). Many teaching approaches emphasise the importance of developing students' multimodal resources (Coyle & Meyer, 2021), and they are regarded as important by teachers (Cardenas-Claros et al., 2023). Input modality, in the case of SBW tasks, could be defined as the channel through which stdnts recive the source (Mayer, 1997), , audiisual, adity, pictri or txual. though the effect of input modalities in receptive sils or grammar knowledge (se for example Kim & Godfroid, 2019) has rceived some atention, hir effect on production tasks stil remains uncertan (Cai & Huang, 2023). Mixed findings have een shown in integrated speaking tasks, since Cai and Wang (2017)indicated that a combination of text and video input helped learners in story alignment, accuracy and complexit, while Hsieh and Davis (2019) found no significant differences between audio-only and audiovisual inputs in complexty and fluency.

Similarly, regarding written production tasks, as highlighted by recent iterature (Cai & Huang, 2023; Chan & Yamashita, 2022) few studies have addressed the effect of input in SBW. To our knowledge, only Cubilo and Winke's(2013), Chan and May's (2022) and Cai and Huang's studies have compared input modalities in SBW. Cubilo and Winke (2013) compared the efect of a video-based and an audio-only input in sW holistc cores, and rortd ittl differenc n higher eucation students writing. However,students who received the video input wrote fewer notes. In contrast, Chan and May (2022) used a short summary SBW task to compare listening-to-write and reading-to-write tas, and suggested some differences in the processes involved. Using a panellit judgement procedure, they indicated that some characteristics were more salient i judges comments when asessing a certain type of task, with comprehension of input, paraphrasing skills and academic style being more predominant in reading SBW task assessment, while comprehensiveness and staging of information were more evident in the listening SBW task. Cai and Huang (2023) used three mo. dalities in a story continuation written task, focusing on alignment text, text and pictures, and text and video. Overall students who used the text $^ +$ video input performed better in linguistic and situational alignment, and produced more accurate and cohesive writing, whereas learners receiving the text and pictures input only performed bettr i situational alignment when compared to those using the text-only input. Although they did not specifically compare nput modalities, Cheong e al. (2021) found some differences in the use of sources in a listening/reading-to-write task. Participants in their study, in general, tended to use more information from the text than from the audio. They found an effct of language in the use f sources, as writers use of the text increased when composing in 2, while the use of the audio input decreased. When examining students' perceptions of input types in the sBW tasks, on the whole, Cubilo and Winke (2013) reported that students preferred the video input, as it was believed to be useful for recalling information. Similarly, learners in Cai and Huang's study (2023) emphasised that the video helped them to contextualise information from the text (Cai & Huang, 2023), however, some students found pictures not especiall helpful in the writing task, and, in some cases, redundant (Cai & Huang, 2023).

Consequently, as can be observed from the studies reviewed in this section, the efect that different input modalities have on subsequent SBW argumentative writing has not yet been clarified in the iterature, especially due to the lack of comparative SBW studies. The present study wil try to complet this gap and wil focus on the efect of input modalitie and languages in a Sw task, by examining students peformance in wrten arumentationelements and sourcing trategie. This rearch, thus, diffrs from previous studies in three main aspects: a) input modalities (audiovisual and textual, containing the same information), b) type of SBW task (argumentative, vs summary in Chan & May, 2022 or story continuation in Cai & Huang, 2023), c) languages (trilingual writing vs studies meuring L1/2). As reently suggested by Cai and Huang (2023) ittl is yet known about the efect of different modalities in SBW tasks.

Furthermore, although much research in sBW has focused in either argumentation or source use strategies (see Literature Review above), to our knowledge, only one study (i., Chuang & Yan, 2023) has focused on their potential interrlation. In their study, students tended to use more information from the source to support their arguments than to produce counterarguments. In addition, they found a negative corrlation between the use of sources and argument structure (as measured as ordinal categories), as students Who used the source more frequently tended to create poorer arguments. Their study, however, mainly focused on argument structure at paragraph level and reasoning quality, and did not analyse what source use strategies are used to produce eparate argumentation elements.

# 3. Research questions

Therefore, the present study's main objective isto explore the efect of dfferent input modalities on secondary education students argumentation and sourcing strategies in a trilingual SBW task. Based on findings obtained from previous research, the following research questions are addressed:

RQ 1. Does input type (video vs. text) inluence students' production of argumentation elements? And source use strategies? RQ 2. Is there any difference in argumentation between Basque, Spanish and English? And in source use strategies? RQ 3. Do students use different source use strategies to produce each argumentation element in Basque, Spanish and English?

Based on previous literature suggesting input modality differences in SBW tasks (Cai & Huang, 2023; Chan & May, 2022), input type is expected to affect students wriing of argumentatio elements and source use strateies. Rgarding the efect of languages itis expected that students will produce similar arumentation patterns in the three languages, due to cross-linguistic transfer and a shared underlying proficiency (Cumins, 1980; Rinnert e l., 2016; Granados et al., 2021, 2022). However, previous research has suggested that proficiency level plays role in the use of source (Sole et al., 2013; Read, 1990), and, as a consequence, we do expect students to copy more in their L3 (English) than in 1 and L2, as the linguistic resources available to them in their 3 ae carcer due to their lower proficiency in English. It is ssumed that there will be lite difference between 1 and L2 in regard to argumentation and sourcing strategies, dueto parallel development of their literacy skills in both languages (Lorenzo & Rodriguez, 2014). With regards to RQ 3, in line with Chuang and Yan (2023), who found a negative correlation between the use of sources and argument structure, it is hypothesised that more complex argumentation elements would require more creativity and a les frequent use of paraphrasing and copying and, consequentl, students wil use les copying and more original ideas to produce complex argumentation elements (re buttals and warrants), while copying will be predominantly used in simple argumentation elements (data and counterarguments.

# 4. Material and methods

# 4.1. Participants

This research was conducted in a state school in a mainly Spanish-speaking area of the Basque Autonomous Community (henceforth BAC), Spain. The participants were 34 Basque-Spanish bilingual students who studied English as their third language. Two Year 9 (14-15 years old) intact clsses participated in the study, which were taught by the same teachers. Each clas differed in the type of input they used to complete the SBW task, as one group received a video source (G_VID, $\mathbf { n } = 2 0 $ ), and the other a written text (G_TXT, n $= 1 4$ . All were enrolled in a Basque immersion Model D, where Basque is the primary language of instruction, and Spanish and English are taught as subjects. Participants received instruction $2 6 \mathrm { h }$ a week through the medium of Basque (of which 3 were Basque language classes), $^ { 3 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ of English and $^ { 3 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ of Spanish (see Cenoz, 2023 for more information on the multilingual programmes in the Basque Country).

The majority of participants $\mathbf { ( n = 3 3 }$ ) self-reported to be Spanish dominant, with only 1 student having Basque as their L1. In order to control for participants' language proficiency, a LexTale test was performed in each language (de Bruin et al., 2017; Lemhofer & Broersma, 2012; Izura et a., 2014). In the test participants had to diferentiate between real words and pseudowords from a lis of tokens, indicating if particular words existed inthe target language or did not. The proportions f crrct and incorrect responses were calculated and subtracted, and thus each participant was given a score ranging from - 1 to 1. An independent samplest-est showed no difference between G_VID and G_TXT (all $p s > 0 . 2 2 \AA$ , which suggests that both groups have the same language proficiency. Participants scored a mean value of 0.75 ( $\mathrm { S D } { = } 0 . 1 1$ ) in Spanish, 0.47 ( $\mathrm { S D } { = } 0 . 1 3$ ) in Basque, and 0.16 $S _ { Ḋ } \mathrm { Ḋ - } 0 . 1 3 Ḍ Ḍ$ ) in English. A repeated measures ANOVA showed significant differences between all combinations of languages at the $p < 0 . 0 0 1$ level, indicating that participants were more proficient in Spanish, then in Basque, and then in English. Therefore, in this paper, Spanish will be considered the L1 of the sample, Basque their L2 and English their L3.

# 4.2. Materials

Participants completed threeargumentative SBW tasks in the discipline of Science and in thre languages (Basque, Spanish and English). The task was identical in al three languages and was designed in line with the educational curriculum of the BAC (see below

for a detailed description of the procedure).

Nutrition was chosen to be the topic of the compositions, since it i a discipline-related topic worked on acrossecondary education. It is worked in the subject of science and, in the case of Model D schools, the language of instruction is Basque. Students were spe. cificlly asked to take a stance and argue in favour or against two scientific concepts (chicken and chocolate), comparing them, and providing as many arguments as possible. Participants had to answer the following question in a 150-word writen composition: Which one of the two foods is healthier? To support their answers and to control for topic knowledge (Rinner e l., 2016), sources were made available to the participants, ensuring all had equal information when producing the written texts (Read, 1990).

Identical information source materials were designed for the two input types - a two-minute-long video and a written text in the form of tables and lists. Both sources contained the same information and were identical acrosslanguages. The video was an animated video in which the benefits and disadvantages of the two pieces of food were reported, and no comparison or argumentation appeared in the video. The sources contained information both for and against each of the foods (chicken and chocolate) so that students could use it to support their claims. An equivalent amount of information was provided in favour of or against either chicken or chocolate, in order to avoid bias. Information in both sources was presented to students without any inherent persuasive or argumentative structure. This was carried out by creating sources that were not discourse-marked, avoiding connectives and expressions related to argumen. tation, such as those focusing on causal-consequential relationships (e.g., ecause, for that resn..). Agumentation elements were not per se included in the sources, as information was presented objectively so that participants could interpret and use the informatio for their own arguments, rather than relying on already existing argumentation elements provided within the sources. The sources had been checked and approved by an expert in the discipline, a Food Science graduate. Using BEDCA (RedBEDCA & AESAN, 2024), a nutrition-specific database from the Spanish Minstry of Science and Innovation, they checked whether the nutritional information in the sources was correct, and suggested some modifications in order to ensure both foods had pros and cons.

# 4.3. Data collection procedure

Data were collected by two researchers. In order to compare the effct of different input modalitie (video and written text), two classes were selected, one of them received the data as a written text (G TXT) and the other in the form of a video (GVID). Therefore, the groups were required to complete the same task, with the only difference being the modality of the sources.

Before writing the three texts, students completed a background questionnaire. They were given ten minutes between task and task. As task familiarit and practice may have a direct impact on student written performance (Garcia-Ponce et al., 2022), the order of the text languages was counterbalanced. The main objective of counterbalancing the order of the languages was to contrl for potential differences in the comprehension of the sources, as, probably, participants sarting in their 1 would have an advantage over those starting in their L2 or L3. Students in each class were thus divided at random into three groups, each of which started writing in a different language and then continued with the other two. A repeated measures ANoVA showed that the order of the texts afected only some variables. In fact, participants who started writing in Spanish $( p = 0 . 0 1 )$ or English $( p = 0 . 0 0 9 )$ tended to write fewer counterarguments in their firs text than in the other two. In addition, students also showed to include fewer dat in their first composition, but this was only significant in the case of those who started writing in Spanish $( p = 0 . 0 3 7 )$ . All other variables did not differ significantly due to the order of the texts. Therefore, it could be concluded that pseudo-randomising the order of the tests helped to counterbalance the outcomes.

Participants were presented with the sources, which they could check for $4 ~ \mathrm { m i n }$ during which they were expected to select information from the materials and make notes based on them. They were informed that they would not be allowed to use the source text or video while writig, however, they would be permitted to use their notes, which were later collected. Students were given 25 min to complete the wrtten task in each language. As explained in the previous paragraph, the order of the languages was counterbalanced. Therefore, students received the corresponding source in a particular language, in which they were later required to write the text, e., if they watched the source video in Basque, they were required to writ the fllowing composition in Basque. Allexplanations were carried out in Basque, as it is the language of instruction.

# 4.4. Data analysis

After data collection, all handwritten texts were transcribed for coding in MAxQDA 2022 (VERBI Software, 2021). Toulmin's Argumentation (1958) elements and the use of sources were annotated in the corpus.

As mentioned in the literature review, Toulmin's Argumentation (1958) is one of the most used models to explore argumentative features. Some studies (e.g, Qin & Karaback, 2010; Crammond, 1998; Liu & Stapleton, 2014) have suggested a distinction between fundamental and secondary argumentation elements. Fundamental elements (claims and data) constitute the foundational elements of argumentative structure, thus serving as requisites to construct argumentation patterns (Qin & Karaback, 2010; Toulmin, 1958). Put in other words, argumentation is not possble if the writer does not specify their opinion on a topic, or if they just produce their opinion without supporting evidence. In contrast, more complex elements (counterarguments, warrants and rebuttals), are ofen considered secondary and optional, and contribute to the complexity of the argument (Chuang & Yan, 2023; Crammond, 1998). Due to their complexit, students often struggle when producing them (Qin & Karaback, 2010). Previous research has often adopted a modified version of Toulmin's original model (see Crossey et al., 2022; Cheong et al., 2021; Qin & Karaback, 2010). Backings and qualifiers (included in Toulmin's model) were not coded due to the lack of their presence in the corpus (Qin & Karaback, 2010). To the four remaining Toulmin elements (claims, data, warrants and reutals, we added a ifth element that was also present i previous studes, counterarguments. As students were asked to compare two elements, they were expected to provide evidence for and against both foods, consequently, the presence of counterarguments was anticipated. Following Liu and Stapleton (2014) and Crossley et al. (2022) however, we did not differentiate between counterargument claims and counterargument data (see for example Qin & Karaback, 2010), and focused on counterarguments on the whole. The definition and examples of each element can be found in Table 1.

Although verbalisation of arguments may elicit certain lexicogrammatical features (Stapleton, 2001), such as in my opinion' for claims, "because" for data or however' for counterarguments, students may insinuate their positions or arguments without explicit verbalisation or linguistic indicators (Qin & Karabacak, 2010). It is important to highlight that some lexicogrammatical items might be used to introduce more than one argumentation element. As can be sen in Table 1, the students used "because" both for data and warrants, which made the annotation proces more dificult In these cases where there were mismatches or no lexicogrammatical feature was used by students, argumentation elements had to be interpreted following their definition.

Following previous research on the use of sources (e.g., Plakans & Gebril, 2013), the strategies used by students to integrate in. formation were coded. Plakans and Gebril (2013) identified whether T-units in their corpus were borrowed explicitl copying or quoting) or implitly (paraphrasing or summarising) from the sources. Our analysis is based on their use of explicit and implicit borrowing of information, however, we do not useT-units as the unit of analysis, as our interest is in the production of argumentation elements. In this study, thus, each argumentation lement produced by the participants was coded as copied (explicit use), paraphrased (implicit use) or fully original (Cheong et al., 2021). Copied information (C) was coded in cases where students took chunks of information verbatim directly from the source. A chunk was marked as explicit when strings of 4 or more content words were taken directly from the source (van Weijen et al., 2019). Paraphrasing (P) included information that was present in the source but had been reformulated or changed, and original information (0) was not present in any of the sources. Examples of sourcing trategies can be seen in Table 2.

Regarding the coding process, a third of the corpus (all texts in Basque, $\mathtt { n } = 3 4$ ) was first analysed in MAxQDA by the first and third authors separately. The analyses were then discussed and discrepancies were solved. For practical purposes, the irst author annotated the remaining texts.

Every argumentative text requires the presence of the claim, a it represents the writer's point of view towards the topic (Toulmin, 1958). In our corpus, 3 students did not produce claims in their texts, therefore, thir 9 texts were excluded from the sample due to their expository nature (Crosey et al., 2021), and the corpus was finally composed of 93 texts, 31 in each language. The claim is not included in the following analyses in the Results section, as they were exclusively used to discriminate between argumentative and expository texts.

Analysis counts were entered into JAMovI (The jamovi project, 2022) to perform the necessary statistical analyses. The data were checked for normality and they were found to be not normally distribute, and Levene's test was significant, indicating unequal variances for the groups. Therefore, non-parametric analyses were carried out to answer the research questions.

# 5. Results

Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics of the number of words in the texts, the argumentation elements and participants strategies for sourcing. Mean and standard deviation values are shown divided by language (Basque, Spanish and English) and group (G_VID and G_TXT). Table 3 will be referred to when answering RQ 1 and RQ 2.

5.1. Does input type (video and text) influence students' production of argumentation elements? And source use strategies?

A within-groups ANOVA (with Friedman's test) was run to check differences between argumentation element frequencies. It showed significant differences (all $p s < . 0 0 1 \ r$ , with data being the most used element in both groups, followed by counterarguments and warrants. All texts included data $\mathrm { ( m i n { = } } 3 \mathrm { \cdot }$ ) irrespective of language. However, not all texts presented counterarguments, warrants and rebuttals. Counterarguments were common and appeared in $9 1 . 4 \%$ of the texts, with only 8 texts (2 in Basque and English, 4 in Spanish) not including them. Warrants were scarcer, as 28 texts lacked one $3 0 . 1 1 \%$ of the total texts). Rebuttals were even scarcer since they were hardly used by students in the sample, in fact, out of the 93 texts, only 19 ( $2 1 . 4 3 \%$ of the texts) included a rebuttal, 5 in

Table 1 Definitions and examples from the corpus of each argumentation element.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Element</td><td>Definition</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Claim</td><td>The writer&#x27;s opinion or assertions about a particular topic.</td><td>If we talk about nutricional values, chicken is the healthies option.</td></tr><tr><td>Data</td><td>Information or evidence that supports the claim.</td><td>[C]hicken is the healthies option. Because per 100 g of chicken, it conteins 99,2 kcal, 0,46 g of sugar, 11 mg of calcium...</td></tr><tr><td>Warrant</td><td>Connections between the claim and supporting data, therefore justifying how the data support the claim.</td><td>The chiken is one of the principal elements on healthy dietes because it helps the nervous system and the digestive system to function well and also gives a lot of energy to the body.</td></tr><tr><td>Counterargument</td><td>Information or evidence that opposes the claim.</td><td>However, the milk chocolate can control cholesterol, has influence on the state of mind, imprube [improve] the memory and the concentration studying because imprube brain&#x27;s connections.</td></tr><tr><td>Rebuttal</td><td>Statements used by the writer to refute a. counterargument.</td><td>[Milk chocolate] may have more calcium than the chicken but its still the worts [worst] option respecting nutricional value.</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* Examples are unaltered versions of students' productions in English.

Table 2 Examples from the corpus of each sourcing strategy.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sourcing strategy</td><td>Example from original source</td><td>Student production</td></tr><tr><td>Original</td><td>(there were no references to muscles in the sources)</td><td>Chicken has many proteins so it is good for muscles.. Chicken is used in a lot healthy diets because helps nervous</td></tr><tr><td> Paraphrase</td><td>- It is used in many healthy diets. - It helps the nervous system and the. digestive system to function well.</td><td>system and gives a lot of energi.</td></tr><tr><td>Copy</td><td>- It gives energy to the body (from text) Chocolate helps us to control our cholesterol, and there are many studies that confirm its effect on our state of mind. It is also good for memory and for studying. (from video)</td><td>The chocolate help us to control our cholesterol, it affects. our state of mind and it&#x27;s good for memory and for studying..</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* Examples are unaltered versions of students' productions in English

Table 3 Descriptive statistics of the texts: Mean (SD).   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Basque</td><td colspan="2"> Spanish</td><td colspan="2">English</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>G_VID</td><td>G_TXT</td><td>G_VID</td><td>G_TXT</td><td>G_VID</td><td>G_TXT</td></tr><tr><td>Number of words</td><td>151.50 (34.19)</td><td>143.43 (47.86)</td><td>198.10 (37.01)</td><td>195.57 (67.45)</td><td>178.45 (57.09)</td><td>144.36 (51.29)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Argumentation element</td></tr><tr><td>Data</td><td>8.579 (2.317)</td><td>6.667 (2.570)</td><td>7.789 (2.043)</td><td>6.667 (1.969)</td><td>7.895 (2.580)</td><td>5.417 (1.881)</td></tr><tr><td>Warrant</td><td>1.789 (1.653)</td><td>1.923 (1.969)</td><td>2.263 (2.941)</td><td>1.500 (1.567)</td><td>1.789 (0.833)</td><td>0.833 (0.937)</td></tr><tr><td>Counter.</td><td>3.737 (2.535)</td><td>4.333 (1.155)</td><td>4.000 (2.749)</td><td>4.750 (2.417)</td><td>3.316 (2.311)</td><td>3.000 (1.595)</td></tr><tr><td>Rebuttal</td><td>0.105 (0.315)</td><td>0.333 (0.651)</td><td>0.158 (0.375)</td><td>0.500 (0.522)</td><td>0.158 (0.375)</td><td>0.333 (0.888)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Source use strategies</td></tr><tr><td> Original</td><td>0.947 (1.580)</td><td>0.750 (1.138)</td><td>1.158 (1.573)</td><td>1.167 (1.467)</td><td>1.053 (1.649)</td><td>0.500 (1.000)</td></tr><tr><td> Paraphrase</td><td>11.053 (4.129)</td><td>10.750 (4.634)</td><td>10.737 (5.290)</td><td>9.917 (4.055)</td><td>8.316 (5.186)</td><td>8.000 (3.075)</td></tr><tr><td>Copy</td><td>2.211 (3.029)</td><td>1.750 (2.221)</td><td>2.316 (2.286)</td><td>2.333 (1.969)</td><td>3.947 (3.865)</td><td>1.333 (1.875)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Basque, 9 in Spanish, 5 in English. Only one student included a rebuttal in their three texts, four students in two texts and eight injust one of the texts. In order to answer RQ1 and check diffrences between G_VID and G_TXT, non-parametri between-group KruskalWallis ANOVAs were performed, with Group (G_VID and G_TXT) as the grouping variable, and either argumentation elements or sourcing strategies as the independent variables. Regarding the production of argumentation elements in each of the languages, significant between-group differences were found in the use of data in Basque and in English, as students in G_VID produced more data than those in G_TXT in both languages, $\chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 ) = 4 . 1 8$ $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 4 1$ for Basque, and $\chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 ) = 6 . 2 4$ ${ \tt p } = 0 . 0 1 2$ for English. In contrast, students in G_TXT outperformed those in G_VID in the use of rebuttals in Spanish $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 ) = 4 . 0 4 3$ $\begin{array} { r } { \mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 4 4 , } \end{array}$ . No other comparison was significant.

Similarly, another Friedman's ANOVA showed significant differences between the three types of strategies (original, paraphrase or copy) identified in student writing. As can be seen in Table 3, paraphrasing was the main strategy used by students in the three anguages, followed by copying and, lastly, by original ides. Students in the sample rarely included original or copied information from the texts. The difference between paraphrasing and the other two strategies was significant in all languages (all $p < 0 . 0 0 1 $ ). The only combination that was not significant was the use of original and copied ideas in English $( p = 0 . 0 6 7 )$ . A between-groups KruskalWallis test showed that there was a statisticallysignificant difference in the use of copied segments in English between G VID and G_TXT, $\chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 ) = 4 . 2 0 6 4$ $p { = } 0 . 0 4$ , with a mean score of 3.947 ( $\mathrm { S D } { = } 3 . 8 7 _ { . }$ ) in G_VID and 1.333 ( $\mathrm { S D } { = } 1 . 8 7 $ in G_TXT. No other differences were found between the groups i sourcing strategies.Findings show that students in G_VID copied more from the sources in English than those in G_TXT.

5.2. Is there any difference in argumentation between Basque, Spanish and English? And in source use strategies?

To answer RQ 2, the frequencies of each argumentation element were counted and analysed in each of the languages, as well as the frequencies of sourcing strategies. Table 3 above summarises descriptive statistics for each variable. Levene's test was significant, indicating unequal variance for the groups, and, therefore, a non-parametric Friedman'stest was performed, followed by DurbinConover post hoc comparisons.

There were no statistically significant effects of language in the production argumentation elements, but post hoc pairwise comparisons showed some significant differences between language pairs. Students in the sample included more data in Basque than in English $( p = 0 . 0 2 7 )$ , but there was no significant difference between Basque and Spanish, and Spanish and English. Students produced more counterarguments in Spanish than in English $( p = 0 . 0 4 1 )$ , although there was no significant difference in the use of counterarguments between Basque and Spanish and Basque and English. Pairwise comparisons showed no differences between languages in the use of warrants or rebuttals.

In order to check for between-language differences in sourcing strategies non-parametric Friedman's tests were performed. There was a significant difference between languages in paraphrasing. $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 2 ) = 9 . 3 3 , p = 0 . 0 0 9 )$ I, and a marginally significant difference in the use of original ideas $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 2 ) = 5 . 9 4 2 , p = 0 . 0 5 2 )$ . There was not a significant difference between languages in the use of copied ideas $\left( p = \right.$ 0.581). Durbin-Conover post hoc comparisons were carried out to examine differences between language pairs. These comparisons showed greater use of original ideas in Spanish than in Basque $( p = 0 . 0 2 3 )$ and English $( p = 0 . 0 5 1 )$ , though no differences were found in the production of original ideas between Basque and English. Regarding the use of paraphrased ideas from the original sources, participants paraphrased less in English than in Basque $( p = 0 . 0 0 3 )$ and Spanish $( p = 0 . 0 1 9 )$ . The difference in the use of paraphrasing between Basque and Spanish was non-sigificant Pairwise comparisons showed no differences between languages in the use of copied information.

5.3. Do students use diffrent source use strategies to produce each argumentation element in Basque, Spanish and English?

To examine if students' source use strategies were similar across the four argumentation elements, the percentages of the three strategies used by the participants (copying, paraphrasing, and original ideas) were calculated for each of the four argumentation elements (data, warrants, counterarguments, and rebuttals) in the three languages.

As reported in Section 5.1, some argumentation elements (mostly warrants and rebuttals) were hardly used by students in the sample. We acknowledge that pertinent statistical analyses could not be performed due to the fact that not all texts included all argumentation elements. For example, as mentioned in Section 5.1, only $2 1 \%$ of the texts contained a rebuttal, and only one participant did include it in their three texts. Few participants included warrants $( 3 0 \% )$ or rebuttals $( 2 1 \% )$ in any of their texts, which would imply excluding those who did not produce them from the inferential analyses to answer this RQ. In order to perform inferential analyses with the corpus, even if scores were corrected or transformed, the results would always be unclear. In fact, even if the percentage of original warrants was superior to original datafrequencies, more data were produced overall and therefore, the results of the tests would not be reliable,as excluding the majorit of participants would not provide clear picture. Though the results may not be strong enough to be generalisable, descriptive statistics may help to answer this research question partially.

The proportion of each strategy per argumentation element was calculated and can be sen in Table 4. It was calculated by dividing the total counts of a particular element (e.g. all warrants produced by all students in Basque) by the number of that element when produced with a certain strategy (e.g. the number of all paraphrased warrants inall the texts in Basque). As can be observed, the percentages are similar across languages, with slight ifferences from one to the other. The results showed that paraphrasing was the most frequent strategy used by students in all argumentation elements $( 6 2 . 1 1 { - } 9 0 \% )$ . Copying was the second most common strategy in the sample in the case of data and counterarguments, which are the elements that students produced the most. However, this tendency was different i the case of warrants and rebuttals, where the use of original ideas was higher than that of copied ones. In the case of warrants, original ideas accounted for $2 6 . 3 1 \substack { - 3 0 . 5 6 \% }$ of the total, which presents a big difference with respect to data $( 3 . 5 0 { - } 8 \% )$ and counterarguments $( 2 . 9 0 { - } 7 . 7 3 \% )$ I. Interestingly, out of all the rebuttals that students produced, all of them were paraphrased $( 8 0 - 9 0 \% )$ or original $( 1 0 - 2 0 \% )$

# 6. Discussion

This study focused on how secondary education students incorporate information from different sources into their multilingual writing compositions in order to construct argumentative subject-specific texts. Following previous studies (Qin & Karaback, 2010; Crossey et l., 2022; Toumin, 1958), argumentation elements were analysed from a discursive perspective in order to identify claims, data, warrants, counterarguments and rebuttal in students' texts. The origin of each argumentation element was marked according to Plakans and Gebril (2013), identifying whether each element was an original idea or if it was borrowed (paraphrased or copied) from the source.

In line with previous literature (Plakans & Gebril, 2013; van Weijen et a., 2019; Sole et al., 2013), participants in the sample relied heavily on the sources using the information in the video and text to construct their writing. The sources were not used to support ther ideas but rather constituted the core of their texts (Plakans & Gebril 2012; Leki & Carson, 1997). In fat, many students in the sample did not include information outside the sources, although suggested to do so. However, i contrast to Watanabe (2001), participants mostly paraphrased and did not copy the information, which suggests that they were able to understand the sources, or that they were aware of plagiarism (Pecorari, 2013), although it is normall not a common concern in secondary education. In fact in the national context of the study, students in secondary education are not normall required to be \*mult-voiced" (Pecorari, 2013), and use and quote other sources and authors to defend their positions, since they normally study through textbooks, which can be perceived as more impersonal.

Table 4 Percentages of the use of each strategy in argumentation elements divided by languages.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="3"> Basque</td><td colspan="3"> Spanish</td><td colspan="3">English</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>p</td><td>c</td><td>0</td><td></td><td>c</td><td>0</td><td>p</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Data</td><td>4.11</td><td>83.09</td><td>12.80</td><td>8</td><td>74.75</td><td>17.25</td><td>3.50</td><td>75.08</td><td>21.42</td></tr><tr><td>Warrant</td><td>27.08</td><td>62.11</td><td>10.80</td><td>26.31</td><td>65.35</td><td>8.33</td><td>30.56</td><td>64.51</td><td>4.94</td></tr><tr><td>Counter.</td><td>7.73</td><td>73.90</td><td>18.37</td><td>2.90</td><td>82.01</td><td>15.09</td><td>3.33</td><td>74.10</td><td>22.57</td></tr><tr><td> Rebuttal</td><td>10</td><td>90</td><td>0</td><td>11.11</td><td>88.89</td><td>0</td><td>20</td><td>80</td><td>0</td></tr></table></body></html>

$\scriptstyle \mathbf { \dot { a } } _ { \mathbf { O } = }$ original, $\mathbf { P } =$ paraphrase, $\scriptstyle \mathbf { C } = \mathbf { c o p y }$

With respect to RQ 1, the results partiall corroborate the effect of input type, as some differences were found between G_VID and G_TXT. Previous studies have suggested diferences related to input modalities in sBW tass and that the processes activated in listening-to-write and reading-to-write are diffrent (Cai & Huang, 2023; Chan & Yamashita, 2022), although some processes .., comprehending and evaluating information, are common to both types of tasks (Zhu et al., 2016). This might also be the case in video-input tasks, in fact, results show that participants in G_VID used more data than those in G TXT, while those from G TXT used more rebuttal i their L1. The video input might have contributed to participants recalling information from the source (Cubilo & Winke, 2013; Cai & Huang, 2023) due to its clear narrative and including bimodal information (written text and audio), which might have helped in activating visual-spatial and episodic working memories (Michel e al., 2019; Kormos, 2012) and facilitate recalling information from the source (Kellgg, 1999 Cai & Huang, 2023). The lack of a clear narrative in the text might have elicited students selection and evaluation of information, which are more complex higher-order thinking skils (Afflerbach et al., 2015) and could potentially lead to more complex argumentative structures, such as using complex elements. There were significant differences in the amount of copied information in English between G_VID and G TXT, probably because of participants' lower proficiency in L3 English and the characteristics of audiovisual sources (Sole et al., 2013; Read, 1990). Consequently, due to their limited repertoire of lexical resource, participants resorted to the sources more for lexical and grammatical rtrieval in their 3 than in L1/L2 (Chau et al., 2022) instead of transforming the information. Interestingly, the students in G VID tended to mention the source by expresions such as in the video it s said, while there was not single reference made to the text inG T. This can probably be explained by th fact that students may have perceived the voice in the video as a person, and, therefore, given it an authorial status. In contrast the text may have been perceived as more impersonal without a clear author. Other analyses of the same corpus with other linguistic measures (.e., complexity, accuracy and fluency measures) might contribute to further explore across-input differences.

Regarding RQ 2, differences were found across languages. Students used more data in L2 Basque than in L3 English, and more counterargument i L1 Spanish than in L3 English. The lck of greater differences could be attributed to Cummins CUP (1980), which suggests that there are shared features among one's languages. In fact, the development of the academic language proficiency of a writer has been shown to develop simultaneously in al languages (Granados et al., 2021). The knowledge of argumentation as a cognitive discourse function (Dalton-Puffer, 2013) might be considered topic, disciplinary, procedural or strategic knowledge. Pre vious research has supported Cummins' LIH and CUP (1980), suggesting that knowledge is generall transferable and is shared across languages (Rinnert e l., 2016; Forbes & Fisher, 2018; Genesee, 2006). I line with van Weijen et al. (2019), the resuls of our study suggest that the production of argumentation elements is similar acros one's languages. There were no differences in argumentation between Basque and Spanish, which suggests that students' L1 and L2 are similar in proficiency due to the high amount of exposure to L2 Basque, the language of instruction. This might indicate that the immersion programme is successul in biliteracy development (Lorenzo & Rodriguez, 2014). In contrast to Cheong et al. (2021), there were no diferences in the use of complex argumentation elements between languages, neither in the use of rebuttals nor warrants.

Regarding source use trategies, as expected, similar pattens emerged across languages (vanWeijen et a., 2019; Chau et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2021b; Kato, 2018). The lack of differences in copying acros languages might sugest a shared strategic or procedural knowledge (Forbes & Fisher, 2018) that goes beyond separate languages or is transferred across them, or the nature of SBW as a crosslingustic construct (Chan & Yamashita, 2022; Zhu et al., 2021b). More originals were used in L1 than in L2 and L3, and paraphrasing was similar in L1 and L2, with fewer instances of paraphrasing being used in L3. These diffrences might probably be due to language proficiency, as participants may have th facilitating lexical resources in L tocreate original ideas, but not in their L2 or L3. Furthermore, this sugsts that they lack the neessary resources to properl transform ideas fromthe sources ino their wrtten texts in L3.

RQ 3 sought to analyse f students use of strategies dffered acrossargumentation elements. As stated by Chuang and Yan (2023), our study corroborated differences in sourcing strategies when producing argumentative structures. In line with Qin and Karaback (2010), simple and complex argumentation elements were identified in the corpus. Though paraphrasing was the main strategy used for all elements in all languages, simple elements elicited fewer original ideas and more copying than complex elements, with $2 6 . 3 1 \substack { - 3 0 . 5 6 \% }$ of the warrants and $1 0 { - } 2 0 \%$ of the rebuttals being original. Students' use of specific sourcing strategies, therefore, might be interconnected with the complexity of agumentation elements. In fact, writers may need to either reflect critically on the sources to provide n interpretation of information, or to be more creative and use their own ideas for the construction of ther texts. Furthermore, not a single rebuttal was copied from the source material, which might be explained by the very nature of the element since producing rebuttas requires the consideration of the views of both the writer and others so that refuting is completed (Liu & Stapleton, 2014).

# 7. Conclusions

The results of the present study have led us to conclude that diffrent input modalities may impact to some extent the written outcomes of a SW argumentative task in trilingual writing. Diffrent sub-processes might have been activated by the type of input. In addition, the lack of greater differences between languages in argumentation may hin a a similar development in students mastery of academic language in their three languages (Granados et al., 2021; Cummins, 1980), suggesting that immersion setings sucessuly develop students' L2 (Basque, in this case) and that argumentation might be transferable across languages (Cummins, 1980, 2021) This study has also found differences in the subject-specific strategies used to produce simple and complex argumentation elements, leading students to activate different cognitive processes at the different stages of argumentation.

Some limitations of the present study need to be acknowledged. The size of the sample was smal, and, therefore, findings may not be generalisable to all languages and contexs. Consequentl, RQ3 could not be statistically proven, and descriptive analyses were used. If sttistical analyses were to be used, this would require a arge number of students performing the sametask, and selecting those participants who had produced allargumentation elements. In addition, participants' working memory was not measured, which would have provided a clearer picture of the influence of the sources on the written production. Future research should measure participants working memory skill in different domains (e.g., visual or auditory, using tests such as n-back, visual cors or listening span tests to control for variabilit in working memory abilities. Difference in participants working memory skills cross modalities could have favoured their performance on the tasks with distinguishing input characteristics see for example Kam et al., 2020). The current study failed to capture participants independent writing, listning and reading skill before the sBW, which would be beneficial to explore the efect f independent skill on the task. Furthermore athough a counterbalanced order was used to control for text completion order, practice and language-proficiency efects could not be avoided. As previously suggested (Abrams, 2019), future research should further address how students incorporate information from different input modalites, which needs to be explored from different perspectives and with a variet of approaches. Processes might be examined using both quantitative and qualitative methods, such as keystroke logging, eye-tracking or smartpens to help identify what happens in the process of both producing argumentative elements and when borrowing from sources. Qualitative studies could help understand the writers decisions and check the differences between input types. Other product-oriented analyses (CAF measures, holistic asessment or Zhu's 4 Traits model) might shed light on the usefulnes of integrated tasks. It would also be of interest to analyse if these patterns occur similarly across secondary ation or higher ction prorams, a wellas writing  ther diclins such s social scices. Likwise, theffect of multilingualism could also be explored, for instance, as to whether language acquisition order, typology or proficiency influence a learner's SBW scores.

In spite of the aforementioned limitations, the results bear important pedagogical implications for multilingual education and writing pedagogy. Firs, the present study might shed light on the usefulnes of SBW tasks for integrating subject-specific content (in this case, science) and language into a single task,allowing for an integrated asssment of disciplinary knowledge and language (Llinares et al, 2012). Implementing SBW teaching and assessment in secondary education may serve to improve academic writing in secondary education, which would be beneficial for students in their future, as SBW is often used in higher or tertiary education. Teaching-learning approaches that focus on the interconnectedness of source use strategies and argumentation elements can be derived from the findings of this study, informing pedagogical approaches that instruct learners how to (differently) integrate information from various sources into their writing. Furthermore, similarities found in crosslingusiticargumentation skils and SBW strategies offer possibilities to use multilingual approaches such as Integrated Didactics of Languages (see Manterola et al., 2020), where studentscould receive multimodal inputs n thir L1 or L2, and then construct texts in L3. Finall, as suggested by Cai and Huang (2023), our study emphasises the importance of using ifferent input modalities in instructional setings for teaching purposes, which could facilitate learners' exposure to authentic input materials (both audiovisual and textual).

# Funding

This work was supported by the Basque Government [grant number PRE-E_2021_1_001 & IT1664-22] and by the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities [grant number PID2019-111655RA-100].

# Declaration of Competing Interest

None.

# Data Availability

The authors do not have permission to share data.

# References

Affrac     15    i 4 202 /g 10.1080/00405841.2015.1044367   
Arias-23.      in. online publication. https://doi.org/10.1515/eujal-2023-0022   
Cai . 23.    n     0. 10.1016/j.jslw.2023.101060   
Cai, N., & Wang, M. (2017). Effcts of input modality on L2 oral alignment. Modern Foreign Languages, 40(4), 518-528.   
Cadnas-C,  ko  y,  n  2023). hr  i  fr sd r fo g g Language Teaching Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688231216044   
C-a,     021  sch ti s wing aitive  a sive and effective methodology i secondary ducation (Advance online publication) Rading and Writing htps:/do.org/10.1007/11145-021-10191-0.   
enoz, J. 2023). inn the ae t.   d. rn t   sfo s autonomous communities (pp. 33-53). Edicions de la Universitat de Lleida.   
Chan  h .s,   
han,.  mri n i    /.g 10.1177/02655322221135025   
Chan, ., mhi, . (02). Inawting an itscrr:  mt-s. ing 54, ile 10662. hp/i.0.16/. asw.2022.100662   
Cha     n      e use and text quality. Frontiers in Psychology, 13, 01-20. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.914125   
heng,  f     n a independent reading cognitive skills. Reading and Writing, 31,779-811. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-017-9811-8   
Cheong,    , . (021) re-d tion  f of sble adc kill An ey st corig sod choo students' L1 and L2 writing. Sustainability, 132, 2869. https://doi.org/10.3390/su132212869   
hang, 3.i m   d iv wti.    ng 60, Article 101003. https://doi.org/10.1016/jjsw.2023.101003   
Coyle, D., & Meyer, O. (2021). Beyond CLIL: Pluriliteracies teaching for deper learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Pres.   
Crammond, J. (198). The uses and complexity of aument structure i expert and student peruasive writing. Writen Comunication, 15, 230-268.   
Crosley, ,    m 21.  n s wtin P  g o g, aay quality. Reading and Writing. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-021-10221 $- \mathbf { X }$   
Crossle,   .  y E   4() 1-34. https .17239/jowr-2022.14.01.01 taking. Language Assessment Quarterly, 10(4), 371-397. https://doi.org/10.1080/15434303.2013.824972   
r o    e, 23, 47-58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.06.002   
i,            i 018n practie ad aiitie r wig rm  in ish at uivsiti in hi.  f Son  win 39, 1-15. h/i.og0.1016/. jslw.2017.11.001   
Cumins, J. (1980). The exit and enty fallcy in ilingualdtion. ABE Joal, 4(3), 25-60. htp://doi.0rg/10.1080/08855072.1980.10668382   
Cummins, J. (2021). Rethinking the education of multilingual learners: A critical analysis of theoretical concepts. Multilingual Maters.   
Dalton-Pufer, . (2007). rse in conten-nd-angg-nated lng (CL cooms. Jon Bjamins. http:/oi.rg/10.1075/t.20   
on-Pfe . 13   iv i or Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(2), 216-253.   
Dalon-Pufr, . 16). iv re tio ig an inti l strct  . ,  ooe   .) Conceptualisingintgration inCLl and mullingual edcation (p. 29-54). Mulilingual Mater. htps://doi.org/10.21832/9781783096145-005.   
de Bruin , ra,  ai, J. 2017Th   f g rfcie. er n P, , 1 t/./10.389/ fpsyg.2017.00522   
Fores,  ir  8   sic fe n  d rt winds e 1(2. https://doi.org/10.1515/applirev-2018-0008.   
ia-  -   2     t  d exploratory case study. Porta Linguarum, (37), 123-142. https://doi.org/10.30827/portalin.vi37.15855   
e ,  e   -stic st  .)   n Language Learners (pp. 153-174). Routledge   
ranads,    2021).  for th in s  st  ir t in  CLL/ bilingual setting. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 25(8), 3005-3021.   
anads,    2) f a  n - o f ive academic language proficiency during sec0ndary sch00l. Language and Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/09500782.2022.2079951   
G, . e 01).    l A comparison study. Assessing Writing, 18(3), 218-238. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2013.05.002   
Hsieh C. vis 019 efft f l it n mi ist- k ema  . Pggou,  Bai d.), Go perspectives on language asssment rearch, thory, and practice (p. 96-107). Routledge. http:/doi.org/10.4324/9780429437922-7.   
zura, C., Co,, & Brart,  2014) xtal t t ray and eficiny as th Spanh vauly i. Pogca 35, 4966.   
m    .      i 32(2), 213-230. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344020000014   
Kato,  018.  thfrf  i i .  e, 1 /..539t v11n10p75   
Kellog, R T. (19. onns of working mry n text proctin. n M. nce . efery Eds.), Th cotive dnds f win (. 43-161) Amsterdam University Press.   
Kim, K 201 hud  List r dty ffcs in mici an xplicit e. h d  Jol, 103), 648664. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12583   
oros, . 012 f i f n2w f   900. //101/.02.09.03   
Lei I, o  (197).mely fe   dth iin  o   in it r. 0rerl, 11), 3969. https://doi.org/10.2307/3587974   
Lofer,  Brrma2012). cing xLE quck and vald xicl et for Adancd rs o ish ioMe, 4, 325-343. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-011-0146-0   
Li tii nti i k . System, 45, 117-128. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2014.05.005   
Llinares, A., Morton, T., & Whittaker, R. (2012). The roles of language in CLIL. Cambridge University Press.   
Lorezo  014  d if 2ie a a  iin in   47, 6472. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2014.09.016   
Loez 17       e   , (2) 177-197. https:/doi.org/10.1515/eujal-2017-0007   
Manchon, R. M. (Ed.). (2011). Learning-to-write and writing-to-learn in an additional language. John Benjamins.   
Manchon   021). 2 ig nd g lg. n RMhn . .), Th  h i d  qusin Second language acquisition and writing (pp. 1-7). Routledge.   
Manterola, az de G aa   mgre  200ar and x prtion odar cion tchi matrils ftions on an integrated didactics of languages, 26-3 Didacticae, 8. https://doi.org/10.1344/did.2020.8.26-39.   
ts     0 i  t conflicig information from multiplesoures. Cognition and Instruction 36(2), 119-138.https://doi.org/10.1080/0737008.2018.1425300   
Mayer,  (199).tima n: re w askig therit qsin. tiol s, 321) 19.s/i.og/0.120/153269532011   
Micel   01  r w   of econ Language Writing, 45, 31-45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2019.03.002 study. Second Language Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658320915501   
eon,   2 l t  i r  i  ng /. org/10.1007/s11145-021-10243-5.   
Orasita-di, 221.inh  wng stic ti a sti tie. l Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 25(6), 1-22. https:/doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2021.1894089 99(1), 167-180. https:/doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.99.1.167 10.1016/j.asw.2011.09.002 217-230. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2013.02.003   
Polias, J. (2016). Apprenticing students into science: Doing, talking & writing scientifically. Lexis Education.   
Qin, J. ak 010hes  t ti  4456. /..1016 j.system.2010.06.012   
Red . (190 P e  n a  wn t h r ic  , 109-11. /.g/.1016/08-4069000-   
RedBEDCA & AESAN 2024. Base de Datos Espanola de Composicion de Alimentos (BEDCA). (https://www.bedca.net/).   
Rinrt,  hi  2016 icoee a i wiing Mo  a., o f  d oen e Writing (pp. 365-386). De Gruyter Mouton. https://doi.org/10.1515/9781614511335-020. org/10.1177/13670069030070010301   
Shnahan   han, . (008.gry i  ts Rk t i. d o Rie, 71), 4059   
Sole, ,      13  n ai  th  th  a na written synthesis task. Written Communication, 30(1), 63-90. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741088312466532   
Stapon, .01). sg cril hn  h wingf J it s: s at o   airit. en Communication, 18, 506-548.   
wain,0   . ) halliday and vygotsky (pp. 95-108). Continuum.   
The jamovi project (2022). jamovi (Version 2.3) [Computer Software]. Retrieved from (https://www.jamovi.org).   
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge University Press.   
aeie    h 01.  u a io    win -ite ri nd Writing, 32, 1635-1655. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-018-9842-9   
andme v  Br t 00 f a ftie r  tg mtive and informative synthesis texts. Reading and Writing, 33(2), 239-266. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-019-09958-3   
VERBI Software. (2021). MAxQDA 2022 [computer software]. Berlin, Germany: VERBI Software (Available from maxqda.com.). University of Hawaii at Manoa].   
Wgl    113. org/10.1016/j.jslw.2012.03.004   
Wigate, .012)  g    wi i t  of s fc P, 1 45154./. 10.1016/j.jeap.2011.11.001   
Yng  an 012)    d isi   ly, 61) 80-103. https:/doi.org/10.1002/tesq.6   
Ye W.  . 3.    tg     l  t  es test performance (Advance online publication) Reading and Writing. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-023-10419-1.   
h, 100546. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2021.100546   
Zh,  i,   , Chg  Li 2016) g th eh  n is  istg-wig s n hee langgt   t   w .   3(, 67-85./. org/10.1080/15434303.2016.1210609   
h,   1 t    as ate writing assessments. Reading and Writing, 34, 49-78. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-020-10065-x

oberto Ari- h t at t   ie   f trst s h  f nm lingualism, disciplinary writing, language teaching and learning, and cognitive discourse functions.

Ana m  h   i.    i oe teaching and learning and disciplinary literacies.