# The spatial politics of gender in EAP classroom practice

Roslyn Appleby\*

The ELSSA Centre, University of Technology, Sydney, PO Box 123, Broadway, NSW 2007, Sydney, Australia

# Abstract

This paper explores some of the challenges faced by EAP teachers as they address gender issues that arise when teaching in a non-Western cultural context. It draws on interviews with four Australian teachers regarding their experiences in delivering EAP programs in East Timor as part of an international aid effort, and focuses on critical incidents in which gender was perceived as an issue in classroom practice. Through these incidents, we see the ways in which teachers navigated the competing claims of gender equity and cultural sensitivity in the pedagogic domain of the classroom. A spatial analysis is proposed as a means of exploring the teachers’ accounts and as a means of countering the temporal narratives of progress that shape conventional discourses of development, EAP and gender equality. The paper concludes that the teachers’ racial and economic position, and their status as cultural outsiders, affects the ways in which they can speak and act on issues of gender.

$^ { © }$ 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: English for academic purposes; Gender; Space; Teacher narratives

# 1. Introduction

Pragmatic approaches to EAP have traditionally meant that political issues of students’ and teachers’ subjectivities and lived experiences have received little attention in mainstream EAP research and practice, where traditional notions of context and relevance have mostly been concerned with acculturation to institutional expectations and discipline-specific written ‘products’ (Belcher, 2006, p.149). More recently, critical scholars in EAP have taken up an educational agenda that aspires to social and political engagement, critique and even transformation. This agenda assumes a broader, dynamic notion of context for EAP, and moves beyond concerns with institutional acculturation, towards an interest in relations between language, knowledge and power (Benesch, 2001; Pennycook, 1997; Singh & Doherty, 2004).

However, as Hyland and Hamp-Lyons (2002) noted in the first issue of this journal, EAP has ‘‘yet to seriously confront’’ the challenges that arise in relation to issues of power, and ‘‘effective classroom responses [to such challenges] are often constrained by the institutional contexts in which we work’’ (p.10). It is one aspect of this complex relationship between language, power and context that I seek to explore, by focusing on the challenges, responses and constraints experienced by EAP teachers as they negotiate incidents in which gender arises as a dynamic aspect of intercultural classroom life. Central to this discussion is an understanding of gender as constituted through discourses that produce and position subjects within contextually specific relations of power.

This paper draws on data from semi-structured interviews with four white, female EAP teachers, all L1 speakers of English, who were employed by Australian non-government organisations responsible for delivering development aid programs in East Timor. Elly1 and Dana, in their late 20s, taught EAP to university students in Dili, the capital city; Kate and Jane, in their mid 50s, taught EAP to in-service school teachers in a regional town, as part of a program sponsored by the Catholic church in Australia. My discussion of their accounts is inflected by my own contemporaneous experiences of teaching EAP in East Timor. The interview data are drawn from a larger research study (see Appleby, forthcoming) of EAP teachers’ experiences of living and working in contexts of international development2 where gender, race, economic status and national origins were salient dimensions of the hierarchies that structured daily life.

The range of languages used by the students in these EAP programs reflected East Timor’s complex colonial and linguistic heritage. The university students spoke one or more of the 19 national language varieties3 , and had been educated in Bahasa Indonesia as the language of instruction during the decades of Indonesian occupation (1975e1999). The Timorese teachers were accustomed to teaching in Bahasa Indonesia and, in addition to their national languages, some had knowledge of Portuguese, which remained as a legacy of an earlier era of Portuguese colonialism (early 1500se1974). At the time of this study, the language policy for East Timor as a newly independent state was the subject of vigorous debate, with the 2002 constitution eventually declaring Portuguese and Tetum (a national lingua franca) as co-official languages, and English and Indonesian as working languages. Nevertheless, popular demand for English had grown as a result of the large international community working in East Timor and using English as a common language. Although some of the students in these programs aspired to studying in an English speaking country at some time in the future, most used English to further their studies or professional activities in East Timor.

In this paper, teachers’ accounts of critical incidents are discussed in the light of several paradoxes that shape the negotiation of gender issues in the development classroom. The incidents are regarded as ‘critical’ in that they not only reveal something of the workings of gender relations in classroom life, but also point to certain contradictions that surface as a range of gendered discourses are played out in an intercultural EAP ‘contact zone’ (Pratt, 1992). As key sites in the global spread of English language and Western knowledge, EAP contact zones bear the legacy of ‘‘neocolonial practices’’, and the power relations produced in these sites are ‘‘reconstituted and contested in day-today pedagogic interactions’’ (Singh & Doherty, 2004, p.11e12). An aim of this study is to consider some questions arising from the teachers’ pedagogic interactions, in regard to the conflation of English and ‘civilised’ notions of gender equality, the division between public life and private experience, and the role of the EAP teacher in pursuing emancipatory politics.

# 2. Temporal and spatial politics in international development, EAP, and gender

The context of international development is, in many respects, different from the usual ‘First World’ location of many gender and language teaching studies. Nevertheless, it bears similarities with other contemporary EAP sites where diverse cultures interact, and where identification of appropriate cultural norms is open to question (Singh & Doherty, 2004). In order to better understand the perceptions and difficulties faced by teachers in the present study, I will outline here some aspects of international development that are relevant to the context in which they worked.

# 2.1. Time-oriented discourses

The discursive framework of international development, realised in mainstream, neoliberal development policies, establishes what I have called elsewhere a temporal narrative of progress (Appleby, 2005) that sustains notions of Western cultural, academic and linguistic superiority. According to this linear, time-oriented framework, ‘advanced’ Western nations have set an agenda of social and economic progress that can serve as a template for producing similar developments in nations classified as ‘less advanced’. Promoting gender equality as a feature of time-oriented social progress has also, in recent decades, been an important aspect of international development policies. Through ‘gender mainstreaming’, development organisations intend the goal of social progress towards gender equality to be incorporated into the design, delivery and evaluation of all development programs (Mazurana, Raven-Roberts, Parpart & Lautze, 2005; and see, for example, AusAID, 2007).

In contrast to the economic/social progress agenda of official development policies, critical scholarship suggests that international development risks serving as a site for the reproduction of historical, colonial conditions of inequality (Escobar, 1995). From this perspective, the discourses of development have produced a ‘Third World’ where people are defined in terms of deficiency, thereby justifying the intervention and improvements supposedly offered by ‘First World’ expertise. Similar neocolonial discourses have been identified in programs that propose First World solutions to perceived gender inequality, yet perpetuate essentialist notions of ‘Third World woman’ as the passive victim of patriarchy (Mohanty, 2003). Indeed, gender inequalities may be intensified where development programs occur in conjunction with military intervention, and male participants in combative roles dominate the social milieu (Mazurana et al, 2005).

In the case of East Timor, an extensive international development effort in recent years has been accompanied by military intervention which has, in turn, affected gender relations. Following centuries of Portuguese colonialism and decades of occupation by Indonesia, the East Timorese vote for independence in 1999 triggered a campaign of violence and destruction that prompted an international military response. Over succeeding years, through periods of political instability, the continuing international military and development presence has been seen by critical scholars as a new wave of patriarchal colonialism (Chopra, 2002). Thus, although Timorese women’s organisations have denounced a culture of patriarchy within their own communities, development ‘solutions’ and military interventions have themselves been viewed as problematic (La’o Hamutuk, 2001).

# 2.2. Spatial analysis

As a means of disrupting the linear, time-oriented discourses underpinning educational institutions and endeavours, I deploy a spatial analysis to frame my exploration of gender and EAP in this context. Associated with a ‘spatial turn’ in the social sciences, and influenced by Foucault’s (1984) spatial politics, a focus on space4 and spatiality (relations of power inherent in particular places) is intended to yield a more complex reading of social and political context that takes into account participants’ contingent, situated experience, and invites the emergence of subjugated knowledges (Massey, 1994). In its simplest form, the basic idea is that ‘‘who we are is intimately connected to where we are, and that places can be moral5 sites of power struggle, exclusion and prejudice’’ (Benwell & Stokoe, 2006, p.12).

The analysis I propose considers the ways in which social relations of gendered and racialised power are shaped by two broad, overlapping socio-spatial concepts which I outline here in simplified form. The first is the Western gendered division between public space, characterised as the domain of rationality and masculinity, and a subordinate private space, characterised as the domain of domesticity and femininity. This concept of the public domain has been mapped onto a vision of colonial space as the realm of heroic, masculine endeavour, where white women have occupied an ambiguous position: privileged by race, but relegated to the private sphere in ‘nurturing’ and ‘civilizing roles’ as teachers and nurses. The second refers to the way institutional spaces, such as medical, educational, military establishments, produce particular types of subjects who are endowed with differential authority. Thus, for example, when in the classroom, teachers are produced as subjects who are vested with certain powers, including the power to organise and control the classroom space. Both of these socio-spatial concepts carries a message about who ‘belongs’ in a particular space, and what type of behaviour is appropriate or inappropriate for participants in particular places. Taking these concepts together, I see the EAP classroom in the context of international development, with its legacies of patriarchal coloniality, as a site where complex relations of power are played out.

Myriad contradictions surface as teachers and students negotiate and contest these socio-spatial concepts in their everyday pedagogical interactions. My discussion will focus on several such contradictions, or spatial paradoxes, that emerged in this study. These concern the tension between visions of gender equality and cultural sensitivity in a site where competing ‘First World’ and ‘Third World’ feminisms come into play (Mohanty, 2003), and where white women may be implicated in the paternalistic, colonial discourses of development (Wells & McEwan 2004); the discomforts of the ‘Western’ teacher, displaced in the ‘Third World’ (neocolonial) contact zone; the interaction in the classroom between public institutional space and personal private space; and the tension between authority vested in the teacher and authority devolved in more democratic or nurturing student-centred pedagogies. These paradoxes pose critical challenges for the EAP classroom in development contexts, where Western teachers are charged with a complex institutional agenda: on the one hand, the task of acculturating students to (foreign) academic norms; at the same time, the task of advancing principles of gender equity, while remaining mindful of the potential cultural (and feminist) imperialism associated with the teaching of English.

# 3. Critical incidents in EAP, gender and institutional authority

I turn now to a discussion of how the female teachers in my research context perceived gender as an aspect of their language teaching practices. None of the teachers professed to focus on gender as an issue, confirming Sunderland’s (2000) observation that gender rarely figures in language teachers’ reflections on classroom practice. Gender nevertheless emerged in narratives of certain events where it was tied in with other axes of difference such as ethnicity, economic status and nationality. In my exploration of teachers’ accounts, I focus on how female teachers negotiated questions of authority, cultural difference, and gender in the language classroom and beyond. Rather than demonstrating a singular argument or solution, these stories point to the very complexity of an institutional space where different cultures and expectations of authority and gender intersect.

# 3.1. Elly: gender, authority and nurture

Ros: Were there any issues or experiences related to gender that came up in your teaching?

Elly: OK, gender wise [.] a minority of students in the class were women, and they tended to defer to the blokes, in the sense that the guys’d get on the computer [for writing practice] and just tap away and the women’d just sit back a little bit. But also, the women were often also running households at home and trying to feed kids and doing all that sort of stuff as well [.]

We instituted a half-half rule, so when half time was up they would change seats [at the computer], so most of them would go with that. A couple of guys would hang on and hang on and hope that I wouldn’t notice and the girls wouldn’t say anything. And I’d just go over and chuck ’em off their chairs and put the women in the seat.

In classroom activities where access to educational resources was seen as inequitable, Elly felt comfortable in exercising authority to oppose what she saw as relatively straightforward examples of gender imbalance, reorganising the classroom space and time to enable greater equality. This authority could be seen as a product of the mutual constitution of social and spatial relations within the institution and the classroom, where the power to author spatial control is vested in the teacher (C. Luke, 1996). However, when reflecting on these interventions, Elly pointed to some of the doubts that troubled her in this simple exercise of authority.

Like many of her colleagues, Elly had distanced herself from the patriarchal relations she perceived in the development context, where gender, racial and economic hierarchies characterised interactions between the international development community and Timorese communities. In her teaching position she had expressed a desire to break down the hierarchies that positioned her above her students, and to establish a more democratic pedagogical relationship. In this desire to be ‘in there, proving my commitment to them’, Elly demonstrated her identification with a nurturing pedagogy that has emerged in the ‘progression’ from an earlier era of authoritarian, patriarchal, teachercentred discipline, towards a more ‘natural’, maternal, learner-centred model of teaching (Jones, 1990; McWilliam, 1999). While this approach sanctions increased student-centred authority in the classroom, there is the risk that unacceptable behaviour by students in the classroom may continue unchallenged by the teacher (Ellsworth, 1989). By controlling access to resources in the classroom, Elly enacted a more teacher-centred agenda, using her institutional authority to act in favour of ‘‘feminist normative visions of ‘the good’ and socially just’’ and, with the institution of rules for appropriate behaviour, to lead students towards a supposedly more ‘enlightened’ worldview (C. Luke, 1996, p.302).

Nevertheless, for Elly, the possibility that the imposition of gender-equality practices may contradict Timorese cultural norms led to ‘all sorts of contradictions in my head [.] I don’t know the answer to this one. This is like a cultural relativism versus human rights argument, and I never know what to think’. Reflecting on this dilemma, Elly drew on her Marxist ideology. She reasoned that eventually gender equality would evolve in East Timor due to ‘social and economic transformations’ in the ‘phases of development’, thus viewing women’s development within the framework of teleological progress. For now, she acknowledged that foreign teachers’ introduction of gender-affirmative, equal opportunity practices may well have achieved little in terms of addressing the underlying cultural and economic structures that hold women in a particular position within a society:

I think that introducing some of those ideas, whether they get adopted now by, say, Timorese communities or not, is as much of an intervention as can be made. [.] But it doesn’t surprise me at all that, you know, that the [international agencies] withdraw and the village groups go back to their traditional ways, because none of the social structures have changed.

In this sense, the teacher was caught between public policy rhetoric that might insist on a formalised meaning of equality and access, and cultural structures that were assumed to be organised along different lines. Of course, as the gender dichotomies within the international development community demonstrated, at any stage of economic development it is characteristically women who are working, studying, ‘running households at home and trying to feed kids and doing all that sort of stuff as well’. In both developing and developed societies, women maintain responsibility for the domestic/reproductive role of society despite gaining access to the public domain of productive labour.

# 3.2. Kate: gender and culture

Elly’s authority to organise the space of the classroom according to liberal ideals of gender equity was apparently received with only mild resistance, as some of her male students lingered in their seats. However, greater difficulties arose where the gendered meanings of spaces outside the classroom interacted with the educational domain, where issues of gender equality confronted issues of perceived cultural difference, and where the public/private division of gendered space intersected. The EAP discourses that Kate drew on were those that presented Western language teaching qualifications and methods as more advanced than those practiced in East Timor, thus validating the role she took up as a Western expert assisting the progress of development. The demonstration of ‘modern’ teaching methods for EAP was the primary organising principle of her lessons, with elements arising from the immediate context, such as issues relating to gender or cultural difference, providing a background for the lesson sequence.

Kate’s lessons were mostly designed to demonstrate a mixture of text types and teaching methods, drawing on genre approaches that have been influential in a strand of critical literacy teaching in Australia. Such approaches claim to empower marginalised students through explicit instruction in the ‘powerful’ forms of writing and speaking; however, they can tend to neglect local contingencies and be conservative of prevailing (externally imposed) norms and hierarchies (A. Luke, 1996). For one particular lesson, Kate ‘invited [the students] to all come to the house where we [expatriate teachers] were living and I got all the resources and we made pancakes’:

We did it as a recount of our own experience, a language experience approach, and then converted it to a procedure thing, a recipe, for Shrove Tuesday [a Christian celebration], which turns out is a big deal up there [in East Timor].

Since the teaching method was to be ‘hands-on’ and ‘experiential’, the class had shifted from the conventional classroom to the domestic space of the home, a move that raised particular aspects of the gendered meanings of space. In this account the teacher’s authority to organise the teaching and learning space of the classroom was carried over into the domestic space of the home:

I made a little bit of a cross-cultural faux pas, with insisting that everybody had to participate at all levels and that included the men washing up. [.] Carlos’s eyes got as big as saucers, ‘You want me to do the washing up?!’

At this point, with Carlos indicating his resistance to Kate’s directions, a number of different cultural discourses could have been invited into the discussion, and formed the basis of open inquiry. Considering that the cultural politics of Timor were at this point a relative unknown for the teacher, these might have included inquiries about patterns of interaction in Timorese domestic space or, since this event was situated in relation to a religious festival, the patterns of gender played out in Timor as a deeply Catholic country. Yet, in Kate’s recollection, only one cultural perspective was made available:

I said [flippantly] ‘yeah, everybody can have a go’ [laughs]. So I just made the point that if you’re doing this sort of thing you just have it as an across the board rule that everybody has to wash their hands, everybody has to have some hands-on experience and participate, and that includes the cleaning up, and you don’t get to- I said this is an English lesson, so although maybe it’s culturally inappropriate in Timorese society, if we’re exploring English and Australian styles of education it’s something to explore.

So I didn’t impose it that it was better, I usually- and I probably told them that line too that, [when I was teaching] in Taiwan I very strongly said that it wasn’t Western education practice or business practice was better than their style, but I wanted them to know how to eat with a knife and fork as well as with chop sticks, and to choose when it was appropriate to do it either way. So that got over a few humps in Taiwan, and I think I used the same story up there [in East Timor]. But I- at the time I didn’t realise how strongly ingrained it was that a man would never do the washing [up].

Within a liberal framework of equality (‘everybody has to .’) and tolerance towards difference (‘it wasn’t Western education . was better’), Kate’s accounts seems to imply a set of generalised cultural assumptions: about gender equality being synonymous with English language communities; about gender inequity being located in ‘other’ cultures; and about the freedom of individual choice. Presented through a singular authoritative speaking position, such generalisations risk reproducing a temporal narrative of progress that implies a moral hierarchy between ‘the West’ and ‘the rest’. It is these meanings that need to be addressed if English language teaching is to resist the racist and classist ‘civilising legacies’ of English language work (Schenke, 1991). As critical scholars have pointed out, the homogenous construction of ‘Third World’ women and men as subjects of patriarchy based on ‘‘less rational and enlightened cultural norms’’ maintains the ‘‘superiority of the West’’, diminishes the significance of race, class and nation, particularly their relation to colonial heritage, and assumes that Western women are liberated and in control of their own lives (Mohanty, 2003, p. 41).

In this incident, the balance between norms of gender equality and cultural sensitivity became more difficult as teacher and students moved outside of the classroom to a non-institutional domestic space, and the requirement for the students’ bodily, hands-on performance of gender seemed to provoke a degree of resistance. The invocation of cultural appropriacy also opened questions of which cultural context is assumed to be relevant, and whose cultural norms should apply, leaving a rather shaky connection between the language lesson and context of use. These sticky areas leave the teacher in a difficult intersection, at the boundary between Western notions of gender and the domain of cultural sovereignty that remains ‘unknowable’ when opportunities for interrogation and inquiry are bypassed.

A way forward might start with an exploration ‘spatial practices’ (de Certeau, 1984) that resist universalist narratives of progress and univocal, authorised versions of how spaces are to be used. Spatial practices are those that engage with the multiplicity of stories and memories in any context or place, and may emerge when students (and teachers) are invited ‘‘to present their own stories, on their own terms, and through their own eyes’’ (Asher & Smith Crocco, 2001, p.135). Opening up inquiry into situated, gendered experiences could highlight, on the one hand, a less than ideal domestic situation in the teacher’s Australian home location, where women continue to spend much more time in unpaid domestic work than do men (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2006). Alternatively, a closer look at the immediate intercultural, development context of Timor would have demonstrated how gender is entangled with other dimensions of difference in the domestic domain. My own observations in expatriate houses revealed that white teachers, whether men or women, never did the washing up: this was a task assigned to the Timorese domestic workers who performed this labour for expatriate professionals while they, in turn, worked in the public domain. It seems that in this intercultural context, the salient hierarchies relevant to the division of labour were racial and economic rather than gendered. These diverse experiences of domestic space would seem to offer fruitful places for inquiry, for disrupting colonial legacies, and developing critical insights and agency amongst both teachers and students.

# 3.3. Dana: gender and pedagogical order

While most of the teachers assumed the institutional authority to control the space of the classroom, the performance of authority was nevertheless contingent; as we have seen in Elly and Kate’s experience, pedagogical authority relied on student consent. In Dana’s experience, the teachers’ authority was openly contested by one male student’s behaviour, and tempered by her awareness that she was an outsider on someone else’s turf.

In the campus where Dana’s program was located, the majority of students were young, politically active males, and had been involved in the fight for Timorese liberation. They had lobbied international agencies to provide an English language program to support their tertiary studies and had also, in the hiatus that followed the Indonesian withdrawal, been granted control of the site where the program was conducted. In this context, several teachers commented that they modified their usual performance of authority in consideration of their own status as outsiders teaching in a cultural space where students exercised considerable agency. For Dana, the youngest of the female teachers, the experience of teaching in the student-controlled campus was particularly unsettling. Her story demonstrates how the conventions that prescribe appropriate authority in the space of the classroom were disturbed by the unexpected eruption of performances that, from the teacher’s point of view, belonged outside the classroom, but were enabled by the gendered relation between the young female teacher and young male students.

As a relatively recent university graduate, Dana expressed a sense of being out of place in a position of authority on he campus: ‘I found the whole situation of being there pretty tricky’.

I remember walking in on that first day and it feeling a little bit um, intimidating, and um . I don’t know . on the one hand it was great to be working in the university, but it was weird to be um, like, the university administration, where you know, we’d been used to- I’d been used to being the student when I was on campus, so it was kind of weird to be in a different role.

Her sense of place was further disrupted as she became aware of the political implications of the teaching role. Based on her experience of teaching EAP in Australia, she believed that politics did not belong in the classroom, but because of the contested nature of the physical site she gradually became aware of the political position she occupied:

I remember those first couple of meetings we had [between teachers and student leaders] and there were problems with organisation and all that kind of stuff. That was quite sort of disorienting, ’cause we were there to just teach and there were all these political problems and that was sort of quite- was a little bit difficult at the start.

The teacher’s unease culminated in an incident in her classroom where one male student, angry with the perceived misadministration of the program, stood up in class to make a public declaration. The long list of complaints included one accusation that Dana felt was ‘totally justified’: that the students ‘should have been taught in Indonesian’, by Indonesian-English bilingual teachers, since this was the language of instruction most familiar to the students. As a monolingual language teacher, Dana saw herself as the victim of institutional and disciplinary policies that favoured ‘native’ speakers of English:

I felt horrendous. I felt attacked. And pretty kind of freaked out. I found it was very hard not to take it on personally as a criticism of my teaching, ’cause there I was teaching in English, you know, because I’d been put in that position.

Dana suspected that the student’s challenge to her authority was related to a history of involvement in student politics and ‘fighting the Indonesians’. This ‘culture of political activism’ had been transferred into the classroom but, in her view, ‘it was not the appropriate forum to raise the issues that he was raising’. An example, perhaps, of learnercentred democracy gone too far? As Dana’s sense of institutional authority slipped, the male student’s challenge recalled the sense of gendered embodiment and vulnerability she had experienced in the militarised environment outside the classroom: ‘I always find that as a young female teacher that you always get challenged a bit more, because of your gender and because of your age’.

I don’t think he would have done that in [a male teacher’s] class for example. And you know, I think I was less confident at that point too, so as soon as you’ve got a young female teacher who isn’t maybe quite as confident as, say an older male teacher, sometimes that can be tricky.

Following this incident Dana’s level of comfort, and related expectations of control in the classroom, appeared to be compromised by the fear of potential challenges from her male students. Although Dana had previously seen thorough lesson planning as a means of securing control in the classroom this space now became one of latent threat and uncertainty:

I found it difficult to relax with the student, $I . . . J$ and you know, there were times when I was a little bit, um, a little bit wary of what was going to happen next, um, that was mainly with the male students, some of the younger male students.

In this space, simultaneously constituted by the weight of educational authority, by gendered hierarchies, and by a student politics of liberation struggles, who gets to be ‘standing up in class and doing the speech’?

The incident seems to signal a confrontation between the ‘normal’ male-dominant gendered hierarchy and the pedagogical hierarchy between female teacher and male student. In such events, there is a ‘‘point of confusion’’ that results from trying to think the gender relation (‘male-female games’) and the pedagogical relation (‘student-teacher games’) at the same time (Gallop, 1995, p. 85). In such a challenge, Gallop suggests that the ‘‘awkward question of sex’’ arises: the sexed bodies of teacher and student are materialised, and the assumed institutional authority of the teaching position is compromised by the reduction of the teacher to the space of her sexed body. As Gallop wryly comments: ‘‘However much the teacher might dream of divesting her- or himself of authority so as to get closer to the female student, she or he clearly does not want it taken away by the insubordinate male student’’ (Gallop, 1995, p. 80).

In this context the added complication of the teacher being a cultural and political outsider, rather than in a position of institutional ownership and control, further confused what could be considered appropriate in this contested space. If we see the student’s performance as a challenge to the traces of cultural/linguistic imperialism in the structuring of the educational program (for example, in favouring English-only teaching practices), our focus shifts away from gender and the bodies of the individual female teacher and the individual male student, and turns to the location of both within international English language teaching and development policies and practices that disadvantaged both male and female teachers and students.

In a contrasting narrative of shifting authority, Dana related an incident in which another group of students at the university initiated a spontaneous ‘discussion on Timor and what was the future, problems that Timor is facing and solutions. And that was a great class that was totally like, um unplanned, an unplanned class that just took a direction because we were talking about it and it was interesting.’ This discussion also arose from students’ dissatisfaction with a development agenda controlled by international organisations, and yet it offered for Dana a more productive engagement across difference. Relinquishing her own desire for a class controlled by teacher planning, Dana stepped back as students took the floor; she saw herself neither as the teacher-in-authority providing technical instruction in ‘‘the mechanics of learning a language’’, nor as a victim of masculine anger. Rather, she was a ‘‘special guest’’, a witness who could listen to students’ concerns and proposals to shape a different future. In a landscape that was overrun with ‘masculinised’, expatriate plans for development, this forum facilitated students’ agency to construct and embody their own plans for a new nation, moving towards a critical engagement between language and a local spatial politics.

# 3.4. Jane: gender in public and private space

Like Dana, Jane found her capacity to exercise authority was subject to student consent and spatial limitations. Her experiences in an EAP professional development program indicated the complex movement of gender between a public, institutional space of the school, and a private space of home and family.

In the [class] I had a woman who- she came in one day with a black eye and word had it that her husband had bashed her, but it was very much, ‘Don’t talk about it, don’t mention it’. [.] She came in and she was verythere were two women and one sort of protected the other, like, she kind of slid into the seat, [although she normally] never sat to the back of the room, she was always at the front, and she and this friend sat up the back, close to the window. I guess from body language, I knew she had been abused. [.] The one that had been abused was sitting against the wall, so the other one- so there was no way that I could get around her.

Jane felt her students actively separated from the classroom space those issues she assumed arose from genderrelated difficulties in their personal lives. In a class of students she described as ‘quiet’ and less ‘politically active’, her account of this event suggested how the students used the organisation of space within the classroom to keep private issues secluded from the institutional gaze. This created uncertainty for the teacher in knowing whether or how to acknowledge the situation:

Jane: I certainly needed to go back to the college [administration], back to the [person in charge] and say, ‘What do I do, how do I deal with this? Or don’t I? Or, what is it?’ [.]

Ros: So how did you decide to deal with it?

Jane: Um, I didn’t. I didn’t like myself for not doing anything, um, and- but I did speak about it, not about it [in class], I sought guidance in it.

Jane’s deliberations indicated a pull towards nurturing discourses in which the teacher felt responsibility to extend her pedagogical interest into the private domain of family life. Her institutional inquiries confirmed suspicions that her student had been identified as a victim of domestic violence; however, her pedagogical scrutiny risked aligning her with an intrusive institutional agenda of social monitoring and regulation. Jane deliberated various options with another expatriate development worker:

Well okay, what can you do? You can say, ‘You need to go somewhere’, [but] where does this woman go when this happens? Um, there is nowhere for her to go. You can say, ‘Come here’ [to my house], and then you havethen you are- you don’t know culturally what you’re doing.

Engaging with students’ lived experience required a need for sensitivity in the balance between teachers’ authority and student privacy, between the institutional, panoptic spaces of the classroom and the private worlds that students may not want to have colonised by the institutional gaze. As professional practitioners of EAP and as cultural outsiders, most teachers, like Jane, avoided explicitly raising gender as a topic for discussion in their classroom teaching, and instead allowed students to regulate the extent and the ways in which it was explicated.

Unlike Kate’s story, Jane’s account does not confine the problem in question to a specific culture or national location, thereby avoiding the implication that gendered violence was a ‘Third World’ problem amenable to Western solutions. The teacher’s deliberations suggested how gender relations linked the spaces of home, community and classroom, demonstrating how the social, cultural and spatial aspects of the dilemma were mutually constituted. Yet, despite this intersection with the classroom, the boundaries maintained by the students limited the teacher’s authority and involvement in out-of-classroom experiences, and in turn constrained her authority within the classroom to approach a significant issue of gender relations. These constraints were personally frustrating and professionally problematic, given the intertwining of language and context, the complex positioning of female teachers within foreign social networks (for example, Simon-Maeda, 2004), and policies that encourage the incorporation of gender equality strategies in development programs (AusAID, 2007). Although the public and private domains do intersect in the classroom, negotiating the line that divides the two is a challenging balancing act for teachers of EAP.

To engage with the complexity of factors at play without breaching students’ privacy, Jane might have taken up the work of autobiography (Schenke, 1991), relocated in the contact zone of development. Jane’s experiences outside the classroom, had induced a sense of gendered spatial restriction and fearfulness: on the streets and on the beaches, female teachers had been exhorted e primarily by male expatriates e to modify their dress, only venture into public space in pairs, and stay home at night. Sharing these personal, situated experiences could potentially have supplied a rich source of gender-focused discussion that drew on the cultural and political perspectives and expertise of students.

# 4. Conclusion

In the teachers’ narratives, we can begin to see some of the challenges that face teachers when attending to gender as a dynamic dimension of their intercultural EAP practice. The paradoxes evident in their narratives indicate some of the contradictory discourses within which the language teacher must perform, working within a framework that confers institutional authority, yet responding to a call to democratise the classroom; working against perceived gender inequalities, while remaining sensitive to cultural difference, and to the heterogeneity within that cultural difference. Although international development policies that frame the teachers’ work propose an ideal temporal narrative of progress for gender equality, the teachers’ dilemmas and difficulties highlight a challenge to the imposition of Western feminist norms in other cultural contexts, and are evidence of a practice that comprises significant complexities and contradictions. The relative detachment of the classroom from the world beyond allowed the teacher, in some instances, to establish certain ‘gender rules’ applicable to the contained space of the classroom, but this authority did not necessarily extend to an engagement with cultural practices of gender as they were experienced in the world outside the classroom. For most of these teachers in the development context, it was not simply a matter of acting with authority to help their students towards enlightenment (C. Luke, 1996) or to develop intercultural ‘competence’ in gender issues (Norton & Pavlenko, 2004). Rather, their pedagogical practice was a matter of working in a borderland that was inscribed with strong but contradictory demands for teachers to join the struggle for ‘knowable’ human rights, and simultaneously to respect an ‘unknowable’ local cultural politics. Although teachers may be able to take up the authority conferred by the institution, their privileged position in racial and economic politics of difference, and their status as cultural outsiders, constrains the ways in which they can speak and act on issues of gender.

In Elly’s and Kate’s stories, I focused on accounts of teachers’ perceptions and performances of gendered authority, in the first instance located in the conventional public space of institutional EAP education, and in the second event, crossing into the domestic space. While the authority to organise classroom space and time to ensure gender equality in access to resources appeared to be relatively unproblematic in the first case, the physical shift from the classroom to the domestic domain potentially opened up more difficult questions of cultural difference and the presumed knowability of gendered meanings in other spaces. The transfer of the teacher’s institutionally conferred authority raised questions about the privilege of a foreign ‘expert’ to ascribe the appropriate norms and gendered meanings within another cultural context for EAP. The spatial shift from public to private, and across cultural boundaries, thus opens a difficult area for teachers as local gender relations become an object of improvement, potentially enabling the relics of colonial hierarchy to be reinscribed in the civilising legacies of English language work.

Far from describing a linear progress towards emancipatory goals, Dana’s and Jane’s accounts demonstrated how teaching spaces were co-constructed through the various gendered and racialised relations and meanings brought to the classroom by teachers and students. As outsiders to East Timorese politics, history and culture, the teachers’ authority was relational and dependent, tied up with territoriality, students’ agency in contesting spatial meanings, and rights to ownership and privacy. Challenges to teacher authority to control the pedagogical space and to fix gendered meanings were evident in the teachers’ narratives, and highlight the extent to which the teachers’ authority is dependent not only on the institutional location of the classroom, but also on the cooperation of students. Students’ contestation of authority was expressed in various embodied performances, with a reluctance to relinquish seating positions, with ‘eyes as big as saucers’, in standing up to deliver a speech, with a shielding of bodies to prevent teacher access. Gendered meanings were entangled with culturally and contextually embedded patterns of public and private space that also limited the authority of the First World teacher to institute normative visions of social justice. The authority of the female teacher was structured in a complex set of power, gender and knowledge relations within the classroom, and between the classroom and communities beyond the classroom walls.

While these challenges to the female teachers’ authority were frustrating in some cases, they also potentially opened the way to greater awareness of the struggle over multiple differences inscribed within the classroom and in the context outside the classroom, and provoked several of the teachers to reflect on the limits of First World pedagogical practice in confronting gender issues. In these difficult circumstances, rather than rushing to a quick success by advancing principles of gender equality derived from a position of supposed cultural superiority, there is value in ‘‘remaining open and vulnerable’’ to ‘‘what is not, or cannot, be fully known and controlled’’ (Ellwood, 2006, p. 68), staying within the grey area of uncertainty. To do this, we might begin by framing gender within a specific postcolonial context, and ask: what are the effects on gendered embodiment and spatiality of being in the contact zone of development? This then entails opening a space for reflection and questioning, and an exploration of the ways in which gender and other dimensions of difference are played out in students’ experiences and perceptions; and an exploration of teachers’ own gendered, yet ambiguously complicit, experiences in the contact zones between communities engaged in development. In either case, teachers and students together need to step outside the classroom, physically or symbolically, to engage with the way gender is taken up in the social, economic and political visions and performances of development as a postcolonial, intercultural process.

# Appendix: Transcription codes

[.] - some original text omitted . - pause

[text] - not stated by interviewee, but inserted by researcher to ensure clarity of meaning   
text- - speaker self-interrupts   
text - indicates emphasis by speaker   
[text]- includes description of the non-verbal (laughter and gesture)

# References

Appleby, R. (2005). The spatiality of english language teaching, gender and context. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Technology, Sydney.   
Appleby, R. Time, space and gender: English language teaching in international development, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, forthcoming.   
Asher, N., & Smith Crocco, M. (2001). (En)gendering multicultural identities and representations in education. Theory and Research in Social Education, 29(1), 129e151.   
AusAID. (2007). Gender equality in Australia’s aid program e why and how. Canberra: Australian Agency for International Development.   
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2006). How Australians use their time. Available from: http://www.abs.gov.au. Accessed 09.04.08.   
Belcher, D. (2006). English for specific purposes: teaching to perceived needs and imagined future in worlds of work, study, and everyday life. TESOL Quarterly, 40(1), 133e156.   
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes. Marwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Benwell, B., & Stokoe, E. (2006). Discourse and identity. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.   
de Certeau, M. (1984). The practice of everyday life. Berkley: University of California Press.   
Chopra, J. (2002). Building state failure in East Timor. Development and Change, 33(5), 979e1000.   
Ellsworth, E. (1989). Why doesn’t this feel empowering? Working through the repressive myths of critical pedagogy. Harvard Educational Review, 59, 297e324.   
Ellwood, C. (2006). On coming out and coming undone: sexualities and reflexivities in language education research. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 5(1), 67e84.   
Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering development: The making and unmaking of the third world. Princeton: Princeton University Press.   
Foucault, M. (1984). Space, knowledge, and power. In P. Rabinow (Ed.), The Foucault reader (pp. 239e256). New York: Pantheon.   
Gallop, J. (1995). The teacher’s breasts. In J. Gallop (Ed.), Pedagogy: The question of impersonation (pp. 79e89). Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.   
Hyland, K., & Hamp-Lyons, L. (2002). EAP: issues and directions. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1, 1e12.   
Jones, D. M. (1990). Genealogy of the urban schoolteacher. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), Foucault and education (pp. 57e77). London: Routledge.   
La’o Hamutuk, & The East Timor Institute for Reconstruction Monitoring and Analysis. (2001). Women and the reconstruction of East Timor. La’o Hamutuk Bulletin, 2(5). Available from: http://www.laohamutuk.org/bulletin.html. Accessed 02.01.07.   
Luke, A. (1996). Genres of power? Literacy education and the production of capital. In R. Hassan, & G. Williams (Eds.), Literacy in society (pp. 308e338). London: Longman.   
Luke, C. (1996). Feminist pedagogy theory: Reflections on power and authority. Educational Theory, 46(3), 283e302.   
Massey, D. (1994). Space, place and gender. Cambridge: Polity Press.   
Mazurana, D., Raven-Roberts, A., Parpart, J., & Lautze, J. (2005). Gender, conflict, and peacekeeping. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.   
McWilliam, E. (1999). Pedagogical pleasures. New York: Peter Lang.   
Mohanty, C. T. (2003). Feminism without borders: Decolonizing theory, practicing solidarity. Durham and London: Duke University Press.   
Norton, B., & Pavlenko, A. (2004). Addressing gender in the ESL/EFL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 38(3), 504e514.   
Pennycook, A. (1997). Vulgar pragmatism, critical pragmatism, and EAP. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 16(4), 253e269.   
Pratt, M. L. (1992). Imperial eyes: Travel writing and transculturation. London: Routledge.   
Schenke, A. (1991). The ‘will to reciprocity’ and the work of memory: fictioning speaking out of silence in E.S.L. and feminist pedagogy. Resources for Feminist Research, 20, 47e55.   
Simon-Maeda, A. (2004). The complex construction of professional identities: female EFL educators in Japan speak out. TESOL Quarterly, 38(3), 405e436.   
Singh, P., & Doherty, C. (2004). Global cultural flows and pedagogic dilemmas: teaching in the global university contact zone. TESOL Quarterly, 38(1), 9e42.   
Sunderland, J. (2000). Issues of language and gender in second and foreign language education. Language Teaching, 33, 203e223.   
Wells, J., & McEwan, T. (2004). Gender mainstreaming: moving from principles to implementation. Development Bulletin, The Australian Development Studies Network, ANU, 64, 31e33.

Roslyn Appleby is a Senior Lecturer at the University of Technology, Sydney, where she teaches and coordinates language and literacy programs within several faculties. Her research focuses on postcolonial and feminist perspectives in international English language education.