Book review

Critical Thinking in Academic Writing: A Cultural Approach, Pu Shi (Ed.). Routledge, London and New York (2022). ix + 173 pp., 120 (hardcover), ISBN 978-1-032-03882-7

It is essential for students and teachers f L2 writing to understand the intricate connection between writing and critical thinking (CT) For this purpose, Crial thinking in acadmic witig a cl aroch, y Shi Pu, offer lanuag teacher  flexible framework to provide intruction on CT strategies explicitly and tacticall in the process of teaching L2 academic writing. Critical language awarenes specialists and researchers wil find this book empowering as it lays out methods for teaching CT i atransformative and socially active manner while addressing CT from a global, culturally infused viewpoint.

Pu's involvement in CT within Western academic setings motivated her to write this textbook because CT "was one of the most important criteri for evaluating the quality of students' written assgnments' (p.4). Although CT is a requirement for students academic success in higher edcation, thee is no consensus on it meaning, process or deveopment, cially across ifferent cultual and academic discourse communities. As it receives considerable attention in language learning, teaching, and academic discourse (Hadley & Boon, 2022), CT for many scholars has come to mean - as Pu proclaimed -- a robust repertoire of thinking/languaging abilitie, recogntion ofassumptions, and analysis of the perspective f thers as well a the understanding of why and how to employ reasoning skills in writing..

The book is divided into three main sections. The first section, including Chapters 1-3, gives an intriguing introduction to a theoretical perspectivef . The second section, consisting of Chapters 46, provides n in-depth discussion of the empirical findings. Finally, the third section, Chapter 7,offers a theorization of the study findings and discusses the potential benefits of adopting a culturall attuned approach in second language education. The audience of this book includes English writing and education (EFL/ ESL) teachers; instructors who teach first-year linguistically diverse composition courses; and professors who teach subjects such as intercultural rhetoric, academic discourse, and English education.

The introduction of the book problematizes CT as a romanticized construct and educational ideal in Western institutions, and from the beginning, the author's main goal i to iluminate the gloal pedagogical implications of the obstacles that 2 wring students may encounter in the proces of using and reflcting on language consciously.In the introduction, Pu also unpacks the dominant AngloSaxonist appication of CT and argues that CT should not be taught as a mere cognitive skill but rather as a sociocultural relevant concept with connections to students' lived experiences.

Based on eight months of ethnographic fieldwork, Pu's thesis can be distilld into the following statement: When utilized as atool. CT empowers students who apply it in a thoughtful way rather than enacting it superficially whil responding to skil-training tass in writing coures. Situated in two different cultural contexts, China and the UK, the book compares students' CT applications in their written assinments across three goups of hinee students studying in these two countres Pu passionately deentralizes the concet of CT and unpacks cultural factors in how Chinese postgraduate students conceptualize, promote, and capitalize on their CT skills in written academic discourse. Students in different contexts perceived CT as a means of achieving academic success as information acquisition, and as the location and summarization of relevant literature followed by an explicit explanation of findings.

Following this line of thought, she proposes that L2 writing teachers should incorporate and encourage students to use CT in high. stake writing. Even though the author states that the implication of this work is directly related to Chinese students who are in the process of developing their academic discourse skils, such timely work is relatable to other global contexts. The unique cultural approach used in the book has significant implications for a much wider range of settings.

Continuing the introduction to CT, Chapter 2 examines students' written assignments and demonstrates that CT is reflected in their writing as acultural practice. Providing practical examples from participants, the author makes the case that the students' cultural backgrounds play a critical role in how they apply and perceive their CT abilities. For example, Suyan was not able to process the meaning of critical in her writing process because she could not locate the concept in her cultural linguistic tradition. Pu explicates further that, to Chinese students, thinking critically could mean that they must \*process this jargon by matching it with a certain cultural concept, be it a certain way of thinking or a certain kind of writing" (p.30).

In Chapter 3, Pu succinctly showcases Suyan's sruggle when she first moved to the UK as she was not able to write academically with a critical tone. That i, she struggled to retain an analytical and evaluative voice in her essay because she came from a distint cultural and educational background. Gradually after acouple of meetings with her professor, Suyan was able to expres her thoughts critically in writing. For her, being able to criticlly argue and writ in a second language meant hfting from her Chinese mode into an English mode' of writing. For her, CT was being able to write in a very explicit way \*and changing a deductive logic to an inductive structure (p.24). In another revealing example, Bailu narrated that CT in writing is similar to dialectical thinking, which involves objectively utilizing one's reasoning skills.

The findings of this empirical study provide new insight into CT, highlighting that students enactment of CT can be "mediated by requirements conveyed through language and situated in certain intitutional and national culture" (p.29). Extending her analysis of CT, Pu call upon teachers to support 2 writers with a variet of options that allow them to go beyond cultural boundaries and achieve deeper intellectual growth in their writig. This could entail providing examples of effective academic writing and establishing a welcoming learning atmosphere that motivates 2 writers to share their thoughts confidently. For her, the goal of teaching CT is not to parrot instttional requirements, bt to use those requiremnts alaorm o ultivate students self-refletio, promote an agentive writing mood, and foster students' awareness of their positions concerning other texts.

Highlighting evaluative argumentation as one element of CT in writing, Pu showcases that CT is not linear but rather a relatively complex proces neotiated and formed in relation to instittional practices and individual differences. Chaptrs 4 and 5 xamine how students conceptualize and apply their perception of CT in litrature review drafs of their master's theses. The reults of three crosscase contrastive analyses of the three Chinese students emphasized that CT is a cultural practice in the ollowing ways. The first group (Chinese students in the UK) perceived CT as an evaluative tool and a prerequisit of academic and writing suces to negotiate meaning in academic discourse. The second group (Chinese students in China studying English) believed that CT is information acquisition and that gaining reearch experience in academic sttings was necessary for CT. The third group (Chinese students in China writing their thes in Chinese used C to locate ll literature on a subject, idntify the most relevant literature, explore the internal links among published papers, and summarize the findings in a logical and cogent manner. According to these results, teachers can provide students with the chance to expand on their awareness and put i into practice so that L2 writers can become responsible and capable language users.

The book then presents readers with the most revealing section, Chapter 7, which theorizes and proposes the multidimensional techniques that promote students' CT. Pu contends that CT is an open system" with aplethora of micro and macro nuanced elements that shape students' ways of expressing their critical thoughts such as their \*positioning, goals, knowledge, and metacognitive reflection' (p. 91). The findings of her reearch show that cultural awarenes and individual aility are crucial components of students performance of Cr. The manuscript ends with a discusson of empowering pedagogical techniques, such as incorporating cultural references and examples of CT that are contextually meaningful and relevant to students backgrounds, as part of a broader approach to cultivating Cr. eachers then can capitalize on students' abilit to apply CT in their written draft, open future reearch avenues to investigate rlationships between students backgrounds and their use of CT, and discuss how to expand CT across contexts, cultures, and spaces.

In conclusion, the author expertly conveys the nuanced enactment of CT and illustrates how it can be influenced by institutional and cultural norms. Pu exudes optimism about the possbilities for teaching and incorporating CT in non-western contexts. Further. more, Pu strategically decolonizes authority and normativity when teaching CT to international students in writing classrooms in a way that can \*unsettle monoglossc conceptualizations of language [and CT]\* (Kubota, 2022, p. 2). However, I wish Pu could have provided more explicit theorization of how L2 writing teachers can challenge the influence of colonialism and imperialism on our epistemological views of Cr. The book offers, at the practical level, acinating and hands-on analysis with implications for creating a more inclusive learning environment that welcomes CT as local cultural practice. Educators should be cognizant that many students of color expresscultural peculiarities in CT and should welcome non-Eurocentric knowledge as a legitimate mode of expressing and thinking. In fact, longitudinal studies involving L2 writing participants from many cultural and social backgrounds can expand our understanding of the various sociocultural manifestations of CT.

# Acknowledgment

The authors would like to thank the Deanship of Scientific Research at Majmaah University for supporting this work under project number: R-2023-122.

# References