# The effect of lexical coverage on L2 learners' reading comprehension of narrative and expository genres

Tianjiao Song a,b, Barry Lee Reynolds a,c, \*

a Faculty of Education, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China b Faculty of Foreign Languages, Guangdong Ocean University, China c Centre for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Lexical coverage   
L2 reading comprehension   
L2 vocabulary size   
Narrative   
Expository

Understanding the relationship between lexical coverage (i.e., the number of words known in a text) and second language (L2) reading comprehension is pivotal to L2 instruction as it helps teachers set sensible vocabulary learning goals and select suitable reading materials. This study examined the unique contribution of 7 lexical coverage figures (i.e., $9 0 \%$ $9 5 \%$ $9 6 \%$ $9 7 \%$ $9 8 \%$ $9 9 \%$ and $1 0 0 \%$ to the comprehension of narrative and expository texts read by Chinese EFL undergraduate students $( N = 2 3 4 )$ . Participants completed the Vocabulary Size Test, a L2 reading ability test, a background knowledge test, reading comprehension tests, and topic familiarity ratings. Results of hierarchical regression analyses showed that after accounting for L2 vocabulary size and L2 reading ability, lexical coverage remained a steady, though weak, predictor of narrative and expository comprehension scores. No indication of a lexical threshold for reading comprehension was found. Instead, lexical coverage was found to be a stronger predictor of expository comprehension scores than narrative. While findings suggested $9 8 \%$ lexical coverage was reasonable for satisfactory comprehension of L2 narrative texts, $1 0 0 \%$ lexical coverage may be needed for satisfactory comprehension of L2 expository texts without the support of background knowledge. Pedagogical implications were discussed in relation to the findings.

Reading has been considered as a primary source of meaning-focused input for language development (Krashen, 1993). This is particularly true in many second language (L2) contexts due to learners limited exposure to English in thir daily lives (Grabe, 2004; Kweon & Kim, 2008). As a result, reading comprehension has been a major research strand of L2 studies (Grabe, 2009; Suk, 2017). Although this body of research has revealed a number of variables contributing to L2 reading performance, such as language proficiency (Lee & Schallert, 2014), word decoding skill (Jeon & Yamashita, 2014), and lexical inferencing ability (Zhang & Shulley, 2017), L2 vocabulary knowledge has been reported to underlie these and other abilities (e.g., Harrington, 2018; Leeming, 2014). Therefore, L2 vocabulary knowledge has been considered as a powerful predictor of reading succes (Grabe, 2009, van Gelderen t al. 2004; van Gelderen, Schoonen, Stoel, de Glopper, & Hulstijn, 2007, inter alia), which is also reflected in the large correlations found between vocabulary knowledge and reading performance (Laufer, 1992; Qian, 2002).

Central to the relationship between vocabulary knowledge and comprehension is lexical coverage: \*the percentage of running words in a text known by the readers (Nation, 2006, p.61).It follows that the more words readers know (i., L2 vocabulary sie, the more words they are likely to know in any given text (i.e. lexical coverage (Laufer & Ravenhorst-Kalovski, 2010). s it is ssumed that readers primarily draw on vocabulary knowledge to read a text (Anderson & Freebody, 1979), lexical coverage is a meaningful construct in gauging the extent to which readers with particular vocabulary sizes are able to comprehend a text (Webb, 2010).

In examining the lexical coverage-comprehension relationship, some early research gauged a few lexical coverage figures (e., $8 0 \%$ $9 0 \%$ $9 5 \%$ , and $1 0 0 \%$ ) and proposed different probabilistic lexical coverage thresholds (i.e., $9 5 \%$ or $9 8 \%$ for adequately comprehending a text without a major lexical burden (e.g., Hu & Nation, 200; Laufer, 1989; Schmitt, Jiang, & Grabe, 2011). Nevertheless, it is concerning that the previously suggested lexical coverage thresholds have been widely adopted by reading researchers but without extensive replication with L2 learner populations. This issue is important because compared with L1 reading comprehension, reading in a L2 is more cognitively demanding as readers need to process both text information and new words (Koda 2007). Thus, the knowledge of words in the texs read may be pivotal for L2 readers successully extracting textual information and constructing semantic connections among ideas in L2 texts necessary for comprehension (Grabe, 2009).

Besides, previous studies did not control for L2 reading ability and L2 vocabulary size. Thus, the unique contribution of lexical coverage to comprehension remains unclear. Furthermore, the previous findings, either drawn from examining one fiction or a few academic texts, were inconsistent regarding the facilitative role of lexical coverage in reading comprehension. It remains an open question whether lexical coverage similarly predicts the reading comprehension of narrative and expository genres. To ill these gaps, this research explored the effect of seven lexical coverage figures (i.e., $9 0 \%$ $9 5 \%$ $9 6 \%$ $9 7 \%$ $9 8 \%$ $9 9 \%$ , and $1 0 0 \%$ ) on L2 readers' comprehension of narrative and expository genres after L2 reading ability and L2 vocabulary size were controlled.

# 1. Literature review

# 1.1. Lexical coverage and L2 vocabulary knowledge

One way to understand the lexical coverage-reading comprehension relationship is examining how one percentage change in lexical coverage impacts the density of unknown words in texts (Table 1).

Table 1 shows a trend that the lexical load of a text increases as the lexical coverage decreases. A text with $9 9 \%$ lexical coverage refers to readers encountering 1 unknown word out of every 100 words read. At $9 8 \%$ lexical coverage, the load increases to 1 unknown word in every 50 words read. If one in every 20 words is unknown (i.e., $9 5 \%$ lexical coverage), readers are likely to face a daunting number of dictionary lookups to comprehend a text (Hsu, 2009). Low lexical coverage of $8 0 \%$ (i.e., one in every 5 words being unknown) is likely to make comprehension impaired (Hu & Nation, 2000. This could be particularly true when some unknown words are content words that carry important meaning (Aaronson & Ferres, 1984). Moreover, with such low coverage, the contextual clues are often presented in the words unknown to the readers and thus unusable (Laufer, 2013). Therefore, we can reasonably assume that a higher lexical coverage of a text results in better comprehension of that text.

Previous corpus research examined how large a vocabulary ize is needed for reading English written discourse (e.g., newspapers, novels) without encountering too many unknown words (Hsu, 2011; Nation, 2006, inter ali). Knowledge of the 2000 most frequent word families' in the British National Corpus (BNC) can account for $8 6 \% - 9 0 \%$ lexical coverage of an average English written text (Nation, 2006, 2013). The third 1000 word families provide an additional $_ { 3 - 5 \% }$ coverage of written text; the fourth to fifth 1000-word families cover an additional $3 \%$ To obtain $9 8 \%$ high coverage of "English written text', a vocabulary size of 8000-9000 word families is needed (Nation, 2006, p. 79). Without an adequate vocabulary size, reading becomes a daunting tas for the majority of L2 readers that typically have acquired an English vocabulary ize f only around 100-2000 word familie eg., Nurweni & Read, 1999; Webb & Chang, 2012). Therefore, language teachers' understanding of the efect lexical coverage has on learners reading comprehension is important as this knowledge can inform pedagogical practices associated with vocabulary and reading instruction.

# 1.2. Lexical coverage and L2 reading comprehension of narrative and expository genre

Some previous research tended to propose a probabilistic lexical coverage threshold for adequate reading comprehension. A major pedagogical implication of lexical threshold reearch i determining the vocabulary size learners need to obtain for reading unmodified academic texts. Based on various criteria for adequate comprehension, previous studies suggested different lexical coverage figures (i. e., $9 5 \%$ or $9 8 \%$ ) for reading comprehension, with some research not finding a lexical threshold for reading comprehension (Schmitt et al., 2011).

Hu and Nation (2000) examined the effect $8 0 \%$ $9 0 \%$ $9 5 \%$ , and $1 0 0 \%$ lexical coverage had on the reading comprehension of a 673-word fictional narrative. Nonwords were used tocreat the 4 lexical coverage versions of the narrative. Adequate comprehension was operationalized as the average reading comprehension scores received on the $1 0 0 \%$ lexical coverage version of the narrative by the participants. The study found that none of the participants that read the $8 0 \%$ version of the text were able to adequately comprehend it. A few participants could adequately comprehend the $9 5 \%$ lexical coverage version and even fewer the $9 0 \%$ version. Hu and Nation (2000) extrapolated from the comprehension results of the $9 5 \%$ lexical version that $9 8 \%$ lexical coverage was necessary for unassisted pleasure reading of fiction.

Since the publication of Hu and Nation (20oo), this $9 8 \%$ lexical coverage figure has been widely cited, with many studies using it to make claims that reearch participants have adequate comprehension to read texts used in studies investigating vocabulary acquisition through the reading of fiction (e.g., Hu & Nassaji, 2014; Pellicer-Sanchez, 2016). According to Google Scholar, Hu and Nation (2000) has been cited 1806 times (July 17, 2022). However, to date, only one published study was conducted to replicate Hu and Nation (2000) and yielded different findings. Laufer (2020) examined the effects of $9 0 \%$ $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ lexical coverage on Arabic-L1 high-school students' lexical inferencing and reading comprehension of a fiction. The study used the $9 0 \%$ and $9 5 \%$ lexical coverage versions from Hu and Nation (2000) and developed a $9 8 \%$ version by using nonwords. Using the multiple-choice reading comprehension test from Hu and Nation (2000), Laufer (2020) found those who read the $9 5 \%$ version scored higher than the $9 8 \%$ and $9 0 \%$ versions. This result leads to the question of whether $9 8 \%$ is the optimal figure for narrative reading comprehension. However, it should be noted that the findings of these two studies were based on the analyse of a short fiction at 3-4 lexical coverage figures .., $8 0 \%$ $9 0 \%$ $9 5 \%$ , and $1 0 0 \%$ in Hu and Nation; $9 0 \%$ $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ in Laufer) and a relatively small number of participants for each coverage figure. For a more comprehensive description of the lexical coverage-reading comprehension relationship, further replication is required to examine other lexical coverage figures and larger sample sizes.

Table 1 Lexical coverage and density of unknown vocabulary per 100 tokens (Hu & Nation, 2000, p. 405).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Lexical Coverage (%)</td><td>Density of Unknown Tokense</td><td>Lines of Text Per 1 Unknown Word</td></tr><tr><td>99</td><td>1 in 100</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>98</td><td>1 in 50</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>97</td><td>1 in 33</td><td>3.3</td></tr><tr><td>96</td><td>1 in 25</td><td>2.5</td></tr><tr><td>95</td><td>1 in 20</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>90</td><td>1 in 10</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>80</td><td>1 in 5</td><td>0.5</td></tr></table></body></html>

Research conducted with expository texts has also found inconsistent results. Laufer (1989) gauged the percentage of running words readers needed to know in a text to ensure adequate reading comprehension of academic texts. Lexical coverage was calculated as the percentage of unknown words highlighted by the participants in the texts and adjusted by the participants' correct translation of these words. Considering a $5 5 \%$ passing score on the Cambridge First Certificate exam as adequate comprehension, the study found that $9 0 \%$ lexical coverage did not yield significant differences between the number of participants who scored above and below $5 5 \%$ on the exam. However, at $9 5 \%$ lexical coverage, significantly more readers were found to score above $5 5 \%$ on the exam. Laufer (1989) proposed that the $9 5 \%$ lexical coverage figure enabled adequate comprehension.

However, t is unclear in Laufer (1989) whether lexical coverage was calculated based on lemma or word family counts. It is necessary to state this clearly as the calculation of lexical coverage can vary depending on the unit used (Reynolds & Wible, 2014). For example, the verb drie" and its past tense "drove" can be counted as two word tokens of the same lemma; likewise, the word "driver" could also be counted if lexical coverage was calculated based on word family counts (Schmitt, 2010). Besides, the $5 5 \%$ criterion for reasonable comprehension was not justified other than it being the cutof at the institution where the data was collected. Further, this criterion for adequate comprehension appeared to be fairly conservative compared to the often-cited suggested aim of $7 0 \% - 8 0 \%$ comprehension scores for silent reading (Nation, 2009).

Different from Laufer's (1989) observation, no lexical threshold was found by Schmitt e a. (2011) who examined the effect of $9 0 \% { - } 1 0 0 \%$ lexical coverage figures on the reading comprehension of two academic articles: one on a topic assumed to be familiar to the participants and another assumed to be unfamilia. Lexical coverage was estimated by participants responses on a YES/NO checklist which assessed participants' prior knowledge of words in the target texts. Participants reading comprehension of the two articles was measured with 14 multiple-choice questions and a graphic organizer task. Different from Laufer's (1989) finding with expository text, results showed a fairly linear correlation $( \rho = 0 . 4 1 , p < . 0 0 1 )$ between text comprehension and the number of known words in the texts, suggesting that there appeared to be no lexical threshold for lerners reading comprehension to noticeably increase when lexical coverage was raised from $9 0 \%$ to $1 0 0 \%$

While informative, Schmitt et al's (2011) study did not control the text length so as to retain the authenticit of academic texts. The 200-token difference in text length may have made the estimate f lexical coverage between the two texts les comparable. Moreover, participants previous knowledge of the two academic texts was not directly tested but was determined by researchers subjective assumption. Considering the facilitative role of background knowledge in reading expository texts (Brantmeier, 2005), more controlof background knowledge is necessary to examine theffect of lexical coverage on expository reading comprehension. This is supported by the findings from a recent study with Chinese EFL undergraduate students, showing background knowledge played an independent and more influential role than lexical coverage in the reading comprehension of the expository genre (Song & Reynolds, 2022). Thus, a direct measure of background knowledge is needed to gauge the lexical coverage-expository reading comprehension.

# 1.3. Limitations of previous research

A review of the iterature shows mixed results regarding the lexical coverage-reading comprehension relationship. As for the narrative genre, Hu and Nation (2000) proposed $9 8 \%$ for adequate comprehension, while Laufer (2020) found $9 5 \%$ was more conducive t reading fiction. Likewise, findings drawn from the expository genre were inconsistent regarding whether there is a lexical threshold for reading comprehension. The discrepancies in previous findings may be due to the methodological ssues involved in early research, such as word counting unit (e.g, Laufer, 1989) and different lengths of texts (eg., Schmitt et al., 2011), which affect the examination of the lexical coverage-reading comprehension relationship.

Besides, while some previous researchers proposed $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage for adequate comprehension, the degree of comprehension needed also hinges on the genre of the reading material. Reading an expository text may be more cognitively demanding than reading a narratie text, as the expository genre generally concern technical topics, entailing facts and arguments, and have a higher information density than narrative texts (Beauvais, Olive, & Passerault, 2011; Graesse, Singer, & Trabasso, 1994). It can be assumed that compared with story-like narrative texts which are often read for plasure, the percentage of known words in texts may be more central to the reding comprehension of content-based expository texts read for educational purposes. Thus, i is necesary to consider whether there is a genre difference in examining the lexical coverage-reading comprehension relationship.

Further, these previous studies were limited by not controlling participants' L2 vocabulary size--an important dimension of word knowledge (Read, 2004) and a significant predictor of L2 reading comprehension scores (Laufer & Aviad-levitzky, 2017). Laufer (1989) and Schmitt et l. (2011) did not asess participants L2 vocabulary size. Hu and Nation (2000) onlyetimated the participants knowledge of the first 300-word families, but the participants overall vocabulary size was unknown. Besides, these previous studies did not consider L2 reading ability. It has een found that higher-silld readers can make more efective and flexible use of reading strategies for successul comprehension (Cohen & Macar, 2007). It i rasonable to asume that, with the support f sufficient reading skills, silled readers could comprehend a text with a smaller lexical coverage. Confounding learners L2 reading ability may impede our understanding of the lexical coverage-comprehension relationship. Thus, by controlling L2 vocabulary size and L2 reading ability, the current research went beyond investigating whether lexical coverage alone enables predictions about L2 reading comprehension of expository and narrative genres.

# 2. The current study

Considering the limitations of previous studies, the present study took a finer-grained approach to examine the effect of lexical coverage on L2 learners' reading comprehension of narrative and expository genres. ince previous iterature has consistntly suggested that coverage figures above $9 0 \%$ are necessary to make comprehension viable (Hu & Nation, 2000; Laufer, 1989; Schmitt et al., 2011, inter alia), the current study began with the $9 0 \%$ coverage and gauged the contribution six additional lexical coverage figures (i. e., $9 5 \%$ $9 6 \%$ $9 7 \%$ $9 8 \%$ $9 9 \%$ and $1 0 0 \%$ ) provided to L2 reading comprehension. Two reading-related factors: L2 reading ability and L2 vocabulary ize, were controlled to reveal the unique contribution of lexical coverage to reading comprehension. The following are the research questions that guided the current study.

1. Does the lexical coverage of a text addto the prediction of its comprehension after dfferences in L2 vocabulary size and 2 reading ability have been eliminated?   
2. Does lexical coverage similarly predict comprehension for expository and narrative texts?

# 2.1. Methodology

The research methodology has been reviewed and approved by the Universty of Macau ethics review board under the referenceno. SSHRE19-APP066-FED. All articipants voluntered to take part in the study and were provided a smal gif of apreciation (valued US $\$ 10$ for their participation.

# 2.1.1. Participants

Seven intact classes $\left( N = 2 3 4 \right)$ of L1-Chinese speaking first-year undergraduate English majors at a university in China between 18 and 23 years old with an average of 12.53 years of English learning experience were recruited as participants. ll the participants completed three pre-tests: the Vocabulary Size Test, a L2 reading ability test, and a background knowledge test. One-way ANOVAs showed the 7 classes had no significant differences in VST scores $( F _ { ( 6 , 2 2 7 ) } = 1 . 7 5 4$ $p = . 1 1 0$ $\mathfrak { \eta } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 4 4 )$ , L2 reading abilities $( F _ { ( 6 , 2 2 7 ) }$ $= 1 . 5 4 3$ $p = . 1 6 5$ $\mathfrak { \eta } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 3 9 )$ , and background knowledge of the expository text $( F _ { ( 6 , 2 7 7 ) } = 0 . 3 0 7$ A $\pmb { p } = . 9 3 3$ $\boldsymbol { \eta } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 8 )$ . The low scores on the background knowledge test indicated that the participants possessed litle background knowledge about the expository text. This is echoed by participants self-ratings, indicating litte prior knowledge of the expository text. Further analysis of the VST scores on the 1000- and 2000- word family frequency levels showed the participants averagely achieved $7 9 \%$ accuracy on both levels, indicating the participants were likely to have the knowledge of the most frequent 2000 words in English. Table 2 provides a summary of the descriptive statistics of these participant-related variables.

Table 2 A summary of participants' descriptive statistics.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td></tr><tr><td>Age (Year)</td><td>20.240</td><td>1.672</td><td>18</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>English Learning Experience (Year)</td><td>12.53</td><td>1.194</td><td>9.</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td>L2 Vocabulary Size</td><td>71.295</td><td>7.366</td><td> 51</td><td>95</td></tr><tr><td>L2 Reading Ability</td><td>23.697</td><td>4.293</td><td>13</td><td>34</td></tr><tr><td>Topic Familiarity Ratinge</td><td>1.867</td><td>1.025</td><td>1</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Background Knowledge</td><td>1.855</td><td>1.125</td><td>0</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Knowledge of the Most Frequent First 1o00 (K1) English Word-families</td><td>8.816</td><td>.952</td><td>8</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Knowledge of the Most Frequent Second 1000 (K2) English Word-families</td><td>7.940</td><td>1.118</td><td>7</td><td>10</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: L2 Vocabulary Size Test max. possible $= 1 4 0$ , K1 max. possible ${ } = 1 0$ ; K2 max. possible ${ } = 1 0$ ; L2 reading ability test max. possible $= 3 5$ ; topic familiarity rating max. possible $= 7$ ; background knowledge test max. possible $= 9$

# 2.1.2. Assessments

VST Test. Participants L2 vocabulary knowledge was assessed by the 14,000 version of the Vocabulary Size Test, a standardized test shown to be avalid and reliale measure f L2 leaners receptive vocabulary size needed for reading (Beglar, 2010; Nation, 2006; Zhang, 2013). VST was used as it measures participants overall 2 vocabulary size which was found to be a significant predictor of L2 reading comprehension performance (Laufer & Aviad-levitzky, 2017) and L2 proficiency (Leeming, 2014). We used the bilingual Mandarin-English VT, of which the item options are given in the participants' L1. This alows for the measurement of only a learner's receptive vocabulary knowledge, by mitigating theffect of any other 2 knowlege aspects on VT test scores (Egort, 2013). Further, the Mandarin-English version of VST has been used to measure the L2 vocabulary size of tertiary-level Chinese-L1 EFL learners showing a high level of reliabilit of 0.97 (Cronbach's alpha) on at least two empirical research studies (e.g., Reynolds, 2015; Zhao & Ji, 2018). The VST consists of 140 items each of which represents 100 word families sampled from thefirt 14 word family frequency levels of the British National Corpus (BNC, Leech, Rayson, & Wilson, 2001). To correctly answer an item, learners must recognize the meaning of a word by selecting the corrct meaning from four options. Following the VT scoring, participants received one point for each correct response. The score for each of the 14 sequential frequency levels provides an estimate of word knowledge in that band (Masrai, 2019). The total VST core estimates the L2 vocabulary size of a participant. The test showed an adequate internal consistency, yielding a Cronbach's alpha of 0.73 (Field, 2013).

L2 Reading Ability Test. The reading section of the Cambridge Preliminary English Test for Schools (PETfS) was used to assess participants' L2 reading ability. PETfS is a standardized test ssessing intermediat-level (i.e., B1 Level) learners' English language proficiency (https://www.britishcouncil.es/en/exam/pet-preliminary). This study followed the scoring guideline of PEfS by giving one point for each correct response in the reading section. The tes showed an adequate intenal consistency of 0.70 (Cronbachs alpha) (Field, 2013).

Background Knowledge Test. An instrument was used to measure participants background knowledge of the expository target text, operationalized as the subject matter relevant to the text topic (Alexander & Jetton, 2000). The instrument contained 9 multiple-choice items on relevant topic information that was indirectly stated in the expository text (Hammadou, 2000, and 21 items on irrelevant informatio (Appendix A). The inclusion of 21irrelevant items was to mask the purpose of the instrument so as to avoid the possble priming effct of the background knowledge test on participant' reading performance in the main study. All the items were written in the participants' native language to ensure background knowledge and not L2 reading comprehension was being assesed. The test items were reviewed by an English-L1 TESOL educator who has extensive experience in L2 reading studies and a TESOL instructor who teaches tertiary-level English reading courses to ensure the concise formulation of item stems and options. One point was given to each correctly answered item relevant to the epository text while rrelevant items were not scored. The test showed an internal consistency of 0.67 (Cronbach's alpha)5.

Topic Familiarity Rating Scale. Participants' background knowledge of the expository text was further triangulated with a topic familiarity rating scale included in the demographic questionnaire administrated after the reading comprehension tes (Appendix B). Participants marked thir familiarit with the text afer they had completed reading comprehension tests by selecting the relevant familiarity rating on a 7-point Likert scale item.

Reading Comprehension Tests. Two reading comprehension tests were created to measure participants' comprehension of the two texts. To create reliable and valid comprehension items, we took a principled approach for test development. Firs, the most widely-used format for measuring comprehension, multiple-choice, was selected to ensure participants familiarity with the test format (Brantmeier, 2005). Second, all 24 items (i.e. 12 for each article) were written by adhering to Mille, Lin, and Gronlund's (2013) guidelines, including precise formulation of questions and grammatical consistency of all the altenatives. Third, to create two comparable reading tests, the researchers developed the reading comprehension tests based on the first two cognitive levels in Bloom's Taxonomy: basic knowledge and comprehension of facts (Bloom, Engelhart, Furst, Hil, & Krathwohl, 1956). This hierarchical framework posits that readers should first achieve the basic level of knowledge and comprehension of atext before their higher-level text comprehension can occur. Thus, drawing on the first two cognitie levels allowed the researchers to develop comparable reading comprehension tes for both genres. Fourth, the items were piloted with four English-natie peaking postgraduate students who were asked to complete the asessments without having read the texts to ensure the items were context-dependent. Fifth, the reading tests were further piloted with 24 firt-year English majors from China with similar backgrounds to the participants in the main study. Three items were revised based on students feedack on the plausibility of distractors, and the explicitnessof the questions and altenatives. Allthe items were further reviewed and revised by an L2 reading expert that served as a TEsOL trainer and L reading textbook author. The finalized reading test for each genre contained 7 items on basic knowledge and 3 items on the comprehension of facts (Appendices C and D). The score weights complied with the level of knowledge measured, with 1 point for each corrct answer to the knowledge-based questions, and 2 points for comprehension items. The total score of each reading test was 13. The reading comprehension tests showed an adequate internal consistency of 0.677 (Cronbach's alpha) (Field, 2013)

Text Selection. Two texts were selected: one narrative and one expository text (Appendices E and F). The two texts were extracted from third-year English major textbooks used in China and assumed to be new to the participants. This was confirmed by the demographic questionnaire administrated after the participants had read the texts, showing none had previously red either of these texts before the experiment.

These texts were chosen based on their similar lengths and comparable difficulty ratings. Using the Coh-Metrix L2 readability formula' designed to predict L2 learners reading performance,the narrtive readability level was 12.251 and the expository read. ability level was $1 1 . 5 2 3 ^ { 8 }$ suggesting the difficulty of the two genres was similar at both word level (e.g., word length and word frequency) and discourse level (e.g., text cohesion) (Crossley, Allen, & Mcnamara, 2011).

The narrative text titled Face to Face with Hurricane Camille" was a story of the Koshak family fight against the severe hurricane Camille. The expository text, "National Competitive Advantage and the Diamond Model', explained an economic model that was unfamiliar to the participants. As background knowledge has been acknowledged to be particularly facilitative in reading expository texts (Best, Floyd, & McNamara, 2008; Rydland, Aukrust, & Fulland, 2012), using this expository text that was unfamiliar to the participants could help control the effect of prior knowledge and therefore make the two genres more comparable.

Lexical Profiling of the Texts. To conduct valid lexical profiling of the two texts, the present study took careful methodological considerations when selecting a word counting unit and a representative corpus (Reynolds & Wible, 2014). First, there has been an ongoing debate about the unit of word token counting, such as word family or lemma, for valid frequency counts (Vilkaite-Lozdiene & Schmitt, 2019. In our study, the word family was used as the unit for token counting. The rational is that f a member f the family is known, such as a ase word and high-frequency ffixes, learners with basic morphological knowledge of English are likely t recognize the other members of the family by identifying the semantic relationships between regularly ffixed and derived forms of th family e. g., drive, driving, driver) (Beglar, 2010; Nguyen & Nation, 2011). This isupported by empirical research showing L2 leaners above a beginning level of English, as in the present study, can use morphological knowledge to infer the meaning of unknown words while reading (Nassaji, 2003). The sef word family as the unit for word count is further justified by Laufer and Cob's (2019 corpus-ased study which reported high coverage figures $( 9 5 \% - 9 8 \% )$ of the word family in English written discourse, suggesting the knowledge of word family is important to reading written texts.

Second, the lexical coverage of target texts was analyzed with the VocabProfil program? (BNc-20 profile) (htt://www.lextutor. ca/tests/). The BNC-20 profile first matched the two texts with the BNC-20 vocabulary list compile from the most-frequent 20,000 word-families in the BNC (Cobb, 2007; Nation, 2006), and then provided the distribution of vocabulary in these texts at each of the 20 frequency levels (Schmitt, 2010). As both the VST and the VocabProfile program (BNc-20) draw on the same lexical soures (., Nation's word ists sampled from the BNC corpus), using these two tools together may provide an accurate etimate of the percentages of words participants are likely to know in the target textso. The output of the analysis showed the two texts were similar in the number of tokens, and the distribution of tokens across the 20 frequency levels (Appendix G).

Text Simplification. The creation of seven lexical coverage versions of each text followed a systemic procedure. First, as the participants had shown knowledge of the first 2000 words in their VST results, both texts were simplified with K1 and K2 words to ensure a $1 0 0 \%$ lexical coverage figure (Appendices H and I). Then, using the simplified $1 0 0 \%$ version, the remaining six versions were created incrementally by replacing words in the $1 0 0 \%$ version with vocabulary unknown to the participants (i.e., nonwords).

The Creation of the Simplified $100 \%$ Lexical Coverage Version. The $1 0 0 \%$ version of the two texts was created by replacing the low-frequency words above the 2000frequency level with high-frequency equivalents within the 1000-2000frequency levels (Table 3). As the participants' VST scores showed the participants were likely to know the words within the 1000-2000-frequency levels, replacing the lower frequency words with 1000-2000-frequency level synonyms could help reduce participants' lexical diffi culties when reading the $1 0 0 \%$ versions. Further, the most frequent 2000 word-families are deemed as the start-up vocabulary for developing L2 reading and speaking skills (Nation, 2013; Schmitt, 2010), which supports their use for text simplification.

After simplification, the $1 0 0 \%$ coverage versions were the same length1l (1375 tokens), had retained a similar difficulty level (i.e., the narrative Coh-Metrix L2 Readability Level 16.687 and the expository 15.784), and were comparable in a range of lingusic features, including average word length and paragraph length (Table 4). The dfferences in the number of sentences and paragraphs were mainly atributed to the distinct sory-lik features of the narrative genre shown by more dialogue (Bensoussan, 1990), shorter sentence lengths, and more paragraphs than expository texts (Malvern, Richards, Chipere, & Duran, 2004). The $1 0 0 \%$ versions of the two texts were the result of two rounds of reviews and revisions first by a comparable group of learners $\left( N = 8 \right)$ as those in the main study and two linguistic experts that provided fedback on the completenes and appropriateness of the texts. The fial results are presented in Tables 3 and 4.

Creation of Additional Lexical Coverage Versions. Before creating the remaining six lexical coverage versions, the two texts were examined by RANGE (Heatley, Nation, & Coxhead, 2012). As the participants read two texts, RANGE analysis was critical to ensure that nonwords, which were used to create the six additional coverage versions, were used consistently in both texts and that any real words that had been replaced with nonwords i one text had also been replaced with the same nonwords in the other text. Namely f the same real-word appeared in both texts, ll tokens of the word in both texts would be replaced by tokens of the same nonword.

Nonwords were used to create the six additional lexical coverage versions for the two texts. Using nonwords has been a common practice in the research on L2 vocabulary acquisition through reading as it ensures no prior knowledge of target words (Godfroid, Boers, & Housen, 2013), and in the current study also ensured strict control over the lexical coverage figures.

Careful methodological considerations were taken for creating plausible nonwords. First, real words were input into the Wuggy program (Keuleers & Brysbaert, 2010) designed to create phonological and orthographicall legal nonwords. For words that Wuggy was unable to provide matched nonwords, the ARC nonword database that provides legitimate English nonwords was referenced (Rastle, Harrington, & Coltheart, 2002).

Second, to maintain the consistency in linguistic dificulty across the seven lexical coverage versions of the two genres, ll the nonwords matched their real word counterparts in word length and syllable number. The first and second author scrutinized al the nonwords by applying Nation and Webb's (2011) guidelines for common English spelling rules and morphology.

The additional six versions were created by replacing the real words in the $1 0 0 \%$ version with nonwords. The replacement was systemic starting from $9 9 \%$ to $9 0 \%$ For example, to create the $9 9 \%$ coverage version, $1 \%$ of the 2000 high-frequency words in both texts were replaced by their nonwords equivalents.

# 2.1.3. Procedure

The datacllectionoccurred ithrehase (Table 5). Inphase one, participants redandignedonsent form ttheT and theL2 reading ability test, and completed the background knowledge test. Before starting phase two, each of the seven intact classes was randomly assigned as oneof the even lexical coverage groups. ach group readthe two genres adapted to the samelexical coverage .g, the $9 8 \%$ group read two $9 8 \%$ coverage genres). To mitigate against the potential effect reading order may have on reading comprehension, the reading and reading comprehension tests were counterbalanced with half the participants reading the narrative text frst while the other half reading the expository text irs. During the last phase, participants completed a demographic questionnaire.

# 2.1.4. Data analysis

Al the data were analyzed by SPss 17.0. Hierarchical regression analysis was used to examine the unique contribution of lexical coverage to reading comprehension scores of the two genres when L2 vocabulary size and L2 reading ability had been partialed.

Assumption Check. Prior to the regression analysis assumption checks were conducted to ensure the data satisfied the as. sumptions of regression analysis. First, as shown in Table 7, the correlations between llthe explanatory variables were lower than $r =$ 0.70, indicating the absence of multicllinearity (Tabachnick & Fidell 2001). Second, 234 participants in the current study are larger than the optimal sample size recommended for conducting multipleregression with the number of variables involved in this study (i.

Table 3 Cumulative coverage of $1 0 0 \%$ lexical coverage of the two texts.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Frequency Level</td><td colspan="2">Tokens (Cumulative Coverage %)</td></tr><tr><td>Narrative (100% Coverage)</td><td>Expository (100% Coverage)</td></tr><tr><td>K1</td><td>1217 (88.509%)</td><td>1143 (83.13%)</td></tr><tr><td>K2</td><td>158 (100%)</td><td>232 (100%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1375</td><td>1375</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: $\mathrm { K } = 1 0 0 0$ word-families.

Table 4 The linguistic compatibility of the two texts.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Characteristic</td><td>Narrative</td><td>Expository</td></tr><tr><td>Words</td><td>1375</td><td>1375</td></tr><tr><td>Sentences</td><td>119.000</td><td>77.000</td></tr><tr><td> Paragraphs</td><td>26.000</td><td>15.000</td></tr><tr><td>Sentences per Paragraph</td><td>4.577</td><td>5.133</td></tr><tr><td>Average Words per Sentence</td><td>11.529</td><td>17.831</td></tr><tr><td>Average Characters per Word</td><td>4.284</td><td>5.424</td></tr><tr><td>Coh-Metrix L2 Readability</td><td>16.687</td><td>15.784</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 Experiment procedure.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Phase 1</td><td>1. Informed Consent Form (10 min)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2. L2 Vocabulary Size Test (40 min)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>3. L2 Reading Ability Test (60 min)</td></tr><tr><td>Phase 2</td><td>4. Background Knowledge Test (10 min)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Two Weeks after Phase 1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1. Each participant was randomly assigned to read either the narrative or expository text first</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2. Read the first text (30 min)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>3. Reading comprehension test for the first text read (15 min)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>4. Read the second text (30 min)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Phase 3</td><td>5. Reading comprehension test for the second text read (15 min)</td></tr><tr><td>Two Days after Phase 2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1. Familiarity Rating Scale (5 min) 2. Demographic Questionnaire (5 min)</td></tr></table></body></html>

122 in Tabachnick & Fidell, 2001, p. 132 in Stevens, 2002). Third, examining scatterplot matrices, P-P plots, Cook's distance an scatterplots of the standardized residuals against the standardized predicted values, the data were found to stratify normality an nomogeneity of variances (Larson-Hall, 2010).

Hierarchical Regression Models. The unique contribution of each lexical coverage figure to the reading comprehension scores was expressed as $R ^ { 2 }$ change with each lexical coverage figure entered cumulatively in a prespecified order (Larson-Hall, 2010). The order of entering each variable into the regresson model was dictated by the literature and research design (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2001).

The VST score was entered first into regression model 1, because vocabulary knowledge has been reported to be a predominating factor for reading uces (Dro0p & Verhoeven, 2003; Grabe, 2009). In model 2, L2 reading ability was entered into the second step as it is an influentia factor for reading uces (Cohen & Macaro, 2007). The seen lexical coverage figures wre coded as binary variables starting at $9 0 \%$ and ending with $1 0 0 \% ^ { 1 2 }$ ; they were entered into the model sequentially. After entering allthe variables, nine models of the narrative comprehension scores and nine models of the expository comprehension scores were generated.

# 3. Results

# 3.1. Descriptive statistics

The participants' VST scores given in Table 6 indicate they had an average vocabularysize of 7130 word-families. The background

Table 6 Descriptive statistics.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td></td><td>SD</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td></tr><tr><td>L2 Vocabulary Size</td><td>71.295</td><td>7.366</td><td>51</td><td>95</td></tr><tr><td>L2 Reading Ability</td><td>23.697</td><td>4.293</td><td>13</td><td>34</td></tr><tr><td>Background Knowledge</td><td>1.855</td><td>1.125</td><td>0</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Narrative Text Reading Comprehension</td><td>7.282</td><td>1.978</td><td>2</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td>Expository Text Reading Comprehension</td><td>5.919</td><td>2.363</td><td>0</td><td>12</td></tr></table></body></html>

knowledge tes cores indicated the participants had ittl prior knowledge of the target expository text. The results of the two reading comprehension tests showed the participants gained higher scores on the narrative text than on the expository text.

# 3.2. Correlations

Table 7 presents the correlations between explanatory variables and outcome variables. A moderate and significant correlation was found between L2 vocabulary size and L2 reading ability $( r = 0 . 3 2 5$ $p = . 0 0 1 )$ . These two constructs significantly but weakly13 correlated with the expository text reading comprehension scores $( r = 0 . 1 4 3 , p = . 0 2 9$ for L2 vocabulary size; $r = 0 . 1 9 7$ A $p = . 0 0 2$ for L2 reading ability). L2 reading ability weakly but significantly correlated with the narrative reading comprehension scores $( r = 0 . 2 4 2 , p =$ .001).

# 3.3. Hierarchical regression analysis

The regression analyses generally showed an increase in the explanation of the variance of reading comprehension scores as each lexical coverage figure was added into the models. Taking the $9 0 \%$ lexical coverage as a reference, the results from the regression analyses showed that $9 5 \%$ $9 6 \%$ $9 8 \%$ and $1 0 0 \%$ lexical coverage incrementally added to the prediction of the narrative reading comprehension scores. The $9 6 \%$ $9 8 \%$ and $1 0 0 \%$ lexical coverage significantly contributed to the expository reading comprehension scores, indicated by significant $R ^ { 2 }$ changes.

Table 8 shows that, after the addition of L2 vocabulary size and L2 reading ability, the $9 5 \%$ lexical coverage $\scriptstyle \mathtt { \mathtt { S } r } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 2$ A $\begin{array} { r } { p = . 4 4 2 ) } \end{array}$ and the $9 6 \%$ lexical coverage $\scriptstyle ( s r ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 7$ $p = . 1 9 4 )$ accounted for small increases in explaining the variance in the narrative text reading comprehension scores. However, the addition of the $9 7 \%$ lexical coverage $( s r ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 0 , p = . 9 8 8 )$ was unable to account for any additional variance. The $9 8 \%$ lexical coverage $( s r ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 1$ $p = . 7 2 5 )$ explained a small amount of variance, while the addition of the $9 9 \%$ lexical coverage $( s r ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 0$ $p = . 7 7 4 )$ was unable to explain any additional variance. Adding $1 0 0 \%$ lexical coverage $( s r ^ { 2 } =$ 0.004, $\pmb { p = \dots 3 3 4 } )$ to the model was able to explain an additional small amount of variance. Including all9 explanatory variables, Model 8 explained $7 . 3 \%$ of the variance in the narrative text reading comprehension scores.

Table 9 shows that after L2 vocabulary size and L2 reading ability were entered into the model, 5 out of 7 lexical coverage figures could explain additional variance in expository reading comprehension scores. While the addition of the $9 5 \%$ $( s r ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 0$ $p = . 9 1 8 )$ and $9 7 \%$ $\mathsf { s r } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 0$ $p = . 7 9 6 )$ lexical coverage was unable to explain additional variance in the expository text reading comprehension scores, additional variance in the scores could be explained by adding the $9 6 \%$ $\acute { s r } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 2 4$ $p = . 0 1 7 )$ and the $9 8 \%$ $\scriptstyle \mathtt { S } r ^ { 2 } =$ 0.017, $\begin{array} { r } { p = . 0 4 2 ) } \end{array}$ . Adding $9 9 \%$ lexical coverage into the model continued to explain variance in the scores $( s r ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 4$ $p = . 2 9 6 )$ , but it was not found to be statistically significant. The addition of the $1 0 0 \%$ lexical coverage also yielded a small and statistically significant increase in explanation of the variance in the expository text reading comprehension scores $\displaystyle { s r ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 3 3 }$ $p = . 0 0 4 )$ . Including all 9 explanatory variables, Model 9 explained $1 2 . 4 \%$ of the variance in the expository text reading comprehension scores.

# 4. Discussion

4.1. Does the lexical coverage of a text add to the prediction of it comprehension after differences in L2 vocabulary size and 2 reading ability have been eliminated?

The present study found that when L2 reading ability and L2 vocabulary size were controlled, lexical coverage remained a smallbut steady predictor of reading comprehension for both narratie and expository genres. Generall, the prediction of lexical coverage was incremental from $9 0 \%$ to $1 0 0 \%$ , thereby explaining the variance in reading comprehension scores of both genres.

This result supports and extends the earlier findings in lexical coverage-reading comprehension studies by indicating the contributin of exical coverag to reading comprehension (eg, Hu & Natio, 200; Laufer, 1989; Schmitt e l., 2011). Laufer (1989) found undergraduate EFL readers had a higher chance f obtaining adequate comprehension when the lexical coverage of the texts was at and above $9 5 \%$ Hu and Nation (2000) found more tertiary-level L2 learners had a greater comprehension of the text when they read higher lexical coverage versions from $9 0 \%$ . These previous results, together with the findings of our study, indicated lexical coverage does play a role in L2 reading comprehension.

Table 7 Correlations between variables.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>L2 Vocabulary Size (N = 234)</td><td>L2 Reading Ability (N = 234)</td><td>Background Knowledge Test (N = 234)</td><td>Reading Comprehension of the Narrative Text (N = 234)</td><td>Reading Comprehension of Expository Text (N = 234)</td><td>100%a (n= 37)</td><td>99%a (n = 31)</td><td>98%a (n = 34)</td><td>97%a (n = 33)</td><td>96%a (n = 34)</td><td>95%a (n = 31)</td></tr><tr><td>L2 Vocabulary Size</td><td>1.000</td><td>0.325**</td><td>0.040</td><td>0.109</td><td>0.143*</td><td>0.041</td><td>0.088</td><td>0.170**</td><td>0.082</td><td>0.073</td><td>0.029</td></tr><tr><td>L2 Reading Ability</td><td>0.325**</td><td>1.000</td><td>0.058</td><td>0.242**</td><td>0.197**</td><td>0.027</td><td>0.084</td><td>0.131*</td><td>0.031</td><td>0.005</td><td>0.008</td></tr><tr><td>Reading Comprehension of Narrative Text</td><td>0.109</td><td>0.242**</td><td>0.028</td><td>1.000</td><td>0.182**</td><td>0.003</td><td>0.002</td><td>0.033</td><td>0.027</td><td>0.070</td><td>0.046</td></tr><tr><td>Reading Comprehension of</td><td>0.143*</td><td>0.197**</td><td>0.021</td><td>0.182**</td><td>1.000</td><td>0.020</td><td>0.008</td><td>0.122</td><td>0.012</td><td>0.143*</td><td>0.003</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: aLexical coverage groups; $^ { \ast } p < . 0 5$ $^ { \ast \ast } p < . 0 1$

Table 8 Hierarchical regression analyses of the narrative text reading comprehension scores.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Model</td><td>R</td><td>R2</td><td>sr2</td><td>L2 Vocabulary Size (B)</td><td>L2 Reading Ability (B)</td><td>95% (B)</td><td>96% (B)</td><td>97% (B)</td><td>98% (B)</td><td>99% (B)</td><td>100% (B)</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>0.109</td><td>0.012</td><td>0.012</td><td>0.029</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>0.244</td><td>0.059**</td><td>.047**</td><td>0.009</td><td>0.106</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>0.249</td><td>0.062</td><td>0.002</td><td>0.010</td><td>0.106</td><td>0.286</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>0.262</td><td>0.069</td><td>0.007</td><td>0.012</td><td>0.105</td><td>0.367</td><td>0.473</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>0.262</td><td>0.069</td><td>0.000</td><td>0.012</td><td>0.105</td><td>0.368</td><td>0.474</td><td>0.006</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>0.263</td><td>0.069</td><td>0.001</td><td>0.011</td><td>0.104</td><td>0.401</td><td>0.507</td><td>0.041</td><td>0.137</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>0.264</td><td>0.07</td><td>0.000</td><td>0.011</td><td>0.103</td><td>0.438</td><td>0.545</td><td>0.077</td><td>0.174</td><td>0.122</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>0.271</td><td>0.073</td><td>0.004</td><td>0.012</td><td>0.100</td><td>0.673</td><td>0.780</td><td>0.310</td><td>0.411</td><td>0.360</td><td>0.448</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: $^ { * } p < . 0 5$ $^ { \ast \ast } p < . 0 1$

Table 9 Hierarchical regression analyses of the expository text reading comprehension scores.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Model</td><td>R</td><td>R2</td><td>sr2</td><td>L2 Vocabulary Size (B)</td><td>L2 Reading Ability (B)</td><td>95% (B)</td><td>96% (B)</td><td>97% (B)</td><td>98% (B)</td><td>99% (B)</td><td>100% (B)</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>0.143</td><td>0.020*</td><td>0.020*</td><td>0.046</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>0.214</td><td>0.046*</td><td>0.025*</td><td>0.028</td><td>0.093</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>0.214</td><td>0.046</td><td>0.000</td><td>0.028</td><td>0.093</td><td>0.046</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>0.263</td><td>0.069*</td><td>0.024*</td><td>0.033</td><td>0.091</td><td>0.224</td><td>1.045</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>0.264</td><td>0.070</td><td>0.000</td><td>0.032</td><td>0.091</td><td>0.246</td><td>1.067</td><td>0.116</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>0.294</td><td>0.086*</td><td>0.017*</td><td>0.026</td><td>0.086</td><td>0.476</td><td>1.292</td><td>0.358</td><td>0.943</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>0.301</td><td>0.091</td><td>0.004</td><td>0.028</td><td>0.080</td><td>0.636</td><td>1.453</td><td>0.512</td><td>1.103</td><td>0.522</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>0.352</td><td>0.124**</td><td>0.033**</td><td>0.030</td><td>0.070</td><td>1.460</td><td>2.280</td><td>1.329</td><td>1.933</td><td>1.359</td><td>1.569</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: $^ { * } p < . 0 5$ $^ { \ast \ast } p < . 0 1$

While some studies proposed $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage for reading comprehension, the results from the current research suggested no lexical coverage boundary for unassisted reading for either a narrative or expository text For the narrative text, although $9 8 \%$ explained more variance than $9 7 \%$ the $9 8 \%$ coverage was not shown to be an optimal figure, as $1 0 0 \%$ was more predictive of the narrative reading comprehension scores. For the expository text, although $9 8 \%$ could explain a significant amount of additional variance in the reading comprehension scores, $9 9 \%$ and $1 0 0 \%$ were also able to account for additional variance. We found the effect of lexical coverage on L2 reading comprehension generall increased as more words were known in the texs. Our study supports Schmit et al.'s (2011) findings with expository texts and extends their findings to the narrative genre by suggesting a general increasing predictive power of lexical coverage to narrative reading comprehension scores.

Our findings do, however, differ from Hu and Nation's (2000) study in the overall amount of variance explained by lexical coverage. We found the model with all seven lexical coverage figures included explained $7 . 3 \%$ of the variance in the narrative comprehension scores (Model 8 in Table 8), and $1 2 . 4 \%$ in the expository scores (Model 8 in Table 9). These totals appear to be much smaller than in Hu and Nation's (2o00) study where lexical coverage accounted for $4 8 . 6 2 \%$ and $6 2 . 1 0 \%$ of the variance in reading comprehension scores It is important to note that as an early attempt, Hu and Nation (2000 did not consider L2 vocabulary sie and L2 reading abilit. Thus, the amount of variance explained in the reading comprehension scores in their study may not beattributable to lexical coverage alone, but possbly to the combination of lexical coverage, L2 vocabulary size, L2 reading ability, and other factors that may affect 2 learners reding eformance. A further upport for this explanationis the small but sigficant crrelation found in our study between L2 reading ability and reading comprehension scores for both the narrative genre $( r = 0 . 2 4 2$ $p = . 0 0 1 \mathrm { \AA }$ and the expository genre $( r = 0 . 1 9 7 , p = . 0 0 2 )$ , and between L2 vocabulary size and the expository reading comprehension scores $( r = 0 . 1 4 3 , p$ $= . 0 2 9 )$ . Thus, it s reasonable to argue that the present study is more robust as it controlled these two reading-related variables thereby eliciting the unique contributio of lexical coverage to reading comprehension. As such, the smallr amount ofvariance found in the current study is reasonable as it implied the additional variance of each lexical coverage figure after a significant proportion of the variance in reading comprehension scores of the two genres had already been explained by L2 reading ability and/or L2 vocabulary size.

Furthermore, the small amount of variance explained by lexical coverage suggested there were possibly some other factors, n addition to the number of known words in a text, that imposed stronger effcts on reading comprehension. If this holds, then L2 vocabulary ize may not be the primary factor determining satisfactory reading comprehension. This question can be examined i light of word knowledge, which is a multifaceted construct including how many words one knows i.., breadth of vocabulary knowledge or vocabulary size) and how welleach word is known (i., depth of vocabulary knowledge) (Nation, 2013; Read, 200). Recognizing a word form, knowing the word meaning, and the abilit of flent ccessto this knowledge are considered essential kill to read a text (Koda, 2007). Therefore, vocabulary size, which is typically operationalized as the number of words that a learner has obtained form-meaning link knowledge, has been assumed to beenough to extract the meaning of words in receptive tasks (Schmitt 2014) such as reading. However, reading comprehension entails more than knowing the basic meaning of the words in texts. Knowing how the words are syntactically and semantically related with other words in a text is also esential in successully constructing text meaning for comprehension (Kintsch, 1988). This knowledge relates to vocabulary depth which encompasses a word's diffrent meaning senses, appropriate use in contexts (i.e., register), meaning relationships with other words (i.e., synonym, antonym), and syntactic and collocational use (Read, 2004).

Some studies have found that vocabulary depth, although closely related to vocabulary size (Qian, 2002; Vermeer, 2001), can make an independent contribution to L2 reading comprehension (Li & Kirby, 2015; Qian, 2002). Qian (2002), in a study with 217 ESL adult learners, found vocabulary depth and size were positively correlated $( r = 0 . 7 0$ $p < . 0 1 $ ) with vocabulary depth accounting for more variance $( 1 3 \% )$ than vocabulary size $( 8 \% )$ in participants' reading comprehension scores. Likewise, Chen and Liu (2020) identified a large correlation $( r = 0 . 6 1 $ ) between 62 Chinese EFL learners' vocabulary depth (i.e., semantic, morphological, and syntactic word knowledge, and word association) and ize; vocabulary depth was a stronger predictor than vocabulary size for L2 readers academic reading scores. These results, i line with some earlier studie (g, Vermeer, 2001), implied that vocabulary depth may play a more influential role than vocabulary size in readers' text comprehension. Therefore, it can be assumed that the variance explained by lexical coverage in the current study was not as large as one may expect because vocabulary depth could have also contributed to the reading comprehension outcomes. Aside from vocabulary knowledge, some reader-related variables, such as executive function has been found to make significant contributions to reading comprehension (e.g., Kieffer & Christodoulou, 2019).

Taken together, while a large vocabulary size has been considered necessary to ensure sccessful reading (Grabe & Stolle, 2011), our findings indicated that the number of words known in a text was esential but not the only prerequisite for L2 readers comprehension of the texts.

4.2. Does lexical coverage similarly predict comprehension for expository and narrative texts?

Our study found that lexical coverage had more influence on the comprehension of an expository text than a narrative text. $9 6 \%$ $9 8 \%$ , and $1 0 0 \%$ coverage figures were found to be significant predictors of expository reading comprehension scores. Although lexical coverage was predictive of the narrative reading comprehension scores, the predictions were non-significant.

The different predictive power of lexical coverage for the two genres indicated that leaners knowledge of basic word meaning in a given text is particularly important for reading the expository genre. These results corroborated with Yildirim, Yildiz, and Ates's (2011) finding that vocabulary knowledge was astronger predictor of comprehending expository than narrative text. The predominant role of lexical coverage in expository reading comprehension may be explained by the dierent lexical features of the narrative and expository genres. The story-like narrative genre is often easier to comprehend as it contains words describing human characteristics (e.g., emotions), setigs, and aseries of goal-riented actions connected with explici causal links (Bower & Morrow, 1990; Saadania Ketabi, & Tavakoli, 2017). In contrast, the content-based expository texts typically contain words representing complex concepts of subject mattr (Gardner, 2004) prted in a logical relationship that is hypthsized to be more dificlt topredict (Sadatia t al. 2017). This explanation isupported by our lexical profiling of two target texts which showed a large number of register-specific vocabulary across two genres. In the narrative text, the K7 words "debris" and "swipe" depicted the hurricane scene, and \*shud. dered" (K7) described the protagonists' fear about the hurricane. In the expository text, the K7 words \*innovative" and \*reciprocal" described the abstract concept of the economic model. This lexical distinction was also observed in Gardner's (2004) analysis with expository and narrative text for young L1 readers, showing a large number of "register-specific words at all levels of vocabulary" between the two genres (p. 1). Thus, knowing more words in an expository texti presumably central to comprehension as many words in an expository often carry abstract concepts, the knowledge of which could help readers unpack the abstract concepts to construct factual information.

Furthermore, lexical coverage appeared to be particularly important for readers with littl background knowledge of the expository text In order to make the expository text reading comparable to that of the narrative text, the present study took measures to ensure that the participants had litle to no background knowledge of the expository text's content. Without the support of background knowledge, readers of the expository text likely drew on the \*bottom-up" lexical-based approach (Donin & Silva, 1993), rlying more on the knowledge of words to construct text information. In such a case, lexical coverage would be more influential to comprehension of the expository text.

Taken together, the resuls indicated different effcts of lexical coverage on narrative and expository reading comprehension. Researchers are suggested to consider the genre of the target text given to participants when making claims about reading comprehension in connection to lexical coverage. We suggest that researchers may consider continuing to use $9 8 \%$ lexical coverage if the studies require participants' comprehension of narrative texts. The reason is that $9 8 \%$ was found to be more predictive of narrative reading comprehension scores than $9 7 \%$ and $9 9 \%$ was unable to predict additional variance in the scores. However, as $9 6 \%$ $9 8 \%$ , and $1 0 0 \%$ continuously explained significant amounts of variance in the expository reading comprehension scores, we suggest a higher figure such as $1 0 0 \%$ may be necessary for independent reading of expository texts when readers like those involved in the current study have little to no background knowledge on the text topic. It has yet to be determined whether the $9 8 \%$ lexical coverage figure might also be suitable for an expository text when readers have adequate background knowledge in the topic of the text.

# 5. Limitations and directions for future research

While providing additional insights into the lexical coverage-comprehension relationship, the current research stil has a few limitations that should be addressed with future studies. First, we used theST t assessparticipants knowledge of K2 words and ther overall L2 vocabulary size, which showed to be a significant indicator of L2 reading comprehension scores and L2 proficiency (Leeming, 2014). The Updated VLT (i.e., UVLT) tests could have been used as an alternative measure of receptive vocabulary knowledge from 100-5000 levels. However, considering the multipl tests taken by our participants, we did not use the UVLT to avoid the possible test fatigue. If the time for data collction permits, future studies could use the UVLT together with VST. Second, when developing the reading comprehension tests for the two genres, only readers' understanding of basic knowledge and facts were measured. Thus, this study cannot be used to make claims regarding the effect lexical coverage may have on higher levels of text comprehension (e.g., synthesis and evaluation) (Bloom et a. 1956). Third, while our study did find lexical coverage contributed to L2 reading comprehension scores for both genres, reader-related variables (e.g., working memory and topic interest) (Reynolds & Bai, 2013; Shin, Dronjic, & Park, 2018) could not be considered. Future studies that investigate the interaction of these reader-related variables in connection to lexical coverage, L2 vocabulary size, and L2 reading ability are needed. Additionally, as learners may encounter new words presented in definitional contexts that could facilitate their inferencing of these words' meanings, future research is suggested to examine the effect of contextual richnes (i., the informativeness of contexts on L2 reading comprehension.

# 6. Pedagogical implications

Our findings further provide implications for teaching L2 reading. As lexical coverage appeared to be more important in comprehending the expository text, teachers are suggested to reduce students' lexical burden and their lack of content knowledge by providing istruction on the unknown words ocurring in such text (e.g,technical words) (Webb & Nation, 2018). For example, to make the encounters with unknown words have les of an impact on comprehension, prior toassigning readings teachers are advised to spend more class time dealing with technical words by providing definitions and helping students understand the differences betwen the more and les frequent meanings of these words (Chung & Nation, 2003). Teachers are advised to teach students strategies to understand and remember these words by recognizing in-text definitions (Nation, 2013; Webb & Nation, 2018). This type of skill-based instruction could help facilitate L2 learners' independent reading of expository genres, especiall for texts ridled with technical vocabulary (Webb & Nation, 2018).

Lexical coverage could ccount only for a smallamount of variance in the reading comprehension scores for both genres; this result is indicative that more than the number of words known in texts affected the comprehension of those texts. eachers are suggested to go beyond providing simple intruction on the most common meanings of high-frequency words and draw learners' attntion to the need to enhance their vocabulary depth. For example, teachers may design learning activities that encourage students to analyze the connotative meaning and collocational use of words (Zhang & Yang, 2016). Teachers can also group words thematically concerning the theme of the text students read, to enable learners to construct knowledge of the text, and active the meaning senses of these words when they encounter them in future similar contexts (Zhang & Yang, 2016).

# 7. Conclusions

This study aplied a finer-grained research design by contolling for L2 vocabulary size and L2 reading ability to gauge the unique contribution of lexical coverage figures to the L2 reading comprehension of narrative and expository genres. Three main conclusions were drawn. Firs, lexical coverage was found to be a steady, albeit weak, predictor of the reading comprehension scores of both genres. Second, there was no indication of an optimal lexical coverage (e.g., $9 5 \%$ or $9 8 \%$ ) for unassisted L2 reading as essentially more variance in the reading comprehension scores for both genres were explained as the lexical coverage figure increased. Third, lexical coverage was found tobe astatisticall sigificant predictor of the expository reading comprehension scores but not for the narrative reading comprehension scores.

# Author note

The methodology used to colect the data that i reported in the paper was approved by the University of Macau Ethics Review Board under rference No. SSHRE19-APP066-FED and was funded by the Universty of Macau under research grant no. MYRG 2018- 00008-FED.

# Author statement

Tianjiao Song: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing, - OriginalDraft Project administration. Barry Lee Reynolds: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Resources, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Funding Acquisition, Project administration.

# Acknowledgement

This study was supported by funding received from the University of Macau under research grant No. MYRG2018-o0008-FED. Thanks also goes to Dr. Tom Cobb, the developer of Compleat Lexical Tutor (htps://www.lextutor.ca), for providing valuable technical suppor necessary for us to analyze the lexical coverage of our texts. We would like to also express or gratude to the editor Guangwei Hu and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on an earlier version of this paper.

# Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101154.

# References

Ason  18   1. org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1984.tb14758.x   
Alnder,  o  L0  r ti , l,  n  a (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (pp. 285-310). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum...   
Anderon,  ,  (19. d g   1). ed f-  t 2142/17498.   
Beais, ., live, , lt, J. 2011 W ar e texts o nd ter nionshi e text qulit and mt of the witing processes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103(2), 415-428. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0022545   
Beglar, D. (2010. A rasch-ad vldtion f th vaulr ize tes. Lng eting 271), 1018 htps//do.g/10.1177/02653209340194   
Beusa (9   h ion  lti. t x. is r  1, 496. https://doi.org/10.1016/0889-4906(90)90028-b   
Best R   m. 00 fe m in tcdens i ie an tory . g Psychology, 29(2), 137-164. https://doi.org/10.1080/02702710801963951   
Bom,  rt,  st ,   15 f g g  isf b  f ti objectives: Handbook I: Congitive domain. New York: David McKay.   
Bower, G. H, & Morrow, .G (190 Mental models i narrative comprehensio. Scice, 2475),44 48 htp://doi.org/1.1126/science.2403694   
Brameie, . 5 ff rrs e xt te, d t t  g   h. o , 9(1) 37-53. https:/doi.org/10.1111/j.0026-7902.2005.00264.x   
Chen, C. & Liu, Y. C.(2020). The role of vocabulary bredth and depth i EL academic reading test. Reding in a Foreign Language, 32(1), 1-27.   
Chung, T., & Nation, P. (2003). Technical vocabulary in specialised texts. Reading in a Foreign Language, 15(2), 103-116.   
Cobb, T. (2007). Computing the vocabulary demand of L2 reading. Language Learning, 11, 38-63.   
Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin, 112(1), 155-159. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.112.1.155   
Cohen, J., hen, P, st .., & Ake .. (2003.ied mil rson/eion sis fr he vi sci. Mwah, J: rbaum.   
Cohen, A., & Macaro, E. (2007). Language learner strategies: 30 years of research and practice. Oxford: Oxford Universty Press.   
Crosle, .  Al,   mara .. 201. t riity an nive simpliicaton:  mpain f rbiit .  in ign Language, 23(1), 84-101.   
oni,  (93  h  t-  .  g 3) 373-401. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1993.tb00619.x   
Drop, 0   -- 0/ doi.org/10.1598/RRQ.38.1.4   
Elgort, I. (2013). Effects of L1 definitions and cognate status of test items on the Vocabulary Size Test. 30(2), 253-272.   
Field, A. P. (2013). In Discovering statisics using IBM SPS satisics: And sex and drug and rock n' roll (4th e.). London: SAGE Publications.   
Gader, . 204. Vcauy t thogh xtive dg  mparin f wod foud i chdes narrtive and xpiry d mtrial. pled Linguistics, 25(1), 1-37. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/25.1.1   
a    ij    n  a. 00sti     te nowldge in first d od-lge redig comprehsion: omontil ls. Jonl of io Pschgy, 6(1, 1930. hp/doi.org. 10.1037/0022-0663.96.1.19   
an d  ce  tl,  dGer  tij, . (007 e of  eg in  ag 1 d ge : A longitudinal analysi of constituent components. Journal f Ecational Pychology, 993), 477-491.htp:/oi.g/10.1037/0022-063.99.3.77 in Second Language Acquisition, 35(3), 483-517. https:/doi.org/10.1017/S0272263113000119   
Grabe, W. (2004). Rearch n tachng readg. Annual Rviw of Aplied Lingustic, 24(1) 4469. http:/doi.rg/10.1017/s0267190504000030   
Grabe, W. (2009). Reading in a second language: Moving from theory to practice. New York: Cambridge University Pres.   
Grabe, W., & Stoller, F L. (2011). In Teaching and researching reading (2nd ed.). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education Limited.   
Grasser ., Sir, M & Trasso . (1994)ostrtin es during nrrative text omsion. Ph Rew 101(3, 371-395.   
Hadou, . 00he t f y d    g in:  h,  rs. The  al 41), 38-50. https://doi.org/10.1111/0026-7902.00051   
Harrington, M. (2018). In Lexical facility (1st ed.). London: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Hey Rm i /iiatio paul-nation/Range_BNC.zip.   
H  262   
Hsu, w. 2011 The r t of  tts an s rh e for  . ish for iic e, 30(, 247-257. 10.1016/j.system.2014.04.004   
Hu, H-C. M., & Nation, I S.P. (2000. Unknown vocabulary density and reading comprehension. Reading in a Foreign Language, 13(1), 403-430.   
Jen, H hta . (2014). 2 rg coin ad it coe: m-i.  g 641) 160-212. /./0.111 lang.12034   
Keer,       s,3 -3.. org/10.3758/BRM.42.3.627   
Kieffe,    t Reading Research Quarterly, 55(1), 147-166. https://doi.org/10.1002/rrq.289   
intsch, . (198. he le f kee i e comprehsion:  ostrctionintin model. PcolRiew, 952), 163-18. hts./oi.g 10.1037//0033-295X.95.2.163   
da, (20).  d ag g isic  o o a t  g 571) 1. /o. org/10.1111/0023-8333.101997010-i1   
Krashen, S. D. (1993). The power of reading: Insights from the research. Westport, Conn: Libraries Unlimited.   
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1982). Frequency analysis of English usage: Lexicon and grammar. Boston: Houghtin Mifflin.   
wn,   008) d    i  i g      ) . org/10.2307/3243411   
Lafer    -  . p 316-323). Multilingual Matters.   
Lafer, . (19. h i     g .),   si . 6-132) London: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Lafer, . (013. xl theshd or reg creenioWhat thy ae and w they can e sed for chng pr. el rl, 474), 67-872. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.140   
Lauer . 2020   n r d n   at  rl, 54, 106-105. /i.g 10.1002/tesq.3004   
Lafer , i, . 017 t    ed  e  n io Modern Language Journal, 101(4), 729-741. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12431   
Lafer,  i10  is       in Foreign Language, 22(1), 15-30.   
Leech, G., Rayson,   Wison, (2001). Word freuencies in witen and spokn English: Based on th British ntinl corus. ondon: Rutledge.   
Leeming, P. (2014). Analysis of the vocabulary size test. The Language Education Jounal, Foreign Language Edition, 5, 73-87.   
Le . t       i Korea. The Modern Language Journal, 98(2), 553-573. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2014.12088.x   
Li M K, 015    h  sics 365 1134./03/i amu007   
Mae0 Macmillan.   
asrai,  (2019. Vaulry and reing mprehsio reisted: Evidnce for high, mid, and lw-freqncy voaulary knwlege. Se Open, 9(2), 1-13.   
McNamara ., Ger, ., Mary, , ai, 2014). ed eaionf te d rse wih h-er. ambridg niverit Pres.   
Miller, M. D., Linn, R. L., & Gronlund, N. (2013). Measurement and asessment in teaching (11th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.   
aj          , 37. https://doi.org/10.2307/3588216   
Nation I . . 2006). Hw e aly is d for reg and istd g Rvie 631), 5982. /.g/038/ cmlr.63.1.59   
Natin, I. S. P. (2009). Reading faster. Intenational Journal of English Studies, 9(2), 131-144. htps:/doi.org/10.6018/jes.9.2.90791   
Nation, I. S. P. (2013). In Learning vocabulary in another language (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Nation, I. S. P., & Webb, S. (2011). Researching and analyzing vocabulary. Boston, MA: Heinle.   
Nguyen, L. T. C., & Nation, I. S. P. (2011). bilingual vocabulary size test of English for Vietnamese learners. RELC Jounl, 42(1, 86-99.   
re,    19    I t . h for i , 8 61-175./i.g 10.1016/S0889-4906(98)00005-2   
Pelie-6     i 17-30. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263115000224   
Qin D. 00tiih e t     n eti.  ng 52 (3), 513-536. https:// org/10.1111/1467-9922.00193   
Raste,  ingo    005,34th  dase. h l   E   55(4) 1339-1362. https://doi.org/10.1080/02724980244000099   
Read, J. (2000). Assessing vocabulary. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Red . (200) lmbi hedths w sho the ot f voaua wge e deid? P. ad, & B. fer (s., Vy n  second language (pp. 209-227). Amsterdam: John Benjamin.   
Reynolds, 15f d  d     g sis Review, 6(4), 467-497. https://doi.org/10.1515/applirev-2015-0021   
Reynos,    013). t f r ch  d  l a iih   ti Technology, 44(3), E77-E80. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8535.2012.01344.x   
Reynolds,   l .014) e  iy qi   did t ad o .  l, 84, 843-861. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.197   
Rydand, , Akst, .  land  202). w od dig, vuly d po topic w prt reg comehsin:  st of language. minority students in Norwegian fith grade classooms. Reading and Writing 25(2), 465-482. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-010-9279-2   
Sadai  eai,  akli,  017. s of  comion csstxt ty: ariso ial an t omnsion o xpository anrraie txs in Ia  lr  of chiustic h, 465, 1087-109. h/.g/10.1007/s10936-017-9481-3   
Schmitt, N. (2010). Researching vocabulary: A vocabulary research manual. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Schmit,  014. e   f v  th h h  g 4), 13-951. /.g/.1g.1207   
Schitt , Jiag, Y  Grae, W. (2011. The ag of words known in a tex nd eang comrehesion. he odem gg Joal, 95(1), 2643. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2011.01146.x   
Shin, J, Dronjic, , & Park, B. (2018). The interplay between working memory and backround knowledge in L2 reding comprehension. Tel Qurerly, 53, 320-347. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.482   
Son,    (2  o  rt  t   . , ,63774 https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.3100   
Stevens, J. (2002). Applied multivariate statistics for the social sciences. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Suk,  (2017).  f xi g n r ,  ,     r, 1), 7389 https://doi.org/10.1002/rrq.152   
Tabachnick, B., & Fidell, L. S. (2001). Using multivarite statistics. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.   
eer,01)    2    i  73 . org/10.1017/s0142716401002041   
Vite   01 r     .,h   1) New York: Routledge.   
Webb, s. (2010). Using glossaries to increase the lexical coverage of television programs. Reading in a Foreign Language, 22(1), 201-221.   
eb, ., & Chang, C. (2012) Scond language vcaulary growth. REL Joul, 43(1), 13-126. htps:/do.0rg/10.1177/033688212439367   
Webb, S., & Nation, I. S. P. (2018). Teaching vocabulary. Boston, MA: Heinle.   
Webb, S., & Rdgers, M. P. H. (2009). The lxcal coverag f movies. Aplied Lingustics 30(3, 407-427. htps:/do.org/10.1093/applin/mp010   
Yidr ,   . 011.s y  so ia pt g i ad t tio  f v ay according to text types. Educational Sciences: Theory and Practice, 11(3), 1541-1547.   
Zhang, X. (2013). The I don't know option in the vocabulary size test. Tesol Quarterly, 47(4), 790-811. htps:/doi.org/10.1002/tesq.98   
hang J. he 017. r ds ive is rs a ish     a  a ord learning. Journal of Research in Reading, 40, 169-183. https:/doi.org/10.1111/1467-9817.12100   
ang, .   016). h    d s    i.  , 9 69715 https://doi.org/10.1111/flan.12225   
Zhao P, ,  018.f th  th y it E , 493) 0./..110368663976

Ms. ii sh    the F f Foe    it. h wkn r h ithe Education at the University of Macau, with a focus on L2 vocabulary acquisition.