# The role of foreign language in the experience and emotional expression of guilt: evidence from moral scenarios and autobiographical memories of bilinguals

Andreas Kyriakou, Irini Mavrou & Kiriakí Palapanidi

To cite this article: Andreas Kyriakou, Irini Mavrou & Kiriakí Palapanidi (2024) The role of foreign language in the experience and emotional expression of guilt: evidence from moral scenarios and autobiographical memories of bilinguals, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:10, 1407-1421, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2024.2365238

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2024.2365238

# The role of foreign language in the experience and emotional expression of guilt: evidence from moral scenarios and autobiographical memories of bilinguals

Andreas Kyriakou $\textcircled{1}$ a , Irini Mavrou a,b,c and Kiriakí Palapanidi $\textcircled{1}$ a Departamento de Lenguas Aplicadas, Universidad Antonio de Nebrija, Madrid, Spain; b Centro de Investigación Nebrija en Cognición, Universidad Antonio de Nebrija, Madrid, Spain;  Department of Culture, Communication and Media, IOE, UCL’s Faculty of Education and Society, University College London, London, UK; d Department of Spanish Language and Literature, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece

# ABSTRACT

This study investigated the influence of language – first language (L1) versus second language (L2) – on the experience and the expression of the emotion of guilt. Fifty-two Greek – Spanish bilinguals read two moral scenarios that induced guilt in their L2 (Spanish) and rated the intensity with which they felt a series of emotions (moral scenario task). Then they were asked to recall and write about a real-life event that made them feel guilty in their L2 (autobiographical memory task). A month later they performed the same tasks in their L1. Content analysis and emotional vocabulary analysis were conducted to examine crosslinguistic differences in the expression of guilt. Overall, these bilinguals experienced higher levels of guilt and regret when they read the moral scenarios in their L1 Greek. They also used a greater number of emotion words in their autobiographical memories in L1. However, they appeared to be more willing to talk about sensitive topics (e.g. infidelity, homosexuality, and death) in their L2. These findings have implications for both psychotherapy and L2 instruction.

ARTICLE HISTORY Received 10 November 2022 Accepted 4 June 2024

# KEYWORDS

Guilt; regret; social emotions; emotional memories; moral dilemmas; emotionaldetachment effect

# Introduction

Guilt is a pervasive emotion that people experience after doing something they regret. A wide range of situations can elicit the emotion of guilt, from eating junk food or working excessive hours and not spending enough time with family to more unethical actions such as stealing, cheating, or harming someone physically or emotionally. Although the vast majority of people in Western societies experience guilt on a daily basis (Carroll 2020), it is often hard for them to recognise it, accept it or verbalise the actions that made them feel guilty. In the era of globalisation, with more and more people relocating abroad for love, work, studies, or better living conditions, it is surprising that empirical evidence on the experience and expression of guilt in a second language (L2) is still very scant.

This study investigated whether Greek – Spanish bilingual speakers – an underrepresented population in bilingualism and L2 emotion research – experienced heightened levels of guilt in their first language (L1), as opposed to their L2, after reading two realistic moral scenarios that induced this emotion. Research on moral decision-making suggests that emotionally charged moral scenarios systematically evoke guilt in both L1 (Horne and Powell 2016; Parisi et al. 2021) and L2 (Driver 2022; Kyriakou and Mavrou 2023a, 2023b). However, the extent to which moral scenarios trigger different levels of guilt across languages (L1 versus L2) is a question that remains unanswered. Our second goal was to examine how these bilingual speakers expressed feelings of guilt in their written autobiographical memories for guilt-provoking events in L1 and L2. Autobiographical memories – mental constructions of events occurred in the past and retrieved and narrated in the present for specific purposes (Brewer 1986) – constitute one of the most common means for expressing emotions, feelings, and thoughts in daily life (Alea, Bluck, and Semegon 2004; Pavlenko 2007). They offer deeper insights into people’s personal experiences and enable them to construct their personal identity (Pavlenko 2007; Wilson and Ross 2003). Research on autobiographical memories of bilinguals has mainly focused on primary emotions, such as anger (Ho 2009; Vidal Noguera, Villar, and Mavrou 2022), fear (e.g. Chamcharatsri 2013), sadness (Jansson and Dylman 2021) and happiness (Bartolac 2016) or a combination of both (Kheirzadeh and Hajiabed 2016; Thoma, Lorette, and Krautz 2022). Bilinguals’ autobiographical memories related to social emotions, such as guilt, have received scant attention. This is at odds with evidence suggesting that social emotions, including guilt, are the most frequently evoked in everyday social interactions and are thus part of people’s everyday autobiographical memories (Körner et al. 2016). To our knowledge, this study is the first to analyse and compare both the causes of guilt emerging from bilinguals’ autobiographical memories for guilt-provoking events in their L1 and L2 and the L1 and L2 emotion words used to describe this emotion. As bilinguals who acquire their L2 later in life tend to provide less strong emotional responses to emotion-inducing stimuli in their L2 (see Caldwell-Harris 2014, for a review), our hypothesis was that our participants would employ a significantly greater number of emotion words to narrate a guilt-provoking event in their L1 than in their L2. We also speculated that these bilinguals would talk more about sensitive topics in their L2 due to the emotional blunting in L2 contexts (Ivaz, Griffin, and Duñabeitia 2019; Marian and Kaushanskaya 2008). The analysis of both the themes and the emotional vocabulary used to express guilt in L1 and in L2 is particularly relevant for therapeutic intervention among bilinguals who are confronted with past traumatic events and painful situations and have to confess their feelings of guilt in order to develop self-compassion and move forward (see Cook and Dewaele 2022).

# Guilt in moral scenarios

Guilt is usually described as an unpleasant, self-conscious emotion, involving negative evaluations of oneself which are elicited by intrusive thoughts (e.g. ‘I did that horrible thing’; Tangney and Tracy 2012, 448) related to specific actions that have occurred and that people are convinced they shouldn’t have done or should have done differently (Haidt 2003; Tangney, Stuewig, and Mashek 2007). Guilt is usually experienced after causing emotional or physical harm to someone or after violating interiorised moral codes which are valid and acceptable in particular societies and cultures (de Hooge, Breugelmans, and Zeelenberg 2008; Tangney and Dearing 2002). Although guilt is a disagreeable emotion associated with negative feelings such as distress, tension, self-blame, remorse, and regret (Cavalera and Pepe 2014; Eisenberg 2000), it is broadly acknowledged that the sense of guilt can induce prosocial or reparative behaviour in order to wipe away this undesirable emotion (Tangney, Stuewig, and Mashek 2007; Xu, Bègue, and Shankland 2011). Leunissen, Sedikides, and Wildschut (2017) pointed out that the experience of guilt entails accepting responsibility for wrongdoing and encourages relationship-restore actions (e.g. apologising to the victim) (see Bybee and Quiles 1998).

Guilt is believed to be one of the emotions most intensively experienced when individuals respond to emotionally charged moral dilemmas in their L1 (Choe and Min 2011; Szekely and Miu 2015; Tasso, Sarlo, and Lotto 2017). In Choe and Min’s study (2011; Study 1), 243 participants indicated guilt as the most strongly experienced emotion while reading high-conflict moral dilemmas, such as the footbridge dilemma in which one must decide whether to sacrifice one innocent person to save five (Greene et al. 2001). Likewise, Tasso, Sarlo, and Lotto (2017) measured self-rated emotional responses to high-conflict (footbridge-type) and low-conflict moral dilemmas and found that guilt was one of the most felt emotions, irrespective of the type of moral dilemmas and the type of decision (deontological versus utilitarian).

Research on how guilt is involved in moral dilemmas presented in L2 has received much less attention. An exception is Driver’s (2022) study, in which 280 bilinguals were asked to rate whether they felt specific emotions, including guilt, after reading the footbridge dilemma and the trolley dilemma and after making their moral decision in their L1 or L2. Although the participants rated guilt as one of the most powerful emotions they felt, the level of guilt did not differ significantly across language conditions probably because the list of emotions was presented to them only in their L1. In a more recent study, Kyriakou, Foucart, and Mavrou (2023) asked 204 English – Spanish bilinguals to justify their decision and to express their emotions after reading the footbridge dilemma in their L1 or L2. In the L1 condition, one third of the participants reported that they would have felt guilty if they had chosen to sacrifice the innocent man, but only 13 expressed similar arguments in their L2.

So far, the limited number of studies on guilt in relation to moral scenarios have been based on unrealistic, hypothetical situations which are unlikely to occur in real life and have been criticised for lacking ecological validity (Bauman et al. 2014). To overcome this limitation, this study used two everyday moral scenarios. Consistent with the view that emotional stimuli in L2 generate reduced emotional resonance (Caldwell-Harris 2014; Dewaele et al. 2021; Ożańska-Ponikwia 2019), we hypothesised that our participants would provide lower ratings of guilt after reading the two moral scenarios in their L2 than in their L1.

# Guilt in autobiographical memories

Guilt forms an integral part of people’s memories of autobiographical events in interpersonal contexts (Körner et al. 2016). In fact, autobiographical memories have been the foremost technique employed in the field of psychology to investigate the experience of guilt (Dahl, Honea, and Manchanda 2003). In Keltner’s study (1996), 51 undergraduate students were invited to recall an event that made them feel guilty and to describe it in one to two sentences. The results of content analysis revealed that the most common antecedents of guilt were: (1) failure to perform duties, such as not studying enough for an exam; (2) dishonesty, especially telling lies; (3) harming someone emotionally; (4) cheating (e.g. in an exam); and (5) breaking a diet or giving up exercise. Using a similar approach, Etxebarria and Pérez (2003) asked 129 adolescents and 73 adults to think about three specific events that caused them guilt. Guilt was associated with (1) emotional neglect in a relationship; (2) getting involved in someone else’s troubles; (3) neglecting responsibilities, such as turning in an assignment late; (4) being rude to other people; (5) lying; (6) cheating on a loved one; (7) belittling others; and (8) neglecting self-care. Similar findings were obtained in Robinaugh and McNally’s study (2010) with non-clinical adult participants. Cheating in relationships and causing physical harm were the most frequent reasons for feeling guilty. To a lesser extent, participants indicated the death of a loved one, stealing, and committing dishonest acts related to academic activities as guilt-provoking events. More recently, Luck and Luck-Sikorski (2022) recruited 604 German adult participants and found that the main reasons that made them experience guilt in their daily life were (1) lying/ hiding the truth; (2) neglecting or spending little time with family members; and (3) having negative thoughts about others. Nevertheless, the above studies have focused on antecedents of guilt only in the L1. Building upon this research, the current study sought to explore whether the language (L1 versus L2) in which guilt-evoking experiences are expressed results in the same or different antecedents of this emotion and number of emotion words used to express feelings of guilt.

# Research questions

Despite the growing number of studies on the role of language in bilinguals’ emotional experience and expression, empirical evidence on guilt, a social emotion of high relevance, in L1 versus L2 is almost absent. The current study addressed this gap by examining the role of language (L1 versus L2) in the emotion ratings of guilt induced by realistic moral dilemmas, as well as the specific themes and emotion words used to narrate autobiographical memories of guilt in L1 and L2 by the same participants. The following research questions were established:

(1) Does the language used (L1 versus L2) influence the emotion ratings of guilt that Greek – Spanish bilingual speakers provide after reading realistic moral scenarios in their L1 (Greek) and L2 (Spanish)?   
(2) Does the language used (L1 versus L2) influence the themes and emotion words used by these bilinguals in their written autobiographical memories of guilt in L1 and L2?

# Methods

The study received prior approval from the Research Ethics Committee of Nebrija University and followed the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki.

# Participants

Sixty-nine Greek – Spanish bilinguals were initially recruited. The participants were undergraduate students of Spanish language and literature at National and Kapodistrian University of Athens and completed the different tasks of the study in classroom. However, data from 17 participants were excluded due to missing information, very low proficiency level in Spanish or because their autobiographical memories did not address guilt-related events. This resulted in a final sample of 52 participants1 (38 females), aged between 19 and 65 $( M = 3 6 . 0 3$ , $S D = 1 2 . 7 1$ ). The disproportion between male and female participants in this study can be attributed to the elevated percentage of women, as opposed to men, in language-related careers (Pavlenko 2005), which also applies to the Greek context. Furthermore, although our sample was composed of undergraduate students of Spanish language and literature, substantial age-related differences were observed. Specifically, our participants did not strictly belong to the age range of 18–22 years, as would be expected in the case of students who attend undergraduate programs in other countries, and this is due to the increasing number of mature students at tertiary education institutions, including Greek universities, over the last two decades (Griffiths, Kaldi, and Pires 2008; Sakkoulis and Vergidis 2023). As Sakkoulis and Vergidis (2023) clarify, there is a considerable number of undergraduate students attending Greek universities who are older than expected. These are students who were unable to complete their bachelor’s degree within the time period required and were therefore remained enrolled in universities programs for many years. It should also be noted that Greek students may study languages and linguistics at a later age, after having completed a bachelor’s or a master’s degree in a different subject during early adulthood. For example, participant ID01 was 50 years old, had a master’s degree and had started learning Spanish when he was 44 years old at private language school before commencing his university studies in Spanish language and literature. Similarly, ID25 was 49 years old, had a master’s degree and had started learning Spanish at the age of 44.

All participants were speakers of Greek L1, had started learning Spanish after puberty in instructional settings $( M = 2 2 . 0 6 $ , $S D = 1 2 . 3 6 )$ and had an upper-intermediate level of Spanish at the moment of data collection according to the self-reported ratings that they provided using 7-point Likert-type scales for reading ability $M = 5 . 6 0$ , $S D = 0 . 9 7 ,$ ), writing $( M = 5 . 0 2 , S D = 1 . 0 9 )$ , speaking $\langle M = 4 . 7 9$ , $S D = 1 . 1 3$ ), listening $( M = 5 . 6 3$ , $S D = 0 . 9 7 ;$ ), and overall Spanish L2 proficiency $( M = 5 . 3 0$ , $S D = 0 . 9 1$ ).

# Materials and procedure

A factorial design was adopted for this study. After giving their informed consent and responding to questions regarding their demographic and language background, the participants were instructed to complete two interrelated experimental tasks in Spanish L2. In the first task (moral scenario task), participants were presented with two emotional moral scenarios – the student’s dilemma and the cheater’s dilemma – which are likely to occur in real life and, as previous studies have suggested, are able to induce the emotion of guilt (de Hooge, Breugelmans, and Zeelenberg 2008; Kyriakou and Mavrou 2023a). This kind of everyday moral dilemmas are characterised by high ecological validity and promote psychological processes similar to those associated with moral decision-making in real-life settings (Bauman et al. 2014; Körner and Deutsch 2023; Singer et al. 2019); therefore, participants’ responses to these dilemmas are more effectively aligned with their real moral behaviour (FeldmanHall et al. 2012).

In the student’s dilemma (adapted from de Hooge et al. 2008), the participants were asked to imagine that they were enrolled in a compulsory module and, in addition to taking an individual exam, they had to complete an assignment in groups of two to successfully pass the module. Due to lack of effort and involvement in the completion of the assignment on the participants’ side, their classmate did not pass the module, but the participants did because their exam results were good enough to allow them to pass the module. Therefore, they had to decide whether they would tell their professor the truth even if they risked to also fail the course. In the cheater’s dilemma (adapted from Kyriakou and Mavrou 2023a), the participants had to decide whether they would tell their partner that they got drunk during a business trip and ended up cheating on them with an unknown person. Both moral dilemmas were deemed appropriate for our sample (i.e. undergraduate adult participants), as they were linked to these students’ social reality. After reading each moral dilemma, the participants were asked to rate the intensity with which they experienced feelings of guilt, pride, shame, regret, and fear using 11-point Likert-type scales $[ 0 =$ not at all, $1 1 =$ very strongly) (de Hooge, Breugelmans, and Zeelenberg 2008). Both moral dilemmas and emotion ratings were provided in Spanish. This moral scenario task also served as an induction technique aiming at activating moral schemas and L2 emotional vocabulary knowledge, which participants would eventually use when retrieving an autobiographical memory of guilt in their L2 (for a similar methodological approach, see Vuoskoski and Eerola 2012).

In the second task (autobiographical memory task), participants were instructed to write about an event that made them experience the emotions of guilt and remorse and to provide information about the place and the people they were with when the event occurred, how old they were, what happened that made them feel guilty, how they acted and what they did to stop feeling guilt and remorse, whether the event had any consequences in their daily life and how they feel when remembering the event. The same participants were contacted after a month and performed the same experimental tasks in their L1 (see Panayiotou 2004, for a similar methodological approach). They were presented with the same moral scenarios and emotion ratings in Greek L1 and were then instructed to narrate an autobiographical memory related to the emotion of guilt again in their L1. The exact prompts for the moral scenario task and the autobiographical memory task in both Greek L1 and Spanish L2 are included in the Supplementary Material.

# Content analysis

An inductive (bottom-up) content analysis was carried out by the first two authors of this study following Elo and Kyngäs’s (2008) three-phase approach, namely, preparation, organising and reporting the results. In the first stage, the autobiographical memories in L1 and L2 were transcribed by the first author and imported into ATLAS.ti (version 8.4.5; ATLAS.ti Scientific Software Development GmbH 2022), a computer-assisted qualitative data analysis software that enables researchers to identify coding schemes and categorise them into main themes (Hwang 2008). Subsequently, the first two authors read the autobiographical memories to ensure that they described guilt-inducing events. In the organising stage, they read them again and created initial codes independently using memos and highlights. Repetitive structures (e.g. common words and phrases) were gathered in order to generate codes. The codes derived from this process were later re-read and classified into broad categories based on thematic similarity. In the final stage, the two coders discussed the results until reaching an agreement about the categories. The frequency with which each category appeared in L1 and L2 was calculated. Inter-rater agreement was high (Cohen’s ${ \sf k } = 0 . 6 9$ , for L1; Cohen’s ${ \sf k } = 0 . 8 3$ , for L2).

# Emotional vocabulary analysis

Emotional words can be divided into emotion words, emotion-related words, and emotion-laden words (see Pavlenko 2008), but this study focused exclusively on emotion words, that is, words that directly name an emotion or an emotional state. Emotion words were identified independently by the first two authors using Diccionario de los sentimientos [Dictionary of feelings] (Marina and Penas 2000) and Ελληνόγλωσσο ονοματολόγιο συναισθημάτων [Greek language dictionary of emotions] (Tsantila 2005) for Spanish and Greek words, respectively. Inter-rater reliability was calculated using the Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC). We employed the two-way mixed mathematical model because the set of raters was fixed and was not randomly selected, neither did we intend to proceed to generalisations. Furthermore, we were interested in the absolute agreement between raters and report here the coefficients corresponding to single measures, which indicate inter-rater reliability when only the scores by one of the raters – and not the average score – is used for hypothesis testing. For Spanish words, $\mathsf { I C C } = . 9 1 3$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [.854, .949], while for Greek words ${ \mathsf { I C C } } = . 9 4 8$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [.911, .970]. Lastly, we calculated the predominant emotion words used in each language condition.

# Results

# Emotion ratings in L1 and L2

A two-way mixed ANOVA was used to examine the effect of language (L1 versus L2) and moral dilemma (the student’s dilemma and the cheater’s dilemma) on participants’ emotion ratings. Table 1 presents means and standard deviations for emotion ratings by language condition and moral dilemma. Guilt was the strongest emotion that the participants felt in their L1 regardless of the dilemma. In the L2 condition, they reported significantly less guilt $( F ( 1 , 1 0 2 ) = 1 1 . 9 8 3$ , $p < . 0 0 1$ , $\eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 9 3 )$ and less regret $( F ( 1 , 1 0 2 ) = 4 . 6 7 3$ , $p = . 0 3 3$ , $\eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 3 4 )$ than in their L1, and no main effect of the moral scenario was observed (guilt: $F \ 1 , 1 0 2 ) = . 9 7 3$ $p = . 3 3 $ , $\eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 0 1$ ; regret: $\begin{array} { r l } { ( F } & { { } ( 1 , 1 0 2 ) = } \end{array}$ .067, $p = . 7 9 7$ , $\eta ^ { 2 } = . 1 . 3 6 7 \times 1 0 ^ { - 4 } )$ . Additionally, no statistically significant effects of language and moral dilemma on the emotion ratings of shame were found. Regarding the remaining emotions (i.e. pride and fear), the participants reported having felt more pride in the student’s dilemma than in the cheater’s dilemma $( F \left( 1 , 1 0 2 \right) = 2 4 . 5 1 7 , p < . 0 0 1 , \eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 5 6 )$ and more fear in the cheater’s dilemma regardless of the language condition $( F ( 1 , 1 0 2 ) = 6 5 . 7 2 2$ $p < . 0 0 1$ , $\eta ^ { 2 } = . 1 7 2 )$ . Although age differences were not the focus of this study, we also performed a two-way mixed ANOVA with age as a covariate due to considerable age-related variation among our participants. This analysis yielded an interaction between age and the emotion of pride, but the $p$ -value was very close to the cut-off point of .05 $( F ( 1 , 1 0 1 ) = 4 . 1 8 1$ , $p = . 0 4 3$ , $\eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 1 0 )$ .

Table 1. Means and standard deviations for emotion ratings in L1 and L2.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">The student&#x27;s dilemma</td><td colspan="2">The cheater&#x27;s dilemma</td></tr><tr><td>Emotions</td><td>Greek L1</td><td>Spanish L2</td><td>Greek L1</td><td>Spanish L2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mean (SD)</td><td>Mean (SD)</td><td> Mean (SD)</td><td> Mean (SD)</td></tr><tr><td>Guilt</td><td>9.5 (2.03)</td><td>7.81 (2.79)</td><td>9.61 (2.23)</td><td>8.13 (2.81)</td></tr><tr><td>Pride</td><td>2.1 (1.73)</td><td>2.3 (1.99)</td><td>1.38 (1.53)</td><td>1.38 (1.34)</td></tr><tr><td>Shame</td><td>7.78 (3.08)</td><td>7.61 (3.00)</td><td>8.04 (3.04)</td><td>8.69 (2.84)</td></tr><tr><td>Regret</td><td>8.92 (2.42)</td><td>7.58 (2.85)</td><td>8.92 (2.85)</td><td>8.17 (3.09)</td></tr><tr><td>Fear</td><td>2.69 (2.40)</td><td>2.67 (2.05)</td><td>5.19 (3.90)</td><td>6.08 (3.77)</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Content categories for autobiographical memory task

This section summarises the results of content analysis of the participants’ autobiographical memories in their L1 and L2. Table 2 presents the themes addressed in these autobiographical memories, which were classified into seven main categories: (1) harming someone emotionally or physically; (2) norm violation; (3) not being faithful in relationships; (4) hiding the truth/lying; (5) death-related events; (6) not helping someone in need; and (7) other. As some participants $( n = 2 2 )$ ) produced thematically similar autobiographical memories in their L1 and L2, we also conducted a complementary analysis that only considered bilinguals’ autobiographical memories that differed thematically across language conditions $( n = 3 0 ;$ ; see Table 3). This complementary analysis roughly replicated the same patterns as did the analysis with the entire sample.

Overall, in both language conditions participants mainly narrated autobiographical memories of guilt after harming someone emotionally or physically, such as harming an animal, belittling others, rejecting someone, being rough or aggressive towards someone, neglecting a friend, or harming someone’s feelings by telling the truth.

ID27, L2: I told a friend of mine that I like another person, without knowing that he was in love with me. I know I didn’t have to feel bad about it, but I didn’t want to break his heart.2

The second most frequently mentioned category in the L1 condition concerned norm violation. Norm violations included breaking the law by stealing something, damaging someone’s property, cheating in an exam, or skipping quarantine.

ID08, L1: Last winter I spent my time during quarantine with my family, my mother, my father, and my sister. Around mid-February we had many discussions to the point that we ended up not talking to each other. My sister and I united forces against our parents and decided to take turns going out in secret, covering for each other.

Of interest, the participants were more likely to narrate an event related to norm violations in their L1 than in their L2, and this difference was statistically significant $\left( t = 2 . 8 5 0 \right.$ , $p = . 0 0 6 )$ .

The second most frequent category in the L2 condition referred to not being faithful in relationships. In this condition, participants who reported not being faithful in relationships provided reasons why they had cheated on their partners. For example, ID43 admitted that he cheated on his partner because he was very drunk.

Table 2. Themes of the autobiographical memories by language condition (entire sample, ${ \mathsf n } = 5 2$ ).   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Content categories</td><td colspan="2">Frequencies (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Greek L1</td><td> Spanish L2</td></tr><tr><td>Harming someone emotionally or physically</td><td>19 (36.54%)</td><td>16 (30.77%)</td></tr><tr><td>Norm violation.</td><td>13 (25%)</td><td>3 (5.77%)</td></tr><tr><td>Not being faithful in relationships</td><td>6 (11.54%)</td><td>11 (21.15%)</td></tr><tr><td>Hiding the truth/Lyinge</td><td>7 (13.46%)</td><td>9 (17.30%)</td></tr><tr><td>Death</td><td>1 (1.92%)</td><td>7 (13.46%)</td></tr><tr><td>Not helping someone in need</td><td>3 (5.77%)</td><td>2 (3.85%)</td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>3 (5.77%)</td><td>4 (7.69%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3. Themes of the autobiographical memories that differed in L1 and L2 $( n = 3 0 )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Content categoriese</td><td colspan="2">Frequencies (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Greek L1</td><td> Spanish L2</td></tr><tr><td>Harming someone emotionally or physically</td><td>10 (33.33%)</td><td>7 (23.33%)</td></tr><tr><td>Norm violation.</td><td>13 (44.33%)</td><td>3 (10%)</td></tr><tr><td>Not being faithful in relationships</td><td>1 (3.33%)</td><td>6 (20%)</td></tr><tr><td> Hiding the truth/Lyinge</td><td>3 (10%)</td><td>5 (16.66%)</td></tr><tr><td>Death</td><td>1 (3.33%)</td><td>7 (23.33%)</td></tr><tr><td>Not helping someone in need</td><td>1 (3.33%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>1 (3.33%)</td><td>2 (6.67%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

ID43, L2: As I was very drunk, I ended up having sex with a stranger in the toilet of a club and unfortunately, we did not use a condom. The next day I couldn’t remember what I had done the night before because it was a pretty crazy night. When my boyfriend asked me about that night, I didn’t tell him anything.

Another participant mentioned that she cheated on her partner because she was not in love with her boyfriend anymore:

ID11, L2: When I was eighteen years old, I was in a relationship. One day I did something bad. I cheated on him with another guy. Two weeks later I told him I didn’t want us to be together anymore because my feelings for him had changed.

The third most frequent category in both language conditions was hiding the truth or lying, with participants recalling events in which they told lies to their parents or friends, or they avoided revealing the truth about important personal matters. For example, in the L2 condition, ID52 stated that as a teenager she began to tell lies to her parents that she needed money to buy schoolbooks, but instead she spent that money on clothes and cosmetics. Likewise, in the L1 condition ID36 said that she lied to her best friend about being tested positive for COVID-19 because she had argued with her boyfriend, was feeling sorrowful and was not feeling like going to her friend’s party.

Moreover, our participants appeared to be more willing to express strong feelings of guilt related to irreversible loss, such as the death of a loved one, the death of a pet or the death of a homeless person, in their L2 than in their L1 $\left( t = - 2 . 1 9 8 \right.$ , $p = . 0 3 3 \mathrm { , }$ ).

ID37, L2: One night my father’s sister who lived with my grandmother called us and told us that my grandmother passed away. I felt horrible. I hadn’t visited her for almost a month, and I couldn’t say a proper goodbye to her. I realised how selfish I was, since the only thing that mattered to me was partying and having a good time and not being with my grandmother during her last moments.

To a lesser extent, guilt-provoking events were associated with not helping someone in need, such us refusing to help a colleague in the workplace or a partner to carry out a task. For example, in the L1 condition ID03 mentioned that her ex-boyfriend decided to move out, but she preferred to go on holiday instead of helping him move.

Finally, memories falling into the category ‘other’ included events such as talking bad about someone’s family, not complying with duties, revealing a secret, or neglecting self-care. For example, ID28 commented that he felt guilty because he revealed a friend’s secret to another friend.

# Language and emotional vocabulary

Differences in the emotional vocabulary that our participants used in their autobiographical memories of guilt in L1 and L2 were examined by means of a one-way ANCOVA with age as the covariate. In terms of length of the narratives, no main effect of language $( F \left( 1 , 1 0 2 \right) = 0 . 1 5 8 , p = . 6 9 1 , \eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 0 2 )$ or age $( F ( 1 , 1 0 1 ) = 0 . 5 5 8$ , $p = . 4 5 7$ , $\eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 0 5 )$ on the total number of word tokens was found. This finding can be taken as an indication of our participants’ ability to use a wide range of vocabulary to express autobiographical memories both in their L1 and L2. However, the autobiographical memories of guilt in Greek L1 contained a higher proportion of emotion word tokens $M = 7 . 1 5$ , $S D = 4 . 4 3$ ) than did those written in Spanish L2 $( M = 5 . 4 4 , S D = 2 . 8 6 ; F ( 1 , 1 0 2 ) = 5 . 4 2 3$ , $p = . 0 2 2$ , $\eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 5 1 ,$ ). Furthermore, no main effect of age on the number of emotion tokens was observed across language conditions $( F \left( 1 , 1 0 1 \right) = 0 . 0 8 0 , p = . 7 7 8 , \eta ^ { 2 } = 7 . 5 1 7 \times 1 0 ^ { - 4 } )$ .

We also conducted a complementary analysis to explore whether the induction method we used to activate moral schemas related to the emotion of guilt had an influence on the emotionality of the autobiographical memories of guilt. To this end, we ran a correlation analysis between the emotion ratings of guilt in the moral scenario task and the number of emotion tokens in the autobiographical memory task for each language condition separately. No statistically significant correlations were found between the number of emotion tokens used in the autobiographical memory in Greek L1 and the emotion ratings in the student’s dilemma $( r = . 1 4 7 , p = . 2 9 0 )$ or the cheater’s dilemma $( r = . 0 0 9 , p$ $= . 9 5 0 )$ , nor between the number of emotion tokens employed in the autobiographical memory in Spanish L2 and the emotion ratings in the two dilemmas (for the student’s dilemma, $r = . 1 6 5 , p$ $= . 0 9 0 ;$ for the cheater’s dilemma, $r = . 0 3 1$ , $p = . 7 5 0 )$ .

Table 4. Predominant emotion words in the L1 and L2 autobiographical memories.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Greek emotion words</td><td>F</td><td>Spanish emotion words</td><td>f</td></tr><tr><td>Evoxn [guilt]</td><td>33</td><td>Remordimiento [remorse]</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>Toyeic [remorse]</td><td>29</td><td>Culpa [guilt]</td><td>21</td></tr><tr><td>Etevaxwpieal [loosely translated as &#x27;to be sad&#x27;]</td><td>12</td><td>Verguenza [shame]</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>Aoxna [badly]</td><td>11</td><td>Mal [Bad]</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>Ntponn [shame]</td><td>10</td><td>Culpable [guilty]</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Metaviwvw [to regret]</td><td>9</td><td>Triste [sad]</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Ayxoc [stress]</td><td>8</td><td>Enamorado [in love]</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Ouwvw [to get angry]</td><td>8</td><td>Enfadar [to get angry]</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Ntpenoai [to be ashamed of]</td><td>7</td><td>Feliz [happy]</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Avnouxw [to worry]</td><td>7</td><td>Dano [harm]</td><td>6</td></tr></table></body></html>

Lastly, we identified the most frequently used emotion words encountered in the autobiographical memories in Greek L1 and Spanish L2 (Table 4). The results revealed that the most frequent words were guilt/guilty, remorse, shame, bad/badly, and to get angry.

# Discussion

This study investigated how Greek – Spanish bilinguals experience and express the emotion of guilt in their L1 and L2. The results revealed that guilt-inducing moral dilemmas made our bilingual participants experienced high levels of guilt and regret regardless of the language in which they read these dilemmas, which is consistent with previous findings suggesting that guilt, regret and remorse are among the most common emotions that L1 and L2 speakers experience during or after reading emotionally charged moral dilemmas (de Hooge, Breugelmans, and Zeelenberg 2008; Driver 2022; Kyriakou and Mavrou 2023a; 2023b; Szekely and Miu 2015). However, the intensity with which guilt and regret were experienced varied; that is, moral dilemmas in L1 induced more intense guilt and regret than moral dilemmas in L2, with emotion ratings for pride, shame and fear being held similar across language conditions. These findings partially support the view that the language in which affective stimuli are presented may influence their processing and emotion ratings (Caldwell-Harris 2014; Dewaele 2015; Pavlenko 2012; but see Caldwell-Harris et al. 2011; Mavrou and Dewaele 2020). They also align with Kyriakou, Foucart, and Mavrou’s (2023) recent study suggesting that feelings of guilt are particularly salient in response to moral dilemmas in L1.

The emerging topics addressed in the autobiographical memories in L1 and L2 were similar to the ones reported in previous L1 studies (Etxebarria and Pérez 2003; Robinaugh and McNally 2010). The novel contribution of the current study is that our participants not only referred to sensitive topics, such as the death of a loved one or homosexuality, more often in their L2 than in their L1 (Cook and Dewaele 2022; Rolland, Dewaele, and Costa 2017) but also felt more guilty because of these events. This result can be attributed to the emotional-detachment effect (Marcos 1976). Bilinguals have the ability to disengage from their emotions and feelings when using their L2, particularly when they talk about unpleasant topics (Costa and Dewaele 2019; Schrauf 2000). Therefore, our participants might have felt more comfortable expressing guilt-provoking events related to sensitive or controversial topics in their L2 with which they may have been less connected (Pavlenko 2005).

Of interest, five participants talked about topics concerning sexual orientation but only in their L2. For example, ID13 mentioned that he had hidden his sexual orientation from his best friend for years, while in Greek L1 the same participant referred to feelings of guilt after cheating in an exam. Homosexuality remains a taboo topic in Greek society (e.g. Greece only recently, in 2024, legalised samesex civil marriage after decades of protests by LGBTQ $^ +$ community and LGBTQ $^ +$ right organisations) and LGBTQ $^ +$ people in Greece are still receptors of negative treatment and discrimination (Pettas, Arampatzi, and Dagkouli-Kyriakoglou 2022). These results argue strongly for an emotional blunting in L2 which serves as a tool of liberation, offering bilinguals the opportunity to talk about taboo topics more freely and to overcome prejudice (see Cook and Dewaele 2022).

Another intriguing finding is that autobiographical memories referring to norm violations were reported more often in L1 than in L2. Sensitivity to social and moral norms appears to be influenced by the language we speak (Białek, Paruzel-Czachura, and Gawronski 2019; Geipel, Hadjichristidis, and Surian 2015). As Geipel, Hadjichristidis, and Surian (2015) argued, people might be more concerned about norm violations and what is acceptable or condemnable in their L1 because they have been exposed to these norms from early childhood and almost always in their L1 during interactions with their parents, or through everyday social communication outside their home (e.g. at school). Episodic memories are more accessible in the language in which they have been encoded (Marian and Kaushanskaya 2004); therefore, autobiographical memories related to social violations in the L2 might not be activated that often or that easily. This explanation is in agreement with Harris et al.’s (2003) study revealing that childhood reprimands (e.g. ‘shame on you’) elicited elevated electrophysiological arousal in bilinguals’ L1 rather than in their L2.

Although our participants appeared to be less hesitant about sharing emotionally charged memories linked to taboo topics (e.g. homosexuality) and strong negative experiences (e.g. death) in their L2, they narrated these experiences using a significantly lower number of emotion words in their L2 than they did in their L1. It is also worth noting that although our participants used L2 emotion words which have exact translation equivalents in their L1, they also used some emotion terms in L1 which are hard to translate in other languages, such as stenahoria, a key emotion term in the Greek culture (Panayiotou 2006). Two explanations may account for this finding. First, our participants acquired their L2 in instructional settings without being immersed in interactions with locals in culturally authentic environments where the use of L2 emotional vocabulary is common (Ożańska-Ponikwia 2019; Pavlenko 2012; Pavlenko and Driagina 2007). Second, it has been argued that bilinguals are more emotionally expressive in their L1 because it is the language of greater emotional reactivity and personal emotional involvement (Dewaele and Pavlenko 2002; Pavlenko 2012). This explanation is supported by several studies in which the use of an L2 made people feel less emotional and less natural when verbalising their emotions (Dewaele 2006; 2015).

Nevertheless, the findings of the present study should be interpreted in light of several limitations. The first limitation refers to the number of moral dilemmas used in this study, which was quite limited – yet similar to the number of dilemmas that many previous studies on the moral foreign language effect employed (e.g. Driver 2022; Dylman and Champoux-Larsson 2020). Future studies should employ a greater number of guilt-inducing moral dilemmas to further ensure whether the intensity of guilt is influenced by the language in which a moral dilemma is presented. Second, we only used subjective measures (i.e. self-reports) to assess participants’ proficiency level in Spanish, which do not always capture subtle differences in language proficiency. Moreover, our participants conducted the moral scenario task and the autobiographical memory task first in their L2 and a month later in their L1. This decision was motivated by the fact that we used intact classes, our participants had to perform a considerable number of tasks, and doing these tasks first in their less dominant language would eventually minimise repetition or memory effects. However, we acknowledge that having applied a counterbalancing technique or choosing a longer time interval between the first and second measurement would have allowed us to control better the aforementioned effects. Lastly, to preserve ecological validity, our participants were free to recall and narrate a memory that caused them guilt at any point in their life. However, the reasons for feeling guilty vary widely at different stages of life (Nikolajeva 2012); therefore, future research should investigate bilinguals’ autobiographical memories of guilt within a defined or across different periods of time.

# Conclusion

This study suggests that the experience and expression of guilt are influenced by the language we speak, at least to some extent. Our findings are valuable for therapists aiming to assist bilinguals to cope with feelings of guilt and recognise their self-worth. From a pedagogical perspective, expressing emotions appropriately is a challenging part of L2 verbal communication; therefore, foreign language teachers should encourage their students to express their emotions about high-conflict and emotionally charged situations of their daily life (e.g. situations that induce guilt) and engage them in speaking and writing activities that enhance their emotional communication skills. This could help L2 learners establish a firm bond between their L2 and their real-life experiences.

# Notes

1. An anonymous reviewer argued that our study is limited by the sample size and underpowered. However, for a repeated measures ANOVA, expected effect size $\pmb { \mathrm { f } } = 0 . 2 5$ (medium effect size), $\mathtt { a } = . 0 5$ , statistical power $= . 8 0 ,$ one group and two measurements, the required sample is 34 participants, whereas our sample size was larger. Likewise, the eta squared obtained by our ANOVA results (see Results section) indicated medium effect sizes. Using the eta squared values to compute the achieved power (post-hoc analysis) led to an achieved power of .942 for our study, which is more than satisfactory.

2. All translations are our own.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

# Funding

This study is part of the project EMILIA (FFI2017-83166-C2-2-R) funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by ‘ERDF A way of making Europe’ and was also supported by the Community of Madrid and the European Social Fund (IN.MIGRA3-CM, ref. H2019/HUM5772).

# Data availability statement

The data are available from the first author of the study upon request.

# Notes on contributors

Andreas Kyriakou holds a PhD in Applied Linguistics from Nebrija University (Spain). Currently, he is a member of the Teaching and Research Staff in the Department of Languages and Education at Nebrija University (Spain). His research interests include the moral foreign-language effect, emotional vocabulary, and emotional expression in multilingual contexts, among others. Email: akyriako@nebrija.es

Irini Mavrou is Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics at Nebrija University (Spain), researcher at the Nebrija Research Center in Cognition, and Senior Teaching Fellow at the Department of Culture, Communication and Media, UCL Institute of Education (UK). Her research interests include second language learning and literacy, individual differences with a particular focus on working memory, emotions and moral decision-making. Email: emavrou@nebrija.es; i.mavrou@ucl.ac.uk

Kiriakí Palapanidi holds a PhD in Applied Linguistics in teaching Spanish as a foreign language from the Antonio de Nebrija University. Her research area is the acquisition of vocabulary in a foreign language. Currently, she is a member of the Teaching Laboratory Staff of Applied Linguistics in teaching Spanish as a foreign language in the Department of Spanish Language and Literature at the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens. Additionally, she is a member of the Associate Teaching Staff in the Hispanic Language and Civilization Program at the Hellenic Open University. Email: kpalapan@spanll.uoa.gr

# ORCID

Andreas Kyriakou $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8275-1462   
Irini Mavrou $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6612-1839   
Kiriakí Palapanidi $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2687-0501

# References

Alea, N., S. Bluck, and A. B. Semegon. 2004. “Young and Older Adults’ Expression of Emotional Experience: Do Autobiographical Narratives Tell a Different Story?” Journal of Adult Development 11 (4): 235–250. https://doi.org/ 10.1023/B:JADE.0000044527.52470.5d.   
ATLAS.ti Scientific Software Development GmbH. 2022. “ATLAS.ti Mac (version 8.4.5) [Qualitative data analysis software].” https://atlasti.com/es   
Bartolac, I. 2016. “How to Express Happiness in English and Croatian?” (URN: 186:495832). Master’s thesis, University of Rijeka. https://urn.nsk.hr/urn:nbn:hr:186:495832.   
Bauman, C. W., A. P. McGraw, D. M. Bartels, and C. Warren. 2014. “Revisiting External Validity: Concerns about Trolley Problems and Other Sacrificial Dilemmas in Moral Psychology.” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 8 (9): 536–554. https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12131.   
Białek, M., M. Paruzel-Czachura, and B. Gawronski. 2019. “Foreign Language Effects on Moral Dilemma Judgments: An Analysis Using the CNI Model.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 85:Article 103855. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jesp.2019.103855.   
Brewer, W. F. 1986. “What is Autobiographical Memory?” In Autobiographical Memory, edited by D. C. Rubin, 25–49. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Bybee, J., and Z. N. Quiles. 1998. “Guilt and Mental Health.” In Guilt and Children, edited by J. Bybee, 269–291. New York, NY: Academic Press.   
Caldwell-Harris, C. L. 2014. “Emotionality Differences between a Native and Foreign Language: Theoretical Implications.” Frontiers in Psychology 5:Article 1055. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01055.   
Caldwell-Harris, C. L., J. Tong, W. Lung, and S. Poo. 2011. “Physiological Reactivity to Emotional Phrases in Mandarin– English bilinguals.” International Journal of Bilingualism 15 (3): 329–352. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 1367006910379262.   
Carroll, J. 2020. On Guilt: The Force Shaping Character, History, and Culture. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/ 9780429263422.   
Cavalera, C., and A. Pepe. 2014. “Social Emotions and Cognition: Shame, Guilt and Working Memory.” Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences 112:457–464. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.01.1189.   
Chamcharatsri, P. B. 2013. “Emotionality and Second Language Writers: Expressing Fear through Narrative in Thai and in English.” L2 Journal 5 (1): 59–75. https://doi.org/10.5070/L25115703.   
Choe, S. Y., and K.-H. Min. 2011. “Who Makes Utilitarian Judgments? The Influences of Emotions on Utilitarian Judgments.” Judgment and Decision Making 6 (7): 580–592. https://doi.org/10.1017/S193029750000262X.   
Cook, S. R., and J.-M. Dewaele. 2022. “‘The English Language Enables me to Visit my Pain’. Exploring Experiences of Using a Later-Learned Language in the Healing Journey of Survivors of Sexuality Persecution.” International Journal of Bilingualism 26 (2): 125–139. https://doi.org/10.1177/13670069211033032.   
Costa, B., and J.-M. Dewaele. 2019. “The Talking Cure—Building the Core Skills and the Confidence of Counsellors and Psychotherapists to Work Effectively with Multilingual Patients through Training and Supervision.” Counselling and Psychotherapy Research 19 (3): 231–240. https://doi.org/10.1002/capr.12187.   
Dahl, D. W., H. Honea, and R. V. Manchanda. 2003. “The Nature of Self-Reported Guilt in Consumption Contexts.” Marketing Letters 14 (3): 159–171. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1027492516677.   
de Hooge, I. E., S. M. Breugelmans, and M. Zeelenberg. 2008. “Not so Ugly After all: When Shame Acts as a Commitment Device.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 95 (4): 933–943. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0011991.   
Dewaele, J.-M. 2006. “Expressing Anger in Multiple Languages.” In Bilingual Minds: Emotional Experience, Expression, and Representation, edited by A. Pavlenko, 118–151. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.   
Dewaele, J.-M. 2015. “The Language Teacher 39.3.” The Language Teacher 39 (3): 13–15. https://doi.org/10.37546/ JALTTLT39.3-3.   
Dewaele, J.-M., P. Lorette, L. Rolland, and I. Mavrou. 2021. “Differences in Emotional Reactions of Greek, Hungarian, and British Users of English When Watching Television in English.” International Journal of Applied Linguistics 31 (3): 345– 361. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijal.12333.   
Dewaele, J.-M., and A. Pavlenko. 2002. “Emotion Vocabulary in Interlanguage.” Language Learning 52 (2): 263–322. https://doi.org/10.1111/0023-8333.00185.   
Driver, M. Y. 2022. “Switching Codes and Shifting Morals: How Code-Switching and Emotion Affect Moral Judgment.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 25 (3): 905–921. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050. 2020.1730763.   
Dylman, A. S., and M.-F. Champoux-Larsson. 2020. “It’s (not) all Greek to me: Boundaries of the Foreign Language Effect.” Cognition 196:Article 104148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2019.104148.   
Eisenberg, N. 2000. “Emotion, Regulation, and Moral Development.” Annual Review of Psychology 51 (1): 665–697. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.51.1.665.   
Elo, S., and H. Kyngäs. 2008. “The Qualitative Content Analysis Process.” Journal of Advanced Nursing 62 (1): 107–115. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2007.04569.x.   
Etxebarria, I., and J. Pérez. 2003. “What Makes us Feel Guilty? Categories of Events in Male and Female Adolescents and Adults.” Estudios de Psicología 24 (2): 241–252. https://doi.org/10.1174/021093903765762938.   
FeldmanHall, O., D. Mobbs, D. Evans, L. Hiscox, L. Navrady, and T. Dalgleish. 2012. “What We Say and What we do: The Relationship between Real and Hypothetical Moral Choices.” Cognition 123 (3): 434–441. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cognition.2012.02.001.   
Geipel, J., C. Hadjichristidis, and L. Surian. 2015. “How Foreign Language Shapes Moral Judgment.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 59:8–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2015.02.001.   
Greene, J. D., R. B. Sommerville, L. E. Nystrom, J. M. Darley, and J. D. Cohen. 2001. “An fMRI Investigation of Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment.” Science 293 (5537): 2105–2108. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1062872.   
Griffiths, V., S. Kaldi, and A. Pires. 2008. “Adult Learners and Entry to Higher Education: Motivation, Prior Experience and Entry Requirements.” In International Association of Scientific Knowledge Teaching and Learning 2008 Conference Proceedings, edited by M. Munoz, I. Jalinek, and F. Ferreira, 632–640. Aveiro: University of Aveiro.   
Haidt, J. 2003. “The Moral Emotions.” In Handbook of Affective Sciences, edited by R. J. Davidson, K. R. Scherer, and H. H. Goldsmith, 852–870. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Harris, C. L., A. Ayçiçeği, and J. B. Gleason. 2003. “Taboo Words and Reprimands Elicit Greater Autonomic Reactivity in a First than in a Second Language.” Applied Psycholinguistics 24 (4): 561–579. https://doi.org/10.1017/ S0142716403000286.   
Ho, J. W. Y. 2009. “The Language of Anger in Chinese and English Narratives.” International Journal of Bilingualism 13 (4): 481–500. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006908353235.   
Horne, Z., and D. Powell. 2016. “How Large is the Role of Emotion in Judgments of Moral Dilemmas?” PLoS One 11 (7): Article e0154780. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0154780.   
Hwang, S. 2008. “Utilizing Qualitative Data Analysis Software: A Review of Atlas.ti.” Social Science Computer Review 26 (4): 519–527. https://doi.org/10.1177/0894439307312485.   
Ivaz, L., K. L. Griffin, and J. A. Duñabeitia. 2019. “Self-Bias and the Emotionality of Foreign Languages.” Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 72 (1): 76–89. https://doi.org/10.1177/1747021818781017.   
Jansson, B., and A. S. Dylman. 2021. “Reduced Vividness of Emotional Memories Following Reactivation in a Second Language.” Cognition and Emotion 35 (6): 1222–1230. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2021.1937948.   
Keltner, D. 1996. “Evidence for the Distinctness of Embarrassment, Shame, and Guilt: A Study of Recalled Antecedents and Facial Expressions of Emotion.” Cognition & Emotion 10 (2): 155–172. https://doi.org/10.1080/026999396380312.   
Kheirzadeh, S., and M. Hajiabed. 2016. “Differential Language Functioning of Monolinguals and Bilinguals on Positive– Negative Emotional Expression.” Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 45 (1): 55–69. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10936- 014-9326-2.   
Körner, A., and R. Deutsch. 2023. “Deontology and Utilitarianism in Real Life: A set of Moral Dilemmas Based on Historic Events.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 49 (10): 1511–1528. https://doi.org/10.1177/01461672221103058.   
Körner, A., N. Tscharaktschiew, R. Schindler, K. Schulz, and U. Rudolph. 2016. “The Everyday Moral Judge – Autobiographical Recollections of Moral Emotions.” PLoS One 11 (12): Article e0167224. https://doi.org/10.1371/ journal.pone.0167224.   
Kyriakou, A., A. Foucart, and I. Mavrou. 2023. “Moral Judgements in a Foreign Language: Expressing Emotions and Justifying Decisions.” International Journal of Bilingualism 27 (6): 978–995. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 13670069221134193.   
Kyriakou, A., and I. Mavrou. 2023a. “¿Eres muy Emocional? I Don’t Think so. How Does Language Influence our Emotional Responses to Everyday Moral Dilemmas?” In Emotion and Identity in Foreign Language Learning, edited by A. Blanco Canales and S. Martín Leralta, 297–321. Oxford: Peter Lang.   
Kyriakou, A., and I. Mavrou. 2023b. “What Language Does Your Heart Speak? The Influence of Foreign Language on Moral Judgements and Emotions Related to Unrealistic and Realistic Moral Dilemmas.” Cognition and Emotion 37 (8): 1330–1348. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2023.2258577.   
Leunissen, J. M., C. Sedikides, and T. Wildschut. 2017. “Why Narcissists are Unwilling to Apologize: The Role of Empathy and Guilt.” European Journal of Personality 31 (4): 385–403. https://doi.org/10.1002/per.2110.   
Luck, T., and C. Luck-Sikorski. 2022. “The Wide Variety of Reasons for Feeling Guilty in Adults: Findings from a Large Cross-Sectional web-Based Survey.” BMC Psychology 10 (1): Article 198. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40359-022-00908-3.   
Marcos, L. R. 1976. “Bilinguals in Psychotherapy: Language as an Emotional Barrier.” American Journal of Psychotherapy 30 (4): 552–560. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.psychotherapy.1976.30.4.552.   
Marian, V., and M. Kaushanskaya. 2004. “Self-construal and Emotion in Bicultural Bilinguals.” Journal of Memory and Language 51 (2): 190–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2004.04.003. of Autobiographical Memories.” The Mental Lexicon 3 (1): 72–91. https://doi.org/10.1075/ml.3.1.06mar.   
Marina, J. A., and M. L. Penas. 2000. Diccionario de los sentimientos. Barcelona: Anagrama.   
Mavrou, I., and J. M. Dewaele. 2020. “Emotionality and Pleasantness of Mixed-Emotion Stimuli: The Role of Language, Modality, and Emotional Intelligence.” International Journal of Applied Linguistics 30 (2): 313–328. https://doi.org/10. 1111/ijal.12285.   
Nikolajeva, M. 2012. “Guilt, Empathy and the Ethical Potential of Children’s Literature.” Barnboken 35 (1): Article 18081. https://doi.org/10.14811/clr.v35i0.139.   
Ożańska-Ponikwia, K. 2019. “Expression and Perception of Emotions by Polish–English Bilinguals I Love You vs. Kocham Cię.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 22 (4): 493–504. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050. 2016.1270893.   
Panayiotou, A. 2004. “Switching Codes, Switching Code: Bilinguals’ Emotional Responses in English and Greek.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 25 (2-3): 124–139. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434630408666525.   
Panayiotou, A. 2006. “Translating Guilt: An Endeavor of Shame in the Mediterranean?” In Bilingual Minds: Emotional Experience, Expression and Representation, edited by A. Pavlenko, 183–208. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.   
Parisi, I., A. Mancini, F. Mancini, S. M. Aglioti, and M. S. Panasiti. 2021. “Deontological Guilt and Disgust Sensitivity Modulate Moral Behaviour.” Clinical. Neuropsychiatry 18 (4): 196–210. https://doi.org/10.36131/ cnfioritieditore20210403.   
Pavlenko, A. 2005. Emotions and Multilingualism. Clevedon: Cambridge University Press.   
Pavlenko, A. 2007. “Autobiographic Narratives as Data in Applied Linguistics.” Applied Linguistics 28 (2): 163–188. https:// doi.org/10.1093/applin/amm008.   
Pavlenko, A. 2008. “Emotion and Emotion-Laden Words in the Bilingual Lexicon.” Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 11 (2): 147–164. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728908003283.   
Pavlenko, A. 2012. “Affective Processing in Bilingual Speakers: Disembodied Cognition?” International Journal of Psychology 47 (6): 405–428. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207594.2012.743665.   
Pavlenko, A., and V. Driagina. 2007. “Russian Emotion Vocabulary in American Learners’ Narratives.” The Modern Language Journal 91 (2): 213–234. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2007.00541.x.   
Pettas, D., A. Arampatzi, and M. Dagkouli-Kyriakoglou. 2022. “LGBTQ $^ +$ Housing Vulnerability in Greece: Intersectionality, Coping Strategies and the Role of Solidarity Networks.” Housing Studies 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/02673037. 2022.2092600.   
Robinaugh, D. J., and R. J. McNally. 2010. “Autobiographical Memory for Shame or Guilt Provoking Events: Association with Psychological Symptoms.” Behaviour Research and Therapy 48 (7): 646–652. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2010. 03.017.   
Rolland, L., J.-M. Dewaele, and B. Costa. 2017. “Multilingualism and Psychotherapy: Exploring Multilingual Clients’ Experiences of Language Practices in Psychotherapy.” International Journal of Multilingualism 14 (1): 69–85. https://doi.org/10.1080/14790718.2017.1259009.   
Sakkoulis, D., and D. Vergidis. 2023. “Matured Students in Greek University: Difficulties in Attending University and Strategies to Overcome Them (a Qualitative Approach).” European Journal of Education Studies 10 (8): 360–378. https://doi.org/10.46827/ejes.v10i8.4931.   
Schrauf, R. W. 2000. “Bilingual Autobiographical Memory: Experimental Studies and Clinical Cases.” Culture & Psychology 6 (4): 387–417. https://doi.org/10.1177/1354067X0064001.   
Singer, N., L. Kreuzpointner, M. Sommer, S. Wüst, and B. M. Kudielka. 2019. “Decision-making in Everyday Moral Conflict Situations: Development and Validation of a new Measure.” PLoS One 14 (4): Article e0214747. https://doi.org/10. 1371/journal.pone.0214747.   
Szekely, R. D., and A. C. Miu. 2015. “Incidental Emotions in Moral Dilemmas: The Influence of Emotion Regulation.” Cognition and Emotion 29 (1): 64–75. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2014.895300.   
Tangney, J. P., and R. L. Dearing. 2002. “Gender Differences in Morality.” In Empirical Studies in Psychoanalytic Theories: The Psychodynamics of Gender and Gender Role, edited by R. F. Bornstein and J. M. Masling, 251–269. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.   
Tangney, J. P., J. Stuewig, and D. J. Mashek. 2007. “Moral Emotions and Moral Behavior.” Annual Review of Psychology 58 (1): 345–372. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.56.091103.070145.   
Tangney, J. P., and J. L. Tracy. 2012. “Self-conscious Emotions.” In Handbook of Self and Identity, edited by M. R. Leary, and J. P. Tangney, 446–478. New York, NY: Guilford Press.   
Tasso, A., M. Sarlo, and L. Lotto. 2017. “Emotions Associated with Counterfactual Comparisons Drive Decision-Making in Footbridge-Type Moral Dilemmas.” Motivation and Emotion 41 (3): 410–418. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-017- 9607-9.   
Thoma, D., P. Lorette, and A. E. Krautz. 2022. “Bidirectional Language Effects: Evidence on the Emotionality of Bilinguals’ Autobiographical Memories from Pupillometry, eye-Movements and Self-Reports.” In Recent Advances in Second Language Emotion Research, edited by I. Mavrou, M. Pérez Serrano, and J.-M. Dewaele, 67–94. Cizur Menor: Thomson Reuters Aranzadi.   
Tsantila, A. 2005. “Το Ελληνόγλωσσο Ονοματολόγιο Συναισθημάτων [Greek Language Dictionary of Emotions].” Ελευθέρνα 2:217–246.   
Vidal Noguera, C., C. M. Villar, and I. Mavrou. 2022. “Seething with Rage: Affective Vocabulary of Anger in the Autobiographical Memories of Spanish–German Bilinguals.” In Recent Advances in Second Language Emotion Research, edited by I. Mavrou, M. Pérez Serrano, and J.-M. Dewaele, 155–189. Cizur Menor: Thomson Reuters Aranzadi.   
Vuoskoski, J. K., and T. Eerola. 2012. “Can sad Music Really Make you Sad? Indirect Measures of Affective States Induced by Music and Autobiographical Memories.” Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts 6 (3): 204–213. https://doi. org/10.1037/a0026937.   
Wilson, A., and M. Ross. 2003. “The Identity Function of Autobiographical Memory: Time is on our Side.” Memory (Hove, England) 11 (2): 137–149. https://doi.org/10.1080/741938210.   
Xu, H., L. Bègue, and R. Shankland. 2011. “Guilt and Guiltlessness: An Integrative Review.” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 5 (7): 440–457. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-9004.2011.00364.x.