# The assessment of writing in languages other than English (LOTE)

We are very pleased to share this diverse, high-quality collection of research projects that target the assessment of writing in languages other than English (LOTE). This collection includes 11 artice, representing first and second/foreign language writing assessment in Mandarin Chinese, Korean, Turkish, Finnish, French, and German.

The idea for this special issue was inspired by the narrative synthesis of Yan, Bowles, and Malone (2021) of language assessment research in LOTE. This synthesis showed that only 12 theoretical or empirical papers were published with a focus on LOTE in Assessing Writing from its inception until 2021. This number constitutes only ${ } ^ { 3 \% }$ of the papers published in the journal. While Assessing Writing was initially envisioned as a venue for publishing research within the area of English language assessment, there is a strong commitment from the editors of Asssing Writing to include multiple perspectives in constructing knowledge about writing assssment. That is why we believed that the timing was right to propose a special issue to turn the spotlight on colleagues working on the assessment of a wider variety of world languages. As you will discover, this collection draws attention to common challenges we all face no matter what the language, as well asconcerns specificto the language being studiedrelating to different writing scripts and modalities, diffrent rhetorical and stylistic conventions, or different educational, political, and social traditions related to quality language use. While we hoped that more submissions representing other languages would have made it through the review process, we are pleased with the six languages represented here. Hopefully this endeavour will encourage more colleagues working with LOTE to contribute to this increasing trend..

The first language we are privileged to feature --where scholarship in writing assessment is substantial and flourishing-is Mandari hinee. Chine is w rreentd n this speil sue and this reflets the current publishing trdwhere we have en an increase in language asesment publications in intenational journals by Chinese researchers. Yuan Yao, Xinhua Zhu, Siyu Zhu, and Yue Jiange investigated the underlying dimensions of the self-eficacy construct in the context of a postsecondary Chinese frst language integrated writing task (\*The impacts of elfefficacy on undergraduate students perceived task value and task performance of L1 Chinese integrated writing: A mixed-method research"). In "Examining the reliabilit of an international Chinese proficiency standardised writing asssment: Implications for asessment policy makers, Jinyan Huang, Danni Zhu, Duquan Xie, and Tiantian Shu examined score variabilit for the HSK-6 writing asessment, leading to meaningful recommendations for future practice (such as the number f raters neded to obtain satisfactory reliability cofficients). In he design and cognitive validity verification of reading to-write tasks i L2 Chinese writing assessment, Rujun Pan and Xiaofei Lu made use of eye-tracking and stimulated recall interviews to gain insights into thecogntive proceses elicited in an academic readingto-writ task t is cler from the tite f thee studies that they lean more into quantitative analysis, with the exception of Rujun and Pan, who use a mixed-method design.

As may be expected, given the dominance of English in scholarship and publishing in writing assessment, studies reported here often make use of conceptual frameworks and tols originally developed in and for English. For example, Soo Hyoung Joo, Yuna Seong, Joowon Suh, Ji-Young Jung, and Jim Purpura investigate the feasibilit of scenario-based language assessment for the Korean language ("Assessing Korean writing abilit through a scenario-based assessment approach"). In another Korean example, Sarah Sok and Hye Won Shin also make use of tools originall designed for English in their work with primary-aged writers (Investigating the dimensions and determinants of children's narrative writing in Korean). In addition to ther findings that elements such as handwriting and gender predict narrative writing scores in their sample, they suggest future work regarding whether \*the unique characterisicsof the Korean language and script may yield specific influences on certain components of the writing construct." Similarl, i A Non-Western Adaptation of the Situated Academic Writing Slf-Eficy Scale (SAwses), Ceymi Doenyas, Zeynep Tunay Gul, and Bulent Alci worked to adapt and validate a Turkish version of a scale originally designed in English to capture the academic writing self-eficacy of post-secondary students. The authors argue that this work can inform initiatives to improve not only

Readers of Asessing Writing will have numerous oportunities to learn about ssues which pertain to specific charactristics of the language of interest. One such opportunity is found in Insights from lexical and syntactic analyses of a French for academic purposes assesment." Authors Randy Appel, Angel Arias, Beverly Baker, and Guillaume Loignon note that adjustments may need to be made to procedures in lexical bundle analysis to beter account for important language diffrences between English and French e.g. greater inflction in French). In this same study, the authors made use of a new tool especially designed for French, the Integrated Lexical Syntactic Analyser (ILSA).

In Chinese character matters! An examination of linguistic accuracy in writing performances on the HSK test," authors Xun Yan and Jiani Lin underook a factor analysis of eror types in the writig of HK test takers. They draw attntion todifferences in error types related to distinct features of Mandarin Chinese grammar, with no equivalent in other languages. They also note that while one could make a case that character errors may be similar to spelling errors in Englis, they may be much more important in dis tinguishing lvels of writing ability in Chinese. Jianling Liao explains how the processof typing Chinese characters is quite different from that of alphabetc languages (\*What skill are being asessed? Evaluating L2 Chinese essays written by hand and on a computer keyboard"). Writers enter the pinyin (Romanised approximation of a Chinese sound) with an alphabetic keyboard, then choose the correct character from a predictive list. This means that typing in Chinese is a process of selection, while handwriting the same characters i a proces of generation. This ifference has implications for how the construct f writing is conceived across modalities in Chinese.

In addition to lening about these language-specific particularities a far-reaching contribution of this collection i the opportunty to broaden the perspective of readers to scholars and scholarship we might not discover otherwise. One example is "Assesing writing in fourth grade: Rhetorical specification effcts on text quality, by Ilka Tabea Fladung, Sophie Gruhn, Veronika Osterbauer, and Jorg Jost. They share insights from the German-language literatre on the concept of task specifications which informs their study on the effects of enriching writing task prompts with rhetorical information about the purpose and audience of the text. Likewise, Mari Honko, Reeta Neittaanmaki, Scott Jarvis, and Ari Huhta draw on a number of previous studies conducted in Finland (and pub lished in Finnish) to inform their work in a relatively unexplored area: raters feelings of confidence when grading high stakes writing assessments ("Beyond literacy and competency- The efects of raters perceived uncertainty on assessment f writing). We hope to see more examples i the future of scholars generously engaging in mediation of ths ort between work done in other languages and the English-medium community.

We wish to sincerely thank the Editors of Assessng Writing, Martin East and David Slomp, for their enthusiastic support of our proposal for this special isue and their encouragement and advice throughout the process. We also wish to acknowledge the peer reviewers for ther valuable and professional feedackto authors. In an effort t stremline the review proces, we requested that those submitting manuscripts for consideration also commit to reviewing the manuscripts of theircolleagues. Their collgial and eficint contributions made the isue what it is. We also wish to recognise the opennessof the authors to our suggetions and recommendations as Guest Editors as we shepherded manuscripts over the finish line. We have learned a great deal though this proces and are humbled by what remains to be learned as we invite more and more cholars and languages into the conversation. In fact, the time may have come to reconsider this ournal's invitation to authors. Instead of the current wording, AJrticle in English about theassessment of writing in languages other than English will be considered," we would advocate for the following: \*While articles are published in English, submissions about the assessment of all languages are encouraged."

# Reference

an ,    01, 17i s  h colloquium virtual conference (LTRC), International Language Testing Association.