Book review

# Language Acquisition and Academic Writing: Theory and Practice of Effective Writing Instruction, James D. Williams (Ed.). Routledge, New York (2023). p. 179 pp ISBN: 978-1-032-35876-5 (hbk), ISBN: 978-1-032-32150-9 (pbk), 978-1-003-32913-8 (ebk)

Current scholarship on academic writing focuses either on theoretical analysis or on the prescriptive rules and conventions for academic writing. However, few contributions approach academic writing instruction by combining theories and practices in an integrative manner. The timely published book, Language Acquisition and Academic Writing: Theory and Practice of Effective Writing Instructio by James D. Williams, is one among the few. The author is a professr f rhetoric and linguistics and former director of the interdisciplinary writing program at SokaUniversty of America. He enjoys extensive experience in teaching and researching academic writing, with a wide range of publications on rhetoric, writing pedagogy and composition studies.In the volume, Williams presents an innovative approach to writing instruction grounded in the research and theory of language acquisition. Admittedl, academic writing is demanding and daunting for both students and instructors. This publication, however, renders the task acessible by introducing a writing pedagogy informed by language acquisition theory that can effectively address the problems and difficulties in teaching writing for academic purposes and guide students to become competent writers of academic discourse.

The book, structured into four chapters, follows a clear problem-cause-solution structure that is easy for readers to understand and explicit for writing instructors to follow in practice. I starts with describing the predicament and problems of teaching and learning academic writing for students and analysing the historical causes leading to such issues from the perspectives of theoreticalapplication and writing practices. It then moves beyond the analysi of flaws in current writing instruction theories and practices to introduce a more effetive aproach that could lleiate the problems and improve students writing skils. In the end, principles and procedures in guiding the application of the approach are delineated with the assistance of affuent writing materias and targeted teaching tips. The book is perfect for writing researchers and instructors to understand the predicament in academic writing and the possibility of implementing new theories in guiding academic writing instruction.

The book starts with raising readers' awarenessover the importance of applicable theories in writing studies in Chapter 1, where Williams explores the roles of theory, the distinctive features of a good theory and the nexus between theory and writing studies. Moreover, the author identifies the reasons for the failure in writing instruction. He atributes the falure to flaws in current theories and practices for academic writing, mainly the gap between writing in the classroom and writing in the real world. For example, instructor often teach rules introduced in writing handbooks without explaining why those rules are necessary and feasibl. Another example is that current theories for writing pedagogy typically recommend processoriented approaches, like "five stages of composing" (p. 40), which are easy to fllow but do not accurately reflect how writing occurs in the real world. While the flaws in current theories and practices fail toprepare students for practical writing in the real world, they enhance readers' awarenes of the need for a more cohesive integration of theory and practice, which is precisely this book's focal point.

Next, the book impresses readers with a creative aproach to writing instruction informed by the theory of immersive language acquisitio, based on reviewing language acquisition theories and assimilating their insights into writing acquisition and intruction. As no single theory encompasses every aspect of language acquisition, Chapter 2 reviews multiple perspectives on language acquisition that have been \*researched extensively and tested and retested over many years' (p. 54). These perspectives, covering the nativist, cognitive, and sociocultural views on language acquisition, have yielded some thought-provoking conclusions. For instance, language annot be explicitly taught immersin i essential for successful language acquisition; adult correction aids in theacquisition process; language is utilized to foster connections with a targeted audience; and learners switch between diverse communication registers without losing their identities. Recognising that writing is an integral component of language aquisition, these perspectives on language acquisition provide theoretical implications for the acquisition of writing and beget a novel approach to academic writing instruction.

Adopting language acquisition theories as the lenses for teaching academic writing, Chapter 3 extends the theoretical implications to the practical level, emphasising immersion in academic reading as a central principle for students'transformation from "conver sational language use to academic' language ability" (Krashen, 2003, p. 15). Drawing on diffrent perspectives on language acquisition, the author tates that academic writig aims to establish social and professonal connections by conveying information to iniders and potentil iniders within specific cademic fieds. This helps to explain why patten drills and self-expresve assignments in academic writing are not as efective as expected in enhancing students writing proficiency. Instead, immersion in academic reading and exposure to formal standard registers are necessary for writing intruction. In addition, some ther essential principle for writing pedagogy analysed in the chapter are grounded in language acquisition theories such as response and corrction, designing assignments that meet the expectations of insiders and considering both linguistic and psychological features. More concisely, the book recommends wID (writing in the disciplines) and WAC (writing across the curriculum) courses as a feasible model in which students are asked to read research in specific disciplines as a means of understanding the methods and ways of knowing that characterise specific fields" (p. 103).

After that, the book provides readers with authentic writing samples i specific disciplines and incorporates writing tasks that align with the proposed writing pedagogy informed by language acquisition theories in Chapter 4. To foster students' audience awareness and prepare them for real-world writing, Williams sugests that instructors design academic writing assignments that are it for real application rather than solely relying on their own experiences. The book also presents the general structure of academic writing within selected areas to familiarise readers with disciplinary conventions. For example, a typical report in life and applied sciences usuall covers Introduction, Literature Review, Abstract, Hypothesis, Procedures and Methods, Result, Research Summaries, and Documentation (p. 110-115). In addition, the publication highlights the diverse stylistic preferences found in diffrent discilinary areas. Importanty, it offers readers writig samples by students and ecerpts from experts arties across the disciline i life and applied sciences, social sciences, and humanities, thus serving as valuable resources. The book also provides tips for effectively engaging and teaching students and supporting academic writing teachers in their instruction practices.

As language education researchers and English writing teachers, we highly recommend this book to readers due to its remarkable strengths. The most notable is that it provides theory-informed insights into writing instruction practices based on immersive principles of language acquisition. This theory-informed approach to writing instruction helps teachers, students and researchers better understand writing instruction and promotes their awareness of the integration between theories and practices in this domain. Sec. ondly, it inroduces a novel theory that guides writing instruction and encourages practitioners to explore the theoretical rationales and feasibility of precriptive rules offered in other publications on academic writing. In this regard, it inspires researchers and teachers to investiate the effectivenes of writing pedagogy based on immersive principles in the classoom. Another noteworthy merit is that this book srves as a valuable reository with writing samples and teaching tips. t provides practcal guidance for teachers and fosters a supportive learning environment that guides students towards acquiring academic writing abilities. Lastly, the book is highly readable as it avoids relying on complicated jargon or terms commonly used in composition studies. Instead, it employs examples and detailed descriptions, such as baby talk" (p. 58-59) and \*the story of Genie' (p. 62-63), to activate readers' background knowledge of language acquisition and facilitate their comprehension. To summarise, the book can be considered a bridge between research monographs on academic writing and a practical guide for academic writing, showcasing its strengths in offering inspiration, practical guidance and facilitating comprehension.

There are also a few minor flaws that could be addressed in future editions of this publication. Firstly, the writing instruction practice in this book is primarily rooted in the US context. Readers from other contexts would obtain broader insights by expanding the book's context and exploring the racticality and effetivenessof the language acquisition-informed approach to writing instruction in their situated stting. Secondly, while ffering writing samples, the author has chosen only three isciplinary areas and a limited number of majors within each as representative examples. It would enhance the usefulnes of this book to include a broader range of academic writing samples, presented perhaps as a resource ibrary or in appendices, to help readers draw more inspiration.

Overall, with its rich content of theoretical perspectives and practical suggestions, as well as it strong readability, this boo will prove to be avaluablerference for undergraduate and postgraduate students, pre-serviceand in-service writing teachers, composition studies scholars, and those interested in writing and writing instruction without profound knowledge in writing and language acquisition. In particulr, it will benefit teachers seeking a changing writing pedagogy o improve their eficacy for academic writing instruction.

# Declaration of competing interest

The authors report no conflict of interest regarding this review.

# Reference

Krashen, S. (2o03). Explorations in language acquisition and use. Portsmouth: Heinemann.