# Language acquisition and language processing: Finding new connections

John C. Trueswell

To cite this article: John C. Trueswell (2023) Language acquisition and language processing: Finding new connections, Language Acquisition, 30:3-4, 205-210, DOI: 10.1080/10489223.2023.2216689

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10489223.2023.2216689

# INTRODUCTION

# Language acquisition and language processing: Finding new connections

John C. Trueswell

University of Pennsylvania

Two central questions addressed in psycholinguistics pertain to acquisition and process. First, how do children, exposed to a relatively small sample of language use in context, come to acquire a complete linguistic system that can express an almost limitless number of ideas? Second, how do adults access this acquired linguistic knowledge in such an expert manner that they achieve interpretation in real time as the signal unfolds, typically making distinctions on a millisecond timescale? Traditionally these two questions have been addressed separately, with the field taking a divide and conquer approach, often with great success. However, over the past three decades, the distinction between these questions, and their artificial divide in the discipline, have been blurred. Children as young as 24 months have been observed to interpret speech in real time, deploying their albeit incomplete linguistic knowledge almost as quickly as their adult expert counterparts (e.g., de Carvalho et al. 2016; Choi & Trueswell 2010, Lidz et al. 2017, Trueswell & Gleitman 2007). Likewise, adults have been observed to be highly adaptive, learning new patterns of speech, new terms, and new syntax from brief exposures (e.g., Caplan et al. 2021, Fine & Jaeger 2013, Norris et al. 2003, Samuel & Kraljic 2009, Wonnacott et al. 2008). In addition, developmental differences have begun to be uncovered in both language processing (e.g., children’s failure to revise real-time interpretations; Atkinson et al. 2018, Trueswell et al. 1999, Huang & Hollister 2019, Woodard et al. 2016, Weighall 2008) and in learning (e.g., of statistical regularities and rules; Hudson Kam & Newport 2005, Hudson Kam & Chang 2009, Newport 2020).

This bridging territory, between processing and acquisition, is fertile ground not only for new research but for new research questions; one must ask how various processing and learning observations of the last three decades coalesce into a more unified theory of language use over the lifetime, and how language learning at any age is shaped by processing considerations. For example, what role does real-time predictive processing play in the acquisition of vocabulary and syntax? Are learning procedures that are designed to facilitate processing the same or different from those designed to acquire linguistic knowledge more generally?

This issue of Language Acquisition is the product of a special theme of the 34th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, entitled Language Acquisition and Language Processing: Finding New Connections. That session, and this volume, aimed to bring together researchers investigating the mechanisms of language acquisition and process, seeking further cross-pollination with adult psycholinguistic research. To be clear, it is not the case that the divide and conquer approach prevalent in the subfields of language acquisition and process is ready to be abandoned completely. However, dialogue between these subfields is increasing to the point that an important theoretical unification is in sight. By bringing together eminent acquisition and processing researchers, we may begin to better understand how the real-time processing of linguistic input (and the ambient referent world) is connected to acquisition, and how the acquisition process itself might be integrated into theories of language processing.

The following is a summary of the articles that appear in this volume, all of which pertain to these issues. As the reader will see, there are emerging themes pertaining to the extent to which there are transparent connections between representation and processing, and between processing and learning. In large part, these researchers take advantage of the dynamic nature of the input to cast traditional learning problems in a new light, but also to offer ways to develop new theories of language learning in which the dynamics of processing play a central role in the acquisition of linguistic knowledge.

# 1. Learning to predict and predicting to learn: Before and beyond the syntactic bootstrapper

In an important paper in this volume that epitomizes the new approach of integrating processing and acquisition, Babineau, Havron, Dautriche, de Carvalho, and Christophe embeds classic theoretical notions of syntactic bootstrapping (Gleitman 1990) into a predictive processing framework (e.g., Clark 2013). At its most general level, predictive processing is asserted to be at the core of how humans develop models of the world, by probabilistically predicting what will happen next. Within adult psycholinguistic work on sentence processing, evidence for phonological, lexical, syntactic, and semantic prediction is growing (e.g., Altmann & Kamide 1999, Van Berkum et al. 2005, Kamide et al. 2003) and notions of predictive processing and surprisal have become central to much of theorizing on adult sentence processing (Futrell et al. 2020, Hale 2003, Levy 2008). Babineau and colleagues review evidence of their own but also of others showing that predictive processing is present early in language development and could play a central role in child language acquisition. Of particular interest is the relationship between child parsing, prediction, and syntactic bootstrapping—the ability of children to use syntactic contexts to infer the meanings of novel words (Landau & Gleitman 1985, Gleitman 1990, Gleitman et al. 2005). As they conclude: “Taken together, we believe that the route we outline is a plausible theory for early language acquisition. From an initial group of semantic seeds, infants could use their predictive processing skills to learn a handful of syntactic contexts. These syntactic contexts would then help them infer the meaning of novel words, creating a larger and more complex lexicon. As the lexicon grows, so does the reservoir of syntactic contexts infants know and use to predict.”

# 2. Parser-grammar transparency and the development of syntactic dependencies

The paper by Lidz also advocates a tighter connection between language acquisition and processing. He does this by examining what developmental psycholinguistics can tell us about the relationship between grammatical knowledge and how it contributes to real-time sentence processing. As Lidz notes, there has been a long history within psycholinguistics of looking for transparent connections between grammar and process (e.g., Chomsky 1968, Kaplan & Bresnan 1982, Steedman 2000). However, with the famous demise of the Derivational Theory of Complexity (DTC; Miller & Chomsky 1963), psycholinguistics went through a phase of being less interested in grammar-parser correspondence. Yet, more recent work has renewed the possibility of instantiating grammatical knowledge in a way that permit its seamless use in processing (e.g., Steedman 2000). Lidz comes down in favor of “transparency between parser and grammar throughout development.” Lidz reviews evidence from his group pertaining to children’s representation and processing of syntactic dependencies, making the case that the moment grammatical knowledge is acquired, even partially, children deploy this knowledge when making real-time sentence processing decisions. Mismatches between grammatical knowledge and use are attributed to developmental changes in more general information processing abilities (e.g., cognitive control; Novick et al. 2005; Syrett & Lidz 2011, Omaki et al. 2014).

# 3. English-learning preschoolers can correctly parse and interpret negative sentences to guide their interpretations of novel noun and verb meanings

In certain ways, the paper by de Carvalho, Gomes and Trueswell makes a similar case as Lidz for transparency between linguistic knowledge and real-time interpretation, here as it pertains to linguistic semantic knowledge. They examine a highly abstract semantic notion: truth-functional negation. They explore the relationship between children’s understanding and processing of negation. Within the literature on comprehension of negation, there is evidence that only after 27 months of age, children are able to correctly interpret negated sentences (e.g., “It’s not in the bucket,” Austin et al. 2014, Feiman et al. 2017, Grigoroglou et al. 2019). Difficulty understanding negative sentences often persists beyond this age (e.g., Doyle et al. 2019, Nordmeyer & Frank 2014). de Carvalho and colleagues argue that these prior experimental demonstrations of children misunderstanding negative sentences may actually reflect children’s still-developing inhibitory control skills, rather than a lack of semantic knowledge about negation. They review recent work showing that even at 18 months of age, infants understand negative sentences under simpler referential conditions that arguable do not tax inhibitory control skills (de Carvalho et al. 2021). In this volume, de Carvalho and colleagues go on to show that negative sentences, under the right conditions, can even be used to aid in word learning. In two experiments, they show that exposure to negative sentences does not disrupt the process of syntactic bootstrapping for the learning of verbs, and that negation can be used to restrict the meaning of novel nouns in a noun learning task: 2-to-4-year-old children were found to use negative sentences like (e.g., “This is not a blicket”) to restrict semantic generalizations for the meaning of a novel noun. These data, in combination with work from production, suggest a tight coupling between children’s developing semantic knowledge and their use of that knowledge during real-time comprehension.

# 4. Social biases can lead to less communicatively efficient languages

If linguistic knowledge and processing are so tightly coupled, why then do natural languages maintain representational systems that permit rather extensive ambiguity and processing complexity? Fedzechkina, Hartley, and Roberts’ paper explores these issues in a highly creative context. They demonstrate that although transparent syntax to semantics mappings are desirable and preferred by learners, pressures exist to sacrifice these unambiguous mappings. They offer evidence that pressures can come from a surprising source, namely social status, which lead learners to sacrifice unambiguous signaling of meaning (presumably in favor of social signaling). In a pair of clever miniature language studies, Fedzechkina and colleagues exposed learners to “dialects” of a miniature language that were either unambiguous in their signaling of semantic role assignment (via case marking) or were inherently ambiguous (no case marking). Left to their own devices, learners naturally prefer and produce dialects that contain case marking, thereby reducing semantic uncertainty. However, if participants are given instructions that promote the social status of a speaker of a particular dialect, learners adopt that dialect, even when that dialect is highly ambiguous. Learners never compensated for this uncertainty even after additional exposure. In the words of the authors, these “findings suggest that social biases not only interact with biases for efficient communication in language change but also can lead to linguistic systems that are less efficient at communicating semantic meaning.”

# 5. Acquiring recursive structures through distributional learning

The paper by Li and Schuler also explores the relationships among representation, learning, and process. Here they examine how evidence for recursive processes and recursive representations might be detected by learners. Much work on the acquisition of syntax has focused on the distributional learning of non-recursive structures. Li and Schuler ask if similar learning mechanisms can be applied to learn recursion. One interesting fact with respect to recursion is that languages differ regarding the contexts in which “infinite free embedding” is allowed. For example, English seems to freely allow for recursive possessives “my neighbor’s dog’s name,” but not so for postnominal possessive “the name of the dog of my neighbor.” Li and Shuler offer experimental evidence for a particular proposal about how recursive environments are learned (e.g., Li et al. 2021). Via distributional learning, “recursion of a structure (e.g., X1’s-X2) is licensed if the X1 position and the X2 position are productively substitutable in the input.” In an artificial language learning experiment, Li and Schuler find that learners exposed to substitutable input, where the same novel noun is permitted at multiple levels, do indeed posit unattested additional levels of embedding, in line with their learning account. This work is an example of how simple learning procedures, attainable by a child learner, may explain the learnability of otherwise complex unattested structures.

# 6. Discourse with few words: Coherence statistics, parent-infant actions on objects, and object names

In an important study in this volume, Karmazyn-Raz and Smith explore a different level of processing to help explain word learning. In particular, as they note, “infants do not hear object names as discrete events but rather in extended interactions organized around goal-directed actions on objects.” To what extent does the tracking of this goal-directed behavior, and the structure of that behavior contribute to word learning? As a first step in this interesting new line of work, Karmazyn-Raz and Smith attempt to examine the non-linguistic “discourse” of goal directed actions, and how it relates to object labeling. They offer a detailed analysis of parent-child interactions (age 12 months) during object play. They look for behaviors akin to discourse coherence, including a novel analysis of the “structured networks of transitions among objects in play that connected all the played-with objects.” This “discourse-like stream” of goal-directed behavior was found to be connected to parent labeling in important ways that may lead to a different understanding of what it means to say labels are mapped onto the referent world. Here, the referent world is highly structured and offers coherence that may be paralleled in linguistic discourse.

# 7. Protracted developmental trajectory for English-learning children’s detection of consonant mispronunciations in newly learned words

Quam and Swingley’s paper in this volume also looks at infant word learning, focusing on the processing of the auditory signal and the learning of word forms. Although it is well known that infants are very good at learning their languages phonemic categories, much less is known about how these categories contribute to the developing lexicon. Quam and Swingley are especially interested in how different sources of variability in the input might influence word learning. In particular, during a word learning task, 24- and 30-month-olds were taught the name for a novel object in contexts of either high or low prosodic variability. And indeed, infants at both ages showed clear signs of learning from both contexts, lending support to the idea that variable prosodic contexts are something child learners can manage when it comes to learning word pronunciations. However, children in their study showed unexpected flexibility: accepting “mispronunciations” of the word at test in which the voicing of the initial phoneme was changed (e.g., “deebo” changed to “teebo” was still acceptable as a name), even though infants can detect such phonemic contrasts. They suggest that task complexity may explain children’s acceptance of what would otherwise be considered mispronunciations.

# 8. Closing remarks

The integration of research on language processing and language learning has matured to a point where it is now possible to consider a more unified theoretical approach to these topics. Appreciation of the serial nature of the input and of the demands of real-time processing has prompted researchers to ask, for instance, how predictive processing may play a role in syntactic bootstrapping and vocabulary growth more generally, how the dynamics of semantic processing interact with word learning, and how processing may shape the representation of the input, from the speech signal all the way up to the referent world. Because of this, adequate accounts of sentence interpretation in adults will also need to be theories of the learning process itself, and vice versa. The work herein offers a glimpse into the future theories of language acquisition in which the dynamics of the input may be leveraged for learning.

# Disclosure Statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

# ORCID

John C. Trueswell $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0009-0008-5613-6341

# References

Altmann, Gerry T. & Yuki Kamide. 1999. Incremental interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of subsequent reference. Cognition 73(3). 247–264.   
Atkinson, Emily, Matthew W. Wagers, Jeffrey Lidz, Colin Phillips & Akira Omaki. 2018. Developing incrementality in filler-gap dependency processing. Cognition 179. 132–149.   
Austin, Keith, Anna Theakston, Elena Lieven & Michael Tomasello. 2014. Young children’s understanding of denial. Developmental Psychology 50(8). 2061.   
Caplan, Spencer, Alon Hafri & John C. Trueswell. 2021. Now you hear me, later you don’t: The immediacy of linguistic computation and the representation of speech. Psychological Science 32(3). 410–423.   
Choi, Youngon & John C. Trueswell. 2010. Children’s (in) ability to recover from garden paths in a verb-final language: Evidence for developing control in sentence processing. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 106(1). 41–61.   
Chomsky, Noam. 1968. Language and mind. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich.   
Clark, Andy. 2013. Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36(3). 181–204.   
de Carvalho, Alex, Cécile Crimon, Axel Barrault, John Trueswell & Anne Christophe. 2021. “Look! It is not a bamoule!”: 18‐and 24‐month‐olds can use negative sentences to constrain their interpretation of novel word meanings. Developmental Science 24(4). e13085.   
de Carvalho, Alex, Isabelle Dautriche & Anne Christophe. 2016. Preschoolers use phrasal prosody online to constrain syntactic analysis. Developmental Science 19(2). 235–250.   
Doyle, Alison W., Kelsey Friesen, Sarah Reimer & Penny M. Pexman. 2019. Grasping the alternative: Reaching and eyegaze reveal children’s processing of negation. Frontiers of Psychology 10. 12127   
Feiman, Roman, Shilpa Mody, Sophia Sanborn & Susan Carey. 2017. What do you mean, no? Toddlers’ comprehension of logical “no” and “not.” Language Learning and Development 13(4). 430–450.   
Fine, Alex B. & T. Florian Jaeger. 2013. Evidence for implicit learning in syntactic comprehension. Cognitive Science 37 (3). 578–591.   
Futrell, Richard, Edward Gibson & Roger P. Levy. 2020. Lossy‐context surprisal: An information‐theoretic model of memory effects in sentence processing. Cognitive Science 44(3). e12814.   
Gleitman, Lila R. 1990. The structural sources of verb meanings. Language Acquisition 1(1). 3–55.   
Gleitman, Lila R., Kimberly Cassidy, Rebecca Nappa, Anna Papafragou & John C. Trueswell. 2005. Hard words. Language Learning and Development 1(1). 23–64.   
Grigoroglou, Myrto, Sharon Chan & Patricia A. Ganea. 2019. Toddlers’ understanding and use of verbal negation in inferential reasoning search tasks. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 183. 222–241.   
Hale, John. 2003. The information conveyed by words in sentences. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 32. 101–123.   
Huang, Yi Ting & Erin Hollister. 2019. Developmental parsing and linguistic knowledge: Reexamining the role of cognitive control in the kindergarten path effect. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 184. 210–219.   
Hudson Kam, Carla L. & Ann Chang. 2009. Investigating the cause of language regularization in adults: Memory constraints or learning effects? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 35(3). 815.   
Hudson Kam, Carla L. & Elissa L. Newport. 2005. Regularizing unpredictable variation: The roles of adult and child learners in language formation and change. Language Learning and Development 1(2). 151–195.   
Kamide, Yuki, Christoph Scheepers & Gerry TM Altmann. 2003. Integration of syntactic and semantic information in predictive processing: Cross-linguistic evidence from German and English. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 32. 37–55.   
Kaplan, Ronald M. & Joan Bresnan. 1982. Lexical-functional grammar: A formal system for grammatical representation. In Joan Bresnan (ed.), The mental representation of grammatical relations, 173–281. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.   
Landau, Barbara & Lila R. Gleitman. 1985. Language and experience: Evidence from the blind child. Cambridge. MA: Harvard University Press.   
Levy, Roger. 2008. Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition 106(3). 1126–1177.   
Li, Daoxin, Lydia Grohe, Petra Schulz & Charles Yang. 2021. The distributional learning of recursive structures. In Danielle Dionne & Lee-Ann Vidal Covas (eds.), Proceedings of the 45th annual Boston University Conference on Language Development, 471–485. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.   
Lidz, Jeffrey, Aaron Steven White & Rebecca Baier. 2017. The role of incremental parsing in syntactically conditioned word learning. Cognitive Psychology 97. 62–78.   
Miller, George & Noam Chomsky. 1963. Finitary models of language users. In D. Luce (ed.), Handbook of mathematical psychology, 269–321. John Wiley & Sons.   
Newport, Elissa L. 2020. Children and adults as language learners: Rules, variation, and maturational change. Topics in Cognitive Science 12(1). 153–169.   
Nordmeyer, Ann E. & Michael C. Frank. 2014. The role of context in young children’s comprehension of negation. Journal of Memory and Language 77. 25–39.   
Norris, Dennis, James M. McQueen & Anne Cutler. 2003. Perceptual learning in speech. Cognitive Psychology 47(2). 204–238.   
Novick, Jared M., John C. Trueswell & Sharon L. Thompson-Schill. 2005. Cognitive control and parsing: Reexamining the role of Broca’s area in sentence comprehension. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 5(3). 263–281.   
Omaki, Akira, Imogen Davidson White, Takuya Goro, Jeffrey Lidz & Colin Phillips. 2014. No fear of commitment: Children’s incremental interpretation in English and Japanese wh-questions. Language Learning and Development 10 (3). 206–233.   
Samuel, Arthur G. & Tanya Kraljic. 2009. Perceptual learning for speech. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics 71(6). 1207–1218.   
Steedman, Mark. 2000. The syntactic process. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Syrett, Kristen & Jeffrey Lidz. 2011. Competence, performance, and the locality of quantifier raising: Evidence from 4-year-old children. Linguistic Inquiry 42(2). 305–337.   
Trueswell, John C. & Lila R. Gleitman. 2007. Learning to parse and its implications for language acquisition. In G. Gaskell (ed.), Oxford Handbook of Psycholinguistics, 635–656. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.   
Trueswell, John C., Irina Sekerina, Nicole M. Hill & Marian L. Logrip. 1999. The kindergarten-path effect: Studying on-line sentence processing in young children. Cognition 73(2). 89–134.   
Van Berkum, Jos JA, Colin M. Brown, Pienie Zwitserlood, Valesca Kooijman & Peter Hagoort. 2005. Anticipating upcoming words in discourse: evidence from ERPs and reading times. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 31(3). 443.   
Weighall, Anna R. 2008. The kindergarten path effect revisited: Children’s use of context in processing structural ambiguities. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 99(2). 75–95.   
Wonnacott, Elizabeth, Elissa L. Newport & Michael K. Tanenhaus. 2008. Acquiring and processing verb argument structure: Distributional learning in a miniature language. Cognitive Psychology 56(3). 165–209.   
Woodard, Kristina, Lucia Pozzan & John C. Trueswell. 2016. Taking your own path: Individual differences in executive function and language processing skills in child learners. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 141. 187–209.