# Caravaggio: a design for an interdisciplinary content-based EAP/ESP unit

Michal Kirschner\*, Carol Wexler

Division of Foreign Languagues, Webb Building, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel

# Abstract

This paper presents a detailed design for a content-based unit, the focus of which is the film Caravaggio (1986) by British director Derek Jarman. The unit also includes readings in art history and film and is part of a specialized EAP /ESP reading comprehension course for firstyear students majoring in art history and in a multi-disciplinary arts program at Tel Aviv University, Israel. The paper includes the practical and theoretical rationale for selecting and sequencing the materials and the tasks which require students to integrate and synthesize the various texts. The paper addresses various theoretical and pedagogical concerns faced by course designers and classroom instructors in an EFL context.

$©$ 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Content-based instruction (CBI); EAP/ESP reading course design; Film in EFL courses

# 1. Introduction

The literature on EAP / ESP syllabi does not usually include detailed descriptions of actual applications or samples of materials used and is often rooted in ESL contexts which ‘‘may not be directly and immediately relevant to situations in nonEnglish speaking countries where the medium of instruction is the mother tongue of the students’’ (Editors of English for Specific Purposes, 1999: 211). In an ESL environment where L2 is used outside the classroom, the environment provides various opportunities for using and learning the L2 and also requires the learner to perform in the L2 in various situations. In the EFL environment, on the other hand, since a different language is used in daily life, the opportunities and needs for using the L2 are far more limited.

The main purpose of this paper is to describe a content-based unit in an EAP course in an EFL university context. For classroom teachers, practical demands often precede theoretical considerations. Our stance is that of reflective practitioners, consulting the theoretical literature when contemplating pedagogical issues. In this paper, we will also address some of the theoretical issues that arose in the process of developing an EAP course design so as to arrive at recommendations that could apply to similar contexts. It is first necessary to look at those aspects of our educational context which informed the curriculum development process.

In mainstream academic content courses at Tel Aviv University, lectures, class discussions and writing tasks are conducted in L1 (Hebrew). However, since very little academic literature is available in Hebrew, most readings assigned are in English. Thus, Israeli students are L2 users in the sense defined by Cook (1999) since they are not native speakers of English but are expected to read and comprehend academic literature in English at a level comparable to their counterparts in Englishspeaking countries. Therefore, in designing an EAP course to meet these needs, the main focus of EAP courses is reading.

At Tel Aviv University, students begin their studies in their major immediately upon entering. Students take EAP courses in their first year at university at the same time that they are taking courses in their chosen disciplines. This situation differs from the context described in much of the literature on EAP courses which refers to pre-academic ESL courses (e.g., Carson, 2000; Murphy, 1996). Thus, in order to adequately prepare students for the kind of work by their academic studies, specializing in a specific academic discipline is another essential attribute of exit-level EAP courses in EFL contexts. Texts from different disciplines vary in language and discourse structure. For example, students majoring in physiotherapy or computer sciences read texts of a far more technical nature and of different genres than students majoring in humanistic subjects. Moreover, the tasks assigned in academic courses often differ from field to field—for example, writing a lab report in the sciences versus an essay analyzing a literary work. Furthermore, if readings are selected from the students’ own discipline, this facilitates students’ perception of relevance to their needs and elicits cooperation, which is particularly pertinent in a setting like ours where EAP courses are compulsory.

Since the texts students are assigned in mainstream courses are usually on one or several related topics, we have adopted a content-based approach (see Robinson, 1991; Shih, 1986; Snow & Brinton, 1988; Spector-Cohen, Kirschner, & Wexler, 2001) to EAP course design. A general feature of content-based reading courses is that what is read and why it is read are determined by the need to acquire particular information rather than to learn a discrete language point. Content serves as the guiding principle for determining which texts to use for the course. Pally (2000a) uses the term sustained content-based instruction to refer to courses in which students study one subject area over an extended period and apply English language skills in a manner simulating an academic context. However, the question of how to determine the relevant content and texts remains. Although one possibility is to choose texts that are identical to those assigned in mainstream academic courses, we have found that since a language course has different pedagogical purposes from mainstream content courses and since students in the language course may not all be concurrently enrolled in the same content courses, rigid adherence to the content course curricula is neither feasible nor desirable. An alternative, perhaps more flexible strategy would be to choose a number of texts that form thematically-linked units on several topics that are relevant to the students’ academic studies.

However, in order to bring students to the level of language proficiency needed to successfully process the ideas expressed in the course readings, texts can be accompanied by tasks which simulate those that students are expected to perform in their academic studies and in their future professional frameworks (see Shih, 1992). A task-based curriculum is therefore appropriate for the educational context referred to in this paper (see inter alia, Long & Crookes, 1992; Candlin, 1987; Prabhu, 1984). Carson (2000: 20) coins the term display task which she defines as ... ‘‘a graded product (e.g., exams, papers) rather than at the level of skills and subskills (reading, summary writing, etc.)’’. She further claims that sustained content is necessary in order to allow students to complete such display tasks. When we examine what students in our setting are expected to do with the English-language texts from their mainstream content courses, it is indeed to ‘‘display’’ (in oral or written form in Hebrew) the extent to which they have understood and applied the information and ideas discussed in course readings. Thus, it follows that such display tasks should serve as the focus of content-based units and should shape both its content and structure.

Robinson (2001) distinguishes between task complexity which is dependent on the nature of the task itself, task difficulty which is contingent upon learner factors such as aptitude, confidence and motivation and task conditions which refers to characteristics of the communicative situation. He claims that task complexity should be the basis for sequencing tasks in designing a course syllabus. Moreover, in analyzing task complexity, Skehan and Foster (2001: 194–195) invoke Skehan (1996)’s notions of code complexity (involving language), cognitive complexity (comprising cognitive familiarity and cognitive processing), and communicative stress which involves such factors as time pressure, length of texts used.

The concepts presented in Robinson (2001) and Skehan and Foster (2001) elucidate some of the problems in our context which need to be considered. Firstly, the texts assigned in mainstream academic courses are in English, a foreign language, at a level which might well be challenging for many native speakers of English. This could account for the prevalence of translation services advertised on campus bulletin boards. Secondly, undergraduate students often lack background knowledge presupposed by many of the readings assigned in their courses which might affect the dimension of difficulty as well as complexity. Thirdly, the sheer quantity of articles and books students are expected to read in a foreign language in a limited amount of time contributes to communicative stress. Finally, executing academic tasks, especially when they involve readings in a foreign language, is both difficult in terms of the students’ current abilities and highly complex. Moreover, the complexity of various academic tasks requires an understanding at a depth that can facilitate a synthesis and integration of ideas from various sources. A content-based unit at the end of the course where students are required to read a series of academic texts in preparation for a unifying task allows us to address the above-mentioned difficulties and serve as a bridge to mainstream academic requirements.

# 2. The Caravaggio unit

The unit described in this paper is an attempt to apply the above observations. It constitutes the final 5–6 weeks of two different EAP courses (which consist of $5 6 { \ - } 4 \mathrm { h }$ per week for 14 weeks). One course is for art history majors while the other is for students enrolled in a multi-disciplinary arts program (which comprises the academic fields of art history, film, theater, and music). The main focus of the unit is the feature film Caravaggio by British film director Derek Jarman (1942–1994). The final display task of the unit is a 3–5 page integrative essay in English analyzing the meaning of the film (See Appendix A).

The film Caravaggio is ostensibly about the life and art of the Italian Baroque artist Michelangelo de Caravaggio (1573–1610). However, it is not a documentary or a dramatic representation of his life. Rather, the film itself constitutes a work of art of considerable complexity which is very difficult to understand upon first viewing. This provides a rationale for class discussion of the meaning of the film (see No. 1 in Appendix B) and for further reading. The fact that the subject of the film is a real artist rather than a fictional character provides authentic justification for reading about the artist and his period. However, various anachronistic elements in the film (e.g., a pocket calculator, a motorcycle and other 20th century devices) indicate that Jarman’s treatment of Caravaggio’s life is not strictly historical. In order to interpret this idiosyncratic feature, it is necessary for students to read further on topics such as the life and work of director Derek Jarman, various theoretical writings on postmodernism, semiotics.

Thus, after first viewing the film in class, the students are assigned several texts in art history about the Baroque period and Caravaggio’s life and works, followed by texts about Derek Jarman, a filmed interview with him, as well as several reviews of the film. The texts chosen comprise various genres typical of art history, film, and theater such as a historical textbook, a chronology, an analysis/review of a work of art, primary sources/historical documents, a survey of an artist’s work or style. The sub-tasks assigned are both intra-textual (the student is required to use information from one particular text) and inter-textual (the student must integrate information from several texts). For a detailed description of the sequence of texts and tasks in the unit see Appendix B.

The film Caravaggio possesses certain qualities that make it appropriate for an integrative task for students in the arts especially film and art history. In addition to its overt art historical subject, the film touches on current social and artistic topics such as love relationships and sexual identity, the nature of an artist’s work and social criticism, all of which are of interest to a young, artistically-inclined, student population. Moreover, the interdisciplinary nature of the film requires that students read texts on various related topics. In addition, the interpretative question assigned in the final task of the unit can be answered at different levels of sophistication. Students can also choose to focus on many different aspects of the film.

# 3. Meta-text: a characteristic of academic texts in the arts

We will now briefly outline some important considerations that influenced our choice of the main task and the related texts and subtasks. Following the procedure for EAP course design outlined in Spector-Cohen et al. (2001), we examined the characteristics of the texts as well as the tasks typically assigned in mainstream content courses in the arts. We were struck by the fact that the topic of many academic articles or books in the arts is another text (a painting, a film, a literary work); that is, many texts in the arts are in effect meta-texts and therefore presuppose familiarity with the text which is the subject of discussion. For example, in film or art history, the ‘‘text’’ under discussion may be either a film or a painting—a work which is experienced visually; therefore, viewing the film or seeing the painting is an essential part of reading such a text. Moreover, many academic texts in the arts are characterized by a chain of intertextual references. For instance, an article analyzing a painting which depicts a biblical scene would refer to the biblical story as well as the painting itself. Hence, the biblical story constitutes another text. In addition, understanding a text which analyzes a work of art may presuppose historical, social and/or theoretical background and may mean that students must read additional literature.

Students in the academic art disciplines are commonly required to analyze and interpret a work of art and to apply various theoretical readings to their analyses. The process of studying an academic topic in the arts necessarily involves reading meta-texts which may be intellectually demanding for undergraduate students, especially when both the object-text and/or the meta-text are in a foreign language.

A film can serve as a text to be analyzed and researched and thus becomes the subject for further reading. This constitutes a rationale for using a film as the focus for a unit in an EAP course for students in the arts. In the unit under discussion, the ‘‘object text’’ is the film Caravaggio. Many of Caravaggio’s works which either appear or are alluded to in the film also become ‘‘object texts’’ about which the students must read additional material. The choice and sequence of the object texts, metatexts and related tasks simulate the process of inquiry that students in the arts typically undergo when analyzing and interpreting works of art.

# 4. The main task, the sub-tasks and the goals of the unit

The primary goal of the unit as well as the course as a whole is to teach students to read academic literature in English at a level where they are capable of integrating ideas and information from a number of texts in order to perform an academic task. It is important to note that completing the final essay, which is a writing task, constitutes a secondary goal. It is intended to provide a purpose for the reading and to evoke the kind of processing required in academic settings. The final essay is a display task in preparation for which the student must undergo a process of inquiry in order to interpret the film Caravaggio. The need to do the essay motivates a contentdriven sequence of activities. One clearly needs to investigate aspects of Caravaggio’s, period, and his life and art which requires that one seek out and read relevant materials. The student must consider the relevance and significance of the ideas in each text in relation to the film. The next logical step is to undertake a similar inquiry about Derek Jarman. This logical progression determined our choice and sequencing of the texts and related tasks .Thus, the rationale for the design of the Caravaggio unit was meaning-based rather than language-based.

We realized that the process of inquiry in preparation for the final task should be broken up into a series of smaller subtasks. Skehan and Foster (2001: 201) discuss the research on the effect of what they call ‘‘pre-task planning’’. In general, they conclude that . . .‘‘complexity and fluency are enhanced by pre-task planning’’. In addition, they cite Coughlan and Duff (1994) according to whom ‘‘. . .planning time may enable learners to engage with the content of the task, with the interpretation of what it entails. . .and with the schematic knowledge which is relevant which is relevant for its effective completion’’ (Skehan & Foster, 2001: 202).

In order to address the language-learning aspects of the course, it was pertinent that the unit focus on various aspects of reading. Regarding one facet of reading, Swales (1990: 26) notes that...‘‘a discourse community utilizes and hence possesses one or more genres in the communicative furtherance of its aims’’. Thus, an EAP reading course that purports to prepare students for membership in an academic or professional discourse community must also expose them to the genres of this discipline. As noted earlier, students are indeed exposed to a variety of genres in the Caravaggio unit (see Appendix B).

However, different text types may require the application of different sub-skills in varying degrees, depending on the purpose for which any given text is read. Examples of the application of such sub-skills in the Caravaggio unit are: reading for main ideas or gist (in all the texts in the unit), scanning for specific details (e.g., dates and events in Nos. 2, 3 and 10 in Appendix B), intensive reading of a dense text with a focus on language decoding skills where called for (e.g., a description of a painting and a textbook excerpt; Nos. 2 and 8, Nos. 9 and 12 in Appendix B); critical reading of primary sources; and generalizing from primary sources (Nos. 4 and 5 in Appendix B). By including these skills in the unit, the instructor has the opportunity to model for students how these skills or tasks should be performed.

Several of the subtasks, which constitute pre-task planning activities in preparation for the final essay, also involve language skills other than reading. For example, each student is required to deliver an oral presentation in English to the class in which she describes and analyzes a Caravaggio painting (No. 8, Appendix B) that appears in the film. Students are instructed to discuss how the painting is represented in the film and how this representation may contribute to an interpretation of the film. During their presentations, students refer to reproductions of the paintings projected onto a screen and are instructed to base their presentation on notes or an outline and not to read a word-for-word lecture.

We instituted these oral presentations since the students’ academic studies in art history often involve analyzing paintings and presenting such analyses to a class. In order to speak about the painting, the student must read several academic analyses thoroughly, which also obliges them to work through a chain of intertextual references; many of the paintings are of biblical or mythological scenes that are explicated in the texts. The prospect of presenting to their peers makes them accountable and requires them to attend to logical coherence and organization, which pertains to the notions of cognitive complexity and communicative stress discussed in Skehan and Foster (2001: 195). Furthermore, as any experienced teacher will attest, teaching or presenting a topic to someone else deepens one’s own understanding. The presentation is a step towards fulfilling the primary goal.

However, undergraduate students in Israel are not required to deliver oral presentations in English in their mainstream courses. In view of the fact that delivering a presentation in English on an academic topic is a daunting task, the question of why these presentations should be in English arises. In view of the primary goal of the unit, one could argue that oral display tasks could just as well be performed in Hebrew. The same claim could be made regarding the written tasks in the unit, especially the final essay.

However, in preparation for the presentation, students read complex and difficult texts. The level of comprehension needed to articulate and communicate their ideas often requires multiple readings of relevant texts. This facilitates vocabulary reentry, that is, repeated exposure to the same lexical items, which enhances vocabulary acquisition. We have also found that many of the students memorize key phrases and sentences and often practice their talk several times, which is valuable for language learning.

Moreover, Robinson (2001) suggests that . . .‘‘the greater the cognitive demands of a task, the more they engage cognitive resources (attention and memory), which will have performance effects. More complex tasks should lead to more pushing of output, and analysis of IL than simpler counterparts.’’ He stipulates that this should result in more ‘noticing’. Schmidt (1990: 129) asserts that. . .‘‘noticing is the necessary and sufficient condition for converting input into intake (italics ours)’’. With regard to vocabulary acquisition, Hulstjin and Laufer (2001) and Laufer and Hulstjin (2001) present the construct of task-induced involvement, according to which the amount of retention is related to the amount of task-induced involvement load. Since the oral presentation is a highly complex task involving productive skills which entail a high involvement load, it seems to meet the above conditions for facilitating language learning.

Finally, we have found that students expect to perform tasks in an English course in English. In order to ensure student cooperation, it is necessary to take into consideration student perception, even if such a task is somewhat different from what is required in mainstream courses. Nevertheless, the choice of doing the various tasks in either English or Hebrew has always presented a dilemma for us. Regarding student’s written work, another consideration is one of convenience for us as instructors who prefer to read student papers in English rather than in Hebrew. It is for all the above reasons that we have made the decision to require English for both oral and written activities.

The Caravaggio unit includes several writing sub-tasks by means of which the student analyzes and interprets the film. Driven by meaning, these tasks, both separately and cumulatively, confront students with the need to deal with the L2. As Hulstjin and Laufer (2001) note, writing tasks involve an increased Involvement Load, which facilitates vocabulary acquisition. Students complete a pre-writing task in which they write preliminary ideas about the meaning of the film after viewing it for the first time. They subsequently discuss these ideas in groups. In addition, students summarize the main ideas of a text, write a chronological list of events based on a text, write a summary in the form of a table as a means of organizing the ideas gleaned from primary sources, write short answers to test questions, write notes for an oral presentation on a painting, and write a first draft of the final paper (see Appendix B).

Many of the sub-tasks involve listening activities which provide an additional channel of language input. Listening may reinforce reading because it contributes to consolidating the connection between the written word and how it is pronounced. Despite their relatively high proficiency levels, many students have considerable difficulty in decoding written English. Unlike the ESL environment, which provides ample opportunity to hear the pronunciation of words encountered in writing or to see the written form of a word previously encountered orally, students in the EFL context hardly ever hear academic discourse in L2. Moreover, the irregular and nonphonetic orthography of English as well as its divergence from the Hebrew alphabet, not to mention many fundamental structural and phonological differences between English and Hebrew, also contribute to the students’ difficulties in decoding written text in English and bottom-up processing in general. Perfetti (1985) notes the importance of bottom-up processing in both L1 and L2. Koda (1997) claims that L2 readers bring their L1 orthographic knowledge and processing mechanism to bear on L2 word recognition, which often results in misidentification and confusion between words and meanings. Listening to the instructor read and listening to and participating in class discussions about the reading enhances decoding skills which may, in turn, facilitate reading as well as vocabulary acquisition. Students also listen to spoken English when they view the film in class without Hebrew subtitles. Film and theater courses often require students to view English-language films for which no Hebrew translation is available. However, the English narration in the film is literary while the dialogue is often very colloquial in accents that the students are not familiar with. Students are expected to view the film a second time on their own, for which they are given the option of viewing the film with Hebrew subtitles. New technological developments (films on DVD) now make it possible to show an English-language film with English-language subtitles. Caravaggio is not available on DVD. However, when we have shown other films for units similar to the one described in this paper (e.g., the film Pollock (2001) on the artist Jackson Pollock), students themselves requested the English subtitles in order to overcome sound problems and to help them decode. We had a similar experience with a taped interview of Jackson Pollock. Students read a written transcript while listening to the interview and were far more involved in this task than we had expected. When asked, they said that simultaneously listening to the text and reading enhanced their comprehension and thus made the task more interesting. Perhaps listening to a film or audio recording while simultaneously reading a transcription provides language input from two different channels with one reinforcing the other.

# 5. The students’ final papers

Students’ first drafts are usually characterized by several problems. In the content dimension, many students merely summarize the readings consecutively without integrating them into a well organized, coherent and substantiated interpretation of the film. Some of the structural problems that we have repeatedly seen are a lack of transitions, faulty paragraph structure, and large sections of texts copied from references without proper acknowledgment. In order to improve the quality of the students’ final papers, we gradually instituted the following changes:

(a) The first time we taught the unit, we assigned the final essay after viewing the film in class and after reading the texts. As a result, students did not have a clearly defined purpose for their reading. When the instructor fails to specify a purpose, especially when students are faced with large quantities of conceptually complex material in a foreign language, everything may seem important to them. Thus, there is a risk of encouraging a word-for-word reading strategy and thus losing sight of meaning. Students are now given the assignment at the very beginning of the unit. We have noted that students have become more focused in their attempt to answer the question posed in the assignment, perhaps because their reading in the process of preparing for the final paper is also more focused.

(b) Since the purpose of assigning a writing task was to facilitate reading, we did not originally consider including a revision process. However, the shortcomings of the papers led us to reassess the role of writing within the reading process. Students are now required to submit a first draft and revise in accordance with the instructor’s feedback. Teacher input on the first draft and subsequent revision by the student are essential components of this type of academic task (Brinton, Snow, & Wesche, 1989; Carson, 2000; May-Landy, 2000; Spack, 1988).

(c) Confronted by the need to give students clearly focused feedback on their first drafts, we developed a set of criteria, which became the basis for the input students received from the instructor and for assessing the students’ papers. These criteria touch on aspects of the content of their papers (for example, whether the paper has answered the question posed by the assignment). They also pertain to aspects of form (for example, paragraphing as well as citing references appropriately). Students’ final papers have always proved significantly better than the first draft in terms of both content and form. In addition, we feel that developing these criteria has had a washback effect on classroom activities. The final paper is now preceded by smaller writing tasks both within the Caravaggio unit and in previous parts of the courses referred to in this paper. These smaller writing tasks allow us to explicitly teach and model some of the criteria. A related washback effect has been that, since the criteria are clearer to us, our teaching has become more systematic and instructions given to the students are clearer. We feel that student papers have improved compared to previous courses.

(d) Students’ first drafts often require extensive corrections. In the past, we found that students did not always understand the teacher’s written corrections and seemed to need more guidance. We therefore instituted compulsory student–teacher conferences. A one-to-one meeting allows the instructor to clarify issues of content, essay organization and language, which are often interrelated.

An interesting aspect of these conferences has been that students often revert to Hebrew when discussing their ideas. The teacher has a facilitating function, helping the student untangle or interpret her thoughts. This also justifies the teacher’s use of the students’ L1 when necessary. It is our view that the use of the student’s L1 is valid when it facilitates intellectual elaboration. Moreover, when students are assigned group activities in class, we have noticed that they often revert to Hebrew in order to negotiate the meaning of a text. Outside the language classroom, when students study together, they do so in their L1, even if the subject matter derives from English-language readings. In our view, in designing and teaching EAP reading courses in an EFL setting, the legitimacy of the student’s L1 must be recognized. As Cook (1999) notes, the native speaker model is not necessarily the appropriate ideal to strive for in all English language courses. In our context, the formula that seems to have evolved is that students working in small groups may revert to L1 if they wish in order to negotiate meaning or in one-to-one conferences with the teacher. All other activities and contexts are conducted in English.

(e) We found that many of the students’ essays did not satisfactorily answer the question ‘‘What is the meaning of Derek Jarman’s film Caravaggio?’’. When we reformulated the task and instructed students to focus on one or several motifs, their papers improved. In order to assure EFL students’ comprehension of various tasks, attention must be paid to how assignments are worded. Kirschner, Wexler, and Spector-Cohen (1992) and Kirschner, Spector-Cohen, and Wexler (1996) present criteria and a procedure for the formulation of language test questions and instructions. (f) In preparing the oral presentation on a painting, many students focused mainly on the painting itself. They often failed to examine how this painting is represented in the film or, even if they had considered Jarman’s representation of the painting in the film, did not communicate their ideas about this effectively. Accordingly, many of the students’ final papers were also flawed in this content dimension. The only visual element used during the oral presentation was a reproduction of the painting to which the speaker referred. Some students did not find the relevant excerpt in the film for their presentation. Moreover, students in the audience did not always remember the relevant scenes and so could not always appreciate the significance of the painting in the film.

It is only recently that we utilized computer technology to juxtapose a scanned image of the painting with the relevant excerpt from the film. Both are simultaneously viewed on a computer screen by the student preparing her presentation and then on a large screen for the whole class during the presentation itself. While this may seem to be a mere technical modification, we feel that a consideration of how materials are presented to students is an important aspect of designing a sustained content unit of great complexity. Technical innovations may serve to break up material into smaller, more manageable components, perhaps allowing students to complete this pre-task and the final papers more successfully.

# 6. Language assessment

An important question asked with regard to a language course is whether it has facilitated a measurable improvement in the students’ L2 language proficiency.

As noted earlier, the writing task at the end of the unit was devised in order to facilitate an integrative process of this kind. In other words, the primary goal is actually realized and assessed by means of a display task. If students demonstrate that they can successfully perform the task, does this not provide indication of the students’ language proficiency? In other words, ‘‘just doing it’’ is the eating which is proof of the pudding, particularly in view of the fact that the Caravaggio unit comes at the end of these courses for students with a high proficiency level in English who are immediately called upon in their content courses to apply the very skills practiced in the unit. This is consistent with some of the literature on alternative assessment, such as Brown and Hudson (1998) and Birenbaum (1996). In content-based EAP courses designed for lower proficiency levels, it would not be feasible to institute a sustained content unit of such conceptual and linguistic complexity. According to Clarke (1980) and Eskey (1988), cited in Clapham (1996), the L2 reader must reach a certain threshold L2 proficiency level before L1 reading skills can transfer. An investigation of how successful performance of complex display tasks correlates with specific clearly identifiable L2 proficiency parameters is not within the scope of this paper.

However, in order for students to achieve the primary goal, it is essential that they perceive an improvement in their English vocabulary (their receptive vocabulary for recognition purposes) and reading fluency. This ultimately allows them to feel capable of tackling academic tasks which involve reading in English. We therefore interspersed meaning-based activities with those that focused explicitly on language (for example, reviewing, drilling and testing vocabulary from the various texts read in the Caravaggio unit and reading comprehension quizzes on individual texts). However, we have found that too many explicit language assessment activities sometimes interrupt the focus on meaning and may constitute a distraction. Skehan and Foster (2001: 205) claim that. . .‘‘attentional limitations for the L2 learner and user are such that different areas of performance compete for one another for the resources that are available’’, positing . . .‘‘a basic tension between meaning and form’’. Thus, it is necessary to attain a balance that permits explicit attention to language while at the same time allowing students to undergo the process of completing the task at hand.

Nonetheless, what is the place of norm-referenced language assessment as a means of monitoring student progress? At Tel Aviv University, as in all other Israeli universities, students take a standardized national English language examination for placement in EAP courses. We have found that the results on this test are a very reliable indicator of the students’ English language proficiency. Thus, when students enter the two EAP courses referred to in this paper, they are quite homogeneous in terms of their L2 proficiency level, either because they were directly placed into this exit-level course or because they successfully completed at least one previous course (in which they were also placed by means of the standardized placement exam). In the two courses referred to in this paper, the Caravaggio unit is preceded by reading activities of texts in the students’ respective disciplines with extensive language assessment which allows the teacher to monitor student progress in terms of language. In addition, in order to complete course requirements, students take a final reading comprehension examination consisting of one complete academic text of approximately 10 pages which is related in content to one of the topics read about in both courses (for a detailed discussion of the form of the reading comprehension tests of this type see Kirschner et al 1992, 1996). Average grades on this examination have generally been quite high (For example, $8 6 \%$ in 1999, $8 7 \%$ in 2000 and $90 \%$ in 2001). One could argue that the test might have been too easy and did not accurately reflect an improvement in the students’ reading ability. However, we are familiar with the level of language skills required in the final exam of the course that precedes the two courses discussed here. The texts used for the final exam are not only twice as long, but far more complex linguistically and conceptually. Yet, ‘‘prior knowledge of formal and content schemata. . . [facilitates] L2 reading’’ (Robinson, 2001: 312, citing Carrell, 1987). Since the final exam deals with a topic on which students have some background knowledge, we would conclude that the high scores on the final exam indicate that students have indeed acquired the skills necessary to deal with a full-length academic text in the arts.

# 7. Student response

As experienced EAP instructors and course designers, we have observed that students are far more engaged in the process of reading and learning in this unit than in other courses. Student evaluations comprising four open-ended questions were administered several times in order to examine student perceptions and to identify aspects of the unit that require modification. In response to a question on their general evaluation of the Caravaggio unit, most students responded positively, corroborating our impression. Many of the students found the content of the readings and the films fascinating and highly relevant to their studies. Another comment made by some students was that, unlike previous English courses that were not content-specific, this was a very engaging way to learn English. Some of these students even suggested that the entire course consist of one sustained content unit on Caravaggio; others felt that the course should consist of several such units.

However, we noted some difference between some of the art history students and the multi-disciplinary arts students in their reactions to the final task. Some students in the former group expressed reservations about the fact that the focus of the unit had been on a film rather than on an artist and his works. Students in the other group did not express this objection. This problem was partially solved when we reformulated the final assignment requiring students to choose one or several motifs in the film to focus on. This allowed students to place more emphasis on the art-historical aspect of the film. Another difference was in response to a question about which subtask in the unit they found the most helpful. In contrast to the students majoring in the multi-disciplinary arts program, students majoring in art history almost all preferred the oral presentation on a specific Caravaggio painting. This type of task is commonly assigned in art history courses. Thus, the differences in preferences between the two groups indicate that student perceptions of the language course are affected by the relevance of topics and tasks to their academic needs. Moreover, many of the students in both groups indicated that they had been intimidated by the prospect of having to give an oral presentation on an academic topic in English and had felt a sense of accomplishment when they successfully fulfilled this assignment.

In response to the question, ‘‘To what extent did your English improve as a result of the Caravaggio unit? Please specify.’’, students all indicated that their English had improved. However, some students noted that this was perhaps due to the considerable exposure to reading and subsequent discussion in English facilitated by the course as a whole. Student responses varied as to which specific activities contributed to their improvement and which specific language skill had improved. It is interesting to note that although the courses in question are defined as reading courses, students often cited other language skills or activities such as speaking in English in front of a group, writing the paper at the end of the unit and acquiring professional terms in art history. Perhaps the variety of sub-tasks allowed the individual student to focus on those aspects of language which she needed in order to perform challenging academic tasks in a foreign language. In addition, extensive classroom experience has shown us that what we intend to teach does not always coincide with what individual students actually learn.

In response to the question ‘‘What changes to the Caravaggio unit do you recommend for future courses?’’, some students indicated that the unit was too long. The following year, the unit was shortened and student evaluations did not include any criticism pertaining to excessive length.

# 8. General comments and recommendations

The following comments and recommendations are presented in the hope that they may be applicable to other educational settings.

(a) In order to engage students and ultimately facilitate language learning relevant to their immediate needs, it is our view that an exit-level EAP course should not only be content-based but, if feasible, the content itself should derive from the specific academic discipline that students are concurrently majoring in. In addition, we have found that a content-based unit which is unified by an integrative task is efficacious as a design principle because it allows the instructor to simulate the activities involving L2 that are typically performed in academic content courses. We hope that such modeling as well as overt discussion of strategies also facilitates the development of meta-cognitive skills. (b) A final integrative task of such a unit constitutes an alternative form of language assessment. This task as well as subtasks assigned during the unit serves a dual function in that they simulate an academic process of inquiry and are an indication of the students’ L2 proficiency. Alternative assessments can complement more traditional forms of language testing (such as vocabulary tests and reading comprehension tests).

Developing a clear set of criteria for assessing student work is an important part of the process of curriculum design. Although assessment is done after the student has produced the display task, it is intrinsically linked to goal setting when the task is first formulated and assigned. Ideally such criteria and goals should be clear and articulated to both the teachers themselves and the students at the outset. In practice, however, such curriculum and task refinement is often achieved heuristically.

(c) Films have a natural appeal in the classroom. Voller and Widdows (1993), Ross (1991), Chapple and Curtis (2000) and Pally (2000b) describe ESL or EFL courses using feature films. We suggest that a feature film be used for an integrative unit. It can serve as a bridge to the students’ academic work, if it generates a need to read a series of texts and to perform related tasks. Films of an interdisciplinary nature often facilitate such a process, especially when the subject is a real person in a real historical or cultural setting and/or with many historical and cultural allusions. Moreover, in a university setting, the film should be intellectually challenging in order to sustain interest and motivation for further reading. Other feature films that we have used are The Pillow Book (1996) by Peter Greenaway for students majoring in East Asian Studies; Mr. Death (1999) by Errol Morris for students majoring in the Humanities; for the arts students, Ed Harris’s Pollock (1999) about the artist Jackson Pollock. (d) The course designer or instructor is faced with many practical and pedagogical considerations such as should the entire course consist of one topic that is the subject of all course readings and assignments or should the course perhaps consist of several units? Should all these units be accompanied by integrative tasks? A criterion for designing and sequencing both texts and tasks is complexity (and perhaps difficulty), as recommended by Robinson (2001). This complexity and/or difficulty may apply to the academic content in question, the tasks or the language. For example, we have added a similar unit on the modern artist Jackson Pollock, which for historical reasons, should have followed the Caravaggio unit. However, as the film Pollock and the related readings and tasks were somewhat less complex in terms of content, we scheduled it before the Caravaggio unit. This sequencing seemed to allow the student to gradually work through some of the abstract content that came up in both units. Thus, the texts and tasks in both units could be exploited as vehicles for language learning.

It is our position that an entire course on a topic as specific as Caravaggio would not be efficacious. Students in an EAP course are generally receptive to reading material from their discipline. Nonetheless, they regard the course as a language course and may feel that exclusive attention to one topic is excessive. In our experience, when content serves as the main organizing principle for an EAP course, both students and instructors may sometimes lose sight of the purpose of the course. Having more than one content unit can provide the variety and flexibility that a language course demands, redirecting attention to language while sustaining content and providing opportunities to practice the tasks required in academic settings. Moreover, practical constraints such as time should be considered so that explicit language activities are given their due place.

(e) As EAP instructors teaching discipline-specific courses, whose expertise is in the field of language, we lack the qualifications and the authority to act as experts in the field in question. We disagree with Carson (2000) and Murphy (1996) who claim that the general undergraduate courses (for instance, Introduction to Psychology) that instructors might have taken sometime in the past constitute sufficient background to enable them to teach content-based language courses and act as experts in the field (for example, in simulating a lecture in psychology). Even in introductory mainstream courses, the content instructor is an expert in the field and a member of a discourse community and, as such, is aware of what ideas are stressed by experts and for what purpose. The language instructor is often not privy to such nuances. Thus, we advocate caution on the part of the instructor in integrating content in a language course. In designing specialized content-based courses, our stance vis-a\` -vis the content is that of an inquiring student. This position enables us to effectively model language and study skills for the students.

(f) One important difference between EFL and ESL settings is the relative importance of the four language skills. In EFL settings many professionals (e.g., doctors, psychologists etc.) need to read the literature in their field in English with complete proficiency. Their written or spoken English may not be at the same level. In an ESL setting, the environment often ascribes equal importance to all skills. Thus, in EAP courses in EFL settings, contextual factors influence course design; the language skills of speaking, listening and writing may come into play in order to reinforce reading, but the primary emphasis should remain reading.

(g) The nature of the EFL setting requires that the respective functions of L1 and L2 be acknowledged and considered in making pedagogical decisions. The students’ L1 may underlie some shared L2 language difficulties which should be addressed by the instructor. This is not feasible in an ESL environment, where students have varied linguistic backgrounds not shared by the teacher. A related issue is that of code switching between L1 and L2 on the part of either teacher or students. The use of L1 may be beneficial in negotiating meaning. Perhaps, however, the subject of code switching in the context of meaning-based tasks in EAP classrooms in EFL contexts needs to be further investigated.

(h) Content-based course design is predicated on the notion of authenticity. Strict adherence to the notion of authenticity would require that, as in mainstream academic courses, students independently find materials relevant to their papers. However, in order for class time to be used efficiently, it is essential for the class to have a shared corpus of readings. Nevertheless, these practical and pedagogical constraints do not obviate a measure of independence on the part of the students. For instance, students could be required to find at least one additional source relevant to the particular motifs they have chosen to explore. In addition, in choosing texts, the pedagogical concerns of the language course may sometimes override academic content-based considerations. Other compromises regarding authenticity may well be inevitable and must be adjudicated according to course goals.

# 9. Conclusion

Finally, we have found the process of developing both the courses and the specific unit described here to be an enriching and challenging experience. The materials and related tasks to be chosen for such units should be determined in an ongoing process of design, implementation, evaluation and revision, custom-designed for specific groups of students in specific settings. In our view, the notion of such ongoing development is an essential attribute of EAP course design.

# Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Dafna Ben-Anath, Elana Spector-Cohen and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.

# Appendix A. Final assignment for the Caravaggio unit

In your opinion, what is the meaning of Derek Jarman’s film Caravaggio?

What is your interpretation of the film? Write an essay of approximately 3–5 pages in which you develop several (one, two or three) aspects, themes or motifs that are significant in the film. Give specific examples and other support for your ideas. Use both the film and at least six of the texts that we have read for this support. These references must be cited in the appropriate manner and listed in a list of references at end of your paper.

# References

Aronson, A. (1991). Postmodern design. Theatre Journal, 43, 1–13.   
Friedlander, W. (1985). Caravaggio: documents on the artist’s life and work. Excerpts reprinted in FMR, No. 9, pp. 66–72.   
Hibbard, H. (1983). Caravaggio, London, GB: Thames and Hudson.   
Jahiel, E. (1995). Caravaggio: A film review. Available: www.funet.fi/pub/culture/tv $^ +$ film/reviews/C/ CARAVAGGIO.4343.   
Janson, H.W. (1977). The history of art (pp. 482–485). New York: Harry N. Abrams.   
Jarman, D. (1986). Caravaggio. Film produced in the United Kingdom by the British Film Institute (BFI), in association with Channel 4 and Nicholas Ward-Jackson.   
Kitson, M. (1969). The complete paintings of Caravaggio. England: Penguin Books Ltd.   
McMullen, K. (1994). There we are: an interview with Derek Jarman. Film produced by the British Council.   
Moyr, A. (1982). Caravaggio. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc.   
Rayns, T. (1986). Unnatural lighting, American Film, September, pp. 46–59.   
Tillman, L. (1987). Love story, Art in America, 21–23.   
Wollen, R. (1992). Derek Jarman: a portrait (pp. 161–171). London: Thames and Hudson Ltd.   
(a) Students work in groups of 4–5. Each group reads and   
discusses several documents and examines where the events   
fit into the biography (see No. 3 above). Each group   
reports to the rest of the class   
(b) In class discussion, students draw conclusions about   
Caravaggio’s life, work and personality

Appendix B. The Caravaggio unit: table of texts and tasks (complete references to texts and films are listed in Appendix A)   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">No. Text/film Derek Jarman&#x27;s</td><td>Teaching points and tasks.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">1.</td><td>film Caravaggio (90 min)</td><td>(a) Before viewing the film:. Short introductory discussion about the film, Derek Jarman, and Caravaggio (read a short introductory text on. the artist from the internet, view paintings by Caravaggio which also appear in the film, give a list of the characters and the credits of the film). (b) View the film in class; assignment: write a few thoughts. on the film and read text No. 2 below (c) After viewing the film:</td></tr><tr><td>. class discussion of the film.</td><td>. listing of the film&#x27;s main motifs and themes : presentation of the main task (the essay) : class discussion on information/literature needed to complete the main task . distribution of a list of readings which includes the items listed by the students in the above discussion (e.g., background on the period in the history of art,. Caravaggio&#x27;s biography, Jarman&#x27;s biography, criticism/ analyses of works by both artists etc.) Text type: an excerpt from an art history textbook</td></tr><tr><td>2. H.W. Janson,</td><td>The Baroque in. Italy and Germany. In The history of art M. Kitson,</td><td>(a) Students read this text and answer detailed questions (b) The class writes a summary of the four main points in. the text Text type: an artist&#x27;s biography--a chronological list of. significant events, people and works with reference to scholarly debates on Caravaggio&#x27;s life and works</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>The complete paintings of Caravaggio.</td><td>(a) Students scan for significant dates and works, the main. controversies in the literature about his life and works (b) In class, list main events in Caravaggio&#x27;s life on the board</td></tr><tr><td>4.</td><td>primary sources documents, and letters) on the artist&#x27;s. life and work.</td><td>FMR art journal; Text type: primary sources (excerpts from historical.</td></tr></table></body></html>

5. M. Kitson The Critical history. In The complete paintings of Caravaggio

Text type: primary documents of critics’ reactions to   
Caravaggio (16th–20th century) and a short textbook   
excerpt that summarizes the critical history   
(a) Students work in small groups on the documents by   
critics in one particular century. The group sums up the   
attitude of critics of that century towards Caravaggio and   
his work   
(b) Each group reports to the rest of the class. A summary   
in the form of a table is written on the board   
(c) The class reads Kitson’s summary of the ‘‘critical   
history’’ and compare their conclusions to Kitson’s   
conclusions

6. M. Kitson, Introduction. In The complete paintings of Caravaggio

Text type: an overview and analysis of Caravaggio’s style, motifs, works etc.   
(a) Preview article and read for homework   
(b) Students take reading comprehension quiz which elicits the main characteristics of Caravaggio’s art in various periods of his life

7. H. Hibbard, After-thoughts. In Caravaggio

Text type: The concluding chapter of a book on   
Caravaggio which analyzes some aspects of Caravaggio’s   
life and works   
(a) Students skim for the main ideas and organization and   
then read the entire chapter for homework   
(b) Students are given a comprehension quiz on the main   
ideas   
8. (a) H. Hibbard,   
excerpts on   
paintings. In   
Caravaggio   
(b) Moyr,   
excerpts on   
paintings. In   
Caravaggio

Text type: description and analysis of individual paintings (a) Elicit from the students what elements need to be understood about each painting (a clarification of the scene depicted in the painting, at what part of Caravaggio’s life the painting was created, the composition, in what way the painting was typical or unique, the circumstances of the commission of the painting etc.) as well as how this painting is represented in Jarman’s film

(b) Each student or pair of students prepares a $5 { \mathrm { - } } 1 0 { \mathrm { - } } \operatorname* { m i n }$ presentation in English on a specific painting and on how this painting is represented in Jarman’s film. Visual aids used are: a slide or other projection of the painting and a clip of the relevant excerpt of the film

9. T. Rayns, Unnatural lighting, American film

Text type: a film review; mainly gives background on   
Derek Jarman and his other works   
(a) In class discussion, elicit the question relevant to this   
text from the students: What aspects of Derek Jarman’s   
personal background might explain his interest in the artist   
Caravaggio?   
(b) Students read the text and answer the above question   
for homework

10. Wollen, R., Derek Jarman’s biography. In Jarman: a portrait.

Text type: an artist’s biography; a chronological list of significant events, people and works with commentary.

(a) Students scan the text for dates and main events. (b) Answer the following questions:   
 What were Derek Jarman’s main activities up to 1970?  When did Jarman make his first full-length feature film?  What important information is given about the making of the film Caravaggio and Jarman’s view of the artist Caravaggio?   
 What characterizes the final years of Jarman’s life?  What aspects of Jarman’s biography are particularly pertinent to the film Caravaggio?

11. Film by K. McMullen, There we are: an interview with Derek Jarman $( 3 0 \mathrm { m i n } )$

Text type: a filmed interview with Derek Jarman at the end   
of his life   
(a) Due to the poor sound quality of the film (as well as   
Jarman’s unclear speech), students read a written synopsis   
of the film in class before viewing the film   
(b) View the film in class. Elicit connections between the   
interview, the setting (Jarman’s paintings and his home)   
the content of many of the texts read

12. (a) L. Tillman, Text type: film review Love story, (a) Students are assigned both articles for homework with Art in America guiding questions. (b) E. Jahiel, (b) Class discussion in groups of both articles; students are Caravaggio: a also asked to consider what aspects of the interpretations film review, in each of the articles they find interesting and/or from the internet consistent with their own interpretations

13. Final assignment Task: students are required to write a 3–5 page essay answering the following question: In your opinion, what is the meaning of Derek Jarman’s film Caravaggio? (a) Students independently view the film a second time sometime during the unit, preferably before the oral presentations on the paintings (see No. 8 above) (b) In answering the above question, they must refer to the texts read in the unit

# References

Birenbaum, M. (1996). Assessment 2000: towards a pluralistic approach to assessment. In M. Birenbaum, & F.J.R.C. Dochy (Eds.), Alternatives in assessment of achievements, learning processes and prior knowledge. Kluwer Academic Publishers.   
Brinton, D. M., Snow, M. A., & Wesche, M. B. (1989). Content-based second language instruction. Boston, MA: Heinle and Heinle.   
Brown, J. D., & Hudson, T. (1998). The alternatives in language assessment. Tesol Quarterly, 32(4), 653– 675.   
Candlin, C. N. (1987). Towards task-based language learning. In C. N. Candlin, & C. Murphy (Eds.), Lancaster practical papers in English language education: Volume 7. Language Learning Tasks. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.   
Carrell, P. (1987). Content and formal schemata in ESL pedagogy. TESOL Quarterly, 21, 461–481.   
Carson, J. G. (2000). Reading and writing for academic purposes. In M. Pally (Ed.), Sustained content teaching in academic ESL/EFL: A practical approach (pp. 19–34). Boston & New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.   
Chapple, L., & Curtis, A. (2000). Content-based instruction in Hong Kong: student responses to film. System, 28, 419–433.   
Clapham, C. (1996). The development of IELTS: A study of the effect of background knowledge on reading comprehension. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Clarke, M. A. (1980). The short circuit hypothesis of ESL reading- or, when language competence interferes with reading performance. Modern Languages Journal I, 64, 203–209.   
Cook, V. (1999). Going beyond the native speaker in language teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 33(2), 185– 209.   
Coughlan, P., & Duff, P. (1994). Same task, different activities: Analysis of an SLA task from an activity theory perspective. In J. Lantolf, & G. Apple (Eds.), Vygotskyan approaches to second language research (pp. 173–194). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
(1999) Editorial English for Specific Purposes, 18(3), 211–212.   
Eskey, D. E. (1988). Holding in the bottom: An interactive approach to the language problems of second language readers. In P. L. Carrell, J. Devine, & D. E. Eskey (Eds.), Interactive approaches to second language reading (pp. 93–100). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Hulstijn, J. H., & Laufer, B. (2001). Some empirical evidence for the involvement load hypothesis in vocabulary acquisition. Language Learning, 51(3), 539–558.   
Kirschner, M., Wexler, C., & Spector-Cohen, E. (1992). Avoiding obstacles to student comprehension of test questions. TESOL Quarterly, 26(3), 537–556.   
Kirschner, M., Spector-Cohen, E., & Wexler, C. (1996). A teacher education workshop on the construction of EFL tests and materials. TESOL Quarterly, 30(1), 85–111.   
Koda, K. (1997). Orthographic knowledge in L2 lexical processing: A cross-linguistic perspective. In J. Coady, & T. Huckin (Eds.), Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition (pp. 35–52). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Laufer, B., & Hulstijn, J. H. (2001). Incidental vocabulary acquisition in a second language: the construct of task-induced involvement. Applied Linguistics, 22, 1–26.   
Long, M., & Crookes, G. (1992). Three approaches to task-based syllabus design. TESOL Quarterly, 26(1), 27–47.   
May-Landy, M. (2000). Linking assessment to the content-based curriculum. In M. Pally (Ed.), Sustained content teaching in academic ESL/EFL: a practical approach (pp. 223–239). Boston & New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.   
Murphy, J. M. (1996). Integrating listening and listening instruction in EAP programs. English for Specific Purposes, 15(2), 105–120.   
Pally, M. (2000a). Sustaining interest/advancing learning: sustained content-based instruction in $\mathrm { E S L } /$ EFL— theoretical background and rationale. In M. Pally (Ed.), Sustained content teaching in academic ESL/EFL: a practical approach (pp. 1–18). Boston & New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.   
Pally, M. (2000b). ‘‘Film & society’’: a course for analyzing readings, writing, and critical thinking. In M. Pally (Ed.), Sustained content teaching in academic ESL/EFL: a practical approach (pp. 158–178). Boston & New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.   
Perfetti, C. A. (1980). Reading ability. New York: Oxford University Press.   
Prabhu, N. S. (1984). Procedural syllabuses. In T. E. Read (Ed.), Trends in language syllabus design (pp. 272–280). Singapore: Singapore University Press/RELC.   
Robinson, Pauline (1991). ESP today: a practitioner’s guide. London: Prentice Hall.   
Robinson, Peter (2001). Task complexity, cognitive resources, and syllabus design: a triadic framework for examining task influences on SLA. In Peter Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 287–318). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Ross, N. J. (1991). Literature and film. ELT Journal, 45(2), 147–155.   
Schmidt, R. (1991). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11, 129– 158.   
Shih, M. (1986). Content-based approaches to teaching academic writing. TESOL Quarterly, 20(4), 617– 646.   
Shih, M. (1992). Beyond comprehension exercises in the ESL academic reading Class. TESOL Quarterly, 26(2), 289–318.   
Skehan, P. (1996). A framework for the implementation of task-based instruction. Applied Linguistics, 17, 38–62.   
Skehan, P., & Foster, P. (2001). Cognition and tasks. In Peter Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 183–205). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Snow, M., & Brinton, D. (1988). Content-based language instruction: investigating the effectiveness of the adjunct model. TESOL Quarterly, 22(4), 553–574.   
Spack, R. (1988). Initiating ESL students into the academic discourse community: How far should we go? TESOL Quarterly, 22(1), 29–51.   
Spector-Cohen, E., Kirschner, M., & Wexler, C. (2001). Designing EAP reading courses at the university level. English for Specific Purposes, 20(4), 367–386.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Voller, P., & Widdows, S. (1993). Feature films as text: a framework for classroom use. ELT Journal, 47(4), 342–353.

Michal Kirschner and Carol Wexler are instructors, course coordinators and curriculum designers of advanced EAP reading courses in the Division of Foreign Languages at Tel Aviv University in Israel. They have published articles on language testing, in-service teacher training and curriculum design.