# The need for critical digital literacies in generative AI-mediated L2 writing

Ron Darvin

The University of British Columbia, Canada

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Generative artificial intelligence   
Critical digital literacies   
Materiality   
Indexicality   
Ideology   
Platform design

This article asserts that the use of generative AI (GenAI) technologies for L2 writing needs to involve critical digital literacies. Drawing on the initial insights from a case study exploring the GenAI practices of secondary school students in Canada, this paper highlights emergent issues surrounding the dispositions of these learners towards these tools, the designs of platforms, and the material differences in the way these tools generate responses and encourage specific practices. Recognizing the inequalities that circumscribe the use of these technologies, this paper proposes materiality, indexicality, and ideology as key constructs that help develop an understanding of critical digital literacies relevant to GenAI-mediated L2 writing and digital multimodal composing. These constructs draw attention to how platform designs and other material processes, together with learner access to resources, can steer learners toward particular interactions and discourses. By understanding how GenAI platforms trained on large datasets can privilege certain ways of thinking and writing, L2 writers can develop a more critical perspective of how these technologies can shape the way we write ourselves into being.

# 1. Introduction

In a recent discussion on generative AI (GenAl) in the Jounal of Second Language Writing, Warschauer e al., 2023 proposed an AI literacy that L writers ned to efectively navigate and integrate AI technologie into their writing tasks (p. 2). They highlighted the tensions and challenges that arise from the integration of AI-generated texts into the writing practices of L2 learners, and issues of academic dishonest, equit and overreliance on these tols. Addressing these isues, they proposed a framework that involves being able to understand the afordances of A tools, from writing ideation to text modfication and feedback provision, highlighting the need to provide efective prompts and to corroborate the content generated by Al. While this framework identifies the literacies necessary for L2 writers to achieve their particular intentions, this paper elaborates on the importance of developing critical digital literacies (CDL) and focuses on how issues of power and agency circumscribe the use of GenAI: from the ideologies embedded in the designs and outputs f various platforms, to the inequalities of uer resources and the datasets of large language models. It draws attention to how these toos are implicated in the economy of big data, and how the interplay of data and algorithms can reproduce not onlycertain biases and assumptions, but also the inequalities of high-resource and low-resource languages.

By recognizing the distributed agency of human and nonhuman interactants in GenAI, CDL enables a critical awarenessof how power operates in GenAI-mediated writing and digital multimodal composing. Tools like ChatGPT, which can se, hear, and speak, have blurred the boundarie between writing and visual, auditory, and spatial modes of communication. Advances in natural language processing, computer vision, and speech-to-text technologies have integrated these modes, enabling learners to navigate seamlessly between them. At th same time, interactions with these ools are often solitary, involving individualized multimodal input and output. Given the nature of these human-AI interactions, how L2 writers are able to evaluate such output and how L2 teachers are able to mobilize a metalanguage to discusstheaffordances and constraints of these tols become particularly crucil. As Gen provides genre exemplars and rhetorical strategies, L2 writers need to recognize how these enerated responses are algorithmic compositions or data patchwork whose provenance is obscured by the black box of AI. By drawing attention to the design and output of these tols CDL attempts to make visible what this black box conceals.

In digital literacies scholarship, CDL is a construct that draws attention to how digitally-mediated interactions and semiotic pro ductions can reflect and reproduce relations of power (Darvin, 2017). With a particular focus on texts, Avila and Pandya (2013) describe CDL as a processof exploring thesocial and politicl dimensions of digital texts and for redesigning them to better serve voices that are often marginalized. Recognizing how the personal and affctive experiences of digital media can make such ideological critique challenging, angrazio (2016) propose citical digtl design, a refletive approch whre lnrs defamliariz digitl texts, and examine how they promote specific ideologies. Similarly acknowledging the personal nature of digital practices, Tagg and Seargeant (2019) argue that CDL needs to pay attention to how people's online interactions play a significant role in the way infor. mation flows and isconsumed in a networked society. Drawing on the concept of context design, these scholars point out how such interactions are shaped by the perceived affordances of tools, norms of communication and belief regarding online writing. Woven together, these theorizations of CDL demonstrate how a critical lens can cast a light on how GenAI-mediated writing and digital multimodal composing (Jiang & Hafner, 2024; Jiang & Ren, 2020) are sites of competing and colluding intentions, designs and ideologies.

Recognizing CDL as a means to exercise learner agency, this paper illuminates how power operates within the layers of GenAI mediation, privileging some languages and forms of knowledge over others, and ultimately shaping L2 writing practices. It draws on the preliminary findings from atwo-month study of the GenAI practices of secondary school students in British Columbia, Canada. This larger study investigated the purposes of L2 writers for investing in the use of GenAl tols, and the ways they enacted specific digital literacies to achieve such purposes. Incorporating case study methodology (Duff, 2014), this study involved participants $\mathbf { ( n = 6 ) }$ who were a mix of Grades 8-12 learners and who spoke a language other than English at home. Data was collcted through two one-hour sessions with each partcipant which included semi-structured interviews and observations of the learners using GenAI technologies for dfferent purposes. Protocols for the first interview focused on encouraging participants to share what they considered their GenAI practices. In between the two interview sessions, participants shared screenshots of their GenAl interactions with the researcher, and these digital artifacts served as elicitation devices for the second interview. The observations involved think aloud protocols where participants verbalized their thoughts and intentions as they used ChatGPT, Copilot, CharacterAl, ChatAI and Snapchat My AI. The researcher took down notes during these observations, and screenshots of the GenAI interactions were collected.

Audio from the interview sessons was transcribed and screenshots were tagged and linked to the relevant sections of the transcripts. For instance, during a participant's decritionftheir interactionon ChatGT, a corresponding crensht of the interface was linked to the transcript's timestamp, allowing for direct cros-referencing of verbal accounts and visual interactions. With the aid of NVivo, a computer-assted qualitative data analysis software (CAsQDA), firt-order and second-order codes were developed from the data by examining repetitions, metaphors and other pattrns, and by grouping codes into categories and sub-categories based on certain exemplars. An open coding process generated first-order codes like "device used'", \*prompt construction', \*voice interaction" "image generation, etc. The irs-order code "device used for instance emerged from repeated participant references to \*my laptop" or "my phone", and contributed to the second-order code, aes t resources". As these codes were categorized, coding processes and choices were documented in coding memos, while posing questions and making connections in theoretical memos. Apart from the thematic analysis of the transcribed interviews and think aloud statements, a multimodal discourse analysis (Jewit, 2017) of the screenshots displaying participants interactions with the tools was also conducted. This analysis included highlighting what modes or features of generated multimodal texts participants found salient, and dissecting platform designs such as the placement of feedback buttons, and visual elements such as avatars.

As a brief report, this paper provides an overview of the preliminary insights from this study. It identifies some key issues of Gen-AI mediated L2 writig that emerged from the analysis, discuses how CDL can be a way to frame and think about these issues, and ffers some pedagogical implications of such insights..

# 2. Emerging issues

After conducting a preliminary analysis of the data, certain issues surrounding the use of these tools for 2 writing emerged, involving the dispositions of learners towards these technologies and the ways they negotiated the affordances and constraints of various platforms.

# 2.1. Dispositions towards GenAI

In the study, a number of participants tended to treat GenAI technologies as neutral toos that provided accurate answers to their questions, without examining further the underlying biases of these responses. None of them used the feedback mechanisms available in these tools such as the thumbs up or thumbs down buttons. In some cases, participants treated the tools more like dictionaries or thesauruses,aking for the meanings of words and altenative word choices to avoid repetition in writing assgnments. Others had a more moderate engagement, using the tools for straightforward queries and general information rather than for in-depth writig assistance. Many of them did not demonstrate an awareness of how these tools operated to generate texts, and those who somewhat understood the way these tols worked, demonstrated a more practical understanding rather than a critical awarenes. Consistent with all the participants was an admission of ther hesitation for teachers to know that they used thee tool, acknowledging how these tools were often perceived to be instruments for plagiarism.

# 2.2. Platform designs

The participants in the study used a variety of GenAI platorms: ChatGPT, Copilot, Chat AI, Character AI, Snapchat's My AI and Dall-E. Powered by different large language models (LLMs) and diffusion models, these platforms incorporate designs that provide diverse affordances and constraints and encourage different user behaviours. I contrast to ChatGPT which involves a more generic interface, Character Al offers a variety of characters, each designed to provide unique, human- like interactions tailored to specific tasks. A feature of Snapchat, My AI enables users to customize the chatbot by giving it a name, changing its chat wallpaper, and assigning t a crtain personality. llthese matri differnces not only shap the gerated reponses, but also the different ways the learners engage with these platorms. One My AI user in the study for instance positioned the chatbot as a friend whom she can converse with about quotidian topics, while ChatGPT users tended to use itas a source of information. In the study, the participant demonstrated varying levels of awarenes of the differences between the GenI platforms they used, but most semed to focus more on the difference between GenAI tools and other traditional search methods like Google.

# 2.3. Material inequalities

Through observations of the participants' GenAI practices, what also became apparent were certain inequalities that shaped the extent to which learners would benefit from these tools. Diffrences in the devices they used to aces GenAI appeared to shape how they performed specific tasks. Limitations i typing and scren size on a phone for instance seemed to encourage mostly practices of retrieving information, finding definitions and synonyms, and understanding basic concepts, while using a laptop facilitated copying and pasting information, moving across patforms, and deeper integration of AI tols in the learning process The paid premium version f Copilot that one articipant had accessto had image generation affordances that the fre version of ChatGT did not. Apart from the paywalldifferences, the tools also recognize the home languages of the participants in unequal ways. In ChatGT, Malayalam would often be confused with Tamil or Telugu, or the ool also often misundersood spoken Vietnamese. Tied to the economy of big data, the differences in these tools' abilit to recognize low-resource and high-resource languages also indicate which sources of knowledge dominate the data used to train these tools. These inequalities are concealed by the black box of Al and further obscured by the solitary nature of these practices, and this iolation limits opportunities to compare and contrast responses generated for different users.

# 3. The need for critical digital literacies

Given thee isues involving dispositions towards GenAlI, plaform deigns and unequal acces to resources, this paper recognizes an urgent ned to develop critical dgital literacies alongide GenAI-mediated writing practices. This critical perspective casts alight on how biases, ideologies and inequalities are embedded in these tools (Kubota, 2023), and how the identities of L2 writers and their acces to resources can shape unequal opportunities for learning (Darvin, 2017). In contrast to functional digitl literacies that enable learners todraw on the existing features and functionalities of digital ools in ways that align with platform logics and conventions, I define critical digital literacies as the practices of interrogating and resisting how power operates in the reproduction of ideologies, inequalities and modes of exclusion in digitally mediated spaces..

Recognizing that digital tools are never neutral, CDL draws attntion to how mechanisms of power shape the way knowledge, identitie, and social relations are egitimated and valued online. Incorporated in platorm designs and algorithms are ideologies that represent the interests of specific people and institutions. Circumscribed by competing intentions and worldviews, online spaces are sites of struggle that can reproduce ofline inequalities and modes f exclusion. To disrupt such ideological reproduction, CDL involves critical ways f interpreting and assembling linguistc and semiotc resources online, critiquing and challenging existing practices in order to create moreequitable and inclusive online spaces. To respond to the gaps and inequalities in the GenAI practices of this study's participants, this paper highlights the inificance of the following constructs in sering aseuristic to develop  more critical view of GenAI technologies.

# 3.1. Materiality

In recent years, there has been an increased atention to the role of materialit in understanding how power operates in online spaces (Leander & Burrss 2020) particularl as this mediation involves the entanglement of human and nonhuman interactants: users devices, platorm designs and algorithms. To evaluate the texts and writing feedback that GenAI platforms produce L2 writers need to develop a greater undersanding of the material processes that constitute such production. As L2 writers engage with various GenAI platforms, the design and infrastructuref these platforms havethe power to directattention, to asemble information and to construct conditions of possbility in these spaces (Bucher, 2018). The layout, buttons, prompts and avatars in these tools are sociotechnicel structures (Darvin, 2023) that shape interactions within these spaces. Whether users are asked to Message ChatGPT or "Send a chat" on My AI ater choosing an avatar to depict the AI's \*personality", these structures can shape the particular ways users engage with these tools. At the same time, the arrangement of semiotic forms in the layout of a platform can be structured by devices (laptop vs.

phone), interface choices (browser vs. app), and screen orientations (landscape vs. portrait), and these variations impact the way information is presented (Darvin, 2023). Aligned with this view, Dunaway and Soroka (2021) point out how material features of devices such asscreen size and portaility have structuraleffects on information processing (p.72), and thus play a role in the way L2 writers are able to use GenAI tools for learning.

These material differences shape various inequalities, particularly as leaners have unequal aces to devices such as laptops or subscriptions to premium versions of GenAI platforms. In the study this paper is based on, only a few learners had uninterrupted acces to a laptop, while most had to rely on using their phones. The researcher observed that accessing ChatGPT via a browser on a laptop enabled learners to switch easily between this plaform and Google, and to open aditional tabs to search for corroborative information online, facilitating the verification of ChatGTs responses. sing a laptop also offered ther affordances: participants could download, copy, and paste output acros platorms, and engage in digital multimodal composition by assembling these resources in applications like Microsoft Word. There are also major diffrences between the free version of ChatGPT (GPr-3.5) and the paid version, ChatGPT Plus (GPT-4). During the research period, participants using GPT-3.5 could not request the tol to create images. OpenAI has also pointed out the GPT-4 is more advanced i terms of reasoning and handling complex queries, and provides more precise and detailed responses. GPT-3.5 is limited to text-based inputs and is prone to inaccuracies. It is trained on data up to September 2021, and thus lacks knowledge f events, reearch or changes that occurred after this cutoff. GPT-4 on the ther hand supports text, voice and image inputs, and is able to access real-time data from the web when browsing tools are activated.

# 3.2. Indexicality

The challenge of being able to understand the underlying logics of GenAI tools and the way responses are generated is that AI is a black box, a system whose internal workings are not easily understood or transparent. Not only are platform architectures proprietary but also deep learning and other advanced machine learning techniques can mean that some stes in the algorithmic procescan be opaque even for developers. To develop CDL that recognize both the affordances and constraints of GenAI tools, learners need to rely on what they can see: the designs of platorms and the texts they generate. In ChatGPT for instance, the most popular GPT for the category "Writing (EN) is Write For Me", which includes the description, Write tailored, engaging content with a focus on quality, relevance and precise word count. Character Al on the other hand has a chatbot calle English teacher that introduce itself with: will talk with you and at same time correct your grammatical errors'. Apart from helping learners evaluate the legitimacy and credibility of these customized chatbots, these descriptions together with suggested Conversation Starters' signal the creators intentions and encourage contrasting interactions. In the study, when one participant provides the rubric for an in-class writing assignment and asks ChatGPT, How to write an essay within the following mark scheme", ChatGPT responds with To score well within this mark scheme, ensure that your esay.." and provides particular sugestions. By framing the answer as a means to "score well, the response and its interpretation of the provided rubric reflect specific understanding of what good writing is and what it is for, overlooking the contextin which this task was assigned or the topic the leaner is expected to write about. When ChatGPT revises a learner's academic essay by removing firs-person pronouns, the revision indexes a specific conception of authorial voice in academic writing.

# 3.3. Ideology

To develop a critical awarenes of how these tools operate, learners need to recognize that the designs and outputs of chatbots are "material forces subject to and reflective of conditions of production and patterns of distribution' (Blommaert, 2013, p. 33). Designs index specific ways of thinking about the purpose of these tols, while outputs index not only dominant ideologies embedded in platform datasets, but also pecific understandings of legitimate discursive features and rhetorical strategies. As GenAI tools provide recommendations for writing, L2 writers need to examine critically how such outputs index particular language ideologies and the privileging of certain discourses, genres, and style. Because these predictive technologies rely on statistical properties of language such as word frequencies, common phrases, and contextual usage, they can reproduce dominant discursivestructures and conventions, alongside notions of standard language or linguistic purism. Operating with the same logic of predictability, GPT detectors like GPTZero or Turnitin rely on the natural language processing concept of perplexity- or unpredictability- to distinguish human writing from AI output. Some researchers Liang et al., 2023) have pointed out that such logi can disadvantage L2 writers of English, whose work may be misclassfied as AIgenerated if it does not demonstrate lexical diversity or syntactic complexity. The extent to which large language models recognize low-resource and high-resource languages also index conditions of production because such distinctions aretied to the economy of big data and broader geopolitical inequalite. The knowledges and languages represented in the outputs of these tols reflect those who have the material resources to produce vast amounts of data online. Because these tools are trained on large datasets, output can reproduce historical biases and forms of prejudice, and privilege Eurocentric knowledge. In one study examining LLM-generated reference leters, for instance, leters intended for female applicants would highlight \*interpersonal skills while thoe for male applicants would highliht \*leadership skills (Wan et a., 2023). Generated images can also reflect these gender biases, depicting nurses as females, and doctors as males, for instance, and L2 writers who use GenAI tools for digital multimodal composing will need critical digital literacies to recognize these stereotypes.

Drawing on notions of materiality, indexicality and ideology, this sociomaterial perspective of CDL highlights how interactions with GenI tols are aways sites of struggle- aneotiation of plom desig and user deign that indexe reltions of power, idloges, and colluding or cllding interests. Rather than referring to a critical Al literacy, this paper uses the term critical digital literacies because it recognizes that the notions presented here are not exclusive to AI technologies. While acknowledging the plurality of literacies asserted by New Literacy Studies t highlights that despite the diverse features affordances and constraints of different digital technologies, what constitute digital mediation remains consistent. Whether we are referring to the digital literacies sur. rounding the use of ChatGPT, Google or Instagram, it s the interaction of users, digital tols, and contexts that shape these practices. Oftentimes, there is aconvergence of thee technologie in different plaforms: Google and social mediaplatorms ike Tikok use I to provide search resuls, translate, personalize content and curate feeds. At the same time, verifying information provided by ChatGPT involves lateral reading and finding corroborative or contradictory information in other wesites and online sources. Hence critical digital litracy practices that evaluate GenAI should not be confined within a GenAI platform, but should involve learners moving across diverse digital spaces to dissect the biases and ideologies of GenAI outputs.

# 4. Pedagogical implications

By providing abrief report of the initial findings of astudy on GenI practces, this paper sserts the need for acritical perspective to understand issues of power and inequality surrounding GenAI-mediated L2 writing. While Warschauer e al., 2023 draw attention to the need to understand, acesand navigate, prompt, corroborate, and incorporate Al in ethical and effective ways, this paper highlights how detecting biases, assumptions, and ideologies of GenAI platorm designs and outputs also matter. While employing prompt engineering strategies is important to generate the results one seeks, it is also crucial for learners to understand the way platform designs, sociotechnical structures and algorithmic processes can steer them towards particular forms of knowledge, including genre structures and rhetoricalstrategies. For the language classroom to be a space where L2 writerscan develop CDL, language teachers also need to negotiate their own dispositions towards GenAI technologies because the extent to which they recognize these tools as either opportunities or threats and create a space for L2 writers to openly share thir practices willdetermine how these learners are able to develop critical perspectives.

Pedagogical strategies that integrate CDL in the L2 writing classroom with particular attntion to materiality, indexicality and ideology can include larners: 1) asking a platorm to revise a text they have written and analyzing the extent to which the revision changes the voice, stance and style they originally employed; 2) using different plaformsto achieve the same writing task, comparing interactions with the toos, and reflecting on the extent to which the designs and responses of these platforms shaped such interactions; 3) uploading the same text to diferent platforms and comparing the writing feedback and recommended rhetorical strategies they provide; 4) prompting a platform to generate images for anarrative they have written, and examining the patterns in which identities are represented in such images; and 5) engaging in translanguaging while asking the GenAI platform for feedback on their writing, and comparing the extent to which the tools recognize their L1s and provide sufficient responses. These are just a few examples of how learners can develop a more critical disposition towards GenAI-mediated writing, and the concepts of materiality, indexicality and ideology can serve as a metalanguage to think about the design of these pedagogical strategies. What technical knowledge about these GenAI tools do language teachers need to understand and discuss their material and ideological constrints? How can the genres produced by GenAI tools be dissected further to understand the ways these tols interpret rhetorical situations and communicative purposes? By understanding how human and non-human interactants constitute online interactions in ways that privilege certain ways of thinking and writing, L2 writers can engage with GenAI tools with greater reflexivity and criticality. Creating a space in the L2 classroom for learners to explore and examine GenAI platorms, texts and practices can foster a critical awareness of how these technologies can shape the way we write ourselves into being.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement.

Ron Darvin: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization..

# Acknowledgements

Hampton Fund Research Grant.

# Data Availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

# References

Avila, J. , .13  t i.   ., digital literacies as social praxis: Intersections and challenges (pp. 1-14). Peter Lang.   
Blommaert, . (013).ic an  sco s amatriais sic.  ck  Phe (.),lit   i .47-56) Routledge.   
Bucher, T. (2018). If... then: Algorithmic Power and Politics. Oxford University Press.   
Dai 17  .   .  , Education, 9 pp. 17-30). Switzerland: Springer.   
Darvin, R. (2023). Sociotechnical sructure, materialist semiotics, and online anguage lerning. Language Lening echnolog, 27(20), 28-45.   
Duff, P. A. (2014). Case study research on language learning and use. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 34, 233-255.   
uaway, J a . 2021).i   ie a i str. o ioey, 41, 694   
Jewit, . (017)l yis n    ds), The  ook of e dd in (. 6984) Routledge.   
Jiang, L, & Hafner, C. (2024). Digital multimodal composing in L2 classrooms: A research agenda. Language Teaching, 1-19.   
Jing L, & Ren, W. (2020). Digal mutidal composing in L2 lening: Idlogies and impact. Jounal f Lnguge, Intity dcation, 20(3), 167-182.   
Kubota, R. (2023). Another contradiction in AI-assted second language writing. Journdl of Second Language Writing, 62, Article 101069.   
Lender, M  Burrs,  2020. Criticl ircy fr a tma wod: hn ee re ad oe wh mch. rih J f Ecin Technology, 51(4), 1262-1276.   
Ling, W., Yksekonul, M., Mao, Y., Wu, E, & Zou, J. (2023). GPT detctors are biasd against nonnative English writers. Pttens, 47), 1-9.   
Pangrazio, L. (2016). Reconceptualising critical digital literacy. Discourse: Studies in the Cultral Politic of Education, 37(2), 163-174. 62, Article 100776.   
an, .    e .  . 223).   a  md  e Letters arXiv Preprint. arXiv:2310.09219.   
Wrr,   r J 3  s as second or foreign language. Journal of Second Language Writing, 62, Article 101071..