Book review

Educational Change amongst English Language College Teachers in China: Transitioning from Teaching for General to Academic Purposes, Yulong Li. Springer, Singapore (2020). $\mathbf { x } + \mathbf { 1 4 9 } \ \mathbf { p p }$ , Hardcover ISBN: 978-981-15-3052-4, eBook ISBN 978-981-15-3053-1. EUR 49.99 (Hardcover), Free (eBook).

In response to the rise of English as an academic lingua franca, English for academic purposes (EAP) has developed into a main branch of English for pecific purposes (ESP), and a key area of English teaching and research. In the Chinese tertiary context collee English teaching (CET), the teaching of English as a compulsory course mainly to frs- and second-year non-English majors, is the major ste of EAP reform. However, due to the heated debate on whether EAP should replace the long-term dominance of English for General Purposes (EGP) in the CET curriculum, onlya small number of high-ranking universities have bn experimenting with EAP courses, most of which are implemented by individual teachers in their daily teaching practices without much top-down support (Cheng, 2016).

This book by Yulong Li i a timely contributionto aid our understanding of the work of pioneering CET teachers i the processes of change from EGP to EAP teaching. It reports on the lived experiences of four EAP practitioners from three universities adopting different EAP policies in Shanghai, the irst city in China t officilly mplement an EAP framework in 2013) in an attempt to cultivate professionals who can engage in international communication using English Practitioners wil find their experiences inspiring and the proposed EAP framework useful to reflect upon their own EAP knowledge and teaching practice. Researchers interested in the EAP reform and EAP practitioners in China will no doubt, find the EAP policie, facilitating and prohibitig conditions, and the teachers resilience informative.

The six chapters in the book are coherently organized. Chapter 1 introduces the background of EAP in China. Chapter 2 focuses on the definition of the EAP concept and studies of EAP teacher development in iterature, and then moves to the research questions guiding the study that s reported in this book. Chapters 3 to 5 present the research methodology and report the research findings. The last chapter highlights the implications of this research for EAP theory, EAP teaching, teacher development, and language policy updates.

Li presents a comprehensive picture of the EAP reform in China in Chapter 1, allowing us to understand its complexity and uniqueness. He introduces the standpoints of EAP reform proponents by listing aseries of problems exposed by the EGP-based CET curriculum and the academic circe, such as students' lack of direction to disciplines, poor learning motivation and academic misconduct He also points out the concerns of opponents about students different levels of English proficiency and uncertainty about their disciline, as well a the unsatisfactory qualifications of marginalized CET teachers. Li ends the chapter by highlighting that the majority of universities and CET teachers arestill unfamiliar with EAP and therefore have a cautious attitude toward EAP reform.

Although EAP has a prominent placein Englis teaching and research, it remains a confusing concet, and ittl is known about EAP practitioners (Ding & Campion, 2016). Li therefore begins Chapter 2 by synthesizing different schools of EAP theories, and proposes understanding EAP as multiple literacies, including academic litracy, discilinary cultural literacy, critical literacy and digitl lit eracy. This framework may help bewildered readers and practitioners understand the concept of EAP more thoroughly. Li enhances our understanding of EAP practitioners by exposing challenges they face regarding thir professional identitie, teaching materials, training opportunities and standards. He also points out the imitations of related empirical research (mainly conducted in the UK context) that largely ignores important ssues such as marginalization of reearcher as outsiders and lack f atention to practitioners interpretations of actions and behaviors. He call for further research to better understand AP practitioners worldwide, and assertsthe significance of his study on the EAP practitioners in the Chinese tertiary context.

Li's empirical study begins with a detailed introduction to his research methodology in Chapter 3. He first explains his rationale for adopting phenomenological ethnography as a research methodology in order to understand EAP practitioners' on-site behaviors and actions as an insider, and to examine ther subjective interpretations of life experiences from a neutral postion. This i followed by an account of his methods of collecting (e. observations, interviews, teaching materials, teacher diaries) and analyzing qualitative data through discourse and thematic analysis. He recommends six approaches to guarantee the trustworthiness of his qualitative study; namely, prolonged engagement and persistent observation, triangulation, clarifying researchers' bias, member checking, thick description, and external audits. Li offers a useful guide for gaining a holistic understanding of reearch participants by combining ethnography and phenomenology, although his account might have been more acessible if he had included tables to ilustrate the sequence of events in the data collection and analysis phase, and if he had provided the interview questions in an appendix.

Research findings are reported in Chapters4 and 5.Li first describes the fascinating stories of four EAP practitioners (Fielding Lisa. Bluewitch and Rui), including their education backgrounds, prior teaching and research experiences, and EAP teaching experience at different stages of the fieldwork. He not only exposes the influence of their past experiences, but highlights teaching practices and understanding of EAP and related policies in, on the one hand, facilitating ducational contexts the instutions of Fielding, Lisa and Rui) and, on the other, a high-constraint context (Bluewitch's institution). Drawing on the detailed descriptions of the four cases, Li further answers his thre research questions in Chapter 5 concening practitioners EAP knowledge, the influence of the EGP-EAP transition on their career, and perceived challenges and opportunities.

In terms of EAP knowledge, Li finds that the four practitioners had only a limited understanding of EAP due to the lack of provision for systematic training and guidelines on specific teaching methods. However, he points out that they were nevertheles active pro ducers of knowledge based on their own evaluation of students' current knowledge and level of proficiency, past academic experiences, educational philosophy and their views on international education and students' future employment. For example, to avoid overemphasising the four macro-skill as set out in the Shanghai EAP framework, they all xercised agency to develop students' other aspects of iteracies, such as the emphasis by Fielding and Lisa on students awareness of their own identities as researchers by engaging them in project-based learning, Bluewitch's attntion to nurturing students atitude to academic study by utilizing online resources and establishing a place for EAP internship, and Rui's combination of critical thinking with EAP teaching. In light of this, more top-down support i needed to enhance practitioners' understanding of EAP. On the other hand, context-based teaching practice may also contribute to the development of EAP theory.

In contrast to reports on practitioners' defensiveness or uneasiness during their transition to EAP teaching (Alexander, 2013; Hadey, 2015; Martin, 2014) Li maintains that the EGP-EAP transition exerted positive influences on the practitioners in his study. He informs readers of their development in knowledge about both local and international education contexts, EAP pedagogies, and self-empowerment to conduct teaching and research and to change their marginalized positions. He highlights a range of challenges that hinder EAP practitioners development from their perspective, including their lack of disciplinary knowledge, training, research time, social resourcesto organize academic research activities and academic fredom, students' general low motivation and unpre parednessto study EAP, and the retricted scope of the Shanghai EAP policy with its focus on to academic language knowledge and skil and lasroom teaching. These findings have important implications for policy makers to make informed decisions o curriculum and teacher development.

Afer answering the three research questions, Li offers insightful suggestions for EAP teachers and policy-makers in Chapter 6 in terms of EAP theory and policy updates, teacher and pedagogy development, student preparednes, and coordinating resources. What impresses us most is his proposal for an EAP theory update; that is apart from multiple literacies with their focus on knowledge and skills, context-related experiences need to also be included. For example, in the Chinese contex, the humanistic goals of academic research and moral responsibilities of academics should be stressed. We also find his sugestion of implementing a service-learning method conducive to EAP pedagogy as t allows students to apply their disciplinary knowledge to serve people in real-lif communities.

In sum, this book succeeds in enriching our understanding of EAP as multiple literacie, the status quo of EAP reform in China, and the under-rearched CET teachers during their transition from EGP to EAP teaching. It showcases the affordances and constraints in specific institutional and wider educational contexts, highlighting practitioners identity awarenes, critical reflction, professional autonomy and resilience. It also enlightens policy-makers about the need to update the EAP concept and reform related policy to meet the demand of students, practitioners, and the international educational context.

This book mainly reports on the individual ffort of EAP practitioners with international education or research backgrounds (Rui is an exception) from high-ranked universties in Shanghai, one of the leading cities in higher education in China. Future research on EAP practitioners wit different backgrounds in diverse settings would be a worthwhile endeavour. All inall,it is foreeable that more universitie and practitioners in China wil reform the CET curriculum through offering EAP courses, and this book will be relevant and even inspiring to them. We also recommend it to EAP teachers, researchers and policy makers in similar contexts.

# References

Alexander, O. (2013). Uncoering teacher bles in EAP. In L Bla-Ward, & S. Brewer (Eds.), Sshots of EAP rerch jouneys (p. 1-14). BALEAP.   
Cheng, 016 thi     . nln  . Thokf ishr purposes (pp. 97-108). Routledge.   
Dng A amon, . (2016). AP ther t. nK lnd, . hw .) The o hdook of Egish fo d pe (. 547-59) Routledge.   
Hadley, G. (2015). English for academic purposes in neoliberal universities: A critical grounded theory. Springer.   
ar .014 e P   ii, i,  i -31) Global.