# The effects of Hakka bilingual programs on learning interests for kindergarteners

Chung Chin Wu

To cite this article: Chung Chin Wu (2024) The effects of Hakka bilingual programs on learning interests for kindergarteners, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:8, 1142-1152, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2024.2345709

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2024.2345709

# The effects of Hakka bilingual programs on learning interests for kindergarteners

Chung Chin Wu $\textcircled{1}$

Department of Early Childhood Education, National Pingtung University, Pingtung, Taiwan

# ABSTRACT

To date, little attention has been paid to the impact of immersion programs on learning interests in a second language (L2). The main purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of two types of Hakka-Chinese bilingual programs (immersion vs. non-immersion) on L2 learning interests. Four kindergarten teachers (two in each program) consented to rate a total of 114 kindergarteners aged five years at the beginning and the end of the semester. By conducting confirmatory factor analysis, paired t-tests, and ANCOVA, results showed: (1) Kindergarteners’ learning interest in immersion programs could be differentiated into situational interest and individual interest, (2) The Hakka immersion and non-immersion programs both had positive effects on learning interest and (3) Both learning interests of kindergarteners in the immersion program were found to be inferior to that of kindergarteners in the non-immersion program when the initial differences in learning interests in these two programs were controlled. The results imply that the quality of a bilingual program is more important for cultivating an interest in second language learning than the percentage of time traditionally spent to differentiate between immersion and non-immersion programs (i.e. whether approximately $5 0 \%$ of the curriculum was used to teach a second language).

ARTICLE HISTORY Received 23 February 2023 Accepted 8 April 2024

# KEYWORDS

Bilingual education; Hakka; immersion education; kindergartener; learning interest

# 1. Introduction

Motivation in L2, an influential factor of L2 proficiency, refers to the learner’s engagement in and desire to learn a second language and attitude toward L2 (Dörnyei 2020). Several studies have demonstrated a positive connection between L2 motivation and L2 proficiency (e.g. Alrabai 2020; Dörnyei and Kormos 2000; Li 2020). In the past decades, several L2 motivation theories have been developed and/or adopted concerning L2. These include the socio-educational model (distinguishing between integrative and instrumental motivation; Gardner 1985), the self-determination theory (generally including extrinsic and intrinsic motivation), attribution theory, and L2 motivational selfsystem (consisting of ideal L2 self, ought L2 self, and L2 learning experience; Dörnyei and Ryan 2015). Among these L2 theoretical frameworks, L2 learning interest plays an important factor even though its unique role has been underestimated. For example, L2 learning interest is considered a component of integrative motivation in the socio-educational model and is aggregated with other components (e.g. attitude toward L2 community, integrative motivation) to investigate related research topics (e.g. the effect of the bilingual program on L2 motivation; Dörnyei and Ryan 2015). To date, few studies have focused primarily on L2 learning interest in L2 motivation literature.

The above-mentioned L2 motivation theories focused on subjects’ cognitive processes (e.g. perception, evaluation, and belief), and defined affective components as outcomes of cognitive processes. In contrast, L2 learning interest included affective and cognitive components (e.g. enjoying L2 learning activities and engaging in L2 learning activities) and defined affect as an inherent and integral component of interest (Hidi 2006). Thus, L2 learning interests by definition partially overlap with but significantly differ from L2 motivation. According to Hidi, Renninger, and Krapp (2004), there are two types of learning interests: situational interest and individual interest. The former interest is temporarily triggered by learning contexts with an interesting course design. In contrast, the latter is independent of the learning context and autonomously fosters the learner to continually engage in L2 learning activities due to their long-term positive affact and cognition in the subject.

Three key differences between L2 learning interest and motivation can be identified as follows: Firstly, the relative strength of these two components in L2 learning interest changes over time and the affective component influences L2 learning before the cognitive component takes effect in the early learning stage. Specifically, the affective component of interest triggers L2 learning behavior and directed attention and exploratory behavior at the initial stage of L2 learning activities (Reeve 1989). However, the strength of this component is overridden by the cognitive component as interest is maintained and continues to develop. Secondly, L2 learning interest can be evoked by external (e.g. interesting or valuable L2 learning activities) and internal (e.g. enjoyment or selfefficacy enhanced by past L2 learning processes; Krapp 2005) factors through both affective and cognitive processes instead of the latter process dominantly. Thirdly, L2 learning interest has both shortterm and long-term characteristics such as state and trait learning interest, respectively. If the state learning interest (i.e. situational interest) lasts, it could develop into trait learning interest (i.e. individual interest). L2 motivation has rarely been distinguished in terms of state and trait dimensions in L2 motivation theories. Nor has it been studied concerning the progression of state motivation to trait motivation or the impact of the learning context on the changes. Schiefele (2009) conducted a systematic review of this subject and concluded that individual interest was a better predictor of deep learning than situational interest, which suggests that these two interests may also have different effects on L2 proficiency. Investigating learning interest and different state and trait dimensions may advance our understanding of how the L2 learning context (e.g. bilingual programs) may contribute to the development of and changes in L2 learning interest. This investigation also has important implications for L2 motivation research, how it emerged, and how it changed in the sociocultural context (Mahmoodi and Yousefi 2022).

There are several types of bilingual programs aimed at creating a learning context to help motivate learners toward L2 proficiency. The Submersion Program provides $100 \%$ of instructional time for L2. In this program, the teachers usually do not understand learners’ first language and provide very limited support to help learners with the learning content. The Immersion Program is designed to immerse learners in an L2 instructional environment for more than $50 \%$ of the instructional time. In this program, the instruction is implemented using L2. This program can be differentiated into two subtypes as follows: the One-way Immersion Programs in which the minority language children are immersed in a classroom environment where L2 is the primary medium of instruction (Cummins 2009); and the Two-way Immersion Programs in which the minority and majority language learners in both language groups have language models while learning each other’s language (Padilla et al. 2013). The Non-immersion Program also involves minority and majority language learners but provides less than $5 0 \%$ of the instructional time for L2 in school. In other words, it uses L1 as the primary medium of instruction (Genesee 1985). Not all the teachers in this program are bilingual. Typically, they know and teach only a few simple L2 words commonly used in daily life and their corresponding pronunciations or use a few L2 words to replace corresponding L1 words in their classroom dialogue. For those teachers who do not speak L2 at all, native L2 speaker teachers are hired to help implement one L2 class per day or every three days (Xiong and Feng 2020).

Some studies have described the status and changes of L2 motivation within different bilingual programs. Knell and Chi (2012) found that fourth to sixth-grade students had a positive preference for a two-way immersion program. However, the preference slightly increased from fourth to fifth grade and then considerably decreased from fifth to sixth grade in the non-immersion program. The attitudes of middle-to-upper-grade students in both programs stayed at a high level (with a mean score between about 30 and 36 out of 40). A study of Spanish fourth-grade students enrolled in a two-way immersion and a non-immersion program also confirmed L2 intrinsic motivation (with a mean score above 5.17 out of 7; Fontecha and Alonso 2014). Carreira (2011) investigated the development of and changes in L2 motivation for third to sixth-grade Japanese students in weekly English classes in which they learned English through games and songs. It was found that intrinsic motivation, interest in a foreign country, and instrumental motivation generally declined from the third to the sixth grade (except for a slight increase in intrinsic motivation from the fourth to fifth grade). Intrinsic motivation for L2 was the highest (with a mean score of about 3.5 out of 4) for third-grade students. A study by Nishida (2008) that defined interest and motivation similarly to L2 learning interest also demonstrated a declining trend in interest and motivation in first to sixth-grade students in an English non-immersion program in Japan. Students’ motivation and interest were highest in the first and third grades with a mean score of about 2.69 out of 3 and 4.22 out of 5, respectively. Gardner et al. (2004) found that undergraduate students’ interest in a foreign language in a university non-immersion context (a French class once a week) remained at a high level (with a mean score of about 6 out of 7) as measured from fall to spring. In general, these studies found that interest-related L2 motivation declined with the students’ ages in both programs; L2 interest motivation remained at the highest level for the youngest students regardless of the types of bilingual programs they were enrolled in. These results suggest that students as young as kindergarteners may also endorse high L2 learning interest within both types of bilingual programs. However, further investigation on this topic is needed because related L2 motivation studies have not focused directly on the development of and changes in L2 learning interest in immersion and non-immersion programs with very young students. Moreover, both of these two programs have been shown to contribute to a high level of L2 motivation, but it is also unclear whether there are differences in the effects of these two bilingual programs on L2 learning interest.

Concerning the status of and changes in L2 motivation, studies have investigated the differences in L2 motivation in different bilingual programs. MacIntyre et al. (2003) adopted Gardner $( 1 9 8 5 ) ^ { \prime } s$ motivation theory and found no difference in integrative motivation (as measured by integrativeness, attitude toward the learning situation, and motivation) between two-way immersion and non-immersion programs at the university level. However, the undergraduates in the former program showed a greater willingness to communicate using L2. Similarly, Baker and MacIntyre (2000) also demonstrated that high school students in a French two-way immersion program showed a higher willingness to communicate using French compared with those in a non-immersion program. However, Knell and Chi (2012) found no difference between the two groups (English twoway immersion and non-immersion groups) of elementary school students’ L2 motivation and attitudes toward learning English. In contrast, Murtagh (2008) found that compared with a non-immersion program, a two-way immersion program is better for promoting post-primary student’s L2 motivation. Drawing on the self-determination theory, Fontecha and Alonso (2014) compared the effect of a two-way English immersion program with the effect of a non-immersion integrated English program on 4th-grade students’ intrinsic motivation. The results showed significantly higher intrinsic motivation for students in the immersion program. Similarly, Tanaka and Kutsuki (2018) also demonstrated that the two-way English immersion programs can significantly increase elementary school students’ intrinsic motivation compared with students in a non-immersion program. However, overall, the research findings on the effects of two-way immersion and nonimmersion programs on L2 motivation were mixed. This indicates that the effects of a two-way immersion program on L2 motivation may not be necessarily superior to that of a non-immersion program. Actually, some evidence has indicated that the integration of some elements of nonimmersion programs can also have a positive effect on L2 motivation.

Research studies have demonstrated that authentic learning materials and life experiences (i.e. relating L2 learning content and tasks to students’ backgrounds and life experiences) can benefit teachers’ L2 teaching skills and motivate students’ L2 learning skills and knowledge (Alrabai 2016; Henry et al. 2018; Moskovsky et al. 2013). Clément, Gardner, and Smythe (1977) also found that integrating authentic cultural experiences (e.g. cultural visits) into non-immersion programs can have a significant benefit on integrative motivation. This suggests that a non-immersion program integrated with authentic learning materials and life experiences may also have the potential to promote L2 motivation. However, few studies have attempted to compare the effect of this type of non-immersion program with immersion programs on L2 motivation. The constructs of L2 motivation investigated in L2 studies have considerable differences with the definition of L2 learning interest. Thus, it is unclear whether the two types of bilingual programs contribute to the differences in L2 learning interests. To my knowledge, no studies have investigated the development of and changes in kindergarten children’s L2 learning interest in the two-way immersion and the non-immersion programs or the differences in L2 learning interest between these two programs. To bridge the above-mentioned gaps in the L2 motivation literature, the main purposes of this study are as follows:

1. To explore the development of and changes in kindergarteners’ learning interests (i.e. situational interest and individual interest) in immersion programs and non-immersion programs.   
2. To compare differences in kindergarteners’ learning interests in the immersion program and the non-immersion program.

# 2. Methodology

# 2.1. Participants

In this study, the effects of two Hakka-Chinese bilingual programs—the Hakka (two-way) immersion program and the Hakka non-immersion program—were explored in kindergartens in Taiwan. The kindergartners in the two programs used Chinese as their first language in daily life. Both programs were designed to preserve a disappearing Hakka language using different proportions of the language in the course content and incorporating the Hakka language into classroom interactions. According to Genesee (1985), the Hakka immersion program and the Hakka non-immersion program should respectively use Hakka and Chinese as the main medium of instruction in regular teaching activities in kindergartens. The Hakka immersion program was operationally defined as incorporating the second language (i.e. Hakka) to teach more than $5 0 \%$ of the curriculum. Teachers in the Hakka immersion program used Hakka as the main medium in a thematic course (the most common instruction model in kindergartens in Taiwan). Teachers also used Hakka to interact with kindergarteners. Teachers in the Hakka non-immersion program used Chinese as the primary language in teaching activities and with specific Hakka words replacing Chinese words in their classroom discourses. Teachers in this program usually designed one to two courses a week to teach Hakka songs or rhymes or took kindergarteners to visit surrounding Hakka villages and Hakka cultural heritage sites. The main focus of this non-immersion program was to encourage kindergarteners to use Hakka in their daily lives and to interact with community members who live in Hakka villages, near their homes, or their kindergarten (Hakka Affair Council 2018).

Purposive sampling was used in this study due to the specificity of Hakka-Chinese bilingual programs in kindergartens in Taiwan. The Hakka immersion programs were implemented in kindergartens that had submitted a proposal for implementing the Hakka immersion programs to the Hakka Affair Council and successfully passed the verification. A total of 11 kindergartens implemented the Hakka immersion program (Hakka Affairs Council & National Pingtung University 2023). In these kindergartens, teachers who implemented the Hakka immersion instruction had to pass the Hakka language accreditation test. In contrast, teachers in kindergartens that implemented Hakka nonimmersion instruction could speak Hakka but were not required to pass the Hakka language accreditation test.

A total of four kindergartens were selected for this study. Two were selected from the 11 kindergartens that had implemented the Hakka immersion programs, while the other two were selected from the kindergartens that had implemented the Hakka non-immersion programs (the population of this program was hard to identify). These two kindergartens per program were selected because they simultaneously met the following criteria: (a) the administrator and all the teachers consented to participate, (b) their programs had been implemented three years ago and were still in place, (c) most of the teachers in these kindergartens were Hakka people with Hakka as their first language, (d) the kindergarteners and their parent had consented to participate in this study, (e) kindergarteners enrolled in the program had been taught by the same teachers for more than a year, and (f) teachers in these kindergartens were required to observe the daily performances of every kindergartener in class and write down their observations for the record. A total of 114 (61 males and 53 females) kindergarteners aged five years were selected from four kindergartens and rated by four kindergarten teachers. There were 57 kindergarteners in each of immersion and non-immersion programs. They would remain enrolled in the programs for two years. Their first language was Chinese. Participants were guaranteed that all their responses would be kept confidential and their treatments in kindergartens would not be affected regardless of their responses.

# 2.2. Instruments

A learning interest scale for measuring kindergarteners’ learning interest in the Hakka language teaching activities developed and validated by the Wu (2022b) was used in this study. This learning interest scale was constructed based on the 2-factor learning interest theory and composed of situational interest and individual interest sub-scales. The scale contained eight items—four items to measure each of the two factors. A sample item for measuring situational interest was as follows: ‘Tom (this name was replaced by a Chinese Pseudonym) is attracted by the teaching method and teaching material in the Hakka language teaching activities.’ A sample item for measuring individual interest was as follows: ‘Tom (this name was replaced by a Chinese Pseudonym) enjoys engaging in the Hakka language teaching activities very much.’ Teachers were required to rate kindergarteners on a 6-point Likert scale ( $1 = { } ^ { \prime }$ completely mismatched’ to $6 =$ ‘completely matched’) based on their observations of the kindergarteners participating in the Hakka language teaching activities. The following statistics reported by the Wu (2022b) demonstrate that the 6-point Likert scale instrument is a valid tool: $\chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 9 , N = 1 3 2 ) = 2 2 . 5 3 ( p > . 0 5 )$ , comparative fit index $( C F | ) =$ .996, Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI) $= . 9 9 4$ , root-mean-square error of approximation $( { \mathsf { R M S E A } } ) = . 0 3 8$ ( $9 0 \%$ CI ranged from .000 to .088). This scale was also equally effective in measuring boys’ and girls’ learning interests based on the results of serial model comparisons. It has to be noted that the same learning interest scale for the Hakka language program in kindergarten was implemented twice—at the beginning and end of the semester with a three-month interval.

# 2.3. Analysis

Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was implemented to re-test the validity of the learning interest scale because the effects of immersive Hakka language instruction on kindergarteners’ learning interests need to be based on valid measurement. Several indices were used to evaluate the goodness of fit of the 2-factor learning interest model to the data—the chi-square statistic $( \mathsf { X } ^ { 2 } )$ , the CFI, the TLI, and the RMSEA. The following criteria were adopted to evaluate the adequacy of model fit—the non-significant $\mathsf { X } ^ { 2 }$ (i.e. $p > . 0 5 )$ , the CFA and $\mathsf { T L I } \geq . 9 5$ , and the ${ \mathsf { R M S E A } } \leq . 0 6$ indicated that the 2-factor model fit the data very well. Both . $. 9 5 > { \mathsf { C F A } }$ , $\mathsf { T L } | \geq . 9 0$ , and . $0 6 < \mathsf { R M S E A } \leq . 0 8$ indicated a good model fit. The CFA and $\mathsf { T L } | < . 9 0$ and the RMSEA $> . 0 8$ indicated that the model did not fit the data well (Hu and Bentler 1999; Wang and Wang 2012). After the overall quality of the CFA model was assessed, the quality of the internal structure of the model was assessed by four indices, as follows: standardized factor loadings, individual item reliability, composite reliability (CR), and average variance extracted (AVE). Convergent validity was confirmed if the standardized factor loadings, individual item reliability, CR, and AVE were above .71, .50, .60, and .50, respectively (Fornell and Larcker 1981; Hair et al. 2009). Discriminant validity was verified if the bootstrapped $9 5 \%$ confidence interval of the inter-correlation coefficients between two latent factors did not include 1. All the above analyses were performed by using Mplus 7.4.

After the learning interest scale for Hakka bilingual programs in kindergartens was re-validated, paired t-tests and analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) were sequentially implemented. Paired t-tests were used to examine the respective effectiveness of the two Hakka programs on learning interests (after the implementation of the program) by comparing learning interests measured at the beginning and end of the semester. The immersion and non-immersion program kindergartens were two natural groups. The learning interests of kindergarteners in these two groups may have been different at the beginning of the semester. Therefore, any progress in learning interests resulting from the effects of the Hakka bilingual program may be intertwined with the initial differences. ANCOVA was used to adjust such potential differences in learning interest in the pre-test. Specifically, the means of learning interest in the post-test were adjusted by the mean differences in the pre-test. Paired t-tests and ANOVAs were performed using SPSS 22.0. The significant level was set at .05.

# 3. Results

# 3.1. The validity and quality of the leaning interest scale

The goodness of fit strongly supports the construct validity of the 2-factor learning interest model. Each of the fit indices met the criteria for a well-fitting model: $\chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 9 , N = 1 1 4 ) = 1 8 . 5 7 ( p > . 0 5 ) , C \mathsf { F l } =$ $1 . 0 0 , \mathsf { T L I } = 1 . 0 0 ,$ , RMSEA $= . 0 0 0$ $9 0 \%$ CI ranged from .000 to .081). The standardized factor loadings for the items in the situational interest sub-scale were .93, .93, .89, and .91, respectively. The standardized factor loadings for the items in the individual interest sub-scale were .88, .93, .92, and .94, respectively. The reliability of individual items in the situational interest sub-scale was .87, .87, .79, and .83, respectively. The reliability of individual items in the individual interest sub-scale was .77, .85, .87, and .88, respectively. All the standardized factor loadings and individual item reliability were above .71 and .50, respectively. The CRs for the situational and individual interest sub-scale were .95 and .96, respectively. The AVEs for the situational and individual interest sub-scale were .84. All the CRs and AVEs were above the criteria of .60 and .50, respectively. The bootstrapped $9 5 \%$ confidence interval of inter-correlations between two latent variables ranged from .82 to .93 (1 was not included in this range). It was evident that convergent validity and discriminant validity of the 2-factor learning interest model were confirmed. In summary, the learning interest scale had good overall internal reliability and validity and can be effectively used to measure and understand kindergarteners’ learning interests in the Hakka-Chinese bilingual programs.

# 3.2. Preliminary analyses

Table 1 presents the results of the preliminary analyses. As can be seen, at the beginning of the semester, the situational interest of kindergarten students in the Hakka immersion instruction program $\langle M = 5 . 1 4 \rangle$ ) was higher than the situational interest of kindergarten students in the Hakka non-immersion instruction program $( M = 4 . 4 0 )$ . Similarly, the individual interest of kindergarten students in the Hakka immersion instruction $( M = 4 . 5 3 )$ ) was higher than the situational interest of kindergarten students in the Hakka non-immersive instruction program $\langle M = 3 . 8 4 \rangle$ . There were obvious differences in both types of learning interest between students in the Hakka immersion and nonimmersion programs.

Table 1. Means, standard deviations, and correlations between learning interests.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"> Immersive</td><td colspan="2"> Non-immersive</td><td colspan="4"></td></tr><tr><td>Measures</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>1. Pre_situational interest</td><td>5.14</td><td>.91</td><td>4.40</td><td>.85</td><td>-</td><td>.83*</td><td>.58*</td><td>.46*</td></tr><tr><td>2. Pre_individual interest</td><td>4.53</td><td>1.11</td><td>3.48</td><td>0.90</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>.58*</td><td>.63*</td></tr><tr><td>3. Post_situational interest</td><td>5.31</td><td>0.85</td><td>5.25</td><td>0.76</td><td></td><td></td><td>-</td><td>.82*</td></tr><tr><td>4. Post_individual interest</td><td>4.74</td><td>1.00</td><td>4.53</td><td>1.26</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>-</td></tr></table></body></html>

$^ { * } p < . 0 5$

However, three months later, the situational interest of kindergarten students in the Hakka nonimmersion instruction program $( M = 5 . 2 5 )$ was at approximately the same level as that of kindergarten students in the Hakka immersion instruction program $( M = 5 . 3 1$ ). Similarly, the individual interest of kindergarten students in the Hakka non-immersion instruction $( M = 4 . 5 3 )$ ) was also at approximately the same level as that of kindergarten students in the Hakka immersion instruction $( M =$ 4.74). Kindergarteners’ responses showed no significant differences in both types of learning interest in both the Hakka immersion and non-immersion programs. In general, kindergarteners’ individual interest in the Hakka language teaching activities was slightly lower than their situational interest at the beginning and the end of the semester. Finally, the correlations among pre-test and post-test learning interest indicators ranged from .46 to .83 $( p s < . 0 5 )$ .

# 3.3. The effects of the Hakka bilingual program on learning interests

The paired t-tests were performed to examine the respective effects of these two Hakka programs on learning interests. Results showed that the situational and individual interests of kindergarten students in the Hakka immersion program were significantly higher at the end of the semester than at the beginning, $t ( 5 6 ) = - 2 . 1 8$ and $^ { - 2 . 5 8 }$ , $p { = } 0 . 0 3$ and 0.01 $( p s < 0 . 0 5 )$ , respectively. Similarly, the situational and individual interests of kindergarten students in the Hakka non-immersion program were significantly higher at the end of the semester than at the beginning, $t ( 5 6 ) = - 7 . 3 2$ and $- 7 . 3 5$ , $p { = } 0 . 0 0$ and 0.00 $( p s < 0 . 0 5 )$ , respectively.

ANCOVAs were performed to clarify the effects of the type of Hakka bilingual program on situational and individual interests and results are presented in Table 2. Table 2 shows that after adjusting for differences in situational interests in the pre-test, the situational interest of kindergarten students in the Hakka non-immersion program $\left( M = 5 . 4 6 \right)$ was significantly higher than the situational interest of kindergarten students in the Hakka immersion program $( M = 5 . 1 0 ) , F ( 1 , 1 1 1 ) = 7 . 7 2 , p < . 0 5$ . Table 2 also indicates that after adjusting for differences in individual interests in the pre-test, the individual interest of kindergarten students in the Hakka non-immersion program $( M = 4 . 9 2 )$ was significantly higher than the individual interests of kindergarten students in the Hakka immersion program $( M =$ 4.35), $F ( 1 , 1 1 1 ) = 1 0 . 2 7$ , $p < . 0 5$ .

# 4. Discussion and implications

Firstly, the learning interest scale was shown to be a valid tool to measure kindergarteners’ learning interests in the Hakka-Chinese bilingual program. In addition, kindergarteners’ learning interests in the Hakka bilingual program can be differentiated into situational interests and individual interests, which can be used to understand kindergarteners’ overall learning interests in the Hakka bilingual program. The findings of this study imply that kindergarteners’ situational interest in learning Hakka can not only be evoked by the arrangement of Hakka teaching activities but can be sustained and transformed into a long-term stable individual interest. Although the reliability and validity of the learning interest scale were established by teacher rating, it was common practice for teachers to rate young children’s psychological skills, state, or traits (e.g. Cimpian et al. 2016; E. Hair et al. 2006). There was also evidence to demonstrate the measurement equivalence of kindergarteners’ motivation as measured by teacher rating and kindergarteners’ self-reporting (Wu 2022a). However, this approach may have a potential underlying rating bias, but this limitation can be minimized if teachers objectively observe and document kindergarteners’ behaviors (Burts and Kim 2014). In this study, the selected kindergarten teachers conducted daily observations and documented the observations for each kindergartener while they engaged in L2 learning activities, suggesting the potential teacher rating bias can be effectively reduced. In addition, it should be also recognized that kindergarteners may be capable of rating their L2 learning interests by themselves. Future studies could focus on validating a measurement tool for young children to self-report their L2 learning interest, and further compare their results with present findings.

Table 2. One-way ANCOVA in learning interests.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"> Immersive</td><td colspan="2"> Non-immersive</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Measure</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td></td><td>SD</td><td>F(1, 111)</td><td>n2</td></tr><tr><td>Situational interest</td><td>5.10</td><td>0.09</td><td>5.46</td><td>0.09</td><td>7.72*</td><td>.07</td></tr><tr><td>Individual interest</td><td>4.35</td><td>0.12</td><td>4.92</td><td>0.12</td><td>10.27*</td><td>.09</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: Means of both interest measures were calculated for post-tests after adjusting for differences between groups in the pretests. $^ { * } p < . 0 5$ .

The first purpose of this study was to clarify the effects of two Hakka programs—the Hakka immersion program and the Hakka non-immersion program – on kindergarten students’ learning interests. Students’ initial and final learning interests (i.e. situational and individual interests) were respectively measured at the beginning and end of the two programs. The results show that the Hakka immersion and non-immersion programs were useful in cultivating kindergarteners’ situational interests and individual interests. This finding suggests that both programs incorporated essential and interesting elements in the instruction (e.g. singing Hakka songs) that evoked kindergarteners’ situational interest in learning the Hakka language and using it to interact with others during learning activities. In addition, the findings also imply that when Hakka instruction focuses on Hakka culture in the Hakka non-immersion program it can trigger and maintain kindergarteners’ situational interest and foster individual interest in and perception of the values of the Hakka language. For example, the Hakka language can be used in communicating with elders in Hakka villages and understanding Hakka culture. These results are consistent with the hypotheses of this study that both programs are beneficial for cultivating learning interests.

This study presents preliminary findings for the positive effects of bilingual education on learning interests and supports the findings of previous L2 motivation studies with young students in immersion and non-immersion programs. These studies found that L2 motivation remained at a high level for those youngest students in or during the first year of the study (Carreira 2011; Fontecha and Alonso 2014; Gardner et al. 2004; Knell and Chi 2012; Nishida 2008). However, the findings of this study contradict the findings of previous studies which found that students’ L2 motivation generally declined with age (Carreira 2011; Knell and Chi 2012; Nishida 2008). Therefore, it is unclear whether Hakka bilingual programs can influence other domains of learning motivation (e.g. achievement goals for learning Hakka) or have an effect on cognition outcomes through learning interest. More studies are needed to address these related topics.

The second purpose of this study was to understand whether there were differences in kindergarteners’ learning interests (both situational and individual) between the Hakka immersion and nonimmersion programs. Surprisingly, after controlling for the initial differences in both learning interests, I found that the effectiveness of the Hakka immersion program on kindergarteners’ situational and individual interests was inferior to that of the non-immersion program, which contradicts the findings of previous research (Baker and MacIntyre 2000; Fontecha and Alonso 2014; Knell and Chi 2012; MacIntyre et al. 2003; Murtagh 2008; Tanaka and Kutsuki 2018). According to Genesee (1985), the main difference between immersion programs and non-immersion programs was the proportion of L2 used in the curriculum, reflecting a quantity difference in the use of a second language in bilingual programs. Specifically, the amount of time used to teach learning materials or for students to interact with each other in Hakka in the immersion program was greater than in the non-immersion program. However, the findings of this study indicate that more teaching time and use of the Hakka language in the immersion program did not contribute to kindergarten students’ higher situational and individual interests in learning Hakka and related course materials. On the contrary, the results suggest that the non-immersion program’s focus on interactions with community members and Hakka culture in daily life more easily evoked and sustained kindergarteners’ situational interest and individual interest in learning Hakka. The results also provide evidence supporting the findings of previous studies, which demonstrated that authentic learning materials and life/cultural experiences can effectively motivate learners’ L2 learning (Alrabai 2016; Clément, Gardner, and Smythe 1977; Henry et al. 2018; Moskovsky et al. 2013). These findings of this study imply that the programs investigated in this study not only motivated kindergarteners to speak Hakka while interacting with each other but also encouraged them to learn about Hakka culture. This process may in turn have fostered kindergarteners’ perception of the value of Hakka in communicating ideas (including expressing their self-generated questions) and understanding Hakka culture.

Concerning the cultivation of learning interest in L2, the results of this study suggest that the quality of the language program may be more important than the quantity (i.e. how often Hakka was used to teach learning content, and/or the proportion of course content in Hakka). In addition, these results may also imply that the elements or characteristics that the non-immersion program integrated were critical to the development of and changes in L2 learning interests. However, the above findings were far from conclusive about the effects of Hakka-Chinese or other bilingual programs. Therefore, further studies with more representative samples and large-scale investigations are required to clarify the generalizability of the preliminary findings of this study.

# 5. Summary

Kindergarteners’ learning interests in second language learning can be measured using the six-point learning interest scale. Both the Hakka immersion and non-immersion programs were effective in promoting kindergarteners’ learning interests in the Hakka language. However, some specific characteristics of the non-immersion program may trigger kindergarteners’ curiosity in learning the Hakka language and Hakka-related topics and to perceive the high value of using the Hakka language. To preserve a minority language and culture such as Hakka, the quality of the bilingual program may be more effective than the quantitative aspects of the program.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

# Funding

This work was supported by the Taiwan Hakka Affairs Council under Research Grant (HAC-111-IR-0052-04).

# Notes on contributor

is an Associate Professor of Early Childhood Education at National Pingtung University in Taiwan. He researches in bilingual education and motivation in Early Childhood Education.

# ORCID

Chung Chin Wu $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3224-4515

# References

Alrabai, F. 2016. “The Effects of Teachers’ in-Class Motivational Intervention on Learners’ EFL Achievement.” Applied Linguistics 37 (3): 307–333. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amu021.   
Alrabai, F. 2020. “Modeling the Relationship Between Classroom Emotions, Motivation, and Learner Willingness to Communicate in EFL: Applying a Holistic Approach of Positive Psychology in SLA Research.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2022.2053138.   
Baker, S. C., and P. D. MacIntyre. 2000. “The Role of Gender and Immersion in Communication and Second Language Orientations.” Language Learning 50 (2): 311–341. https://doi.org/10.1111/0023-8333.00119.   
Burts, D. C., and D. H. Kim. 2014. “The Teaching Strategies GOLD® Assessment System: Measurement Properties and use.” Dialog 17 (3): 122–135.   
Carreira, J. M. 2011. “Relationship Between Motivation for Learning EFL and Intrinsic Motivation for Learning in General among Japanese Elementary School Students.” System 39 (1): 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2011.01.009.   
Cimpian, J. R., S. T. Lubienski, J. D. Timmer, M. B. Makowski, and E. K. Miller. 2016. “Have Gender Gaps in Math Closed? Achievement, Teacher Perceptions, and Learning Behaviors Across two ECLS-K Cohorts.” AERA Open 2 (4): 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858416673617.   
Clément, R., R. C. Gardner, and P. C. Smythe. 1977. “Inter-ethnic Contact: Attitudinal Consequences.” Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science 9: 205–215. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0081625.   
Cummins, J. 2009. “Bilingual and Immersion Programs.” In The Handbook of Language Teaching, edited by M. H. Long, and C. J. Doughty, 159–181. Blackwell.   
Dörnyei, Z. 2020. Innovations and Challenges in Language Learning Motivation. Routledge.   
Dörnyei, Z., and J. Kormos. 2000. “The Role of Individual and Social Variables in Oral Task Performance.” Language Teaching Research 4: 275–300. https://doi.org/10.1177/136216880000400305.   
Dörnyei, Z., and S. Ryan. 2015. The Psychology of the Language Learner Revisited. Routledge.   
Fontecha, A. F., and A. C. Alonso. 2014. “A Preliminary Study on Motivation and Gender in CLIL and non- CLIL Types of Instruction.” International Journal of English Studies 14 (1): 21–36.   
Fornell, C., and D. F. Larcker. 1981. “Evaluating Structural Equation Models with Unobservable Variables and Measurement Error.” Journal of Marketing Research 18 (1): 39–50. https://doi.org/10.2307/3151312.   
Gardner, R. C. 1985. Social Psychology and Second Language Learning: The Role of Attitudes and Motivation. Edward Arnold.   
Gardner, R., A. M. Masgoret, J. Tennant, and L. Mihic. 2004. “Integrative Motivation: Changes During a Year-Long Intermediate-Level Language Course.” Language Learning 54: 1–34. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2004. 00247.x.   
Genesee, F. 1985. “Second Language Learning Through Immersion: A Review of U.S. Programs.” Review of Educational Research 55 (4): 541–561. https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543055004541.   
Hair, J. F., W. C. Black, B. J. Babin, and R. E. Anderson. 2009. Multivariate Data Analysis. 7th ed. Pearson.   
Hair, E., T. Halle, E. Terry-Humen, B. Lavelle, and J. Calkins. 2006. “Children’s School Readiness in the ECLS-K: Predictions to Academic, Health, and Social Outcomes in First Grade.” Early Childhood Research Quarterly 21: 431–454. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2006.09.005.   
Hakka Affair Council. 2018. Hakka Affair Council Enforcement Rules of Life School Subsidy. https://www.hakka.gov.tw/ Content/Content?NodeID=63&PageID $\Vdash$ 20914.   
Hakka Affairs Council, & National Pingtung University. 2023. 2021 Immersive Hakka Language Schools. https://hakkat. nptu.edu.tw/p/405-1060-136196,c12547.php.   
Henry, A., H. Korp, P. Sundqvist, and C. Thorsen. 2018. “Motivational Strategies and the Reframing of English: Activity Design and Challenges for Teachers in Contexts of Extensive Extramural Encounters.” TESOL Quarterly 52 (2): 247– 273. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.394.   
Hidi, S. 2006. “Interest: A Unique Motivational Variable.” Educational Research Review 1 (2): 69–82. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.edurev.2006.09.001.   
Hidi, S. R., K. A. Renninger, and A. Krapp. 2004. “Interest, a Motivational Variable that Combines Affective and Cognitive Functioning.” In Motivation, Emotion, and Cognition: Integrative Perspectives on Intellectual Functioning and Development, edited by D. Y. Dai, and R. J. Sternberg, 89–115. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Hu, L.-T., and P. M. Bentler. 1999. “Cutoff Criteria for fit Indexes in Covariance Structure Analysis: Conventional Criteria Versus new Alternatives.” Structural Equation Modeling 6: 1–55. https://doi.org/10.1080/10705519909540118.   
Knell, E., and Y. Chi. 2012. “The Roles of Motivation, Affective Attitudes, and Willingness to Communicate among Chinese Students in Early English Immersion Programs.” International Education 41 (2): 66–87.   
Krapp, A. 2005. “Basic Needs and the Development of Interest and Intrinsic Motivational Orientations.” Learning and Instruction 15: 381–395. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2005.07.007.   
Li, C. C. 2020. “A Positive Psychology Perspective on Chinese EFL Students’ Trait Emotional Intelligence, Foreign Language Enjoyment and EFL Learning Achievement.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 41 (3): 246–263. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2019.1614187.   
MacIntyre, P. D., S. C. Baker, R. Clément, and L. A. Donovan. 2003. “Talking in Order to Learn: Willingness to Communicate and Intensive Language Programs.” The Canadian Modern Language Review 59 (4): 589–607. https://doi.org/10.3138/ cmlr.59.4.589.   
Mahmoodi, M. H., and M. Yousefi. 2022. “Second Language Motivation Research 2010–2019: A Synthetic Exploration.” The Language Learning Journal 50 (3): 273–296. https://doi.org/10.1080/09571736.2020.1869809.   
Moskovsky, C., F. Alrabai, S. Paolini, and S. Ratcheva. 2013. “The Effects of Teachers’ Motivational Strategies on Learners’ Motivation: A Controlled Investigation of Second Language Acquisition.” Language Learning 63: 34–62. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2012.00717.x.   
Murtagh, L. 2008. “Out-of-school Use of Irish, Motivation and Proficiency in Immersion and Subject-Only Postprimary Programmes.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 10 (4): 428–453. https://doi.org/10. 2167/beb453.0.   
Nishida, R. 2008. “An Investigation of Japanese Public Elementary School Students’ Perceptions on Motivation and Anxiety in English Learning: A Pilot Study Comparing 1st to 6th Graders.” Language Education and Technology 45: 113–131.   
Padilla, A. M., L. Fan, X. Xu, and D. Silva. 2013. “A Mandarin/English Two-Way Immersion Program: Language Proficiency and Academic Achievement.” Foreign Language Annals 46 (4): 661–679. https://doi.org/10.1111/flan.12060.   
Reeve, J. 1989. “The Interest-Enjoyment Distinction in Intrinsic Motivation.” Motivation and Emotion 3 (2): 83–103. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00992956.   
Schiefele, U. 2009. “Situational and Individual Interest.” In Handbook of Motivation at School, edited by K. R. Wenzel, and A. Wigfield, 197–222. Routledge.   
Tanaka, Y., and A. Kutsuki. 2018. “Motivation for Learning English in the Immersion Environment of an International School in Japan.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 21 (6): 729–743. https://doi.org/10. 1080/13670050.2016.1210566.   
Wang, J., and X. Wang. 2012. Structural Equation Modeling: Application Using Mplus. Wiley.   
Wu, C. C. 2022a. “Examining the Effectiveness and Efficiency of an Innovative Achievement Goal Measurement for Preschoolers.” Frontiers in Psychology 12: 741088. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.741088.   
Wu, C. C. 2022b. “Developing and Validating the Teacher Rating Scale of Learning Interest for Kindergarteners.” Frontiers in Psychology 13: 890328. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.890328.   
Xiong, T., and A. Feng. 2020. “Localizing Immersion Education: A Case Study of an International Bilingual Education Program in South China.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 23 (9): 1125–1138. https:// doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2018.1435626.