# Is the feedback in higher education assessment worth the paper it is written on? Teachers' reflections on their practices

Article  in  Teaching in Higher Education · April 2010   
DOI: 10.1080/13562511003620019

# 2 authors:

# Is the feedback in higher education assessment worth the paper it is written on? Teachers' reflections on their practices

Richard Bailey & Mark Garner

To cite this article: Richard Bailey & Mark Garner (2010) Is the feedback in higher education assessment worth the paper it is written on? Teachers' reflections on their practices, Teaching in Higher Education, 15:2, 187-198, DOI: 10.1080/13562511003620019

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13562511003620019

# Is the feedback in higher education assessment worth the paper it is written on? Teachers’ reflections on their practices

Richard Baileya \* and Mark Garnerb

a School of Arts and Social Sciences, Northumbria University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK; b School of Language and Literature, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland

Perceptions of the role and efficacy of written feedback in teaching and learning among teaching staff in British higher education institutions have not been extensively researched. In the present study 48 lecturers in one university and from a cross-section of disciplinary backgrounds were interviewed with respect to their lived experiences with writing assessment feedback. Like most universities, theirs has a stated commitment to academic excellence by, among other things, ensuring timely and useful feedback on assignments. The findings suggest, however, that institutional policies and departmental practices related to formative assessment in this respect are not having the intended effect. Teachers have varied perceptions and beliefs about the purposes of written feedback, and are uncertain about what it achieves and what use students make of it. Far from enhancing written feedback, innovative practices and procedures have created new problems for teachers. There is a clear need for continuing research in this area.

Keywords: written feedback; teachers’ beliefs and perceptions; institutional practices and procedures

# Feedback studies in UK higher education

The role of feedback in the development of teaching and learning is widely acknowledged and relatively well documented (e.g. Hattie and Timperly 2007). However, Hounsell (2003, 2007) laments that in British higher education it has languished in a ‘Cinderella status’ on the margin of institutional structures and processes and has attracted little research interest or attention. He divides such research as has been done in the UK into three main clusters: students’ understandings and expectations of assessment criteria (e.g. Higgins, Hartley, and Skelton 2002a, 2002b; Penny and Grover 1996); students’ experience and perception of feedback (e.g. Carless 2006; Hounsell 1987) and the language used in feedback (e.g. Ivanicˇ, Clark, and Rimmershaw 2000; Lea and Street 2000; Mutch 2003). The focus in all three is on the student experience, a focus shared with the growing formative assessment literature in UK higher education, which espouses a student-centred, constructivist paradigm of teaching and learning (e.g. Biggs 1999, 2003; Brown and Glover 2005; Cowan 2003; Hounsell 2007; Nicol and MacFarlane-Dick 2006). The emphasis is on linking feedback with curriculum goals and teaching, learning and assessment strategies, the design of assessment tasks shared understandings between teachers and learners in written feedback interactions.

Rather less attention has been paid to teaching staff themselves in relation to formative learning. Maclellan (2001) states that staff and students may have different perceptions of assessment for learning and attributes this, in part, to teachers’ use of assessment practices which militate against formative learning and consequently restrict students’ views of the utility feedback. Yorke (2003) points out that in a constructivist paradigm there is an inescapable tension between the teacher’s roles of supporting and facilitating students’ learning and that of assessing their achievement. Reid, Francis, and Robson (2005) researched factors which influence the way feedback is socially constructed and presented in the written form and linked this to both broad conceptualisations of the role and purpose of feedback as well as the social positionings, class and gender of assessors. Despite such observations, however, we feel that that there remains an important gap in research into assessment and pedagogical practice in the contemporary context and conditions of higher education regarding the teacher experience. The research reported in this paper was an attempt to explore the lived reality of teaching staff in this regard. In order to capture this sense of the teacher experience we used a qualitative, ethnographic style approach to research and interviewed 48 teachers from a cross-section of faculty and fields of study.

# New practices and new concerns in written feedback

Writing almost 20 years ago Hounsell noted that the ‘traffic of comments from tutor to student is overwhelmingly in the written form’ (1987, 113) in assessment communications. The same is largely true today, in spite of considerable innovation and change in curricula, assessment practices and teaching and learning technologies. Feedback on assignments and assessed work is predominantly in the written form and furthermore, this may be the only kind of feedback students receive in the disparate and modularised mass system (Higgins, Hartley, and Skelton 2002b). The present research was conducted in a British university in which educational policy is quite specific on two issues with respect to feedback. It should be formative as well as evaluative, and it also be ‘timely’ (returned to students within a specified period). Despite the fact that many institutions endorse similar policies on feedback, institutional developments have resulted in a reduction in feedback. The teaching year has been semesterised in many institutions, courses have accordingly been modularised into condensed blocks to create flexibility in curricula, and assessment has been end-loaded. Class sizes and marking loads have inevitably increased. Greater formality has been introduced into with standardised marking procedures and external adjudication. Teachers have less time to write comments on students’ work and there are fewer opportunities for tutorial interactions between tutors and their students (Yorke 2002).

Far more is involved in feedback than interactions between any given student and tutor. Feedback is an interface between teachers’ pedagogical goals; students’ learning needs; and institutional and governmental education policies, which structure and regulate practices and procedures. In the current climate of change and reform in higher education, the response of many institutions has been to standardise and systematise teaching and learning through increasing measures of quality assurance. An example is the use of structured feedback forms, especially in large semesterised and modularised undergraduate courses. Hounsell (2003) itemises four factors that have motivated this development: a concern with greater transparency and equity in assessing students; achieving greater consistency across (and within) departments; quality assurance requirements emphasising formal articulation of criteria and learning outcomes; and support for new teaching staff. This raises questions about the kinds of knowledge that are brought into play in formal teaching and learning and the ways in which teachers are required to (and are able to) adapt their practices. These problems are exacerbated by reforms affecting higher education policy and practice across Europe. The Bologna Process was set up to ensure greater comparability and convergence in higher education systems across European Union member states. With the aim of establishing a ‘European higher education area’, transnational cooperation and parity in quality assurance are emphasised. This aspect of the Bologna reforms is subject to debate because it focuses on comparability in teaching and administrative systems.

Critics point to such measures as evidence of a pervasive techno-rationalism in the academy, which has a number of deleterious consequences. It results in regulating and sanitising teaching and learning interactions $( \mathrm { O r r } 2 0 0 5 )$ , and enforces uniformity by replacing ‘trust’ with documentation as ‘contract’ (Morley 2003). Crook, Gross, and Dymott (2006) consider feedback in the wider experience. They suggest that the trend towards greater proceduralisation in higher education administrative and pedagogical practices has led to the ‘decoupling’ of teacher and student by minimising their points of contact and depersonalising the experience for both parties. Lillis (2006) points out that conformity and control are emphasised over dialogue, contestation and negotiation in the development of learning. Poulas and Mahony (2007) identify that the credibility of feedback is linked to students’ perceptions of their teachers and the confidence they have in them and their practices. The association of good feedback with good teaching is a feature of the social dimension of feedback’s effectiveness.

Lea and Street (1998) identify a further complicating factor, at the underlying level of epistemology. The expectations of written work are discipline- and contextspecific, yet remain tacit, and the meanings of the descriptive terms teachers use in their feedback are often opaque. A lack of clearly specified ground-rules for writing in and across disciplines makes both the quality and substantive form of feedback problematic (Mutch 2003). Catt and Gregory (2006) ask if, in the context of assessment, writing is really taught or simply assessed. If, as they suspect, the latter is the case, students’ broader academic literacy capabilities are not being developed. They believe, in a system in which turnover is high and the focus is on assessment, students become instrumentally motivated, focusing on marks rather than the educational value of written comments (Gibbs and Simpson 20042005; Higgins, Hartley, and Skelton 2002b). Such examples in the literature are evidence of considerable scholarly opposition to the predominant standards model of formative assessment, feedback and learning, underpinned by a constructivist paradigm.

# The study: theory and method

Fundamentally ethnography aims to explore reality as others perceive it and primacy is given to qualitative methods of inquiry. Researchers attempt, as far as possible, to obtain a ‘thick description’ (Geertz 1973) of the social and cultural phenomena in question by examining, in addition to the processes, the circumstances and intentions integral to how something is experienced in given contexts. In our methods we drew on the example of the ‘academic literacies approach’ (Lea and Street 1998) which regards student learning and literacy development as social practice and foregrounds the situated and contextualised nature of pedagogy. This research tradition also emphasises that changing contextual factors in higher education are integral, rather than incidental, to research (Lea and Stierer 2000). In this respect our study is an attempt to explore further the contribution ethnographic style research can make to understanding the lived experience of participants in today’s higher education environment.

The data presented and discussed in this paper were gathered through interviews with a cross-section of academic teaching staff. In total 48 academic staff were interviewed across departments and faculty. Respondents came from a variety of disciplinary and subject areas: traditional humanities (History, English, History of Art), applied and ‘hybrid’ disciplines in social and applied sciences (Politics, Sociology and Criminology, Psychology and Sports Sciences, Geography and various taught programmes in the Business School); and emergent or ‘practice-based’ (Baynham 2000) disciplines: Education, Social Work and Nursing. Supplementary data were additionally obtained through an analysis of documentary sources, both paper-based and electronic guides and handouts on ‘good practice’ in marking and feedback mainly at the departmental level.

The interviews were semi-structured, in order to encourage open and exploratory talk and to engender a similar kind of reflection in respondents. The focus of the questions was on how academic staff conceptualise and experience written feedback in the broader context of what they do. The interviewer encouraged them to reflect on their own practices and the institutional procedures they engage with. The analysis and discussion presented here are therefore grounded in the views and experiences of teaching staff. This empirical approach complements both the more abstract reasoning and evaluative perspectives found in some recent papers on the role and efficacy of assessment feedback (e.g. Hounsell 2007; Mutch 2003; Nicol and Macfarlane-Dick 2006) and those which emphasise the social concerns implicit in the increasingly structured and bureaucratised nature of contemporary higher education (e.g. Crook, Gross, and Dymott 2006; Lea and Street 2000; Reid, Francis, and Robson 2005). The dual status of the principal researcher was a key factor. Being a member of staff at the institution under study gave him the status of an insider: a member of the cultural group being studied. It also facilitated contact with teaching staff in the various departments. In so far as he was based in a discipline area other than those denominated above, he had something of the status of an ‘outsider’ which facilitated seeing as ‘strange’ what is familiar or ‘taken-for-granted’ to ‘insiders’.

The interview schedule comprised the following questions, which were arranged in the sequence shown in order to allow respondents to explore their ideas reflectively and with more depth:

What is the purpose of written feedback?   
What do you hope to achieve in providing written feedback?   
What do you think you achieve?   
What do you think students do with it?   
Why is feedback sometimes ignored by students?

The presentation of the data and accompanying interpretive commentary is divided into two broad headings: the experience and perceptions of academic staff regarding the role and efficacy of providing written feedback to students; their perceptions of what students do or do not do with it and why?

# Perceptions of the role and utility of written feedback

In general, academic staff expressed clear opinions in response to the first question. There was a common emphasis in responses on the formative and developmental role of feedback, as the following excerpt exemplifies:

It is learning, a learning tool. It is about the growth of individual skills and knowledge. But it is also about communication; about shaping expectations and about a reflection on the quality of what has been submitted. (Applied Sciences)

It was also widely accepted that, given the importance of assessment, a sense of attainment is important in motivating students; an awareness that ‘feed-forward’ is as significant as feedback:

To try to encourage students by pointing out what is good about their work. Also, to show them why they didn’t get a higher mark and for that to be something they can apply to later pieces of work. (Social Sciences)

Feedback/forward is usually considered necessary in cases in which a student’s work is deficient in some way that affects their marks:

Unless the student has got a very good mark I want to show them how to get a better mark the next time round. (Nursing)

Many staff are aware of the affective role of feedback:

It is for instruction and motivation. Students realise attention is being paid to them. (Business School)

Such findings are not surprising. Tutors conceptualise written feedback as simultaneously fulfilling formative, instructional and motivational functions. They acknowledge that, since assessment is important, it also has an instrumental role as feed-forward: pointing out what went wrong and how students can get a better mark next time. This instrumental motivation, however, is efficacious only if students use it constructively  about which some respondents were sceptical:

I’m forced to conclude that in many cases students are only really interested in marks. (Social Sciences)

Even where students may wish to benefit from feed-forward, however, it is not always easy for tutors to judge its effect. In the two-semester academic year formal assessment often occurs late in the semester. Feedback on written work may not reach students until after a module has finished and they are engaged in another module in the subsequent semester. This impinges on what teachers feel they can achieve:

I can’t measure that [what feedback achieves]. I may see a student in semester one but not in semester two. I can’t really measure it unless I see students on a long-term basis. (Humanities)

The educational function of feedback is not the only influence determining what is written:

Another person may well look at it [written feedback], of course, a colleague and it may well go to an external. I always think ‘somebody else may read these comments’. The other reason is to justify the mark. If students come back to you it has to be all there. So you are doing it for a number of reasons. (Humanities)

Here we see elements of an agenda that are hidden from students, and of which some teachers may themselves be only dimly conscious. Students are unlikely to be aware that some of tutors’ remarks are determined by the presence of externally imposed standards. Teachers are writing for more than one reader; feedback is not exclusively for the student. In the excerpt above, the lecturer acknowledges that, taken together, marks and feedback constitute a record in the event of a student appeal. There is therefore an inevitable ambivalence in the teacher’s focus while writing feedback comments:

There are two things, helping and performing. It is a balancing act between working to be helpful and knowing you are accountable. (Humanities)

Some teachers resolve the ambivalence by focusing on the second of these two functions, the ‘performing’. Standard forms are used widely throughout the university to make marking faster and enable the timely return of work. For a number of members of staff, completing them has come to take precedence over the educational function of feedback. As a consequence, the written comments become formulaic:

A lot of this feedback is cut and pasted now so students get a standardised format. Once they have learnt to read one response sheet they are able to read all others fluently. The language of the grade descriptor is used more and more . . . We mix and match from the marking criteria. (Education)

# Perceptions of students’ responses to feedback?

The answers to the fourth question (What do you think students do with feedback?) revealed a variety of beliefs  or hopes  together with widespread uncertainty. Respondents typically gave unsubstantiated, impressionistic accounts based on students’ reactions in tutorials. A number of the answers focused on the student: there are ‘good’ or ‘able’ students on the one hand, and ‘poor’ or ‘weak’ ones on the other. The former learn by carefully considering the teacher’s comments and doing things differently next time. The latter fail to take any notice and hence make little progress:

There is no such thing as the average student. Some are motivated and conscientious and make changes. Others don’t really care and are satisfied with less. (Social Sciences)

The less able ones don’t benefit very much. They are getting the same sorts of comments because they have the same sorts of problems. The more able students use it more and can show that they have. (Applied Sciences)

Some respondents attributed the perceived differential usefulness of feedback for students to the way it is understood by both writer and reader. There can be a wide discrepancy between the meanings the two parties attribute to the language used. This difficulty goes deeper than the alignment of tasks, outcomes and assessment criteria:

They may read it and not understand it. The challenge for us is trying to make it as easy as possible to understand. People outside education don’t use words the way we do. (Nursing)

A sense of estrangement from the language of feedback affecting both students and teachers was mentioned by several respondents, for example:

Because they can’t read and understand it; nor understand how to map it onto another piece of work. (Psychology)

I try not to use too many big words. But there are times you have to use the buzzwords. (Social Work)

The latter respondent’s use of ‘buzzwords’ suggest a lack of ownership over, and identification with, the language of formal assessment. In the following excerpt a teacher in a related discipline area speaks of her awareness of the linguistic comprehension gap, and describes how she tries to modify her language accordingly:

Students may not follow or use feedback because they can’t understand it. The language is too difficult; too abstract. Sentence structures might appear too complex for them. I modify my feedback language accordingly. A comment like ‘this essay is carefully articulated’ would be used with a good student and with a weaker one I’d say ‘your writing style is developing’. (Nursing)

Another respondent, from a traditional discipline, reflected on her role as a group tutor to a number of first year students. She was aware of the implicit and varied meanings of the language of feedback, and admitted that her tutorials tended to be dominated by the struggle to elucidate for students the intended meanings of feedback comments provided by colleagues in the same department:

Students don’t use tutorials like they used to. I have found I am working round their writing. Students sometimes ask me ‘what do you mean by structure? This is one of the most obscure of all academic words. It doesn’t say anything really. Often I have to look at their [written] work to get a sense [of another teacher’s comments]. Sometimes it is about the organisation of the sentence; other times it is the overall structure. We have ended up with the pro-forma for feedback. It encourages shorthand in feedback. For example, ‘structure’ is overused. . .I advise students to make use of the tutorials. If we are going to acknowledge that there is broadening access it is not going to be an Oxbridge arrangement. It is about finding innovative ways to support students with their writing and assessment. (Social Sciences)

In the preceding excerpt, the respondent alludes to another common perception of barriers to useful feedback: the way the writing and assessment system operates according to a tacit value system that governs what teachers are willing or able to communicate to students. The following comments, by a lecturer from another curriculum area, express this idea succinctly:

The pressure in the university system encourages teachers to be brief and vague. As one module finishes the next one kicks in. It’s a quick turn around culture. (Social Work)

Both the linguistic difficulties of, and the systemic constraints on, feedback are in evidence in the following excerpt:

Some students simply don’t understand the role of feedback. They don’t see it as particularly valuable and don’t really understand what we are doing or trying to tell them. We are telling them what they are not doing well and what they should be doing but we are not really telling them how to do it. (Business)

To the final question (Why do some students ignore feedback?), most respondents could give no definite answer. They often prefaced their answers with hedges, such as ‘that’s a good question’, ‘hard to say’ or ‘that’s a difficult question to answer’. One respondent simply exclaimed, ‘This mystifies me!’ Another, with 30 years’ lecturing experience, said, ‘I don’t know. It’s a puzzle for me and extremely worrying’. Some described themselves as striving to provide useful feedback, whilst being sceptical about its utility:

I think in some cases it is because they haven’t understood it and in others it is because they don’t link comments up to the work to see how it could have been done differently. In some cases I also think that some assignments are done so much at the last minute that they don’t have time to refer back to previous work. I’m guessing. (Social Sciences)

Here, again, is the problem noted above: a perceived lack of understanding on the part of students concerning why feedback is provided. This is not helped by the fact that many written feedback comments are not clearly referenced (i.e. they do not appear on the scripts themselves, but only on forms or front-sheets). They thus appear disembodied, and students are unable to connect them to specific elements of their assignment. In addition, students are judged as being mainly instrumentally motivated and primarily concerned with marks.

It is clear from the foregoing that academic staff members have many reservations about both the processes of providing feedback and its pedagogical value. This in turn is likely to have a deleterious effect on students’ perceptions of and responses to it, particularly among certain groups of students, such as those designated ‘nontraditional’, part-timers and those with substantial placement components on their courses. This is highlighted in the following excerpt from an interview with a teacher in an applied and interdisciplinary area:

Some students do not understand it; some are overwhelmed by it. They lack selfconfidence. We know that some students, particularly mature ones and those returning to education come with negative emotional connotations. (Applied Sciences)

# Discussion

The data indicate that the conceptions teachers hold about the role and utility of feedback are often at odds with their knowledge of (or assumptions about) what students do with it. This can be attributed to aspects of the system rather than the intentions of teachers themselves. The concerns raised in the feedback research literature, outlined earlier, are substantiated in the data presented here. For example, our data reveal that the purposes of written feedback are perceived as ambivalent, often confusingly so. On the one hand, feedback is intended as a way of explaining to students how their work has been judged and graded and providing of feed-forward advice on how to improve it. On the other hand, it is determined by the need to conform to institutional requirements, procedures and priorities. As the responses show, teachers sense that this balancing act is difficult, if not impossible, to achieve satisfactorily. They are aware of a conflict between their conceptions of the purpose of feedback, their pedagogical intentions and the requirements of the system.

In contemporary higher education, a teacher has to be aware that what he or she writes is not simply a pedagogic interaction between tutor and student. It is also required to fulfil other, wider demands. The policies and practices of the institution; the quality assurance agency; the stipulations of internal and external audit; and the often unclear and varied practices of colleagues across and within disciplinary and subject boundaries  all of these contribute to shaping the amount, form and quality of the feedback they can provide. This state of affairs can reinforce teachers’ stereotypical assumptions about the motivations and behaviour of students. It may also help to shape those motivations and behaviour. As a result, some teachers seem to have become indifferent to the educational value of written feedback, and fall back on simply grading students’ performance, complying with institutional policy and completing the required documentation.

It is clear from the evidence that practices around writing feedback vary. In some cases lecturers write comments only on the front-sheet or pro-forma instrument. In other cases there is commentary in the relevant places on students’ scripts. In a large modularised and interdisciplinary faculty, this variation occurs not only across disciplines and subject areas, but also within them. The result, all too frequently, is confusion among members of staff about the efficacy of written feedback and the way in which it should be expressed; individual teachers are aware that what they write may be different from, or mean another thing for, a colleague. This confusion is almost certainly felt by students, as well.

Far from eliminating the problem of ineffectual feedback, institutional measures such as criterion referencing designed to foreground learning outcomes, standardised feedback forms and transparency procedures, actually appear to exacerbate it. A systems approach too often leads to formulaic written feedback. Many respondents referred to their (or their colleagues’) approach in terms of ‘cut and paste’ and ‘mix and match’. Conformity and uniformity are emphasised at the institutional level too readily at the expense of clarity at the pedagogical. Teaching staff, particularly those in larger faculty with different departments, as is the case in applied and practicebased areas, are not always comfortable with the requirement to use a register, which emphasises the vocabulary of grade descriptors and assessment criteria. They are aware, intuitively or explicitly, that many students do not connect with this language.

Teachers are working within an institutional environment which espouses a ‘conduit’ view of communication (Reddy 1993), within which language is a ‘transparent medium’ (Fairclough 1992). Meanings are taken as given, and understandings emerge incrementally provided they are linked to the ostensive purposes of learning tasks in the form of designated outcomes and assessment criteria. Within this environment, if students do not benefit from feedback, it is too easy to criticise them, rather than the system, for the deficiency. This is by no means the only response, however. Many academic staff are aware that they are in an invidious position: they want to enhance students’ learning through their written comments; but the need to conform to the formal requirements leaves them feeling unable to voice their pedagogical concerns appropriately. Some respondents indicated their frustration at the lack of ownership in their writing of feedback comments. Others adjust their language to meet the perceived needs of individual students, circumventing the limitations of forms and official standards. In practice teachers adapt to the conflicting demands on feedback, but they adapt in different ways. The result may be enhanced learning in a particular area, along with a fragmented learning experience for students across their whole degree programme.

The research findings highlight serious problems with feedback, which we believe are significant to understanding the experience of teaching staff in today’s university system. Institutionally specified learning outcomes and assessment criteria fail to take account of the crucial role of academic social practices in learning and shaping the norms of literacy across fields of study (cf. Lea and Street 1998). However, staff are increasingly under pressure to comply with institutional agendas at the departmental level and adopt practices such as structured forms often with little and insufficient internal discussion and deliberation about ‘best practice’ and fitness for purpose. Our evidence suggests that institutional practices designed to facilitate the efficient communication of written feedback to students are often seen by academic teaching staff to create problems of their own. There is a common ground in the lived experience of higher education: teachers, like students, may experience a sense of disengagement with higher education practices ostensibly designed to support pedagogical and communicative interactions. Both parties may wonder if feedback is worth the paper it is written on.

In this study we have attempted to provide a deeper understanding of the views and beliefs of teaching staff about written feedback in one institutional context. In pedagogical research in British higher education the lived experience and beliefs of teaching staff remain under-explored and under-represented. This paper emphasises the contribution ethnographic research can make in filling that gap and supports the view that more studies across HEIs into diverse aspects of the teacher experience are required. In this way real insights can be developed into the experience of being in higher education today which can serve to more holistically inform policy and practice around formative learning and teaching.

# References

Baynham, M. 2000. Academic writing in new discipline areas. In Student writing in higher education: New contexts, ed. M. Lea and B. Stierer, 1731. Buckingham: Society for Research in Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Biggs, J. 1999. What the student does: Teaching for enhanced learning. Higher Education Research and Development 18, no. 1: 5575.   
Biggs, J. 2003. Teaching for quality learning at the university, 2nd ed. Buckingham: Open University Press.   
Brown, E., and C. Glover. 2005. Evaluating written feedback on students’ assignments. In Innovative assessment in higher education, ed. C. Bryan and K. Clegg, 8191. London: Taylor and Francis Group.   
Carless, D. 2006. Differing perceptions in the feedback process. Studies in Higher Education 31, no. 2: 21933.   
Catt, R., and G. Gregory. 2006. The point of writing: Is student writing in higher education developed or merely assessed? In Teaching academic writing in UK higher education: Theories, practices and models, ed. L. Ganobscik-Williams 1629. Universities in the 21st Century series. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.   
Cowan, J. 2003. Assessment for learning: Giving timely and effective feedback. Exchange 4: 212.   
Crook, C., H. Gross, and R. Dymott. 2006. Assessment relationships in higher education: The tension of process and practice. British Educational Research Journal 32, no. 1: 95114.   
Fairclough, N. 1992. Discourse and social change. Cambridge: Polity Press.   
Geertz, C. 1973. The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.   
Gibbs, G., and C. Simpson. 20042005. Conditions under which assessment supports students’ learning. Learning and Teaching in Higher Education 1, no. 1: 331.   
Hattie, J., and H. Timperley. 2007. The power of feedback. In: Review of educational research 77, no. 1: 81112.   
Higgins, R., P. Hartley, and A. Skelton. 2002a. ‘‘What do you expect?’’: Students’ responses to assessment feedback. In Changing contexts for teaching and learning, ed. M. Graal, 99116. Leicester: Teaching and Learning Unit, University of Leicester.   
Higgins, R., P. Hartley, and A. Skelton. 2002b. The conscientious consumer: Reconsidering the role of assessment feedback in student learning. Studies in Higher Education 27, no. 1: 5364.   
Hounsell, D. 1987. Essay writing and the quality of feedback. In Student learning: Research in educational and cognitive psychology, ed. J.T.E. Richardson, M.W. Eysenck, and D.W. Piper, 10919. Milton Keynes: Society for Research in Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Hounsell, D. 2003. Student feedback, learning and development. In Higher education and the lifecourse, ed. M. Slowey and D. Watson, 6778. Buckingham: Society for Research in Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Hounsell, D. 2007. Towards a more sustainable feedback to students. In Rethinking assessment in higher education: Learning for the longer term, ed. D. Boud and N. Falchikov, 10113. London: Routledge.   
Ivanicˇ, R., R. Clark, and R. Rimmershaw. 2000. What am I supposed to make of this? The messages conveyed to students by tutors’ written comments. In Student writing in higher education: New contexts, ed. M. Lea and B. Stierer, 4765. Buckingham: Society for Research in Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Lea, M., and B. Stierer. 2000. Student writing in higher education: New contexts. Buckingham: Open University Press.   
Lea, M., and B. Street. 1998. Student writing in higher education: An academic literacies approach. Studies in Higher Education 23, no. 2: 15772.   
Lea, M., and B. Street. 2000. Student writing and staff feedback in higher education: An academic literacies approach. In Student writing in higher education: New contexts, ed. M. Lea and B. Stierer, 3246. Buckingham: Society for Research in Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Lillis, T. 2006. Moving towards an ‘academic literacies’ pedagogy: Dialogues of participation. In Teaching academic writing in UK higher education: Theories, practices and models, ed. L. Ganobscik-Williams, 3045. Universities in the 21st Century series. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.   
Maclellan, E. 2001. Assessment for learning: The differing perceptions of tutors and students. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 26, no. 4: 30718.   
Morley, L. 2003. Quality and power in higher education. Buckingham: Society for Research in Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Mutch, A. 2003. Exploring the practice of feedback to students. Active learning in higher education 4, no. 1: 2438.   
Nicol, D., and D. MacFarlane-Dick. 2006. Formative assessment and self-regulated learning: A model a seven principles of good feedback practice. Studies in Higher Education 31, no. 2: 199218.   
Orr, S. 2005. Transparent opacity: Assessment in the inclusive academy. In Improving student learning: Diversity and inclusivity, ed. C. Rust, 17587. Oxford: The Oxford Centre for Staff and Learning Development.   
Penny, A.J., and C. Grover. 1996. An analysis of student grade expectations and marker consistency. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 21, no. 2: 17384.   
Poulas, A., and J. Mahony. 2007. Effectiveness of feedback: The students’ perspective. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 33, no. 2: 14354.   
Reddy, M. 1993. The conduit metaphor. In Metaphor and thought, 2nd ed., ed. A. Ortony, 284324. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Reid, B., B. Francis, and J. Robson. 2005. Gender, bias, assessment and feedback: Analysing the written assessment of undergraduate history essays. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 30, no. 3: 24160.   
Yorke, M. 2002. Academic failure: A retrospective view from non-completing students. In Failing students in higher education, ed. M. Peelo and T. Wareham, 2941. Buckingham: Society for Research in Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Yorke, M. 2003. Formative assessment in higher education: Moves towards theory and the enhancement of pedagogic practice. Higher Education 45: 477501.