# Developing a profile of the ESP needs of Iranian students: The case of students of nursing and midwifery

Golnar Mazdayasna a , M.H. Tahririan b,

a Yazd University, Yazd, Iran b Sheikhbahaee University, Iran

# Abstract

The aim of conducting this study was to investigate the foreign language learning needs of undergraduate medical sciences students studying in faculties of nursing and midwifery in Iran. A total of 681 undergraduate students as well as 168 subject-specific instructors and 6 EFL instructors participated in the study, which was designed on a qualitative-quantitative survey basis using interviews and questionnaires. Extensive qualitative and statistical analysis of the data revealed that most of the students perceived that they needed to master the foreign language before they attended their specialized courses because they needed to use Persian and English sources to study their subject. Over one-third of the students expressed their dissatisfaction with the number of students in each class, with the teaching methodology used, the method of evaluation, and the amount of foreign culture taught in the class and content of the textbook. Equally, the subject-specific instructors’ responses revealed total dissatisfaction with their students’ language skills.

It can be inferred that this course does not fully prepare the students to embark on their studies because it does not sufficiently take into account their (1) learning needs, (2) present level of foreign language proficiency, (3) objectives of the course, (4) resources available in terms of staff, materials, equipment, finances and time constraint, (5) the skill of the teachers and the teacher’s knowledge of the specific area.

Crown Copyright $\circledcirc$ 2008 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Academic learning needs; ESP content; EAP methodology; EAP instructors

# 1. Introduction

Although in Iran almost all undergraduate textbooks are in Persian, students are urged to also read other sources and professional journals in English. Thus, the main aim of English classes at undergraduate level is to help students improve their technical vocabulary, reading, and translation skills. It has been hoped that if students improve their general language skills early in the course, and learn the relevant technical vocabulary of their discipline in their first year, they will be adequately equipped to handle subject-specific textbooks in their later specialized courses. However, the Ministry of Science, Research, and Technology’s high commission offers no clear guidance for selecting and developing basic academic instructional materials related to the linguistic or communicative standards expected by students. English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and English for Specific Purposes (ESP) are developing branches of EFL instruction in Iran, and have a marginal status in the tertiary education.

Prior to the change of government in 1979e80, the British Council had sponsored a major ESP materials initiative in Iran which generated many textbooks targeted to this population (the Nucleus series, edited by Tony Dudley-Evans and Martin Bates, published by Longman from 1976e1980), but after this period EAP and ESP were no longer a priority. In 1985 the responsibility of English language materials production fell on SAMT (the official Iranian center for materials development in humanities). In addition to 6 volumes of General English, SAMT has published 110 volumes of so-called sub-technical and technical English textbooks in different areas of specialization. The textbooks follow a rigid format of such instructional exercises and activities as ‘pre-reading’, ‘reading’, ‘homework’ and ‘language’ exercises for all academic disciplines, with the major focus on reading comprehension skills. In our opinion, the contents of these textbooks are not designed to address the learning needs, wants and desires of Iranian students; the articles are selected mainly on the basis of topic, as being related to the students’ field of study, and not on the basis of genre or discourse of the particular discipline. Of the four skills, only reading has been emphasized.

Although the bulk of undergraduate level English instruction in Iran deals with teaching EAP, this is of a limited scope and has overlooked the principles underlying course design, which should be viewed as an on-going process to suit students’ interests and needs (Sifakis, 2003). In addition, the course applies a text-centered approach and is examination-oriented. After completing their degree programs, most students lack the foreign language proficiency they are expected to have.

The main aim of conducting this study was to investigate the foreign language learning needs, wants and desires of undergraduate medical sciences students studying in faculties of nursing and midwifery in various universities in Iran. The assessment of learners’ needs was performed by considering the views of various stakeholders including students and instructors. Efforts were made to find answers to the following questions:

1. What are the specific English language needs of Iranian nursing and midwifery students?   
2. What language skills do nursing and midwifery students need to develop?   
3. What types of content, methodology and class activities are appropriate for nursing and midwifery students?   
4. What factors should be considered in designing syllabii for nursing and midwifery students?

As for the possible implications, the results may be used as input documentation in making decisions concerning refining, revising, and improving practice in discipline-related EAP instruction in Iran.

# 2. Method

# 2.1. Design of the study

This mixed methods study involved first, a small scale interview study with undergraduate students, EFL instructors, and subject-specific instructors in the medical faculties of three Iranian universities. The interview data provided input to the design of a fairly large-scale questionnaire survey, administered to undergraduates and instructors. The main purpose of the study was to determine perceptions of the foreign language needs of first year undergraduate nursing and midwifery students of various stakeholders including students, subject-specific instructors, and English instructors.

# 2.2. Instruments

Two instruments were used in this study: (1) interviews and (2) questionnaires. At the beginning of the study, interviews were conducted with undergraduate students, EFL instructors and subject-specific instructors at Isfahan, Shahr-e-Kord, and Yazd universities of medical sciences. A list of questions was prepared, regarding such issues as the learning needs of the students, the language skills which the respondents thought students needed to develop, the areas of language difficulty which they experience, as well as the respondents’ attitudes towards language instruction, methodology, content and length of the English course. The main aim of conducting interviews was to personally elicit information regarding the interviewees’ perspectives concerning the learning needs of students, areas of difficulty which students encounter as well as exploring the attitude and expectations of the participants regarding the ESP course. The interviewees’ opinions on the importance of proficiency in different areas of language skills, namely listening, speaking, reading, and writing were elicited. The researcher also explored the interviewees’ views regarding the kind of vocabulary, i.e. technical, semi-technical, and core vocabulary which they expected to be emphasized in the course, their attitude towards language instruction, length of the English course, and their perceptions of communication in the foreign language.

Heads of departments and subject-specific instructors were asked questions about their expectations concerning the medical terminology and expressions which they expect their graduates to know. They were also asked to express their opinions about students’ competence in coping with their academic studies in English, and whether they felt the general English course as well as the specialized English courses provided the English the students need for English in their studies. Finally, they were also asked to express their views about class activities and methodology which are implemented to develop the students’ English proficiency.

The second instrument consisted of two sets of needs analysis questionnaires: (1) Students’ questionnaire, (2) Language and special subject instructors’ questionnaire. These questionnaires were developed after the preliminary interviews with students, English instructors and subject-specific instructors.

Following six items which dealt with personal information such as name, sex, the department in which the students were studying, and whether they had passed their general English course, the student questionnaire had two sections. The first, which was composed of twenty-one items (items 1e21), was designed to explore the opinions of the students about their expressed needs for English language skills in their academic studies. The second, which consisted of fourteen items (items 22e35), explored the opinions of the students concerning language demands, their language needs, their attitudes towards language instruction, the length of the course, and the content, syllabus, and methodology of the specialized English course (refer to Appendix A). The first section (items 1e21), required respondents to express their opinions about each statement by marking the options on a six-point Likert scale ranging from 6 (to a very great extent) to 1 (not at all). The first seven items of the second section (items 22e29) similarly used a Likert scale, while items 29e35 were multiple-choice format.

The instructors’ questionnaire (Appendix B) comprised three sections. The first section, items 1e37, explored the perspectives of the instructors about the foreign language learning needs of medical sciences students in using the four macro English skills and general study skills as relates to their academic studies. In the second section, items 38e42, instructors evaluated the English language proficiency of the students by indicating the extent they developed the desired competence and performance after passing the ESP course. The third section of the questionnaire, items $4 3 -$ 47, used the multiple-choice format to explore their opinions concerning the students’ attitude towards language instruction, length of the course, the content, syllabus, and methodology used in their ESP course.

# 2.3. Participants

Table 1 shows the participants in the interview phase of the study.

In the questionnaire phase of the study, a total of 681 undergraduate medical sciences students studying nursing and midwifery participated in the survey: the sample comprised 623 females and 58 male students with an age range of 20e25 years. In addition, 168 subject-specific instructors and 6 English instructors participated. The participants were from the faculties of nursing and midwifery at the seven medical sciences universities: Tehran, Shahid Beheshti, Iran, Isfahan, Yazd, Kerman, and Shahr-e-Kord, as well as 6 English instructors who taught ESP courses at these universities. These universities were chosen in order to have representative views from different universities nationwide. The ‘In-study Group’ comprised 243 undergraduate students (29 males and 214 females) who had enrolled for a required ‘ESP’ course in the spring semester of 2005e2006 and were in their third to sixth semesters. The ‘Post-study

Table 1 Distribution of participants who took part in the interviews.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>University</td><td> In-study group</td><td> Post-study group</td><td>Subject-specific instructors</td><td>English instructors</td></tr><tr><td>Shahid-Beheshti</td><td>5</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Tehran</td><td>6</td><td>10</td><td>8</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Iran</td><td>5</td><td>6</td><td>7</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Isfahan</td><td>10</td><td>7</td><td>10</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Shahr-e-Kord</td><td>5</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Yazd</td><td>5</td><td>7</td><td>5</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Kerman</td><td>6</td><td>8</td><td>2</td><td>-</td></tr></table></body></html>

Group’ comprised 438 undergraduate students (29 males and 409 females), who had passed the ESP course and were in their fourth to eight semesters. The distribution of the sample is shown in Table 2. It was noticed that at Tehran, Iran, Shahid Beheshti and Isfahan medical sciences universities, the ‘ESP’ courses were taught by EFL instructors; whereas, at Kerman, and Shahr-e-Kord universities, they were taught by subject-specific instructors. At Yazd University, two ‘ESP’ courses were conducted: one class was taught by an EFL instructor and the other by a subjectspecific instructor.

# 3. Data collection and analysis

Data for the study were collected over the spring semester of 2005e2006. Once the first drafts of the questionnaires were prepared, a pilot study was performed on fifteen nursing and midwifery students and six English instructors at Isfahan University of Medical Sciences in order to elicit information concerning the content of the items and clarity of instructions. After revising the questionnaires based on the pilot study and deleting three items, the final versions of the two questionnaires were translated into Persian and administered to the participants. The English language instructors were given the English version of the questionnaire.

# 3.1. The interviews

One of the researchers conducted and tape-recorded interviews with undergraduate students who were in their 3rd to 8th semesters, EFL instructors and subject-specific instructors, as well as several heads of nursing and midwifery departments. The responses provided by the interviewees were recorded and then transcribed by the researcher. Quantitative and qualitative analyses of the responses of the two groups of students and the instructors showed that they were quite similar, although the instructors provided more details than did the students. As relates to general foreign language skills, both students and instructors reported that the students’ English language ability was insufficient to meet the challenge of the large amount of English text they were expected to read in their specialized courses. Most of the instructors were particularly dissatisfied with the low reading ability of the students and indicated that they have no other alternative but to translate specialized English texts in order to put the message across to the students.

The subject-specific instructors felt that students should learn the organization of medical articles and texts and expected them to know how to read, summarize, analyze, and interpret a piece of research done in their field. Subjectspecific instructors also saw the need for students to practice how to write case reports and improve their writing and speaking skills so that they could communicate more effectively with university personnel and doctors in hospitals. This is probably because despite the fact that the language of instruction in all Iranian Universities is Farsi, it has become part of the hospital personnel culture not to write/speak about a patient’s case, disease /treatment in Farsi. In addition, subject-specific instructors admitted that the students commonly need to improve their general English to use linguistic forms and the academic register appropriately.

Regarding students’ speaking ability, instructors and students alike reported that the students lack the experience or confidence to speak; they need to improve their speaking skills for group discussion and presentations. They were of the opinion that the four skills of speaking, listening, reading, and writing should be integrated in the English course content. Concerning the use of technical and semi-technical vocabulary, all the respondents believed that students only memorize the limited amount of technical and semi-technical vocabulary which they are taught in the ESP course in order to succeed in their examination. After they pass their English course, they still lack the ability to use grammatical structures and medical terminology appropriately. They also have problems using semi-technical vocabulary in real contexts.

Table 2 Distribution of participants who took part in the questionnaire survey.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>University</td><td> In-study group</td><td>Post-study groupe</td><td>Subject-specific instructors</td><td>English instructorsd</td></tr><tr><td>Shaheed-Beheshti</td><td>43</td><td>62</td><td>27</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Tehran</td><td>15</td><td>75.</td><td>28</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Iran</td><td>31</td><td>56</td><td>36</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Isfahan</td><td>38</td><td>58</td><td>30</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Shahr-e-Kord</td><td>37</td><td>62</td><td>16</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Yazd</td><td>24</td><td>53</td><td>24</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Kerman</td><td>55</td><td>72</td><td>7</td><td>-</td></tr></table></body></html>

Most respondents were of the opinion that the students need to develop their communicative competence, and that the general and the specialized English courses do not develop the students’ level of proficiency enough to use English in real contexts. The students reported that they encounter serious problems in the 6th and 7th semesters when they have to work in hospitals. For example, students have problems understanding instructions and technical words used in doctors’ prescriptions and hospital orders.

Most of the respondents thought that EFL instructors should be familiar with the medical terminology, so that they would be in a better position to impart the relevant knowledge to students. They felt it would be beneficial for EFL instructors to receive extra instruction regarding medical terminology used in the academic texts before they begin teaching their ESP course. Students reported, overall, the view that subject-specific English courses should be offered throughout the four years of their study, and that they should be provided with other language learning opportunities such as watching films and using the Internet. They also suggested that English classes should be conducted in the language laboratory in order to help them improve their speaking and listening skills.

Some of the subject-specific instructors suggested that EFL teachers should assign relevant topics related to the students’ special subjects for oral presentations. They thought that students should select articles from medical journals or collect information from the Internet concerning the topic about which they have volunteered to give oral presentations. As a student is presenting their lecture in the class, other students could listen and write notes, and after the presentation is over, they could ask questions so that while they get more information they can also improve their oral skills. While subject-specific instructors could see the value of these practices, they did not employ them in their courses. Some of the subject-specific instructors also suggested that the midterm and final examinations for English could be based on topics discussed in the class, and that in the final examination, students could be given some questions to be answered in English. As a result, they would see a stronger link between their English classes and their subject studies, and develop an greater motivation for learning English.

All the respondents believed in the necessity of change in their students’ English education. The specialized English courses, according to them, should provide students with authentic academic language experiences. For example, students should be provided with opportunities to listen to long lectures and conversations involving multiple participants, to write longer papers, to participate in group discussions, and to give class presentations. The English curriculum, they emphasized, should integrate strategy training into the lessons so that students can develop effective language use strategies.

# 3.2. The questionnaires

In order to collect the required questionnaire data, all seven medical sciences universities in Iran (Tehran, Shahid Beheshti, Iran, Isfahan, Yazd, Kerman, and Shahr-e-Kord) were visited by one of the researchers, who was given access to classes in order to administer the questionnaires. For the ‘In-study’ group, the questionnaire was administered during ESP class sessions to ensure the highest possible rate of return. For the ‘Post-study’ group, the questionnaire was administered during one of the subject-specific class sessions. In two instances the data were collected in the hospitals from students in their 7th or 8th semesters who were doing practical experience. The aim of collecting data from students who had already passed the subject-specific English course was to find out (1) whether their objective and subjective needs had been fulfilled, (2) whether they had gained sufficient proficiency to use academic English in their specialized studies, and (3) whether their language needs and perceptions of needs had changed during their four years of study.

In order to ensure a high rate of return by subject-specific instructors and EFL instructors, the researchers distributed and collected the questionnaires in each university in person. One of the researchers visited each instructor in their office, informed them about the aim of the research project, and requested them to fill out the questionnaires. Some respondents returned the questionnaire on the same day; others returned them one to three days later by mail.

The Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) was used for statistical operations needed for data analysis. As no significant between-group variation was found between the seven universities, the statistics related to the responses from all seven universities were added up, forming a single dataset to compare the views of the three groups of respondents.

As shown in Table 3, Pearson Chi-square values were computed for each question. The minimum expected frequency for each cell was 800 or more. The values indicate that while there were similarities in the response patterns of individual members within each group, the total group responses were, nevertheless, independent of one another.

The responses of the three groups of respondents were then cross-tabulated for each question. To aid display of the comparisons between the group responses, the data was summarized. Table 4 presents the percentile frequencies of responses on each question by members of the three groups.

Many of the students in the ‘In-study’ and ‘Post-study’ groups and most of the instructors perceived that students ‘greatly’ need to develop their listening and speaking skills for participating in academic discussions, speaking at seminars, meetings and presentations (cf. items $_ { 1 - 1 2 }$ of the questionnaires for details of the items).

Most of the students in both groups of students and instructors group perceived that the students ‘greatly’ need to develop all their reading skills. Likewise, the majority of the instructors agreed that the students ‘greatly’ need to develop all their reading skills (cf. items 13e17 in Appendix A).

Nearly all subject-specific instructors indicated that the students ‘greatly’ need to develop their reading skills to be proficient enough to perform their duties in their workplace with regard to reading clinical laboratory reports, reading instructions for patient care, and reading doctor’s prescriptions (cf. items 18e20 in Appendix B).

Most of the subject-specific instructors agreed that students have a ‘moderate’ need to improve their writing skills, for taking lecture notes, taking notes from textbooks, writing papers for oral presentations and writing term papers (cf. items 18e21 of Appendix A and 21e24 of Appendix B).

Table 3 Pearson chi-square test results for questionnaire.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Item #</td><td>Value</td><td>df</td><td>Asymp.Sig. (2-sided)</td><td>Obs. count Less than 5</td><td>Min.expected count</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>74.905</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>1</td><td>4.59</td></tr><tr><td>Q1 Q2</td><td>66.708</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>5.47</td></tr><tr><td>Q3</td><td>26.549</td><td>10</td><td>.003</td><td>1</td><td>4.46</td></tr><tr><td>Q4</td><td>21.934</td><td>10</td><td>.015</td><td>0</td><td>6.39</td></tr><tr><td>Q5</td><td>9.819</td><td>10</td><td>.546</td><td>1</td><td>4.98</td></tr><tr><td>Q6</td><td>36.290</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>9.76</td></tr><tr><td>Q7</td><td>9.307</td><td>10</td><td>.503</td><td>0</td><td>5.69</td></tr><tr><td>Q8</td><td>51.731</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>5.84</td></tr><tr><td>Q9</td><td>45.577</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>7.06</td></tr><tr><td>Q10</td><td>47.650</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>7.24</td></tr><tr><td>Q11</td><td>21.355</td><td>10</td><td>.019</td><td>1</td><td>4.59</td></tr><tr><td>Q12</td><td>44.880</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>6.53</td></tr><tr><td>Q13</td><td>239.285</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>3</td><td>2.9</td></tr><tr><td>Q14</td><td>58.218</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>2</td><td>2.30</td></tr><tr><td>Q15</td><td>22.343</td><td>10</td><td>.013</td><td>3</td><td>2.48</td></tr><tr><td>Q16</td><td>62.292</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>2</td><td>2.65</td></tr><tr><td>Q17</td><td>51.225</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>7</td><td>0.18</td></tr><tr><td>Q18</td><td>182.519</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>7.76</td></tr><tr><td>Q19</td><td>130.238</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>7.24</td></tr><tr><td> Q20</td><td>62.928</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>5.82</td></tr><tr><td>Q21</td><td>262.133</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>8.80</td></tr><tr><td>Q22</td><td>82.165</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>11.80</td></tr><tr><td>Q23</td><td>32.488</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>11.62</td></tr><tr><td>Q24</td><td>173.456</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>7.87</td></tr><tr><td>Q25</td><td>75.620</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>6.09</td></tr><tr><td>Q26</td><td>78.886</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>6.22</td></tr><tr><td>Q27</td><td>29.294</td><td>10</td><td>.001</td><td>1</td><td>3.55</td></tr><tr><td>Q28</td><td>70.284</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>5.60</td></tr><tr><td>Q29</td><td>256.553</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>1</td><td>4.44</td></tr><tr><td>Q30</td><td>55.922</td><td>8</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>7.64</td></tr><tr><td>Q31</td><td>186.984</td><td>6</td><td>.000</td><td>1</td><td>3.17</td></tr><tr><td>Q32</td><td>638.821</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>10.34</td></tr><tr><td>Q33</td><td>534.755</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>0</td><td>11.21</td></tr><tr><td>Q34</td><td>621.524</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>1</td><td>4.53</td></tr><tr><td> Q35</td><td>625.926</td><td>10</td><td>.000</td><td>1</td><td>4.31</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Cross-tabulation results of the questionnaires for the three groups.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Item #</td><td>Group</td><td>Not at all %</td><td>A little %</td><td>To some Extent %</td><td>To a moderate Extent %</td><td>To a great Extent %</td><td>To a very great extent %</td><td>Total count</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q1</td><td> In-study </td><td>3.3</td><td>9.3</td><td>10.6</td><td>24.0</td><td>28.0</td><td>24.8</td><td>246</td></tr><tr><td> Post-study</td><td>2.6</td><td>7.9</td><td>10.6</td><td>47.6</td><td>23.8</td><td>7.5</td><td>454</td></tr><tr><td> Instructor</td><td>4.0</td><td>12.7</td><td>4.0</td><td>34.0</td><td>21.3</td><td>24.0</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Q2</td><td> In-study</td><td>5.3</td><td>10.6</td><td>12.6</td><td>30.9</td><td>22.4</td><td>18.3</td><td>246</td></tr><tr><td> Post-study</td><td>4.0</td><td>10.6</td><td>16.3</td><td>25.6</td><td>20.7</td><td>22.9</td><td>454</td></tr><tr><td> Instructor</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.0</td><td>11.3</td><td>14.7</td><td>44.0</td><td>30.0</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study </td><td>1.2</td><td>3.3</td><td>11.8</td><td>22.0</td><td>30.6</td><td>31.0</td><td>245</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q3</td><td>Post-study</td><td>3.1</td><td>8.1</td><td>9.2</td><td>26.1</td><td>30.6</td><td>22.9</td><td>445</td></tr><tr><td> Instructor</td><td>5.3</td><td>2.7</td><td>8.0</td><td>17.3</td><td>35.3</td><td>31.3</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study </td><td>5.0</td><td>11.2</td><td>13.2</td><td>24.8</td><td>21.9</td><td>24.0</td><td>242</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q4</td><td> Post-study</td><td>4.9</td><td>7.7</td><td>13.2</td><td>23.4</td><td>23.4</td><td>27.4</td><td>453</td></tr><tr><td> Instructor</td><td>1.3</td><td>10.7</td><td>5.3</td><td>30.7</td><td>32.0</td><td>20.0</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study</td><td>3.3</td><td>4.5</td><td>8.2</td><td>23.0</td><td>25.0</td><td>36.1</td><td>244</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q5</td><td> Post-study</td><td>3.6</td><td>6.0</td><td>9.8</td><td>19.6</td><td>26.7</td><td>34.3</td><td>449</td></tr><tr><td>Instructor</td><td>2.7</td><td>6.0</td><td>3.3</td><td>26.7</td><td>26.0</td><td>35.3</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study</td><td>4.1</td><td>10.3</td><td>14.4</td><td>21.4</td><td>23.5</td><td>26.3</td><td>243</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q6</td><td> Post-study</td><td>7.1</td><td>111</td><td>14.6</td><td>23.0</td><td>19.0</td><td>25.2</td><td>452</td></tr><tr><td> Instructor</td><td>8.7</td><td>11.3</td><td>6.7</td><td>12.0</td><td>39.3</td><td>22.0</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study</td><td>3.3</td><td>11.5</td><td>10.2</td><td>21.7</td><td>29.5</td><td>23.8</td><td>244</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q7</td><td> Post-study</td><td>4.5</td><td>8.7</td><td>11.1</td><td>27.6</td><td>27.2</td><td>20.9</td><td>449</td></tr><tr><td> Instructor</td><td>2.7</td><td>10.0</td><td>8.0</td><td>22.7</td><td>35.3</td><td>21.3</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study</td><td>6.1</td><td>11.1</td><td>14.8</td><td>25.4</td><td>25</td><td>17.6</td><td>244</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q8</td><td> Post-study</td><td>4.0</td><td>8.2</td><td>17.7</td><td>25.6</td><td>23.8</td><td>20.8</td><td>253</td></tr><tr><td>Instructor</td><td>0.0</td><td>16.7</td><td>4.0</td><td>18.0</td><td>43.3</td><td>18.0</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study</td><td>2.5</td><td>10.7</td><td>12.3</td><td>27.5</td><td>27.5</td><td>19.7</td><td>244</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q9</td><td> Post-study</td><td>5.3</td><td>14.9</td><td>14.9</td><td>29.4</td><td>20.6</td><td>14.9</td><td>456</td></tr><tr><td>Instructor</td><td>6.7</td><td>23.3</td><td>6.0</td><td>14.0</td><td>36.0</td><td>14.0</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study </td><td>6.9</td><td>6.5</td><td>17.5</td><td>26.4</td><td>22.8</td><td>19.9</td><td>246</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q10</td><td> Post-study</td><td>5.3</td><td>12.3</td><td>16.3</td><td>23.3</td><td>20.7</td><td>22.0</td><td>254</td></tr><tr><td>Instructor</td><td>0.0</td><td>7.3</td><td>10.7</td><td>18.0</td><td>44.0</td><td>22.0</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study</td><td>4.9</td><td>6.5</td><td>10.2</td><td>22.9</td><td>26.9</td><td>28.6</td><td>245</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q11</td><td> Post-study</td><td>3.1</td><td>5.7</td><td>12.8</td><td>20.7</td><td>24.7</td><td>33.0</td><td>454</td></tr><tr><td> Instructor</td><td>0.0</td><td>7.3</td><td>7.3</td><td>15.3</td><td>37.3</td><td>32.7</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study</td><td>6.1</td><td>6.5</td><td>13.0</td><td>28.9</td><td>24.8</td><td>20.7</td><td>246</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q12</td><td> Post-study</td><td>4.8</td><td>7.9</td><td>13.2</td><td>27.3</td><td>23.8</td><td>22.9</td><td>454</td></tr><tr><td>Instructor</td><td>0.0</td><td>14.7</td><td>4.0</td><td>14.7</td><td>32.7</td><td>34.0</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study</td><td>1.2</td><td>4.5</td><td>8.5</td><td>16.7</td><td>32.1</td><td>37.0</td><td>246</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Q13</td><td>Post-study</td><td>2.2</td><td>3.9</td><td>7.0</td><td>45.6</td><td>31.6</td><td>9.6</td><td>456</td></tr><tr><td> Instructor</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.0</td><td>43.3</td><td>56.7</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td> In-study</td><td>2.9</td><td>4.5</td><td>8.2</td><td>20.9</td><td>29.5</td><td>34.0</td><td>244</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td> Post-study</td><td>1.3</td><td>4.0</td><td>7.9</td><td>16.7</td><td>30.4</td><td>39.6</td><td>454</td></tr><tr><td>Instructor</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.0</td><td>4.0</td><td>36.7</td><td>59.3</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td>In-study Post-study</td><td>3.3 1.3</td><td>4.9 3.1</td><td>5.3 7.5</td><td>13.5 12.8</td><td>37.3 36.6</td><td>35.7 38.8</td><td>244 454</td></tr><tr></table></body></html>

Most of the subject-specific instructors perceived that the students ‘moderately’ need to improve all their writing skills for writing articles for medical journals, writing medical reports, writing case reports, writing a medical prescription, and writing instructions to patients (cf. items 25e29 of Appendix B).

Most of the instructors were of the opinion that the students ‘moderately’ need to develop all general study skills (cf. items 30e35 of Appendix B).

# 4. Summary and conclusion

A needs analysis study was undertaken in the Iranian medical sciences universities with the aim of investigating undergraduate students’ foreign language learning needs, wants and lacks. The assessment of learners’ needs was performed with the help of various stakeholders including students who were enrolled in ESP courses, those who had passed their ESP courses, and EFL and subject-specific instructors.

The first research question explored the views and perceptions of the students as well as instructors concerning the ESP needs of students. The findings of the study support the view that the students ‘greatly’ need to increase their general proficiency in English. Most of the students felt that the current two-credit ESP course is insufficient and reported that they had expected to be offered specialized English courses throughout their undergraduate studies in order to fulfill their short- term needs.

There was a consistency of opinions among instructors across different universities that the students ‘moderately’ need to develop their general study skills. A solid majority of the instructors also reported that the students need to develop their general reading skills and oral communication skills, and they agreed that the students should be helped to increase their repertoire of vocabulary in order to be able to read extensively in their specialized classes. This indicates that in spite of the fact that the students take a general English course before their subject-specific English course, their level of general English proficiency (GEP) is low. This is in line with what has also been echoed in the literature on EFL/ESP in Iranian settings (Alavi & Tahririan, 1996; Atai, 2000; Tahririan, 1987, 1990).

Most of the students in the two groups perceived that they needed to master an appropriate level of English before they attend their specialized courses, although some felt that they could wait and master English at the same time as studying their specialized subjects. More significantly, most of the students reported that they needed to use both Persian and English sources when studying their subject courses. The students seemed to have clear perceptions of their language needs for academic study and their future careers.

The students’ wishes on the amount of time they expected to be allotted to their English courses per week varied. Most of the respondents stated that they preferred to have the specialized English course in three one-hour sessions per week while others preferred to attend the English course in two 90 minute sessions a week. Students also perceived that English instructors lack sufficient expertise and background knowledge required for teaching specialized English courses. Nevertheless, all subject specific instructors indicated that EFL instructors should teach ESP courses. Additionally, half of the subject-specific instructors were of the opinion that EFL instructors must have sufficient knowledge of the specialized medical vocabulary, while the rest perceived that EFL instructors should have knowledge of specialized medical vocabulary as well as general vocabulary. This confirms the recommendation of Atai (2002, p. 13) that ‘‘EAP instructors reconsider their roles in struggling with EAP contexts and to widen their repertoires of language teaching strategies’’. It does not, of course, in any way address the impracticality of these expectations.

The second research question sought information about the types of skills which nursing and midwifery students need to develop. Subject-specific instructors’ assessment of students’ language skills revealed their dissatisfaction. They contended that, after passing the ESP course, the students do not have sufficient proficiency in reading, writing, speaking or listening; therefore, they encounter difficulties in dealing with tasks they are expected to perform in English. A vast majority of the students in the ‘In-study’ and ‘Post-study’ groups agreed that reading comprehension, followed by listening, speaking and writing are the most important skills needed for their medical studies. Likewise, almost all subject-specific instructors stated that students ‘greatly’ need to improve their reading skill, followed by listening, speaking and writing skills. The subjectspecific instructors consistently ranked the importance of the four skills higher than the students did. Additionally, the majority of the respondents believed that there was ‘a great need’ to develop every sub-skill of the four skills in the ESP course content.

The third research question dealt with finding out what type of content, methodology and class activities are appropriate for nursing and midwifery students. Almost one-third of the students in both groups expressed their dissatisfaction with the number of students in each class, the teaching methodology used, the method of evaluation, the amount of foreign culture taught in the class, and the content of the textbook. At the same time, one-third of the students in both groups felt that they were moderately satisfied with the aforementioned issues. More attention needs to be paid to course design.

As has been echoed in the literature, ESP courses are not designed and/or implemented consistently in terms of syllabus, materials, methodology, and expected English proficiency level on entry. Each university offers these courses independently of others. Likewise, although the textbook, English for the Students of Nursing and Midwifery, has been published under the supervision of the Iranian Center for Studying and Compiling University Books (SAMT), the instructors in different medical sciences universities do not use their materials uniformly and in some departments, especially where the instructors are subject specialists, instructors either compile their own materials or select articles to adapt for their classes at their own discretion. As we saw above, these courses may either be conducted by EFL instructors or by subject-specific instructors. Clearly, some expertise must be brought to the scene to make the ESP teaching practice more consistent with meeting students’ needs.

The fourth question dealt with factors that should be considered in designing the syllabus for nursing and midwifery students. Similar to many other researchers’ findings (cf. Chantrupanth, 1993; Deutch, 2003; Nation, 2000) the findings revealed that there are many factors one should take into account including: (1) the learning needs of the students; (2) learners’ present knowledge and knowledge gaps; (3) the objectives of the course; (4) the resources available in terms of staff, materials, equipment, finance and time constraints; (5) teachers’ skills and knowledge of the specific area. If such factors are not considered, the design of the course may be unsuitable for the situation and the expected results may not be achieved.

Based on what was revealed by the study, the EAP-ESP course for nursing and midwifery students, similar to other subject-specific English courses in Iranian universities, is conducted without consultation or collaboration with the content departments, and without having assessed students’ learning needs – which is the indispensable first step in curriculum development for academic or specific academic purposes. The results of this study suggest that the goals of the course are unrealistic, and its provision inadequate to prepare the students to face the challenges and demands posed by their specialist departments, unless serious measures are taken to resolve some major problems revealed by this study.

# Appendix A

# Students’ Questionnaire

Dear Participants, The following questionnaire is part of a research project that investigates the needs of medical sciences students taking English as a required course.

# Background Information

1. Name and family name: (optional)   
2. Age years

Please tick $( \surd )$ the relevant choice for each question

3. Sex: (a) male (b) female   
4. Department in the Medical Sciences University (a) Nursing (b) Psychiatric nursing (c) Surgical nursing (d) Midwifery (e) Health (f) Pediatrics   
5. Have you passed the General English course? (a) Yes (b) No   
6. Have you enrolled for specialized English course? (a) Yes (b) No

The first section of the questionnaire aims to explore the opinions of the medical sciences students on their expressed needs in using the four macro English skills for their studies. Please tick $( \surd$ the relevant choice for each question.

# Listening skills

<html><body><table><tr><td>As a medical science student,. I need English for:</td><td>Not at all.</td><td>A little</td><td>To some extent</td><td>To a moderate extent</td><td>To a great extent</td><td>To a very great extent</td></tr><tr><td>1. listening to conversations on general topics.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. listening to lectures</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. listening to presentations in class</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4. listening to English mass media.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5. listening to instructions in real situations (hospitals)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6. listening to students, colleagues and patients</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# Speaking skills

<html><body><table><tr><td>As a medical science student, I need English for:</td><td>Not at all</td><td>A little</td><td>To some extent</td><td>To a moderate extent</td><td>To a great extent</td><td>To a very great extent</td></tr><tr><td>7. participating in academic discussions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8. speaking at seminars, meetings and presentations</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9. asking and answering questions in class.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10. asking and answering questions in seminars.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>11. talking with professionals in real situations</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12. talking with lecturers, students and patients</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# Reading skills

<html><body><table><tr><td>As a medical science student, I need to develop my reading skills for:</td><td>Not at all</td><td>A little</td><td>To some extent</td><td>To a moderate extent</td><td>To a great extent</td><td>To a very great extent</td></tr><tr><td>13. reading medical textbooks 14. reading articles in professional journals</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15. reading medical reports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>16. reading English newspapers and magazines 17. reading texts on the Internet</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# Writing skills

<html><body><table><tr><td>The medica As a medical science student, I need to develop my writing skills for:.</td><td>Not at all</td><td>A little</td><td>To some extent</td><td>To a moderate extent</td><td>To a great extent</td><td>To a very great extent</td></tr><tr><td>18. taking lecture notes</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>19. taking notes from textbooks</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>20. writing a paper for oral presentation</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>21. writing term papers</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

The second section aims to explore the opinions of the medical sciences students concerning their language demands, language needs, attitudes towards language instruction, length of the course as well as the content, syllabus, and methodology of the specialized English course. Please tick $( \surd$ the relevant choice for each question.

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Not at all A little To some To a moderate To a great To a very</td><td>extent</td><td>extent</td><td>extent</td><td>great extent</td></tr><tr><td>22. I feel satisfied with the number of students in my class</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>23. I feel satisfied with the topics included in the textbook</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>24. I feel satisfied with the methodology utilized in my class</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25. I feel satisfied with my teacher&#x27;s evaluation method</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>26. I feel satisfied with the present textbook.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>27. I feel satisfied with the amount of foreign culture taught in my class</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>28. I feel satisfied with the content of the textbook</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# Please tick $( \surd )$ the relevant choice for each question

29. I prefer to work and study (a) individually (b) in pairs (c) in small groups

30. The specialized English course should be offered in the (a) 2nd semester (b) 3rd semester (c) 4th semester (d) 3rd year (e) 4th year

31. How long should specialized English courses be offered to students of medical sciences? (a) one semester (b) two semesters (c) through out the four years of their studies.

32. How often do you like to study the specialized English course? (a) once a week (3 hours) (b) twice a week (1.5 hours) (c) three times a week (1 hour)

33. I prefer to be taught by (a) Native English instructors (b) Iranian English instructors (c) Subject specialist instructors

34. I prefer to master my English (a) before starting my specialized subject courses (b) at the same time that I am taking my specialized subject courses (c) after completing my specialized subject courses

35. It is important for me to learn my subject lessons (a) through Persian books and sources (b) through English books and sources (c) through Persian and English sources

# Appendix B

# Subject-Specific Instructors’ Questionnaire

Dear Participants,

The following questionnaire is part of a research project that investigates the needs of medical sciences students taking English as a required course. The first section of the questionnaire is designed to explore the opinions of the special subject instructors about the expressed language needs of medical students in using the four macro English skills for their academic studies. Please tick $( \surd )$ the relevant choice for each question.

# Listening skills

<html><body><table><tr><td>The medical sciences students need English for:</td><td>Not at all</td><td>A little</td><td>To some extent</td><td>To a moderate extent</td><td>To a great extent</td><td>To a very great extent</td></tr><tr><td>1. listening to conversations on general topics.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. listening to lectures</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. listening to presentations in class</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4. listening to English mass media</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5. listening to instructions in real situations (hospitals)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6. listening to students, colleagues and patients</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# Speaking skills

<html><body><table><tr><td>The medical sciences students need English for:</td><td>Not at all</td><td>A little</td><td>To some extent</td><td>To a moderate extent</td><td>To a great extent</td><td>To a very great extent</td></tr><tr><td>7. participating in academic discussions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8. speaking at seminars, meetings and presentations</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9. asking and answering questions in class</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10. asking and answering questions in seminars.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>11. talking with professionals in real situations</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12. talking with lecturers, students and patients</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Reading skills   

<html><body><table><tr><td>The medical sciences students need English for:</td><td>Not at all</td><td>A little</td><td>To some extent</td><td>To a moderate extent</td><td>To a great extent</td><td>To a very great extent</td></tr><tr><td>13. reading medical textbooks</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>14. reading articles in professional journals.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15. reading medical reports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>16. reading English newspapers and magazines</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>17. reading texts on the Internet</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18. reading clinical laboratory reports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>19. reading instructions for patient care</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>20. reading doctor&#x27;s prescriptions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# Writing skills

<html><body><table><tr><td>The medical sciences students need English for:</td><td>Not at all</td><td>A little</td><td>To some extent</td><td>To a moderate extent</td><td>To a great extent</td><td>To a very great extent</td></tr><tr><td>21. taking lecture notes</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>22. taking notes from textbooks</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>23. writing a paper for oral presentation</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>24. writing term papers</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25. writing articles for medical journals</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>26. writing medical reports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>27. writing case reports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>28. writing medical prescriptions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>29. writing instructions to patients</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# General study skills

<html><body><table><tr><td>The medical sciences students need English for:</td><td>Not at all</td><td>A little</td><td>To some extent</td><td>To a moderate extent</td><td>To a great extent</td><td>To a very great extent</td></tr><tr><td>30. learning common core vocabulary</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>31. learning semi-technical conversation</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>32. learning technical conversation</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>33. learning medical technology.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>34. learning new words in sentences, synonyms, and paraphrases</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>35. learning technical reading skills</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> of skimming and scanning.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>36. practicing how to use medical vocabulary in real settings and hospitals.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>37. attending Grammar Workshop&#x27; (remedial language practice)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>where common difficulties of students can be explained</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

The second section aims to explore the special subject instructors’ views in terms of what the medical sciences students lack after passing the specialized English course. ‘Lacks’ are reflected in special subject instructors’ assessment of their students’ language skills on the scale as described below. Please tick $( \surd$ the relevant choice for each question.

<html><body><table><tr><td>Not at all A</td><td>little extent</td><td>To some To a moderate To a great To a very extent</td><td>extent</td><td>great extent</td></tr><tr><td>38. I judge the medical sciences students&#x27; listening ability has been improved 39. I judge the medical sciences students&#x27; speaking ability has been improved</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>40. I judge the medical sciences students&#x27; writing ability has been improved</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>41. I judge the medical sciences students&#x27; reading ability has been improved</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>42. I judge the medical sciences students&#x27; communicative competence has been improved</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

The third section aims to explore the opinions of the special subject instructors, concerning the medical sciences students’ language demands, language needs, attitudes towards language instruction, length of the course as well as the content, syllabus, methodology of the specialized English course. Please tick $( \surd$ the relevant choice for each question

43. The medical students prefer to work and study

(a) individually (b) in pairs (c) in small groups

44. The specialized English course should be offered in the

(a) 2nd semester (b) 3rd semester (c) 4th semester (d) 3rd year (e) 4th year

45. How long should specialized English courses be offered to students of medical sciences?

(a) one semester   
(b) two semesters   
(c) through out the four years of their studies.

46. English should be taught by

(a) English teachers   
(b) Subject-specific instructors   
(c) Both English language teachers and subject-specific instructors

47. What do you expect English teachers who teach you English to know?

(a) general vocabulary and expressions   
(b) specialized medical vocabulary   
(c) both general vocabulary and expressions as well as specialized medical vocabulary

# References

Alavi, S., & Tahririan, M. H. (1996). EFL learners’ proficiency and their performance on GPE and ESP collocations. Indian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 22(2).   
Atai, M.R. (2000). ESP revisited: a reappraisal study of discipline-based EAP programs in Iran. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Esfahan, Esfahan, Iran.   
Atai, M. R. (2002). Iranian EAP programs in practice: a study of key methodological aspects. Sheikhbahaee ELT Journal, 1(2), 1e15.   
Chantrupanth, D. (1993). In designing a short course in ESP. Paper presented at the Annual SEAMEO Regional Language Center Seminar (28th, Singapore, April 19e21, 1993), (pp. 1e11). Retrieved December 18, 2006, from (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 367 189).   
Deutch, Y. (2003). Needs analysis for academic legal English courses in Israel: a model of setting priorities. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2, 125e146. www.elsevier.com. Accessed 18.12.06.   
Nation, P. (2000). Designing and improving a language course. English Teaching Forum, 38(4), 2e11.   
Sifakis, N. C. (2003). Applying the adult education framework to ESP curriculum development: an integrative model. English for Specific Purposes, 22, 195e211.   
Tahririan, M. H. (1987). ESP Yes, But for What Learners? Esfahan: IAPE. 3.   
Tahririan, M. H. (1990). A summative evaluation of teaching English in Iranian universities. Research Bulletin of Esfahan University, 6(2). Esfahan.

Mrs. G. Mazdayasna is an assistant professor of Applied Linguistics at Yazd University, Iran. Her main interest is teaching English for academic purposes and has published a few articles in national and international journals in this relation.

M.H. Tahriria is professor of applied linguistics at Sheikhbahaee University, Baharestan,Iran. He has published articles in foreign/second language teaching and ESP, and is the corresponding author of this article: he can be reached at: Dept. of English, Sheikhbahaee University, Baharestan, Isfahan, Iran 8179735296.