# Commodification and marketisation of genetic testing through online direct-to-consumer platforms in Hong Kong

Olga Zayts The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

# Zhengpeng Luo

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

# Abstract

In this article we examine commodification and marketisation of genetic testing by companies offering direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing to the general public through online platforms in Hong Kong. Recently, offers of genetic testing have expanded from scientific and clinical genetic settings to general medicine (e.g. in hereditary cancer) and non-medical domains (e.g. aptitude tests). The wider availability of tests, however, has raised concerns about the currently available scientifically proven utility of these tests. Using theme-oriented discourse analysis, we analyse the specific discursive modalities through which the DTC companies in Hong Kong make inflated claims about the value of genetic tests to pursue their marketing agenda. We show that in this way the companies are selling ‘more’ than specific products to consumers: they are selling ‘hope’ and ‘increased autonomy’, that is, an opportunity to buy commodities online that promise consumers control of their health and wellbeing.

# Keywords

Commodification, direct-to-consumer genetic testing, discourse analysis, empowerment discourse, genetic determinism, genetic testing, marketisation, personalisation, websites

# Introduction

This article takes a discourse analytic perspective to explore the processes of marketisation and commodification of genetic testing by commercial companies that provide direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing in Hong Kong. In critical discourse studies, the concepts of commodification and marketisation are often used interchangeably: commodification refers to the process of something that has not previously been a commodity (e.g. certain objects, projects and ideas) becoming a ‘sellable’ item offered to consumers; and marketisation, or the use of market-based approaches for the distribution of goods, is often seen as the cause of commodification (see e.g. Fairclough, 1992, 1993; Featherstone, 1991). DTC genetic tests refer to tests that are sold to the public directly foregoing specialist medical involvement (Hogarth et al., 2008).

The approval of some of the genetic tests offered by the US-based DTC company 23andMe by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2015 arguably marks the beginning of a new era in the provision of this kind of service. Genetic science and knowledge have been gradually spreading beyond the purely scientific and medical domains to people’s everyday lives. From a more traditional application in healthcare for screening and diagnosing single gene and chromosomal disorders (e.g. Huntington’s disease, Down’s syndrome), genetic testing has expanded to more common conditions (e.g. diabetes, cancer) and has also been commodified for various non-health-related purposes (e.g. ancestry tests, tests for traits such as inborn talents and athletic ability) (Critchley et al., 2015; Lea et al., 2011; Su et al., 2011). This commodification of genetic testing is reflected in the increasing affordability and availability of both health- and non-healthrelated genetic tests for purchase online.

The availability of genetic testing to a large group of the general public can be seen on the one hand as a positive development in the timely prevention and diagnosis of various diseases. Genetic and other healthcare professionals, on the other hand, have raised concerns with regard to the currently available scientific evidence behind these tests (Hogarth et al., 2008; Roberts and Ostergren, 2013). As discussed in previous research, and demonstrated in this article, these concerns at least partly relate to the marketisation practices adopted by DTC companies. More specifically, previous research has shown how companies draw on certain discourses (e.g. ‘promissory discourses’ (Arribas-Ayllon et al., 2011) of early detection and prevention of diseases) to produce preferred interpretations of their marketing materials by the public, all in pursuit of their for-profit marketing agenda. Among the scientific community, it is widely acknowledged that the scientific evidence for most associations between one’s genetic makeup, health and common diseases is still insufficient. The results that current DTC genetic tests are able to provide are thus probabilistic rather than definitive in nature (Bloss et al., 2010). These results can only lead to modest or minimal changes in disease risk management (Goldsmith et al., 2012; Janssens et al., 2008), therefore the clinical validity and utility of these tests are rather limited (Agurs-Collins et al., 2015; Wessel et al., 2016). Unsurprisingly, in marketing their tests, however, the DTC companies foreground the benefits of the tests, rather than their limitations. They draw on information and advertising materials that are not ‘fully informative’ (Goldsmith et al., 2012: 815) and that lack ‘objectivity and scientific verifiability’ (Liu and Pearson, 2008: 133; see also Lachance et al., 2010; Singleton et al., 2012).

Studies that have examined the marketing practices of DTC companies are still scarce, and the majority of them come from the public health literature and present general, often quantitative, accounts of information provision by marketers of genetic tests. Discourse-oriented studies are even fewer (e.g. Arribas-Ayllon et al., 2011), which is particularly surprising, considering that discourse plays such a central role in commodification and marketisation processes. This article aims to contribute to this paucity of research by examining marketisation and commodification of genetic testing as discursive practices, particularly how DTC companies use discourse ‘as a vehicle for selling goods’ (Fairclough, 1993: 141), that is genetic tests, to its potential clients.

As a specific context for analysis, we have chosen the websites of two DTC companies in Hong Kong. Hong Kong represents a particularly interesting context for closer scrutiny for a number of reasons. First, in comparison to other (Western) countries where DTC testing has been establishing itself in the last decade, it is still in its infancy in Hong Kong. Consequently, to our knowledge, there have been no discourse studies of DTC genetic testing in Hong Kong, or in Asia more broadly. As an emerging type of service in the region, DTC genetic testing is not controlled by any regulatory bodies, and in that sense DTC companies enjoy unreserved freedom in how they choose to market their products. From a discourse analytic perspective, this context represents an interesting hybridity of discourses, discursive practices and genres as DTC companies find ways of establishing themselves in the evolving new market.

In what follows, we first give a brief overview of relevant discourse studies on advertising discourse, including studies of DTC companies’ marketing strategies that we draw on in this article. We then provide an overview of our data and method. The data analysis focuses on the complex intersections between different discourses and discursive practices such as medical, educational, marketing, advertising and legal that DTC companies adopt in pursuit of their promotional and marketing objectives. In the ‘Discussion and conclusion’ section, we discuss the role that discourse plays in establishing new commodity markets in Hong Kong (and China). We suggest that marketisation and commodification processes in health- and wellbeing-related contexts are far more consequential than in other contexts as consumers are sold promises of ‘hope and increased autonomy’ in managing and controlling their health.

# Background

As mentioned in the ‘Introduction’, there is a paucity of discourse-oriented research on marketisation and commodification of DTC genetic testing. Since our focus is on how DTC companies market their services to potential consumers, more general (mainly genre) literature on advertising discourse is relevant to our study, particularly the discussions related to discourse and rhetorical strategies that companies employ to market and sell their various products. Previous research has indicated that in promoting their goods, companies typically pursue two main communicative aims: informational and promotional (e.g. Bhatia, 2005; Labrador et al., 2014). The promotional agenda typically focuses on the positive characteristics of a product to convince potential customers to buy it (Bhatia, 2005; Labrador et al., 2014). Some authors make stronger claims that the two agendas are part of a continuum ranging from ‘informing’ to ‘manipulating’ (rather than ‘promoting’ goods to) customers (e.g. Hatim, 1990). Crook (2004) describes advertising as a form of covert communication, and Fuertes-Olivera et al. (2001) maintain that advertising ‘convey[s] a persuasive message under an informative mask’ (p. 1291).

Among the common strategies that companies employ to market their products are establishing credentials, endorsement or testimonials, and product differentiation (Bhatia, 2005). These three strategies feature very prominently on the DTC companies’ websites (the second strategy, endorsement or testimonials, is discussed at length in Luo et al., forthcoming). Much research has been dedicated to specific promotional strategies ranging from certain lexico-grammatical forms to discourse and rhetorical strategies to various syntactic resources. In particular, features typical of colloquial style, such as inclusive language use, are employed to establish solidarity with potential customers. Information expressions, emotive language and catchphrases are other strategies contributing to that effect (Labrador et al., 2014). Fuertes-Olivera et al. (2001) provide a detailed taxonomy of the most common discourse strategies used for product promotion, which includes, among others, foregrounding strategies (e.g. alliteration, repetition and unpredictable spelling), preference for certain sentence structures (e.g. rhetorical questions and implicit comparisons), figurative language (e.g. metaphors, metonymy) and imitation of informal conversations. Notably, while genre and discourse studies represent different approaches to discourse that draw on different jargon, essentially there is an overlap in the strategies that they identify serving promotional agenda.

With regard to specific marketing strategies of DTC genetic/genomic testing companies, two previous studies are particularly relevant. Arribas-Ayllon et al. (2011) use theme-oriented discourse analysis to examine three DTC companies’ websites, focusing on how the companies draw on personalisation discourse to convince consumers of the ‘wellbeing, disease prevention and personal empowerment’ (p. 53) values that taking a genetic test can allegedly provide. The authors identify three distinct registers of personalisation designed to deflect concerns about the probabilistic nature of genetic testing and the limitations of the current state of genetic knowledge: (1) a paternalistic register that refers to medical mediation, that is, control of genetic information and interpretation of genetic results by a medical professional; (2) a translational register that emphasises direct translation of genetic technology to consumers, with laboratory scientists as the mediators between consumers and genetic information; and (3) a democratic register characterised by unmediated access to genetic information, with strong emphasis on consumer autonomy, information sharing and democratic forms of consumer-led engagement. The authors discuss the discourse of empowerment as a strategy encouraging consumers to take control of their health by getting access to their genetic information. They also identify some discourse and rhetorical strategies that DTC companies employ, including contrast device, conceptual metaphors, modalisation and extreme case formulations. In another related study of DTC genetic testing companies’ websites and clients’ online testimonials that focused on identity, Nordgren and Juengst (2009) found that companies appealed to a rhetoric of genetic essentialism which carries ‘a risk of distortion of the subjective experience of identity due to unreliable uninformative test results, inadequate or misleading explanation, and the fact that the science is still too weak to yield meaningful results’ (p. 157). We selectively draw on these studies in our data analysis.

# Data and method

The data that we examine in this article come from a large-scale discourse analytic study of the emerging context of DTC genetic testing in Hong Kong and China more broadly. The study has been approved by the relevant Ethics Committee of the authors’ institution. The data that we focus on are the websites of two DTC companies in Hong Kong (anonymised as Company 1 and Company 2). Prior to conducting this research, the authors approached both companies and invited them to participate in the project. Both companies expressed keen interest and consented to the project.

Company 1 is led by a specialist medical doctor in Hong Kong. It provides a broad range of genetic tests, including single gene and chromosomal and common complex disorders, and non-medically indicated tests (e.g. child aptitude tests, paternity and family relationship tests). All tests are marketed directly to consumers through the company’s website. However, only the DNA relationship test is available for direct purchase online; other types of tests have to be ordered through the medical staff of the company. The prices of the tests range from HKD2800 to HKD180,000 (from approximately $\mathrm { U S } \$ 360$ to US\$23,225). The company employs a genetic counsellor to provide counselling support to the company’s clients pre- and post-testing if necessary.1

Company 2, led by a Hong Kong team of marketing (non-medical) professionals, offers genetic tests tailored to a specific demographic group: the Han Chinese population in Hong Kong and Mainland China.2 The company offers four types of medically and non-medically indicated genetic tests, namely, hereditary disease DNA screening, hereditary cancer risk assessment, personalised medication DNA testing, and weight control and fitness DNA testing. All tests are also marketed directly to consumers on the company’s website. However, only hereditary cancer risk assessment requires physician mediation; the other three types of tests can be directly ordered online. The prices range from HKD3000 to HKD4250 (from approximately $\mathrm { U S } \$ 380$ to US\$548). No counselling services are offered to the clients.

All web pages with unique URLs within the two companies’ websites were collected and coded using the qualitative analysis software Atlas.ti. The total number of pages analysed in this article is 48 (20 for Company 1 and 28 for Company 2).

We have employed theme-oriented discourse analysis (Roberts and Sarangi, 2005), which led us to identify four ‘focal themes’, the foci of our analysis presented in the following (‘Education’, ‘Marketing and Promotion’, ‘Product Differentiation’ and ‘Avoiding Liabilities’). We have used these focal themes to identify discourse samples for the in-depth analysis and to examine ‘analytic themes’ of specific discourse and rhetorical devices that DTC companies employ on their websites for marketing and promotional purposes. Since our data comprise web pages that include both textual and visual components, we have also paid attention to the multimodal aspect of communication (Kress and Van Leeuwen, 2001). Following previous research that has examined DTC companies’ websites (Arribas-Ayllon et al., 2011), we also draw on Fairclough’s (2003) concept of ‘format’ that brings together the intertextual, semiotic and rhetorical resources in the analysis of websites. This concept proves particularly useful in the analysis of how these various resources interact on the analysed websites.

# Analysis

The analysis presented in this section focuses on a range of discourse and rhetorical strategies that the DTC companies employ on their websites to manage their main (at times competing) agendas, namely (1) educating potential consumers about genetic tests while simultaneously pursuing marketing and promotional agendas, and (2) differentiating themselves from other (competing) DTC companies in the market while also avoiding legal liability for misrepresentation of information.

# Educating potential consumers about genetic tests while pursuing marketing and promotional agendas

Genetic tests are unique consumer products that involve complex scientific information and require substantial genetic knowledge on the part of potential buyers for these tests to be consumed properly (Liu and Pearson, 2008). Previous studies have looked at the demographic characteristics of consumers who buy genetic tests online. They have shown that ‘the average consumer is white, female, and middle aged, with relatively high levels of education and income’ (Burton, 2015: 139). They have also shown that these consumers evaluate themselves as ‘genetically literate’ and buy tests to ‘make changes in risky health habits’ (McBride et al., 2010: 441). On the one hand, the efforts by the DTC companies at educating their consumers further about genetic tests may lead to an even better understanding of the benefits of these tests, potentially boosting the sales of these products. On the other hand, an enhanced understanding of genetic tests may also lead to a better understanding of the limitations of these tests, the latter potentially threatening the marketing agenda of the DTC companies. Indeed, as previous studies have shown (e.g. Gray et al., 2009) presenting more balanced information about the benefits as well as the limitations of genetic tests decreases participants’ intention to purchase them. As our analysis reveals, caught between these two competing goals, the companies may selectively draw on scientifically unsubstantiated genetic information to construct preferred meanings about genetic tests in order to realise their marketing and promotional agendas.

In their efforts to educate potential consumers about genetic tests, both companies adopt an interplay of scientific and lay discourses in order to minimise the complexity of provided genetic information. For example, the websites of both companies include glossary-type pages with explanations of basic genetic concepts. The main page of Company 1 entitled ‘My Genes’ presents the following information:

Example 1

Our DNA is the blueprint of our body – it encodes the build-up of our body, our differences in health and diseases, talents, weaknesses, as well as reactions to food and drugs.

This short introduction to essential genetic concepts is embedded in a scientific discourse featuring scientific jargon (e.g. ‘encodes’, ‘build up’, ‘reactions’), which contributes to the impression of ‘scientific rigor’ and credibility of provided information (Murray et al., 2010: 459). The extract contains a ‘blueprint’ metaphor that is used to explain what DNA is and its relation to human traits and health conditions (‘health and diseases’, ‘talents’ and ‘weaknesses’). While conceptual metaphors typically facilitate understanding of complex information (in this case, the mechanisms behind DNA), the ‘blueprint’ metaphor here reflects a form of ‘genetic determinism’, that is, the belief that all human traits and health conditions are entirely determined by individuals’ genetic makeup (Liu and Pearson, 2008: 132). This essentialist understanding is not an accurate and objective representation of the complex interactions among multiple genetic and environmental factors in the development of most common diseases (Critchley et al., 2015), and it has been strongly criticised in genetic and social sciences literature (Nordgren and Juengst, 2009). Research in these fields has indicated that most common complex diseases are not caused by any particular gene in a clear-cut fashion (Geransar and Einsiedel, 2008; Lea et al., 2011). Rather, most common diseases are influenced by complex interactions among multiple genetic and environmental factors, with each single one of them only leading to minor alterations in risk (Critchley et al., 2015; Janssens et al., 2008). All in all, the complex interactions between genetic and environmental causes in the cases of most common diseases are still poorly understood, and the clinical validity and utility of DTC genetic tests are unclear (American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, 2016; Janssens et al., 2015; Kolor et al., 2009; Wessel et al., 2016). In the context of DTC promotion, however, genetic determinism may be employed to construct preferred meanings about genetic tests to reflect the marketing agenda of DTC companies. That is, by drawing on the inaccurate belief about the importance of genetic makeup for one’s health and wellbeing, the companies may seek to boost the sales of genetic tests that provide such genetic information.

The explanation of basic genetic concepts found on the page ‘About DNA’ of Company 2, in contrast, starts with the use of more lay language:

Example 2

What is DNA? – DNA carries your genetic code;

What is a chromosome? – DNA is packaged into chromosomes;

What is a Gene? – Chromosomes carry genes.

The three question–answer pairs ‘reproduce an imaginary dialogue’ (Arribas-Ayllon et al., 2011: 57) between the company and its potential customers, potentially enhancing the communicative outcome of the company’s educational effort. The colloquial metaphors ‘carry’ and ‘package’ are also aimed at facilitating the understanding of the complex structural relationship between the concepts of DNA, chromosome and gene. As we delve further into the two websites, scientific jargon becomes more prominent:

Example 3

A simple test with a lifetime of benefits.

Hidden in the 3 billion base pairs of human DNA is the code to your unique physical traits, health, disease risk and response to the world around you. Company 2’s genetic testing can accurately decode your genes, giving you a new and better understanding of yourself. This can help you to act quickly to treat a potentially critical illness, safeguard your health and take control of your own life like never before.

The extract starts with a statement explaining the role of DNA in determining people’s physical traits and state of health. This explanation, similar to Example 1, draws on scientific jargon that contributes to the statement’s scientific credibility. Also adding to the impression of the credibility of tests is the reference to their accuracy. Notably, the description focuses on the benefits of genetic testing (e.g. ‘lifetime of benefits’, ‘a new and better understanding of yourself’) and refrains from any mention of its possible limitations. The ‘dialogue’ with the potential consumers is established through personalisation of messages (e.g. ‘your unique physical traits’, ‘the world around you’ and ‘your genes’) and the discourse of empowerment that equates taking the test with taking charge of one’s life and gaining a ‘new and better understanding of [one]self’. There is an implicit dichotomy created between the old you (you before taking the test) and the new you (you after taking the test). That dichotomy is strongly geared towards highlighting the benefits that taking genetic tests brings. In terms of the information structuring, the company’s mixed agendas are also evident in that the educational effort in the first statement about human DNA is immediately followed by promotional statements about the benefits of genetic tests.

Notably, both Company 1 and Company 2 actively utilise the discourse of empowerment on their websites, equating acquisition of genetic information through genetic testing with active management of personal health. For example, Company 2’s homepage features a caption: ‘[t]ake control of your health with (Company 2)’ above a sliding image advertising ‘personalised medication DNA test’. The imperative structure contributes to the sense of power and agency that may persuade potential consumers into believing that once they obtain personal genetic information they will be able to control their own health. Similarly, Company 1 claims that ‘with human genetic knowledge, we can plan our lives and act not by chances but choices’. The process verbs ‘plan’ and ‘act’ frame potential consumers as agents who proactively manage their health. The alliteration ‘not by chances but choices’ contrasts two approaches to managing one’s health: an old approach based on taking chances and a new approach based on making choices. The word ‘choices’ also presupposes the clients’ autonomy in making decisions. In the context of DTC promotion, these choices obviously include taking genetic tests.

The juxtaposition of educational and promotional goals becomes even more prominent in how the two companies discuss the benefits of genetic tests. Highlighting the benefits of testing is arguably the most salient promotional strategy; however, as our analysis shows, these statements are fraught with extravagant claims about the clinical validity and the utility of genetic tests:

Example 4 (Company 1)

We are the first generation in human history who can make use of our own DNA information to improve our health. By knowing in advance our own health risks, the personalised medical prevention of disease can be achieved. Successful prevention and timely detection of severe diseases like cancer can be a reachable goal nowadays.

There are a number of strategies that Company 1 employs in this short example to align itself with its potential consumers. First, the in-group identity markers ‘we’ and ‘our’ create ‘a sense of solidarity’ (Fuertes-Olivera et al., 2001: 1298) between Company 1 and its customers. ‘Personalised medical prevention’ makes the services more appealing to the customers. The attribute ‘the first generation in human history’ evokes a sense of superiority and being in a privileged position of being able to prevent health risks and severe diseases based on the information obtained from genetic testing. The scientific evidence of this strong claim by Company 1 is, however, highly dubious. Even when a genetic test can predict a risk of a specific disease, it remains uncertain whether and when the disease will develop in the future. In other words, predictive genetic tests provide a probability, rather than a definitive disease risk. Conflating the informational nature of genetic tests with precise medical diagnoses and ‘successful prevention of severe diseases’ allows Company 1 to boost the value of genetic testing that they provide at the expense of the accuracy of the information. Contributing to that effect of the value of genetic testing in disease diagnosis and prevention is the repetition of the idea that the diagnosis and prevention of life-threatening diseases like cancer ‘can be achieved’ and ‘can be a reachable goal’.

Similar claims about the benefits of genetic tests are also found on Company 2’s website:

Example 5

[Company 2]’s Hereditary Cancer Risk Assessment identifies genetic variations that are linked to a higher risk of certain cancers. If your [Company 2] results show that you have any of these variations, your doctor will discuss this with you and may recommend regular monitoring to give you the best chance of early detection.

As discussed earlier, one of the strategies that Company 2 employs is personalisation of messages (e.g. ‘your . . . results’, ‘if … you have any of these variations’ and ‘your doctor’) aimed at establishing a ‘dialogue’ with potential consumers, thereby enhancing the communicative effect of the message. The assertion about the association between genetic variations and the risk of cancer is established in a statement that uses the simple present tense which conveys the objectivity of that statement (‘genetic variations that are linked to . . .’). This statement, however, builds on the same genetic determinism previously discussed. The claimed association lacks scientific grounding as non-genetic factors may potentially contribute to the development of cancers.

As Examples 1–5 demonstrate, even when potential consumers are educated and ‘genetically literate’, the complexity of information about genetics and genetic tests calls for educational efforts on the part of DTC companies. The educational agenda, however, interferes with the marketing and promotional aims of these companies. This tension between the two agendas is reflected in the ways in which the two companies strategically foreground the medical benefits of genetic testing (and background their limitations) to construct preferred meanings and interpretations for their potential customers.

As part of the companies’ marketing and promotional agendas, they also need to ensure that they are competitive in the market against other companies that offer similar tests. While there are no precise statistics for the number of DTC genetic testing companies in the world, the International Society of Genetic Genealogy (2016) estimates the number at around 50 companies as of 2016. Most of these companies are based in the

United States, the United Kingdom and Europe, with only around five companies operating in Hong Kong. However small, there is still market competition, and one can expect that the DTC market will be expanding in the future. In what follows, we discuss how the companies discursively manage the agendas of representing themselves as the best service providers while also ensuring that their claims about genetic tests do not lead to legal liability.

# Differentiating oneself and one’s product(s) from other (competing) DTC companies in the market while also preventing legal liability for misrepresentation of information

There are a number of common strategies that both Company 1 and Company 2 employ to market their services. Among these strategies are claims of client-centred service delivery, including customising specific tests to individual client’s needs and a client’s ‘preferred budget’ (Company 2 website), and validation of offered services through reference to external authorities (e.g. ‘the most advanced testing technologies’ in the USA and Germany in the case of Company 1, and accreditation of its genetic laboratory by internationally recognised accreditation bodies in the case of Company 2).

There are also some distinct strategies of how the two companies position themselves in relation to other competitors on the market. More specifically, Company 1 positions itself as a provider of medical services. The information that customers obtain through genetic services is thus seen as a resource for subsequent medical actions. Example 6 illustrates this point:

Example 6

The Start of the [Company 1] Journey.

Company 1 is the pioneer Personal Genetic Services provider up to medical standards in Hong Kong. Our genetic services are specially developed with a medical and health perspective – we are devoted from Day 1 to put the genetic fate of you and your loved ones back in your own control.

This description draws on the conceptual metaphor of a ‘journey’ to emphasise the medical foundation of the company from its inception (Day 1) through the company’s development. The ‘journey’ metaphor is also implicitly evoked in the company’s claim that through testing, the company would be able to ‘put the genetic fate’ of its customers ‘back in … [their] own control’. This creates an interesting dichotomy between relying on one’s ‘fate’, something that is beyond one’s control and predetermined, to being in ‘control’ of one’s health. This is similar to the dichotomy that we discussed in the previous section between the pre-test ‘old self’ and the post-test ‘new self’, an inactive versus an active agent of one’s life. The attribute ‘medical’ is repeated twice in this short extract (‘medical standards’ and ‘medical perspective’), enhancing the idea of the ‘medical endorsement’ (Arribas-Ayllon et al., 2011: 62) of the services that the company provides. As ArribasAyllon et al. (2011) maintain, the ‘medical endorsement implies that testing equates with diagnosis’ (p. 62). This creates a sense of the medical validity and utility of the tests. Since there is currently not sufficient evidence to conclude that genetic testing is useful in measuring genetic risks for common complex diseases (Janssens et al., 2008), the value of genetic tests offered commercially is thus informational rather than medical. As these limitations of genetic testing do not support the marketing agenda of Company 1, rather than disclosing this information, the company foregrounds potential medical benefits of testing. This implies that these tests are diagnostic and prognostic. Implying the medical benefits of testing also serves to enhance the claims of personalisation. Notable also in this short example are the company’s claims about being the ‘pioneer’ in the area of personal genetic services. This statement implies that the company is venturing into new and more advanced areas of genetic testing and highlights its leading position on the market. Such selfpromotional claims are typical of the genre of corporate advertising (Fairclough, 1992).

Company 2’s strategy to stand out from its competitors is to localise its services to the Han Chinese population:

Example 7

[Company 2]’s genetic test panel is unique.

Our scientific team has worked hard to ensure that we test for genetic variants which are specific to people of HAN-Chinese descent, and therefore our results are very accurate and comprehensive to anyone of Chinese origin. This ensures you get the most benefits and values out of taking a genetic test by [Company 2].

The title of this section emphasises the ‘uniqueness’ of the tests that the company provides that specifically target the Han Chinese population. The ‘we’ (Company 2) versus ‘them’ (people of Han Chinese descent) dichotomy sets the contrast between an expert scientific team and lay consumers. This dichotomy also highlights that the scientific team has some knowledge or services at their disposal that lay people do not have immediate access to but may receive through Company 2. The ‘uniqueness’ of the provided services is also implied in the statement that the scientific team ‘has worked hard’ to develop the tests. The intensifier ‘very’ used alongside evaluative attributes ‘accurate’ and ‘comprehensive’ conveys the objectivity and validity of the tests. The statement ‘our results are very accurate and comprehensive to anyone of Chinese origin’ is particularly interesting for closer scrutiny. Once again, this statement makes a bold assertion that does not reflect the complex distribution of possible genetic variants among members of specific ethnic groups. By localising their services to the majority of the population in Hong Kong, the company seeks to boost the appeal of the services that they provide. Foregrounding ethnic backgrounds of tested individuals, however, has another potentially dangerous and legally and morally complex side to it that Company 2’s promotional claims do not address. In particular, there is a risk of genetic discrimination and stigmatisation if one’s genetic results show that he or she is at increased risk of developing a genetic condition due to his or her ethic background (Nordgren and Juengst, 2009).

Deliberate misrepresentation or withholding of information about limitations of genetic testing carries the potential risk of litigation. Legal regulation of genetic testing, however, is still a grey area, not only in Hong Kong but also in other countries where genetic testing is more established. According to the National Human Genome Research Institute (2016) in the

USA, genetic tests ‘go to market without any independent analysis to verify the claims of the seller’. Rafiq et al. (2015) have conducted a systematic review of position statements, guidelines and recommendations on the responsible provision of DTC genetic tests produced by professional organisations in 10 European countries. Their results have shown a similar lack of regulation of DTC organisations in European countries, and that the legislation on DTC genetic testing is largely fragmented and widely variable across different countries. They have also noted that regulations about the safety and quality of DTC genetic tests are still lacking. Despite the lack of formal legal regulations, various professional associations across the world (e.g. American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, 2016; Australian Government National Health and Medical Research Council, 2014) have published statements and guidelines that seek to establish principles for the provision of genetic testing services directly to consumers. These organisations recommend that companies provide scientific evidence about the clinical validity and utility of genetic tests; disclose potential benefits, risks and limitations of undertaking genetic testing; use Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-certified laboratories; involve health professionals in the testing process; and provide genetic counselling to their clients (Lachance et al., 2010).

Both Company 1 and Company 2 include the risks and the limitations of genetic testing on their websites. This information, however, is backgrounded in lengthy descriptions of the ‘Terms and Conditions’ regarding the services that these companies provide, and these descriptions are written in scientific jargon that may not be immediately accessible to lay consumers. Moreover, the ‘Terms and Conditions’ links are listed at the very bottom of the home pages of both companies; accessing them requires scrolling down the page, alongside other information such as ‘Contact’, ‘Privacy Policy’ and ‘Disclaimer’ that is presented as secondary to the information about the actual genetic tests. The presentation of this information is also obscured a by smaller font and less contrast between font colouration and the header background colour choice. The information that the two companies include is essentially the same:

Example 8 (Company 1)

Genetic research is not comprehensive. While we measure many hundreds of thousands of data points from your DNA, only a small percentage of them are known to be related to human traits or health conditions …. Because interpretations provided in our service rely on these published studies, some interpretations may not apply to you. Future scientific research may change the interpretation of your DNA. In the future, the scientific community may show previous research to be incomplete or inaccurate.

(Company 2)

Genetic research is not comprehensive. Because interpretations provided in our service rely on these published studies, some interpretations may not apply to you. Future scientific research may change the interpretation of your DNA. In the future, the scientific community may show previous research to be incomplete or inaccurate.

While there is a lot to be said about Example 8, we focus here on the discrepancies between the statements included in both these examples and the statements that the company provides on other, more accessible pages that we have analysed in the previous examples. Of particular interest to us are the company’s claims about the accuracy versus inaccuracy and comprehensibility versus incomprehensibility of the tests. In the statement in Example 3, Company 2 claims that ‘[Company 2]’s genetic testing can accurately decode your genes, giving you a new and better understanding of yourself’; and in Example 7, the company states that ‘… our results are very accurate and comprehensive to anyone of Chinese origin’. These statements are clearly contradictory to the disclaimers that both companies provide in their Terms and Conditions. In Example 8, Company 1 delineates the applicability of the information obtained from the genetic tests to ‘only a small percentage’ of genes that are actually relevant to human traits and health conditions. This is in stark contrast to the genetic deterministic approach that we have highlighted, for instance in Example 1. Both companies also attempt to delegate the responsibility for inaccurate or inapplicable research to ‘published studies’. The statement that ‘future scientific research may change the interpretation of your DNA’ implies that currently the interpretation of DNA may be inaccurate. This possible inaccuracy and incompleteness is explicitly acknowledged in the next sentence. While these disclaimers can be driven by a responsibility to acknowledge the limitations of the current technologies and the state of knowledge, a more likely motivation appears to be a desire to protect the companies from possible liability for providing inaccurate and misleading information, given that this information is backgrounded on the companies’ websites.

The last example that we examine in this article concerns the disclaimer that both companies make about the utility of genetic tests that they provide. This information is the same, word-for-word, on both websites:

Example 9

You understand that information you learn from [company’s name] is not designed to independently diagnose, prevent, or treat any condition or disease or to ascertain the state of your health in the absence of medical and clinical information. You understand that [company]’s services are intended for research, informational, and educational purposes only.

This example is in stark contrast to Company 1’s assertion that we have discussed in Example 4. As we have noted, in Example 4 the company conflated the informational and predictive nature of genetic tests in order to boost the value of genetic testing. In Example 9, the companies make reservations about the clinical validity and utility of their genetic tests. They delimit the applicability of tests to ‘research, informational and educational purposes only’ and explicitly state that the tests are not to be used for any medicinal purposes. While this disclaimer about limited utility and validity of tests can be read as an example of responsible behaviour, the disjuncture between this disclaimer and the claims that both companies foreground on the main pages of their websites suggests that this is instead a way to avoid possible liability.

# Discussion and conclusion

We started this article with the idea of genetic testing becoming a new ‘item’ in the commodity market. No longer seen as a purely medically indicated testing for the diagnosis and management of rare genetic conditions, it is being increasingly used in cases of common complex conditions (e.g. diabetes, cancer), as well as in other non-medical domains (e.g. paternity tests, aptitude tests). While the tests have become less expensive and more readily available through online DTC providers, they are typically not covered by average insurance policies, and – as is the case with other ‘new commodities’ (see e.g. Featherstone, 1991) – are generally only available to a select group of more affluent consumers of a certain (higher) social status (e.g. Agurs-Collins et al., 2015; Kolor et al., 2012).

As we have noted, while in other countries DTC testing has been around for the last decade, in Hong Kong (and China) it constitutes a new market in which practices of DTC genetic testing are taking shape. The aim of this article was to look at the discursive modalities through which DTC companies make claims about the value of the products that they sell. In our analysis we have explored four ‘focal themes’ on the DTC companies’ websites that relate to communicative agendas that the DTC companies pursue. These agendas are to educate potential customers, to promote and market genetic tests, to be competitive on the market among other DTC companies and to avoid potential liabilities. We have noted how in pursuing these agendas the companies draw on different genres (educational, promotional, medical, advertising and legal) and a range of discourse and rhetorical strategies. This newly emerging form of a web-based interdiscursivity can be described using Fairclough’s concept of ‘format’. Some of the strategies that characterise this format are derived from the existing genres, for example advertising, and have been described in previous research, whereas other strategies are specific to this newly emerging format of personal genomics.

Among the common strategies that we identified on the websites of the companies is the use of lay language alongside the complex scientific and medical language to minimise the complexity of provided genetic information. Medical language serves the impression of scientific and medical credibility of genetic tests. Making medical information more accessible, however, may also result in oversimplification of scientific and medical processes. We have shown that the DTC companies selectively foreground and background certain information and draw on common misunderstandings about human genetics to their benefit. For example, companies actively draw on genetic determinism to highlight the benefits of genetic tests they provide.

The companies also employ what Fairclough (1993: 141) refers to as ‘synthetic personalisation’, that is, ‘the simulation in institutional setting of the person-to-person communication of ordinary conversation … the manipulation of interpersonal meaning for strategic, instrumental effect’. The personalisation is achieved through question–answer sequences creating the effect of a dialogue with potential consumers about genetic science and genetic testing, pronominal use and discourse of empowerment. The empowerment discourse draws on the contrast between a pre-test ‘old you’ and a post-test ‘new you’, with the ‘new you’ discourse constructing clients as active agents who are in charge of their own health, empowered by the genetic information obtained through DTC genetic testing.

We have also discussed the companies’ marketing pursuit of differentiating their products from competitors’ products on the market. Some of the strategies, such as client-centredness, claims of personalisation of services to specific clients’ needs and reference to external (established and recognised) authorities, are common between the two companies. Other strategies, such as framing their services as medical services (in the case of Company 1) or localisation to a majority ethnic group in the region (in the case of Company 2), distinguish the companies from each other. We have discussed that unsubstantiated marketing strategies by DTC companies may carry a risk of litigation. Disclaimers that directly contradict the main claims by the companies with regard to their products can be found on both companies’ websites. In both cases, however, they are backgrounded in hyperlinked, secondary pages. The location of such information suggests that it is not intended to be easily accessible to clients.

With the new technologies entering the consumers’ market, a question for discourse analysts to ask is what role discourse plays in this process. Our analysis suggests that marketisation and commodification of health- and wellbeing-related goods is far more consequential than is the case with other non-health-related commodities. In a traditional clinical setting, consent to genetic testing means that the clients have been given sufficient information and have taken an informed decision. Clients typically get access to genetic professionals, including genetic counsellors. With online provision of genetic services, customers are dealing with these companies directly, foregoing specialist medical attention. The DTC companies are selling more than a product to its customers. They are promising the customers something affirmative, such as hope and increased autonomy in managing and improving their future health. This ‘promissory discourse’ is central to the establishment of these new markets.

# Declaration of conflicting interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.

# Funding

The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.

# Notes

1. Genetic counselling is an encounter that typically involves a genetic professional (e.g. a counsellor, a clinical geneticist or a genetic nurse) and clients who discuss diagnostic and clinical aspects of a genetic condition, family and family history information, inheritance patterns, the clients’ risks and available options of genetic testing. Professionals also provide psychosocial support to clients and the family and facilitate clients’ decision-making regarding genetic tests, management of a genetic condition and disclosure of information about one’s genetic status to family and others (Harper, 2004).   
2. Han Chinese is the largest ethnic group in the world with a population of around 1.3 billion individuals. Around $94 \%$ of the Hong Kong population are Han Chinese (Race Relations Unit, Home Affairs Department, Government of the Hong Kong SAR, 2013).

# References

Agurs-Collins T, Ferrer R, Ottenbacher A, et al. (2015) Public awareness of direct-to-consumer genetic tests: Findings from the 2013 U.S. Health Information National Trends Survey. Journal of Cancer Education 30(4): 799–807.

American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (2016) Direct-to-consumer genetic testing: A revised position statement of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Genetics in Medicine 18(2): 207–208.   
Arribas-Ayllon M, Sarangi S and Clarke A (2011) Promissory accounts of personalisation in the commercialisation of genomic knowledge. Communication and Medicine 8(1): 53–66.   
Australian Government National Health and Medical Research Council (2014) Direct-to-consumer genetic testing: A statement from the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). Available at: https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/_files_nhmrc/publications/attachments $^ { \prime } { \mathrm { g } } 9 _ { \cdot }$ _direct_to consumer_genetic_testing_nhmrc_statement_141208.pdf (accessed 15 November 2016).   
Bhatia VK (2005) Generic patterns in promotional discourse. In: Halmari H and Virtanen T (eds) Persuasion across Genres: A Linguistic Approach. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 213–225.   
Bloss CS, Ornowski L, Silver E, et al. (2010) Consumer perceptions of direct-to-consumer personalized genomic risk assessments. Genetics in Medicine 12(9): 556–566.   
Burton A (2015) Are we ready for direct-to-consumer genetic testing? The Lancet Neurology 14(2): 138–139.   
Critchley C, Nicol D, Otlowski M, et al. (2015) Public reaction to direct-to-consumer online genetic tests: Comparing attitudes, trust and intentions across commercial and conventional providers. Public Understanding of Science 24(6): 731–750.   
Crook J (2004) On covert communication in advertising. Journal of Pragmatics 36(4): 715–738.   
Fairclough N (1992) Discourse and Social Change. Cambridge: Polity Press.   
Fairclough N (1993) Critical discourse analysis and the marketization of public discourse: The universities. Discourse & Society 4(2): 133–168.   
Fairclough N (2003) Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research. London: Routledge.   
Featherstone M (1991) Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London: SAGE.   
Fuertes-Olivera PA, Velasco-Sacristán M, Arribas-Baño A, et al. (2001) Persuasion and advertising English: Metadiscourse in slogans and headlines. Journal of Pragmatics 33(8): 1291–1307.   
Geransar R and Einsiedel E (2008) Evaluating online direct-to-consumer marketing of genetic tests: Informed choices or buyers beware? Genetic Testing 12(1): 13–23.   
Goldsmith L, Jackson L, O’Connor A, et al. (2012) Direct-to-consumer genomic testing: Systematic review of the literature on user perspectives. European Journal of Human Genetics 20(8): 811–816.   
Gray SW, O’Grady C, Karp L, et al. (2009) Risk information exposure and direct-to-consumer genetic testing for BRCA mutations among women with a personal or family history of breast or ovarian cancer. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention 18(4): 1303–1311.   
Harper PS (2004) Practical Genetic Counselling. London: Hodder Arnold.   
Hatim B (1990) The fuzzy nature of discourse in the translation process: Towards a text-based pedagogy of translation. In: Anderman GM and Rogers MA (eds) Translation in Teaching and Teaching Translation. Guildford: University of Surrey, pp. 105–124.   
Hogarth S, Javitt G and Melzer D (2008) The current landscape for direct-to-consumer genetic testing: Legal, ethical, and policy issues. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 9: 161–182.   
International Society of Genetic Genealogy (2016) List of personal genomics companies. Available at: http://isogg.org/wiki/List_of_personal_genomics_companies (accessed 15 November 2016).   
Janssens AC, Gwinn M, Bradley LA, et al. (2008) A critical appraisal of the scientific basis of commercial genomic profiles used to assess health risks and personalize health interventions. The American Journal of Human Genetics 82(3): 593–599.   
Janssens S, Kalokairinou L, Chokoshvilli D, et al. (2015) Attitudes of cystic fibrosis patients and their parents towards direct-to-consumer genetic testing for carrier status. Personalized Medicine 12(2): 99–107.   
Kolor K, Liu T, Pierre JS, et al. (2009) Health care provider and consumer awareness, perceptions, and use of direct-to-consumer personal genomic tests, United States, 2008. Genetics in Medicine 11(8): 595.   
Kolor K, Duquette D, Zlot A, et al. (2012) Public awareness and use of direct-to-consumer personal genomic tests from four state population-based surveys, and implications for clinical and public health practice. Genetics in Medicine 14(10): 860–867.   
Kress G and Van Leeuwen T (2001) Multimodal Discourse: The Modes and Media of Contemporary Communication. London: Arnold.   
Labrador B, Ramón N, Alaiz-Moretón H, et al. (2014) Rhetorical structure and persuasive language in the subgenre of online advertisements. English for Specific Purposes 34: 38–47.   
Lachance CR, Erby LA, Ford BM, et al. (2010) Informational content, literacy demands, and usability of websites offering health-related genetic tests directly to consumers. Genetics in Medicine 12(5): 304–312.   
Lea DH, Kaphingst KA, Bowen D, et al. (2011) Communicating genetic and genomic information: Health literacy and numeracy considerations. Public Health Genomics 14(4–5): 279–289.   
Liu Y and Pearson YE (2008) Direct-to-consumer marketing of predictive medical genetic tests: Assessment of current practices and policy recommendations. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing 27(2): 131–148.   
Luo ZP, Zayts O and Shipman H (forthcoming) ‘His story is truly vivid …’: The role of narratives of vicarious experience in commodification and marketisation of genetic testing in Chinese social media. Journal of Pragmatics.   
McBride CM, Wade CH and Kaphingst KA (2010) Consumers’ views of direct-to-consumer genetic information. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 11: 427–446.   
Murray ABV, Carson MJ, Morris CA, et al. (2010) Illusions of scientific legitimacy: Misrepresented science in the direct-to-consumer genetic-testing marketplace. Trends in Genetics 26(11): 459–461.   
National Human Genome Research Institute (2016) Regulation of genetic tests. Available at: https://www.genome.gov/10002335/regulation-of-genetic-tests/ (accessed 15 November 2016).   
Nordgren A and Juengst ET (2009) Can genomics tell me who I am? Essentialistic rhetoric in direct-to-consumer DNA testing. New Genetics and Society 28(2): 157–172.   
Race Relations Unit, Home Affairs Department, Government of the Hong Kong SAR (2013) Available at: http://www.had.gov.hk/rru/english/info/info_dem.html (accessed 20 September 2016).   
Rafiq M, Ianuale C, Ricciardi W, et al. (2015) Direct-to-consumer genetic testing: A systematic review of European guidelines, recommendations, and position statements. Genetic Testing and Molecular Biomarkers 19(10): 535–547.   
Roberts C and Sarangi S (2005) Theme-oriented discourse analysis of medical encounters. Medical Education 39(6): 632–640.   
Roberts JS and Ostergren J (2013) Direct-to-consumer genetic testing and personal genomics services: A review of recent empirical studies. Current Genetic Medicine Reports 1(3): 182–200.   
Singleton A, Erby LH, Foisie KV, et al. (2012) Informed choice in direct-to-consumer genetic testing (DTCGT) websites: A content analysis of benefits, risks, and limitations. Journal of Genetic Counseling 21(3): 433–439.   
Su Y, Howard HC and Borry P (2011) Users’ motivations to purchase direct-to-consumer genomewide testing: An exploratory study of personal stories. Journal of Community Genetics 2(3): 135–146.   
Wessel J, Gupta J and De Groot M (2016) Factors motivating individuals to consider genetic testing for type 2 diabetes risk prediction. PLoS ONE 11(1): e0147071.

# Author biographies

Olga Zayts is an Assistant Professor at the School of English, The University of Hong Kong. Her numerous publications on various issues in genetic counselling in Hong Kong, including risk communication, uncertainty and (informed) decision-making, have appeared in discourse and interdisciplinary journals such as Language in Society, Journal of Sociolinguistics, Research on Language and Social Interaction, Social Science and Medicine, among others. She is the author of Language and Culture at Work (with Stephanie Schnurr; Routledge, 2017).

Zhengpeng Luo is a PhD candidate at the School of English, The University of Hong Kong. His research investigates the discourse and literacy practices in the emerging context of direct-toconsumer genetic testing in Hong Kong, with a specific focus on issues of online provision of commercial genetic testing services and decision-making in that context.