# CRITICAL CITIZENSHIP PRACTICES IN ESP AND ESL PROGRAMS: CANADIAN AND GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES

Chapter $\ldots$ January 2009

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Miradas situadas sobre translenguaje en una escuela en la frontera Brasil-Bolívia View projec

# CRITICAL CITIZENSHIP PRACTICES IN ESP AND ESL PROGRAMS: CANADIAN AND GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES

In D. Belcher (Ed.) (2009). English for specific purposes in theory and practice (pp. 264-288). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Brian Morgan, York University Douglas Fleming, University of Ottawa

# ABSTRACT

ESP’s focus on the pragmatic demands of language and texts within specific occupational and institutional settings might at first appear incompatible with the theoretical and ideological priorities that have shaped research in critical ESL pedagogies. This chapter, however, explores and advances a notion of complementarity between these two areas of ELT, particularly in respect to promoting a notion of critical citizenship in ESP and ESL classrooms. The chapter begins by drawing on the research literature to define both passive and participatory orientations towards citizenship theory and preparation. The ability of nation-states to promote coherent national identities is then examined in light of globalization pressures and the emergence of transnational, diasporic communities intent on transforming and hybridizing the social spaces into which they ostensibly assimilate. Such nation-state tensions are examined in the specific context of Canada through its provision of the Canadian Language Benchmarks (CLB). The extent to which CLB serves as a “hidden curriculum” in respect to normalizing a passive engagement with citizenship practices is then detailed, particularly in light of the program restrictions (e.g. funding, continuous intake classes) that limit practitioners’ interpretive responses. The authors’ concluding section, suggests a number of exemplary resources, including textbooks, classroom approaches and two case studies.

This chapter explores two aspects of ESP that are especially relevant to citizenship preparation education in terms of transformative theory development and critical pedagogical practice. The first of these is ESP’s focus on the concrete aspects of the language needs of specific subject areas, occupations and social groups. This is a characteristic that makes ESP distinct from other forms of second language education (Master, 2005). The second aspect is that of the emerging strength of critical perspectives within ESP that have critiqued exclusively pragmatic and instrumental concerns within the field (Benesch, 1997; Pennycook, 1997).

Our intention is to contribute to an emerging awareness of complementary research interests developing between ESP and critical pedagogies in second language education (see e.g. Belcher, 2006, pp. 142-144). Through its occupational, institutional and subject-specific rigor, ESP potentially offers grounded micro-perspectives on language, power and identity that have, at times, been found lacking in the theoretical adventurism often prevalent in critical texts. Conversely, for ESP, critical theories and pedagogies enhance contextual understanding and potentially expand the linguistic means by which goal-directed ends can be effectively achieved in this context and enhance the possibilities for transformative pedagogies that are invigorated through a fusion of pragmatic and politicized strategies. We are also, in a sense, peeling back the onion

further in this context by focusing on how ESP can be used to illuminate inequalities based on categories of identity.

We wish to note at the outset, however, that a discussion of national and/or regional policies regarding citizenship education lacks credibility unless it is articulated in terms of globalization processes and the threats and opportunities they pose for nationstates. On the one hand, the unprecedented transnational migrations in today’s world have given rise to citizenship allegiances that are multiple and global, and sometimes fundamentalist in ways inimical to the cohesion of pluralistic societies. On the other, the withering capacity or willingness of national governments to mitigate the inequities of global capitalism on behalf of its most vulnerable citizens has resulted in increased poverty and marginalization of transnational workers (Stasiulis & Bakan, 2005). Such global-national tensions have given rise to contested and competing notions of citizenship in ESP settings but also to creative and transformational pedagogies (cf. Westheimer & Kahne, 2004) in which second language learners can be oriented towards social justice issues of local, national and international consequence.

This chapter first examines the tensions that exist within the academic literature in terms of how citizenship is conceived along a continuum of passivity or participation. We then provide some background on how the citizen-subject is constructed with particular reference to the postmodern notion of identity. Our third theoretical section focuses on an examination of how current processes of globalization affect notions of citizenship and the citizen-subject. From theory, we then turn to an examination of Canadian national ESL policy development and a related assessment document as a way of noting the concrete points of contention that exist around the ultimate goals for citizenship education, which in turn, invoke contested notions of the imagined nation and desirable national identities. We then conclude this chapter by commenting on two studies that describe concrete pedagogical examples which successfully combine ESP’s focus on specific language needs and the strength of critical perspectives on power.

# Tensions within the Citizenship Literature: Passivity or Participation

Citizenship has been a deeply problematic notion within academic discourse since its inception as a separate field of study. Marshall (1950) noted that even though national citizenship formally confers equal status to all members of particular societies, inequalities of class will prevent poorer members of society from participating as fully as those who are richer. In effect, modern citizenship conferred the legal capacity to strive for the things one would like to possess but did not guarantee the possession of any of them" (Isin & Wood, 1999, p. 28).

As Crick (2007) makes clear, debates about how to define what citizenship is are still central to concerns evident in the academic literature. This concern, fueled by declining youth participation in electoral processes in Western countries (Print, 2007) is marked by increasingly nuanced discussions as to how being a citizen can be actively

taken up as a participatory role, rather than as a passive status simply conferred by a nation state (Kennedy, 2007). These debates have long been central to the research literature pertaining to Canadian ESL provision (Derwing, 1992; Joshee & Derwing, 2005).

However, this literature does not examine the notion of subjectivity in ways that are specific to the immigrant experience. Coming to a new country, to a very large extent, means that one‘s self-perception is disrupted and reconstructed. This process of deterritorialisation, as Deleuze and Guattari (1994) termed it, problematises unitary models of personality development such as those of Cooley, Mead, Dewey or even Freud. The post-structuralist concept of identity is a more useful model in explaining how immigrants reconstruct the multiplicity of elements that make up the individual in the context of adopting a new citizenship, and it is to this that we now turn.

# Conceptualizing the Citizen-Subject

Notions of “being” and/or “becoming” a citizen of any nation-state require consideration of how identities or, more specifically, political subjectivities are formed and prepared for civic life and continuity. The terms subject and subjectivity, themselves, offer particular perspectives on identity, particularly as illuminated by way of Norton’s (2000) innovative introduction of feminist poststructural theory into TESOL. The citizensubject, conceptualized via Norton, is not the autonomous, free-reasoning individual of Enlightenment lore, nor is he or she the passive recipient of values ascribed through membership in timeless and rigid social categories. Instead, the citizen-subject is conceptualized as both shaped by the dominant discourses of nationhood but also enabled as a potential agent of change, a source of counter-discursive readings that cumulatively and over time serve to transform and/or hybridize the socio-political spaces into which he or she is ostensibly integrated/assimilated. Yet, to reiterate poststructural precepts, it would be unwise to exaggerate the coherence and calculation that might appear to underpin oppositional practices in the public sphere. Identities, both of the individuals, communities and of nation-states, in this respect, are seen as sites of conflict, contradiction, and change, particularly in light of the threats and opportunities posed by globalization (see Block & Cameron, 2002; Kumaravadivelu, 2008).

# Foreigners, Globalization and Constructions of Citizenship

Globalization processes shape both material realities and imagined possibilities for citizens. Material effects abound in the growing disparities created through the intensification of economic interdependencies and the aggressive promotion of Westernbased cultural commodities and values that undermine local communities. Aligned with this promotion is the emergence of English as the default lingua franca of prosperity and mobility and the subsequent pressures placed on the long term vitality of local vernaculars.

Regarding the imagination, the expansion and accessibility of global media systems—mainstream and alternative—has profound and often unpredictable effects on citizenship practices. A media window onto far away places, for example, can set into motion local and regional aspirations for which national governments may lack the capacity to fulfill. Globalized media, similarly, act on our desires in often unconscious and surreptitious ways, a popular sitcom from abroad, for example, serving to valorize the rights of women, youth, religious and ethno-linguistic minorities in ways that threaten rigid social hierarchies and nation-state identities founded on strong monocultural and monolingual ideologies. Through the growing democratization of information via digital networks, the voices of distant liberatory movements can be heard, previously censored images of political and economic oppression can be circulated, and the citizens of liberal democratic societies thus potentially guilted into demanding action and accountability from their corporate and elected leaders (see e.g. Dartnell, 2006, Rodowick, 2002).

While the multidirectional capacities of new media may foster global consciousness-raising and effective transnational movements, they also complicate the integration/assimilation of immigrants into nation-states and their existing participatory structures. In English-dominant, immigrant-receiving countries, for example, most newcomers gravitate towards cosmopolitan centres such as New York, London, Sydney, Toronto or Vancouver, creating for themselves transnational, juxtaposed lives in which geographical distances are instantaneously bridged through various communications technologies (i.e., the Internet, movies, newspapers) and life “abroad” is eased by an abundance of social services, consumer products and employment possibilities through the home language. This growing prevalence of deterritorialized, expatriate cosmopolitanism challenges conventional approaches to citizenship training in the ESL/ESP classrooms, requiring creative and situated strategies on the part of teachers.

Recognizing these assimilative tensions exacerbated by globalization, it would be useful to consider why immigrant-receiving nations continue to promote the kinds of immigration patterns that they do, especially of the highly skilled, educated, and affluent, most likely to embrace transnational and cosmopolitan values over nationalistic ones. Altruism and pure humanitarianism rarely motivate policy. In Canada, as in most centrebased societies, demographic realities indicate aging and declining populations, and the concomitant dangers this poses for long term economic prosperity and the provision of cherished social programs (e.g. publicly funded health care).

While addressing such developments shows clear prudence and pragmatism, an intriguing supplementary explanation, as conceptualized by Bonny Honig (2001), is also worth consideration. Following Honig, we might reverse a central underlying question that frames this chapter. Instead of asking, exclusively, how best to confer citizenship values onto newcomers, we should also ask how the newcomer confers citizenship upon those of us whose roots in the nation are long and deep. In other words, what additional, ideological and identity-forming functions does the presence of the “foreigner” serve in the stabilization of the status quo? Honig argues that one of the primary functions served is that of legitimation. Amongst us, and “here” of their apparent volition, the presence of immigrants adds legitimacy to the central organizing myths of the nation—its meritocratic, progressive and egalitarian ideals—especially during times of tarnished reputation, when solidarity diminishes and the exceptionality of the nation-state and its dominant elites is increasingly held up to critical scrutiny. On the world stage, as well, the presence of newcomers, serves as a kind of vindication for the nation’s values as it competes in the global market-place of ideas, aggressively promoting its brand of citizenship in the pursuit of needed foreign capital and expertise. Still, as Honig astutely observes, this legitimizing function is a double-edged sword in that the newcomers we encounter often resist or exceed their stereotype; that is, some may not conform to assigned roles as “model minorities” who, for the sake of future generations, passively toil in jobs for which they are over-qualified. As they voice their resentment, questioning the nation-state’s meritocratic and egalitarian ideals, they draw attention to the very contradictions and embedded inequalities that their presence is intended to conceal.

Honig’s thesis is insightful for two reasons in the key issues being raised in this chapter. On the one hand, it suggests credible discursive and ideological reasons for the pervasiveness and normalization of passive citizenship practices in ESP and ESL. It helps explain, for example, why L2 writing instructors deem “inauthentic” ESL/EAP student narratives that fail to reiterate and celebrate cherished national narratives and originary myths (cf. an “Ellis Island” representation, Harklau, 2003). It also explains the commonsensical propensity to favor memorization—of facts, dates, and founding fathers (sic)—over critical investigation that illuminates past injustices and collective efforts towards their amelioration. Treated in this static, positivistic manner—what Derwing (1992, p. 193) aptly describes as a “test mentality”—acquiescence to existing arrangements is enhanced for both the foreigner and the native born.

Still, as Honig suggests, the “foreigner” in our midst offers a voice no longer available to the habituated. Conceptualized this way, ESP/ESL students are seen as sources of critical, participatory insights and texts, revealing complexities that problematize the rigid categories (e.g. as partially formed citizens based upon their perceived L2 limitations) imposed upon them by discourse and manifest in policy and curricula. To reiterate, Honig’s thesis is a provocative one with clear implications for the preparation of citizens in any liberal democratic society. One such society is Canada, to which we now turn our attention.

# Canadian ESL Programming, Tasks and the Hidden Curriculum

As Benesch (1994) notes, citizenship preparation is an integral aspect of second language education where large numbers of immigrants are being integrated into modern nation states. Within the Canadian context, federal policy documents (Citizenship and Immigration Canada, 2006) make it plain that ESL programming is for the dual purposes of teaching the second language and integrating newcomers. The crucial importance of adult English as a Second Language programming for the integration of newcomers has also been acknowledged in a plethora of teaching materials and curriculum guidelines (Ilieva, 2000), and in the academic literature (Wong, Duff & Early, 2001).

For nation-states such as Canada, the integration of newcomers is a pressing problem in light of globalization and the unprecedented number of migrants on the move world-wide. To reiterate, developed countries are increasingly competing with one another to attract skilled immigrants and take advantage of these vast diasporas in ways that preserve and strengthen democratic institutions, social cohesion and economic vitality (Citizenship and Immigration Canada, 2002).

The string of events that led to the creation of the current structure of adult ESL programming in Canada started in 1990, when the federal government initiated a major policy shift in response to changing demographic and economic forces. In response to the perception that high levels of immigration were vital to Canada’s long-term economic and political interests, priority was given to second language education on a centralised and consistent basis for the first time. ESL programming was seen as central to the removal of barriers to newcomer integration and the ability of the nation state to reap the full financial benefits of immigration (for a fuller description of the history of ESL programming in Canada, see Fleming, 2007).

LINC assessment and curriculum procedures are framed by the Canadian Language Benchmarks (CLB).The CLB covers the full range of English proficiency (from beginning to full fluency), incorporates literacy and numeracy, emphasises tasks and situations, features stand-alone descriptors per level, encourages local curriculum development, and includes proficiencies related to learning strategies, socio-cultural and strategic competencies.

CLB development is overseen by the Centre for Canadian Language Benchmarks (CCLB), a non-profit organisation founded in 1998 and funded by the federal government. It is “governed by a nationally representative, multi-stakeholder board of directors including representation from government, English as a Second Language and French as a Second Language experts and language assessors” (CCLB). The official character of the CLB is attested to by government support for the CCLB and the fact that the CLB was painstakingly developed in a long series of consultations and draft formulations facilitated by federal agencies (Norton Pierce & Stewart, 1997).

However, before we proceed to a detailed examination of the CLB and its related documents, we wish to review some issues related to the nature of task-based assessment and hidden curricula. These issues pertain closely to the place content plays in a document of this sort and to the relationship between assessment instruments and curricula. It is our contention that the $C L B$ is a hidden curriculum (Jackson, 1968) in the sense that it encapsulates a privileged body of content and methods meant to socialize learners (and teachers).

Tasks have been commonly employed, as both criteria for assessment and as ways to organise pedagogical activities, since the broad currency of experiential learning was established in general education. This form of education, which is generally taken to mean “learning by doing,” had its early roots in the mid- $1 9 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ century shift from formal, abstract education in schools to practice-based education, elements of which are foundational in the pedagogy of both Dewey and Freire (Lewis & Williams, 1994).

Although the term task has had a long history in general education theory, it is important to note that it was not common to use the term in describing SLE classroom objectives and activities prior to the late 1980's (Long & Crookes, 1992). In second language education (SLE), the use of the term task, in fact, has been closely associated with assessment since the advent of the communicative approach. In one of the first discussions of the communicative approach in curriculum design, for example, Johnson (1979) makes the links between curriculum development, tasks and assessment very clear:

Fluency in the communicative process can only develop within a ‘taskorientated teaching’- one which provides ‘actual meaning’ by focusing on tasks to be mediated through language, and where success or failure is seen to be judged in terms of whether or not these tasks are performed. (p. 200)

Thus, within the communicative approach, the choices a SLE teacher makes about what to teach are made in light of the outcomes and objectives their pedagogy is meant to achieve. In other words, one first sets one’s learning goals and then determines what sequence of tasks best achieves them. Achieving these tasks is the criteria used by teachers to determine whether or not their learners have successfully mastered the material and can thus proceed to the next level of instruction. What is important to our argument here is that content is integral to task design within the communicative approach to second language education.

Today, tasks are prominent in many popular ESL teacher education manuals and course texts (e.g. Brown, 2000). Many SLE scholars have elaborated task-based curriculum models (Skeehan, 2002) and tasks have long been significant elements developed within many curriculum and assessment benchmark projects undertaken by national governments (Brindley, 1995).

As is often the case with national language policy implementation (Shohamy, 2007), the absence of a federally mandated curriculum has meant that the assessment and placement instrument, in this case the CLB, has become the de facto guideline for instructional content in most jurisdictions and not a set of randomly chosen assessment criteria. It is no wonder, under these circumstances, that some scholars and curriculum resources centers have referred to it unambiguously as a curriculum document (Pennsylvania Department of Education, 2006).

As the document recommends, teachers and assessment officers might very well feel free to extract the language embedded within the sample tasks and to add other content as they see fit. However, the content already found within the document is, as we shall demonstrate below, the starting point for those educators who use it. Thus, the content is privileged, in the sense that its importance is stressed by its inclusion. Absent content is not privileged and, as we detail below, reveals serious shortcomings within CLB. Because of the CLB’s nature as a national curriculum document, the content found within it (and excluded from it) takes on an official character.

These contradictory views on whether the document is an instrument for assessment or task/ curriculum development are found within the CLB itself. Even though the author states in its introduction that the $C L B$ is “not a curriculum guide” (Pawlikowska-Smith, 2000, V111), she does say, in the very next paragraph, that the CLB does describe “what adult ESL instruction should prepare adult ESL learner to do”. Thus, the $C L B$ quite clearly sets up tasks which learners are meant to perform in order to advance to the next level of instruction. Teachers, as the document plainly states, are expected to organize learning opportunities for the successful completion of these tasks. The claim that the $C L B$ is not meant to inform curriculum development is rather dubious. As Fox and Courchene (2005) point out,

although the $C L B$ is neither a curriculum nor test according to its developers, providing details regarding text length and sample tasks leads anyone using the document to use these as guidelines for task development. (p. 13)

This point is reinforced by a study of LINC teachers recently conducted by Haque and Cray (2007), in which their respondents confirmed that the CLB was something they could not ignore as a set of reference points for curriculum development.

It is important to note that making pedagogical decisions in reference to curriculum guidelines requires a fair degree of professional autonomy (Fleming, 1998). Unfortunately, the insecurity inflicted on ESL programming within Canada through various funding strategies and conditions has served to deprofessionalize the field (Burnaby, 2002; Haque & Cray, 2007). In comparison to other educational sectors, ESL teachers are often paid far less and have limited access to professional development in workplaces that are transitory and poorly supported in terms of resources. As a result, few ESL teachers have time to focus on developing context-sensitive pedagogies related to critical citizenship and subsequently develop an over-reliance on materials that are superficially Canadian. In sum, the CLB performs the function of institutionalizing ESL instructors by providing them with a template for their classroom practices and framing their assessment procedures. Under these circumstances, privileged content, in the sense we have talked about above, is difficult to augment or resist. It is an examination of this privileged content that we now turn to, in a detailed examination of the CLB.

# The Canadian Language Benchmarks: Promoting Hierarchies of Citizenship

The Canadian Language Benchmarks 2000: ESL for Adults (Pawlikowska-Smith, 2000) is made up of over 200 compact pages. The bulk of the document consists of the actual benchmarks, arranged in 12 levels, from basic English language proficiency to full fluency. It is on these pages, naturally, that our attention in this section is focused.

The preface and introductory chapters provide an interesting segue into the rest of the text. In an obvious reference to the original policy initiatives that gave rise to the $C L B$ , the Board of Directors for the CCLB make use of the preface to tell the fictional story of a 25-year old immigrant from Indonesia who is confused about how his English level had been assessed by his previous school when he changes institutions. According to the preface, this situation is occurring less and less frequently. In addition, so the preface emphasizes, immigrants are now able to refer to the $C L B$ in such high stakes situations as demonstrating their English language ability to employers and to gain entrance to educational institutions. This shift is described by the authors of the preface as no less than a “revolution.”

Even more tellingly, the preface also states that, thanks to the CLB, learners will be able to “plot out for themselves, in advance, their own paths of language learning to attain their goals” (p. v). This is an important point. If learners can predict how their learning will progress upon entrance into the $^ { \circ \circ } C L B$ movement” (as the preface characterizes programs that have adopted the Benchmarks), then is this document not more than simply a description of the English language at a particular level of proficiency? Leaving aside the problem of whether “one size fits all,” does this document not now become a set of learning objectives meant to inform curriculum development?

This ambiguity continues into the text’s introduction, which says that the Benchmarks are “a national standard for planning second language curricula for a variety of contexts” (p. viii), while stating categorically that it is “not a curriculum guide: they do not dictate local curricula and syllabuses” (p. viii). The document even attempts to “have its cake and eat it too” in terms of methodology. Even though the author states that the CLB is “not tied to any specific instructional method” (p. viii), the introduction emphasizes the need for instructors to adhere to common hallmarks of the communicative approach (Brown, 2001): learner-centered instruction, task-based proficiency, and communicative competency.

As a close examination of the CLB and seven closely related official documents reveals, short shrift is given to “being Canadian”. There are only three vague references that pertain to citizenship: "understand rights and responsibilities of client, customer, patient and student" (p. 95); "indicate knowledge of laws, rights, etc." (p. 116); and "write a letter to express an opinion as a citizen" (p. 176). It is also very revealing to note that the word "vote", for example, does not appear in this, or in any of the other seven major documents associated with the CLB. At the very highest levels of English language proficiency (at the point at which one is writing research papers at universities), there are only vague and general references to developing opinions about current events, writing letters to the editors of newspapers and participating in meetings.

The document seems to view English language learners as having rights and responsibilities that pertain almost exclusively to being good consumers. The content includes the need for learners to understand their rights and responsibilities as a “client, customer, patient and student” (p. 95), but not as workers, family members, participants in community activities, or advocates.

In addition, issues related to trade unions and collective agreements are only mentioned twice (again, at the stage at which one is able to write research papers). Labor rights, such as filing grievances, recognizing and reporting dangerous working conditions, and the enforcement of legislated standards of employment are nonexistent.

The content found within the CLB was in great contrast to the conceptions of citizenship described by immigrants in a recent study Fleming (2008) conducted of learners enrolled in a LINC program. In a series of 25 in-depth interviews, a group of Punjabi-speaking learners made it clear that they predominantly thought of “being Canadian” in legalistic terms. Their conceptions centered on rights, adherence to law, and respect for national multicultural policy. These learners, many of whom worked as agricultural laborers or semi-skilled construction workers, provided concrete examples of their struggles to obtain safe working conditions and access to basic standards of employment such as overtime or statutory holiday pay. Consumer rights, such as the few cited in the CLB, did form a part of their concerns. However, an over-riding aspect of their conceptualizations of citizenship was in reference to employment rights and voting, both of which, as we noted above, were virtually non-existent in the CLB.

As noted at the beginning of this chapter, ESP’s focus on concrete aspects of the language needs of specific social groups is a characteristic that makes the field distinct from other forms of second language education. In our examination of the citizenship education needs in the Canadian ESL context, it becomes apparent that a fundamental question in this regard is how (or by whom) these needs are defined. The CLB, tended to approach “Canadian-ness” in terms of normative standards, including various forms of social behavior, which could be taken to imply the existence of a dominant and singular culture to which second language learners have to conform. Citizenship rights at the basic level of English language proficiency had no place in the document. Rights related to voting, employment or group membership were virtually non-existent. The participants in the above cited study, however, spoke of being Canadian predominantly in terms of citizenship rights, multicultural policy and the obligations of being citizens. Any curriculum based on the concerns of the learners themselves would look very different from one based on the official assessment/ curriculum document in this context.

A parallel here can be made with the way in which needs analyses have been problemitized in the ESP literature. As Jasso-Aguliar (1999) points out, unbalanced distributions of power have rarely been questioned by researchers examining how goals and objectives are determined in vocational training contexts. All too often, the opinions of employers and other powerful outsiders are privileged over those expressed by workers and less powerful insiders. As a result, ESP programming goals are skewed towards the needs of managers and not those workers actually taking the training.

Similarly, in the case of citizenship education, programming goals are overwhelmingly set by the state, through the expertise of outsiders such as policy advisors, curriculum developers, program managers and (dare we say it) academics. Even though learners are consulted through their settlement organizations or in occasional venues as TESL Canada Learners Conferences, there have been very limited opportunities for insiders (i.e., the learners) to influence the goals of citizenship education. Certainly, the voices of outsiders in this context are privileged over those of insiders.

# The CLB document: Complicating frames of reference

As a stand-alone text, content analyses of the CLB—of tasks and themes stated, implied and concealed—provide numerous examples to support its depiction as a “hidden curriculum”, one that promotes a dutiful, obedient and passive engagement with the politics of the nation-state. Analyses on these terms alone, however, might not provide a complete understanding of the complex discursive processes involved, or the whole array of techniques through which institutional power is exercised in liberal democratic societies. That is, while it is important to critique the propositional content of a document such as CLB, such critiques are easily allayed through the strategic expansion and inclusion of items identified as necessary for participatory citizenship practices. Indeed, evidence of this occurrence can be found in subsequent LINC 4-6 and LINC 5-7 curriculum documents, both of which include explicit themes and related tasks that are critical-analytic and participatory in relation to Canadian society.

As to whether such themes are merely ornamental—window-dressing to placate academics and community activists concerned with immigrant settlement—is a complex question worth considering. For example, Pinet’s (2006) study of the production, interpretation and implementation of a LINC document arising from the CLB describes how one teacher created her own transformative syllabus, exploring issues of racism and sexism in Canadian society based on the presence of “human rights” and “workers’ rights” as thematic inclusions in the LINC 4-6 guidelines. Though this utilization of the guidelines was perceived as too ideological and/or marginal to students’ needs by some colleagues, the fact that she was able to correlate her syllabus to explicit themes in the guidelines served to legitimize her more critical approach. Still, as Pinet shows, she is only one of six informants to interpret the document in a transformative way, the other five using relatively more passive, transmission-based approaches in implementing ESL citizenship material. Choices present do not necessarily translate into choices taken. Clearly, there exists a whole array of identity-forming discourses that condition the range of meanings practitioners generate in their interactions with curricula. Nation-state power, in this respect, is deployed not only in the content on display in an official document but also in the local strategies that manage the document’s reception, the intertextual and contextual conditions through which preferred meanings are validated and particular social practices legitimized. Through this articulation—whereby curricular documents, funding policies, and prevailing attitudes around language education work in concert—the passivity of a “hidden curriculum” may persist in spite of cosmetic changes made to its appearance. In this articulated sense, Canadian ESL policy structures can be seen as mitigating against critical practices that address social inequalities, hence reinforcing a hierarchical structure to Canadian citizenship that exists both within the nation state (Bannerji, 2000) and within a globalized frame (Stansiulis & Bakan, 2003)

# Exploring Critical Citizenship in ESP: Practices and Principles

The Canadian context we have described above would suggest an additional, critical sub-field of language specialization within ESP, for lack of a better acronym, one that might be called ESD: English for Self-Defense, the rationale for which can be gleaned from Morgan and Ramanathan’s (2005) survey of critical literacies in language education:

Arguably, such skills [i.e. critical literacies] are not just options but necessities, if not forms of self-defense against the intrusiveness of corporate advertising, the growing sameness of cultural products and information from global media empires, and the expansion of sophisticated forms of surveillance and data sharing employed in the name of security…. [O]ur job as educators partially entails cultivating a citizenry that is able to negotiate and critically engage with the numerous texts, modalities and technologies coming at learners, and because we now collectively occupy globalized, interconnected spaces that insist on such critical engagement. (p. 152)

In their survey, the authors suggest a number of key principles and exemplary practices (e.g. a “tool-kit” for action, pp. 156-159) by which such an ESD orientation might be realized and integrated into syllabus design with the intended effect of critically invigorating conventional ESP/EAP curricula. Through critical narrative inquiry, textual juxtapositions, teacher talk, and the use of multimodal resources, student awareness of the “person-formative” nature of texts and discourse is heightened, in turn facilitating oppositional readings and practices around dominant constructions of nation-state citizenship and its attendant privileges and responsibilities.

Commercially published books and materials that address critical or active citizenship are uncommon given the ELT industry’s propensity towards global distribution and generic course-books whose concomitant profitability is enhanced through the maintenance of the ideological status quo in print (see e.g. Gray, 2002). Still, there are a few notable exceptions from smaller publishers and/or non-profit

organizations, some of which we cite here. One publication we highly recommend is The Change Agent: An Adult Education Newspaper for Social Justice, published by the New England Literacy Resource Center (http://www.nelrc.org/changeagent/). Many previous theme-based issues take up concerns relevant to ESP and ESL contexts and are available as downloadable pdf files. Two past issues relate directly to citizenship practices (Issue 18, March 2004 – Voting in the 2004 Elections; Issue 6, February 1998 – Civic Participation) and are full of excellent readings and activities that are interculturally informative and critically-analytic in relation to civic concerns. An issue for 2008 is being planned on the theme of voting and advocacy.

The World around Us: Canadian Social Issues for ESL Students, co-authored by Christine Hoppenrath and Wendy Royal (1997), explores controversial family, community, and social justice issues from a Canadian perspective, a somewhat rare occurrence as noted above. A chapter on critical media literacy is particularly useful for citizenship pedagogies in that it encourages analyses of media bias and particular class interests reflected in the selection and representation of current issues in the news. The chapter’s multiliteracies/multimodality perspective, in which both visual (e.g. advertising) and print media are analyzed, raises awareness of how mainstream media influence individual and collective identity negotiation.

An ESD “tool kit”, one in which participatory citizenship is modeled and promoted for teachers and students, would seem incomplete without the imprint of Paolo Freire and his notions of problem-posing and critical consciencization. Wallerstein and Auerbach’s (2004) Problem-posing at work: Popular educator’s guide is an outstanding classroom resource, integrating Freirien concepts and strategies in inspiring and accessible ways. As well, the notion of global citizenship, which we raise, is expertly developed in a chapter titled “Connecting local and global action: The role of pedagogy in social change”. Substantial chapter references and supplementary references make this an essential text for the development of critical practitioners. The influence of Freire is also strongly evident in Arnold, et al.’s (1991) Educating for a Change, a book that is similarly useful for developing social advocacy skills and community organizing strategies.

In addition to these materials, we’d like to briefly discuss two case studies that developed notions of critical citizenship through context-sensitive pedagogies in ESL and ESP settings. The first (Morgan, 2002) took place in a Chinese settlement agency in Toronto that co-sponsors several LINC and provincially funded adult ESL classes. Notably, many of the students in Morgan’s class had recently immigrated to Canada from Hong Kong in advance of China’s 1997 re-acquisition. The political stability they sought, however, was undermined by an imminent referendum on the province of Quebec’s separation from the Canadian federation, a development frequently raised and questioned in the mixed-level (intermediate to advanced) ESL class Morgan taught: “Would Canadians go to war to prevent Quebec’s separation? What would happen to the

Canadian dollar?” And similar to most Canadians, students were unsure of what the actual referendum question meant.1 Similarly, the meaning and implications of words such as sovereign and sovereignty in comparison to independence or separation were particularly confusing, as witnessed by the number of students searching in their bilingual Chinese-English dictionaries for explanations.

Morgan made this the focus of a lesson, drawing on students’ L1 literacy strategy of “bottom-up” or “lexis-centred” reading (Parry, 1996; Bell; 1995).2 Through their use of bilingual dictionaries and the application of decompositional strategies based on L1 word formation (see e.g. Zhou & Marslen-Wilson, 1994), several students discovered and debated intrinsic word properties that they saw as contributing to the political controversy surrounding the referendum question. The class discussion soon shifted towards broader concerns—debates over how Canada should respond to the outcome of a ‘yes’ vote, and to comparisons with Hong Kong post-1997. These discussions were remarkable for their unprecedented level of engagement with social issues and the complex and often contradictory negotiations of transnational identities taking place (i.e. to what extent are we now Chinese and Canadian?). Much of the dictionary work and small group conversations took place in L1, but as a foundation for whole class, L2 discussions, in which stronger English-speakers helped out weaker ones in expressing their views in the target language.

In sum, participatory citizenship in an L2 was enabled by L1 use and traditional L1 literacy strategies, a classroom approach notably absent in the CLB document. What might be observed—indeed stigmatized—as methodologically and acquisitionally remedial (i.e. bilingual dictionary translation), or indicative of a lower-order cognitive task (i.e. decoding) through a CLB framework, was re-contextualized in ways that enhanced critical engagement and an understanding of language and power around the Quebec referendum that would exceed the ideological awareness of many so-called native speakers and longstanding citizens.

Our second pedagogical example takes place in Australia and describes a workshop on teaching critical thinking in EAP (Thomson, 2002). Several aspects of this workshop are exemplary. First, it effectively integrates a critical-ideological component within a set of pragmatic ESP language tasks (e.g. assessing and integrating research material in academic essay writing). Second, it engages with identity negotiation by drawing students’ attention to the person-formative nature of texts and genres and their effects on judgments regarding truth claims. Third, future citizens of Australia are introduced to one of the nation-state’s most pressing and controversial issues: the land claims and rights provisions of Australian aboriginals. Given this topic and the students involved, this workshop should also be seen as relevant to notions of global citizenship and the emergence of aboriginal land claims and the revitalization of indigenous languages and cultures as universal rights and moral imperatives requiring governmental intervention.

In the workshop, four short texts on the origins of aboriginals—of distinctive historical genres, and two by indigenous authors—were closely analyzed in ways that support critical evaluation of academic research in support of essay writing. At the same time, these analyses and the overall workshop format, including the teacher’s strategic questions and interventions, had a kind of cumulative, problem-posing (cf. Freire) effect whereby participants were made aware of their own cultural biases and the politics of representation—how textual choices mediate our perceptions of historical “truth” and, consequently, our capacity to recognize and subsequently redress past injustices. Of course, not all students follow similar pathways of meaning-making or arrive at the same level of socio-political understanding. Still, what makes this approach so impressive is the critical potential built into the overall structure of the activity. As with the lesson on the Quebec Referendum, critical language awareness of texts, genres or key vocabulary complement—rather than displace—more conventional language learning tasks in an EAP or ESL context. Through active engagement students learn that language is never neutral in debates and struggles over social futures. And they also become more effective users and producers of texts in schools and public life.

# Current Issues/Future Directions

Our focus on exemplary materials and practices draws attention to current challenges and gaps in the field, which we take up briefly in this concluding section. For one, it seems paradoxical to be promoting participatory citizenship in ESP/ESL within societies notable for their declining participation in conventional public practices of democracy (i.e. voting, membership in formal political parties). This appearance of paradox, however, is somewhat misleading if we revisit Honig’s (2001) provocative thesis to reiterate the ideological or discursive work achieved when official citizenship resources in the form of curricula and materials are created and publicly promoted. While such resources might first appear as exclusively serving the integration needs of newcomers, they should also been seen as reminding the native born of the privilege of being Canadian or American, as examples. In this respect, “participatory” practices in ESP/ESL—and the lavish public display of flag-waving citizenship ceremonies—serve the additional function of countering political cynicism and indifference in the general populace by suggesting the intrinsic value of citizenship conferred.

At the same time, we have argued that policy and curricula should not be evaluated in textual isolation. Policy-makers may appear to respond constructively to stakeholder criticism and address existing gaps through the inclusion of more participatory content (e.g. LINC 4-6 & 5-7 curricula), yet deny the material resources necessary for the development and realization of such content in classroom settings. The Canadian research cited in this chapter strongly corroborates this type of situation and its pedagogical effects (Burnaby, 2002; Haque & Cray, 2007). Professional insecurity and poor working conditions are the norm for non-credit adult ESL programming. A noted, scarcity of Canadian-specific resources (Thomson & Derwing, 2004) and the lack of paid professional development opportunities also mean that critical citizenship materials and locally relevant lesson plans are less likely to be generated. In the Canadian context, as well, existing funding models in which minimum attendance numbers must be maintained serve to prioritize lower level ESL and LINC programs, where survival English skills and the most basic and passive forms of task-based citizenship instruction in L2 are likely to occur. More advanced ESL/ESP students—those most capable of critical inquiry and active citizenship in an L2—are also the most likely to leave a LINC class on short notice when job opportunities arise. For those who remain in lower level classes, an additional obstacle may arise through interactions with teachers whose ESL/ESP preparation has been informed by dominant monolingual ideologies, Englishonly approaches, and subtractive bilingual models in the TESOL field, all of which serve to infantilize L2 students and devalue their political experiences and insights as might be expressed through their L1. In short, awareness of this “bigger picture”—of how textual and extra-textual factors articulate in both productive and restrictive ways—is crucial for those interested in promoting critical citizenship in their programs and classrooms.

Another crucial issue for the ESP classroom involves our response to students’ own expressions of indifference or resistance when presented with critical citizenship resources that we have created or endorsed. Not all L2 students value time spent on civic or public concerns. The notion of politics can invoke painful memories for some or a sense of inadequacy in others based on prior identity experiences (e.g. gender, race) and/or ascribed roles in which public participation is discouraged or prohibited. Still, the student who at one moment claims “I am not interested in politics” will show a remarkable propensity to debate so-called domestic affairs at the next. Lankshear and Knobel (1997) address this issue by recommending a more “holistic” approach, in which the personal and the political are more closely and deliberately aligned in the promotion of critical literacies and active citizenship:

Struggles within the private sphere to win a more equitable distribution of domestic work and decision-making power inside the family, and struggle by migrants to negotiate a viable and satisfying identity within their new life

situation, become facets of actively constructing and practicing citizenship. (p. 101)

This conflation of the personal and political is an area of particular strength within critical ESL pedagogies, especially through the work of feminist scholars whose perspectives on critical narrative and L2 autobiography have illuminated social inequities in unique ways unmet through conventional modes of inquiry (e.g. Pavlenko, 2007; Steinman, 2005; Vandrick, 1999). The challenge for teachers, as this research indicates, is to find ways of building upon the private, everyday concerns of students and connecting them to issues of equity and social justice in the broader community.

It is in respect to this last issue that we come full circle in our chapter’s focus on complementarity between ESP’s instrumental and pragmatic orientations and critical pedagogy’s concerns with power and identity. To act on the world purposively through language—a central theme of ESP and this collection—often requires re-connecting the “non-purposive” elements of everyday life, work, and schooling in ways that foreground the complex micro-operations of power and discourse in the positioning of citizensubjects. Critical pedagogies are particularly suited for such a task. Yet, the critical has often eclipsed the pedagogical as seen through the generous excess of theoretical insights proffered in published form. The real-world purposiveness of ESP suggests important second language tools with which to enhance the pedagogical dimensions of critical work. Towards this end, and the promotion of critical citizenship, it is worth revisiting Marx’s (1983) famous pronouncement in his Theses on Feuerbach: “Philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point is to change it” (p. 158, italics in original). Through collaboration and the bridging of vision with action, ESP and Critical Pedagogy in tandem have much to offer in the service of both academic and social advancement.

# References

Anderson, B. (1983). Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism. London: Verso Editions / NLB.   
Appadurai, A. (2000). Grassroots globalization and the research imagination. Public Culture, 12(1), 1-19.   
Arnold, R., Burke, B., James, C., Martin, D., & Thomas, B. (1991). Educating for a Change. Toronto: Between the Lines Press.   
Bannerji, H. (2000). The dark side of the nation: Essays on multiculturalism, nationalism and gender. Toronto: Canadian Scholars’ Press.   
Belcher, D. D. (2006). English for Specific Purposes: Teaching to perceived needs and imagined futures in worlds of work, study and everyday life. TESOL Quarterly, 40, 133-156.   
Bell, J. (1995). The relationship between L1 and L2 literacy: Some complicating factors. TESOL Quarterly, 29, 687-704.   
Benesch, S. (1994). ESL, ideology, and the politics of pragmatics. TESOL Quarterly, 27, 705-716.   
Benesch, S. (1999). Rights analysis: Studying power relations in an academic setting. English for Specific Purposes, 18, 313-327.   
Block, D., & Cameron, D. (Eds.). (2002). Globalization and language teaching. London: Routledge   
Brindley, G. (1995). Assessment and reporting in language learning programs: Purposes, problems and pitfalls. Paper Presented at International Conference on Testing and Evaluation in Second Language Education. Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.   
Brown, H. D. (2000). Teaching by principles. New York: Barnes and Noble.   
Burnaby, B. (2002). Reflections on language policies in Canada: Three examples. In J. W. Tollefson (Ed.), Language policies in education (pp. 65-86). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Citizenship and Immigration Canada (2006). Report to Parliament. Ottawa: Communications Branch, Citizenship and Immigration.   
Crick, B. (2007). Citizenship: The political and the democratic. British Journal of Educational Studies, 55, 3, 235- 248.   
Dartnell, M. (2006). Insurgency online: Web activism and global conflict. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.   
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1994). What is Philosophy? London: Verso.   
Derwing, T. (1992). Instilling a passive voice: Citizenship instruction in Canada. In B. Burnaby & A. Cumming (Eds.), Socio-political aspects of ESL (pp. 193-202). Toronto: OISE Press.   
Dudley-Evans, T.(1997). Five questions for LSP teacher training. In R. Howard & G. Brown (Eds.), Teacher education for LSP (pp. 58-67). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Fleming, D. (2008). Becoming Canadian: Racialized citizenship, ESL learners, national second language policy and the Canadian Language Benchmarks. Berlin: VDM.   
Fleming, D. (2007). Adult immigrant ESL programs in Canada: Emerging trends in the contexts of history, economics and identity. In Cummins, J. & Davison, C. (Eds.), The international handbook of English language teaching. (pp. 185- 198). New York: Springer.   
Fleming, D. (1998). Autonomy and agency in curriculum decision-making: A study of instructors in a Canadian adult settlement ESL program. TESL Canada Journal, 16 (1), 19-35.   
Fox, J. & Courchêne, R. (2005). The Canadian Language Benchmarks (CLB): A critical appraisal. Contact, 31(2), 7-28.   
Gray, J. (2002). The global coursebook in English language teaching. In D. Block & D. Cameron (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 151-167). London: Routledge.   
Haque, E., & Cray, E. (2007). Constraining teachers: Adult ESL settlement language training policy and implementation. TESOL Quarterly, 41, 634-642.   
Harklau, L. (2003). Representational practices and multi-modal communication in US

high schools: Implications for adolescent immigrants. In R. Bayley & S. R. Schecter (Eds.), Language socialization in bilingual and multilingual societies (pp. 83-97). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. Health and Welfare Canada (1988). Report of the Canadian Task Force on Mental Health Issues Affecting Immigrants and Refugees. Retrieved February 26, 2003, from http://ceris.metropolis.net/Virtual%20Library/ health/candian_taskforce/ canadian1.html Honig, B. (2001). Democracy and the foreigner. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Hoppenrath, C., & Royal, W. (1997). The world around us: Canadian social issues for ESL students. Toronto: Harcourt Canada. Hutchinson, T., & Waters, A. (1987). English for specific purposes. London: Longman. Ilieva, R. (2000). Exploring culture in texts designed for use in adult ESL classrooms. TESL Canada Journal, 17 (2), 50- 63. Isin, E. F., & Wood, P. K. (1999). Citizenship and identity. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Jackson, P. (1968). Life in classrooms. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Jasso-Aguilar, R. (1999). Sources, methods and triangulation in needs analysis: A critical perspective in a case study of Waikiki hotel maids. English for specific purposes,18, 27- 46. Johnson, K. (1979). Communicative approaches and communicative processes. In C. Brumfit and K. Johnson (Eds.). The communicative approach to language teaching. pp. 192- 205. New York: Oxford University Press. Joshee, R., & Derwing, T. M. (2005). The unmaking of citizenship education for adult immigrants in Canada. Journal of International Migration and Integration, 6, 61-80. Kennedy, K. (2007). Student constructions of active citizenship: What does participation mean to students? British Journal of Educational Studies, 55 (3), 304- 324. Kumaravadivelu, B. (2008). Cultural globalization and language education. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (1997). Critical literacy and active citizenship. In S. Muspratt, A. Luke, & P. Freebody (Eds.), Constructing critical literacies: teaching and learning textual practice (pp. 95-124). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press. Lewis, L. H., and Williams, C. J. (1994). Experiential learning: past and present. New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education 62 (Summer 1994), 5-16. Marshall, T. H. (1950). Citizenship and social class and other essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Master, P. (2005). Research in English for specific purposes. In. E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of research in second language teaching and learning (pp. 99-115). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Morgan, B. (2002). Critical practice in community-based ESL programs: A Canadian perspective. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 1, 141-162. Morgan, B., & Ramanathan, V. (2005). Critical literacies and language education: Global and local perspectives. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 25, 151-169. Marx, K. (1983). Theses on Feuerbach. In E. Kamenka (Ed.), The portable Karl Marx (pp. 155-158). New York: Penguin Books. Norton, B. (2000). Identity and language learning. Harlow: Pearson.

Norton Pierce, B. & Stewart, G. (1997). The development of the Canadian Language Benchmark Assessment. TESL Canada Journal, 8 (2), 17- 31   
Parry, K. (1996). Culture, literacy, reading. TESOL Quarterly, 30, 665-692.   
Pavlenko, A. (2007). Autobiographic narratives as data in applied linguistics. Applied Linguistics, 28(2), 163-188.   
Pawlikowska-Smith, G. (2000). Canadian language benchmarks 2000. Ottawa: Centre for Canadian Language Benchmarks.   
Pennsylvania Department of Education (2006). ESL resources. Retrieved February 12, 2007 from http://www.pde.state.pa.us/able/lib/able/ pubs/focus0503.pdf.   
Pennycook, A. (1997). Vulgar pragmatism, critical pragmatism, and EAP. English for Specific Purposes, 16, 253-269.   
Pennycook, A. (2006). Postmodernism in language policy. In T. Ricento (Ed.), Introduction to language policy: theory and method (pp. 60-76). Malden, MA: Blackwell.   
Pinet, R. (2006). The contestation of citizenship education at three stages of the LINC 4 & 5 curriculum guidelines: Production, reception, and implementation. TESL Canada Journal, 24 (1), 1-21.   
Print, M. (2007). Citizenship education and youth participation in democracy. British Journal of Educational Studies, 55 (3), 325- 345.   
Rodowick, D. N. (2002). Introduction: Mobile citizens, media states. PMLA, 117 (1), 13- 23.   
Shohamy, E. (2007). The power of English tests, the power of the English language and the role of ELT. In J. Cummins & C. Davison (Eds.), The international handbook of English language teaching (pp. 521- 532). New York: Springer.   
Skehan, P. (2002). A non-marginal role for tasks. ELT Journal 56(3), 289-295.   
Stasiulis, D and Bakan, A. (2005). Negotiating citizenship: Migrant women in Canada and the global system. Toronto: Toronto University Press.   
Steinman, L. (2005). Writing life 1 in language 2. McGill Journal of Education, (40)1, 65- 79.   
Thompson, C. (2002). Teaching critical thinking in EAP courses in Australia. TESOL Journal, 11(4), 15-20.   
Thomson, R. I., & Derwing, T. M. (2004). Presenting Canadian values in LINC: The roles of textbooks and teachers. TESL Canada Journal, 21(2), 17-33.   
Vandrick, S. (1999). ESL and the colonial legacy: A teacher faces her ‘missionary kid’ past. In G. Haroian-Guerin (Ed.), The personal narrative: Writing ourselves as teachers and scholars (pp. 63-74). Portland, Maine: Calendar Islands Publishers.   
Wallerstein, N., & Auerbach, E. (2004). Problem-posing at work: Popular educator’s guide. Edmonton: Grass Roots Press.   
Westheimer, J. & Kahne, J. (2004). Teaching citizenship: Preparing students to become effective, active participants in our democracy. Virginia Journal of Education. 97(5) February.   
Wong, P., Duff, P., & Early, M. (2001). The impact of language and skills training on immigrants’ lives. TESL Canada Journal, 18 (2), 1- 31.   
Zhou, X., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (1994). Words, morphemes and syllables in the Chinese mental lexicon. Language and Cognitive Processes, 9, 393-422.