# Short vs. extended adolescent academic writing: A cross-genre analysis of writing skills in written definitions and persuasive essays

Claire w. Jo1

Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Larsen Hall 303, 14 Appian Way, Cambridge, MA, 02138, United States

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Academic writing   
Adolescent EFL   
EFL writing   
Written definition   
Persuasive essay   
Cross-genre analysis

The aim of this study was to explore the potential of a short writing task in assessing academic writing (Aw) skills hypothesized to be relevant to extended academic writing in adolescent English as a Foreign Language (EFL) learners. Written definitions have been found to predict literacy achievement. Yet neither the language demands posed by written definitions nor their potential to serve as a complementary writing task to assess some dimensions of academic writing has been explored. This study examined associations between AW skills in written definitions and persuasive essays in 180 adolescent EFL learners from Korea and China to contribute information relevant to providing targeted feedback and instruction on essay writing.

Essay-based AW features were analyzed at the lexical, syntactic and discourse levels; definitionbased AW features were analyzed for lexical precision, syntactic complexity, grammatical accuracy, and informativeness. Definitional skills (lexical precision, syntactic complexity, and informativeness) demonstrated significant correlations with essay quality. The syntactic complexity of definitions emerged as a significant predictor of essay quality beyond the contribution of essaybased Aw features. Results suggest that written definitions could be incorporated into classrooms to ensure a more accurate and comprehensive evaluation of writing performance and to offer targeted instruction on writing development.

# 1. Introduction

The ability to deliver one's ideas in academic writing in secondary chool is widely recognized as a vital element of successin both academic and professional endeavors in adulthood (Biancarosa & Snow, 2006; Geiser & Studley, 2002; Leki, 2003; Light, 2001; Schleppegrell 2001). Employing appropriate sets of writing skills enables students to become successful writers of various gen. res--organizational structures that serve particular communicative purposes (Martin, 1994; Martin & Rose, 2007; Paltridge, 2014) One such genre, academic dictionary-like definitions are widely used as a pedagogical tool in classrooms to teach new concepts to students and have bee found to predict aademic achievement (Benelli et al, 206; Gutierrez-Clellen & DeCurtis 1999; Kurland & Snow, 1997; Marinellie, 2010; Scott & Nagy, 1997; Sinclair, 1986. In comparison to written definitions, persuasive essays, a prominent genre of extended academic writing, are introduced as an essential part of writing instruction and assessment in middle schoo. Students are expected to become proficient in this genre of writing by the end of high school as college entrance exams (e.g, SAT) usually include this form of writing (Hillcks, 2002; McNamara e al., 2012) and are a major form of evaluation in undergraduateand graduate-level classes.

For many adolescent English as a foreign language (EFL) learners learning outside English-dominant settings, the use of language features specific to academic writing poses many challenges. In the context of two East Asian countries, Korea and China, the primary objective of secondary school English classes is to prepare students for high-stakes and matriculation exams that asess the ability to understand, but not necessarily produce English (CSAT in Korea; Gaokao in China; EF Education First, 2015; Kang, 2005; Leedham 2014; Shin et l., 2011). These exams are predominantly aimed a asssing recetive knowledge in grammar, vocabulary, reading and listening, mostly through multiple-choice questions and cloze tests (Leedham, 2014; hin et l., 2011). As a result, minimal instructional time i dedicated to teaching academic writing in secondary schol EFL cassrooms (Cho & Brutt-riffler, 2015; Leeham, 2014; Shin et l., 2011). This study was motivated by the potential to use wrtten definitions not as a means f teaching new concepts but as a less time-consuming writing task to assess some academic writing (AW) skills relevant to extended writig. Moreover, this study explores students from Korea and China since despite the similarity in the educational focus of EFL classes in the two countries their writing systems show a stark contrast: The Korean alphabet (Hangul) is almost compleely phonetic-each letter represents a specific sound-- whereas Mandarin Chinese (Hanzi) i predominantly logographic each symbol either represents a word or minimal unit of meaning. By comparing students learning English in similar educational setings with similar goals but who come from markedly different writing systems, I aim to additionally investigate potential differences in adolescent EFLs performances on the two writing tasks by L1 writing systems.

Regular, strategic evaluation of students' writing performance through short writig tasks, namely write definitions, may be one possible instructional strategy in an educational environment that offrs limited opportunities to lean academic writing. Several language components required to produce written definitions use of the precise lexicon and the ability to communicate using complex syntactic structures-mirror some vital AW skls (ie, lexical richness and syntactic complexity called upon in persuasive essays. Depite potential pedagogical benefits of written defintions, neither the language demands posed by this short writing task nor its ability to serve as a complementary writing task to asess some dimensions of academic writing in adolescent EFL leaners has been investigated. The secondary school years mark an important period in writing development as i is during this period that we see a noticeable increase in language demands imposed on students as they learn more complex and abstract knowledge than in the elementary school years (Schleppegrell, 2004; Snow & Uccell, 2009). The relationship between definitional skill and academic writing proficiency in the understudied adolescent EFL population in secondary school thus deserves attention. In addition, the majority of previous studies have focused on the elementary grades, leaving a research gap in students definitional skill in secondary school. In an attempt to address this research gap, this study examines associations between AW sklls in two genres f academic writing--writen definitions (a short writing task) and persuasive essays (an extended writing task) to contribute information relevant to providing targeted feedback and instruction on essay writing in secondary school EFL classrooms.

# 1.1. Academic writing skills in EFL contexts

In East Asia, the main goal of learning English tends to be for successful entrance into prestigious universte and for obtaining employment with major companies that require the ability to understand English. Moving beyond receptive competence in English it is vital to also explore EFLs competence in productive skill for several reasons. English proficiency is no longer defined simply by a high score on an exam. In the increasingly diverse and interconnected world of the 21st century, English has become a prevalent medium for exchanging ideas with people outside of one's country in various sectors, such as business politics, science, technology and academia (Bhatia, 2008; Crystal, 2003; Hyland, 2009; Paltridge, 2014). Writen communication using digital technology in En glish is now essential in business while researchers in the humanities and sciences frequently exchange their research findings via international journal articles wrtten in English. Thus, a high level of receptive knowledge in English alone is no longer adequate for people to participate actively in thi global exchange. Complex communication kills in writig and speaking are expected to be in even greater demand in the future to share, negotiate and critique ideas and plans with colleagues around the globe (Schleicher, 2010) While there have been some notable studies on adolescent Englishas Second/Foreign Language (L2) earners in the recent years e., Enright & Gilliland, 2011; Enright & Quinlan, 2010; Harklau, 2002, 2011; Kibler, 2010, 2011; Ortmeier-Hooper & Enright, 2011; Yi 2010), the rapidly expanding adolescent EFL population has been minimally explored. Furthermore, the current study, which compares writing killsacros two different writing genre, is a dearture from past 2 studie on genre-based pedagogy-- teaching writing for different text types (e.g., explanation, argumentation) (Chen & Su, 2012; Feez, 1998, 2002; Ferris & Hedgcock, 2013; Gebhard et al., 2013; Hyland, 2004, 2007; Nagao, 2019; Worden, 2018).

# 1.2. Measurement of written definitions: window into key academic wring skills

Another genre of academic writing, written definitions have demonstrated a correlation with literacy tasks: reading comprehen. sion, vocabulary knowledge and academic language roficiency (Snow et al, 2007; Ucelli et a., 2015; celliet al. under review). In the Aristoteliantradtion, the writing of dintions draws on several vita aademic language skils that are hyothesizdto berelevant to essay writing quality: lexical precision-use of precise superordinate (genus proximum) that indexes the word's taxonomical category (e.g., anger is an emotion, winter i a season); syntactic complexity-- embedded clauses, extended noun phrases or nominalizations (forming of nouns from verbs or adjectives) that distinguishes the defined word from other words of the same genus (differentia secica) (e., vehicle that hs wo whees nd pedls); and informativenesthe inclusion f relevant content fatures in the definion (Bliet al, 2006 Pillips lowa  ecelli, 2015; Sctt  Ngy, 1991, 1997; S t al, 991; Ccelli e al., 2015; Uccelli e al. under review). Lexical precision has been documented as a vital element of academic writing that requires developing writers to communicate information precisely by gradually employing more complex and abstract (or academic) vocabulary throughout the school years (Bar-Ilan & Berman, 2007; Berman & Nir-Sagiv, 2007; Berman & Verhoeven, 2002; Olinghouse & Leaird, 2009; Ucelli et al, 2015). Higher proficiency inacademic writing has also been associated with more developed morpho-syntactic skills: packing multiple ideas into few sentences. More advanced writers tend to include a greater number of subordinate clauses in academic writing and the depth of their interdependence (i.e., the level of embedding of asubordinated clause) increases with development in writig skils; adult writers frequently embed thre or more clauses into a single sentence (Crowhurst, 1980, 1987; Nippold et al., 2005; Rubin, 1982; Scott, 2004, pp. 340-362).

Lexical precision, syntactic complexit, and informativeness, have been explored in defintional writing in prior research by Ueelli and others. Phillips Galloway and Ucelli (2015) explored lexicogrammatical skills (lexical precision and morpho-syntactic complexity) in written definitions as linguistc skills that support expository writing and found that they captured within-grade and across-grade variability in upper-elementary and middle chool students in the U.S. Uccelli and colleagues' (2015) study similarly found that written defintions scored for superordinate precision (i.., lexical precision), structural density (i.e., morphosyntactic complexit), and informativeness predicted reading comprehension of students in Grades 4 to 8.I another study, moreover, Ucelli and colleagues (under review) developed an innovative tol, the Academic Noun Definition Scoring system (ANDef)-comprised of lexical precision, structural conciseness i.., morpho-syntactic complexity) and informativenessto score 1624 witten defintions of well-known words. Using ANDef, they found that definitional skill predicted academic language proficiency in early adolescents.

Rubrics developed for specific aspects of definitional writing i.e, lexical precision, syntactic complexity, grammatical accuracy, and informativenes could allow reliable assesment of searat AW skils that suport essa writig while reducing the influence of topic knowledge and the cognitive demands inherent t extended essay writing (Phillips Galloway & Uecelli, 2015). In the present study, I explore lexical precision, syntactic complexity, grammatical, and informativeness in writen definitions as AW features that predict persuasie essay quality since they have displayed corrlations with iteracy achievement (i.e, reading comprehension, vocabulary knowledge, and academic language proficiency) in early adolescents in previous research. Moreover, several language components required to produce writte definitions (i.e., lexical precision and syntactic complexity) have been associated with the quality of aademic eys in the literature. anguage sill in writen defintions a short aademic witing enre, a thus expectd to reflect everal A skill similarly called upon i persuasive essays, an extendd academic writig genre and a key litracy task hat has not been explored in relation to definitional skills.

# 1.3. Measurement of persuasive essays

The demands of persuasive essays, a prominent genre of extended academic writing, typically call upon writers to incorporate many features of academic language in order to communicative recisely, concisely and reflectively. Some of the main functions served by these features include: lexical precision (eg, using diverse and precise vocabulary); dense information packing (e.g., including nominalizations and complex syntax); explit discourse organization (e.g., using markers to signal text transitions); and expression of academic stance (e.g., using marker that signal the writers attitude toward a claim) (Schleppegrell 2004; Snow & eelli, 209; Uccelli t al., 2013). ased on prior research, I explored some key features of academic writing that predict essay quality in this study. Limited reearch evidence xists on specific predictors of esay qualit in adolescent EF writing as that the majority of L2 reearch has focused on universty-level students. In earlier studies, I found that AW featuresi.e., lexical diversity, syntactic complexity, the diversity of discourse markers, and the presence of an explicit conclusion-significantly predicted the writing quality of persuasive essays written by adolescent EFLs (Jo, 2015, 2021). Given the scarcity of research on adolescent EFL writing, empirical data on L1 development is also helpful in anticipating which AW features might be associated with essay quality. Research on adolescent and college writers has identified syntactic complexity (Beers & Nagy, 2007; McNamara etal., 2010), lexical diversty, and word frequency as predictive of expository writing quality (McNamara et al., 2010). Furthermore, Uccelli and cllagues (2013) found that beyond lexico-grammatical intricacy, the frequency of organizational markers and epistemic hedges significantly predicted high school persuasive essays' writing quality.

Informed by the scholarship reviewed above, this cross-genre study will explore associations between AW sills in written defi nitions and persuasivesays with the ultimate goal of examining the potentia of written definitions to serve as a complementary short writing task to evaluate adolescent EFLs' writing proficiency.

This study was guided by the following three research questions:

1. Are there differences between Korean and Chinese adolescent EFs in overallessay qualit, definition-based AW features (lexical precision, syntactic complexity, grammatical accuracy, and informativeness, and essay-based AW features (lexical richness, syntactic complexity, and discourse structure)?   
2. Are definition-based AW features (lexical precision, syntactic complexit, grammatical accuracy, and informativeness associated with overall essay quality and essay-based AW features (lexical richness,syntactic complexity, and discourse structure)?   
3. Controlling for L1, do definition-based AW features (lexical precision, syntactic complexity, grammatical accuracy, and informativeness) predict overall essay quality?

# 2. Material and methods

# 2.1. Participants

A total of 180 students 80 EFL students in Korea; 100 EFL students in China participated in this study. Allstudents were in middle school (equivalent to U.S. grades $7 { - } 9 ) ^ { 2 }$ located in middle-class neighborhoods in large cities in their home countries. Overall, students demonstrated intermediate English proficiency (Level 3 out of 6 levels or \*independent leaners") on the CEFR Global Scale (Council of Europe, 2021) following a general English proficiency test (EF SET: EF Standard English Test) that provided an indication of students' general English proficiency levels. Below in Table 1 is the summary of the socio-demographic characteristics of the participants:

Participants were overall pproximately balanced overall for gender and school grade. Analysis by L1, however, indicated that there were more girls than boys in the Korean group and more boys than girls in the Chinese group. Also, the Korean students tended to be younger with almost a half of the Korean students in Grade 7, while a similarly large percentage of the Chinese students were in Grade 9. Looking at the CEFR levels, the two groups demonstrated the identical average level of English proficiency although the Korean group included students of a wider range of English abilities.

# 2.2. Instruments for data collection

Over two sessions, ll participants completed two asessments and a socio-demographic questionnaire via a digital platform on computer. Two assessments were group-administred following standard procedures with a classroom teacher present in the classroom during regular English classes. Below is the summary of the assessments:

# 2.2.1. Session I

Persuasive essay task: 40-minute extended writing task where all students were asked to write a one-page persuasive essay (approximately 250 words) in response to the same prompt selected from the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) (see Appendix A). A single holistic writing quality score was given. A writing prompt from the TOEFL--originally developed for older students (aged 16 and above) than the participants of this research--was used in this study, as the majority of L2 asessments for younger learners (e.g., The TOEFL Junior Tests) do not include writing. The TOEFL, as well as being one of the most prominent standardized assessments for EFLs alongside the International English Language Testing System (IELTS), is one of few L2 assess ments that require extended writing. Furthermore, TOEFL prompts typically do not require cultural background information or extensive knowledge of the topic, Thus choosing one from this pool was considered apropriat fr adolescent writers who may not be familiar with the English-speaking culture or may not yet have developed substantial knowledge on particular subject areas.

# 2.2.2. Session II

Definition task: a short writing task selected from an academic English proficiency test (CALs-I: Core Academic Language Skils Instrument) where students were asked to provide a definition for each of the three words bicycle, anger, winter. The three words on a scale of increasing abstractnessthat had been used and validated in prior research were adopted for the present study (Phillips Galloway  Uccelli, 2015; Ucell et al., 2015; Uccelli t al. under review). Students were iven a total of 10 minutes t write thee three definitions with no restrictions on the amount of time spent on each word. Four separate scores were generated for lexical precision, syntactic complexity, grammatical accuracy, and informativeness (See Appendix B for detailed descriptions of the Definition Scales).

# 2.3. Data analysis

After essays were transcribed by adapting CHAT (Codes for the Human Analysis of Transcripts) to written data (MacWhinney, 2011), AW features were analyzed using an automated language analysis program (CLAN: Computerized Language Analysis from the Child Language Exchange System (CHILDEs). In order for the CLAN to analyze essays for the frequency of individual AW features, essays had to be converte to the CHAT format without spelling errors to prevent the program from treating different spellings of a word as separate words. Essays were transcribed by three research assistants (RAs), who were graduate students in a language and literacy program. Using STATA Version 15, associations between definition-based AW features, and overall essay quality and essay-based AW features were examined through Pearson's pairwise correlational analyses; multiple regression analyses were conducted with overall essay quality as outcome and L1, essay-based and definition-based AW features as covariates.

Table 1 Participants' demographic characteristics.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Total (N = 180)</td><td>Korea (N = 80)</td><td>China (N = 100)</td><td>Chi-square value</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td>Gender</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>-Male</td><td>47% (84)</td><td>38% (30)</td><td>54% (54)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>-Female</td><td>53% (96)</td><td>62% (50)</td><td>46% (46)</td><td>4.89</td><td>.03</td></tr><tr><td> School Level</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Grade 7</td><td>37% (67)</td><td>49% (39)</td><td>28% (28)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>31% (55)</td><td>32% (26)</td><td>29% (29)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>32% (58)</td><td>19% (15)</td><td>43% (43)</td><td>12.83</td><td>.00</td></tr><tr><td>English Proficiency</td><td>M (SD)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>CEFR (1-6)</td><td>3.27 (1.00)</td><td>3.28 (1.63)</td><td>3.28 (.45)</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# 2.4. Rating writing quality

Two native speakers of English with teaching experience in secondary school rated essays. The overall quality of essays was measured using the holistic rubric from the TEFL (se Appendix ). Before reaching a singlescore, the 6-point scale rubric (0-5, with 5 being the highest score) guided a rater to consider multiple dimensions of writing quality including: addressig of the topic; organization and development of ideas with appropriate explanations and examples; unit, progression and coherence; and facility in the use of language, including demonstration of syntactic varit, and appropriate word choices and idiomaticit (correct use of idioms) The essays, without spelling corrections, were resented to the raters in random order to ensure that the raters were not influenced by the writing standards or characteristics of a particular group. Every essay was rated by each rater and f the two raters scores differed by one point, the average of the two was recorded and used in the analysis. For the essays that diffred by two or more points, the discrepancies were resolved through discussions between the raters and the researcher, and the final score was used in the analysis. The percent agreement between the two raters was $9 6 \%$ $\left( K = . 8 2 \right)$ . Only $4 \%$ of the essays did not exhibit either exact or adjacent (difference by one point) agreement.

Table 2 Persuasive essay data coding (Uccelli et al., 2013).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Name of Code</td><td>Description of Code</td><td>Examples</td></tr><tr><td>Length</td><td>Number of words, T-units and clauses per essay</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Lexical richness</td><td>Lexical diversity: variety of words in a text is measured through the widely used vocD that minimizes the impact of length in comparing texts of different lengths</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic complexity</td><td>Number of words per clause</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Discourse structure: : Organizational</td><td>Rates per clause in an essay</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>markers</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Frame markers:</td><td>Markers that signal the sequence of claims or contrastive positions in the argument</td><td>first, second; one reason is, another reason is</td></tr><tr><td>.Code glosses:</td><td>Markers that introduce an example or a paraphrase</td><td>for instance, for example, in other words</td></tr><tr><td>.Transition markers:</td><td>Markers that index inter-clauses or inter-paragraph relations of cause-consequence, contrast, and discourse transitions</td><td>because, even though, however, furthermore</td></tr><tr><td>.Conclusion markers: : Stance markers</td><td> Markers that express a summary or explicitly introduce the author&#x27;s conclusions</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Deontic markers:</td><td>Markers that express obligation, necessity, prohibition, or (dis)approval, displaying an absolute stance</td><td>should, it is wrong</td></tr><tr><td>Epistemic markers:</td><td>Markers that express the writer&#x27;s degree of certainty or beliefs about the truth of a given statement.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>a. Epistemic hedges:</td><td>Markers of degree of uncertainty that index a writer&#x27;s cautious attitude toward the truth of an assertion, including modal auxiliary verbs, adjectives, and adverbs</td><td>it might be true, it is absolutely true</td></tr><tr><td>b. Epistemic boosters:</td><td>Markers of emphatic certainty that index the writer&#x27;s commitment to the truth of an assertion</td><td>it is true, it is absolutely true)</td></tr><tr><td>c. Markers of beliefs:</td><td>Mental verbs through which the writer acknowledges that assertions are the result of one&#x27;s or other&#x27;s</td><td>I believe, people think</td></tr><tr><td>Overall essay quality</td><td>beliefs 6-point TOEFL holistic essay rubric</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# 2.5. Length

Essas were first divided into T-units  defined as thematic unit of complete and autonomous meaning- corresponding to a main clause plus all the subordinate clauses embedded in it (Hunt, 1965). Other length variable total number of words and the number of clauses per esay) were also calculated using an automated language analysis program, Tool for the Automatic Analysis of Syntactic Sophistication and Complexity (TAASsC) (Kyle, 2016).

# 2.6. Lexical and syntactic measures

Using vocD, essays were analyzed for lexical diversity by measuring the variety of words in a text. VocD, a widely used tool, has been found to minimize the impact of length in comparing texts of diffrent lengths (Duran et al., 2004). Additionall, syntactic complexity-- the number of words per clause in an essay (Beers & Nagy, 2007)-- was measured in CLAN.

# 2.7. Discourse measures

The coding adapted in this study for analyzing discourse features in the essays was based on previous studies on academic writing (Hyland, 2005) and adolescent writing development (Reilly et al., 2002; Uccell et al., 2013). It comprised two discourse dimensions: organizational markers (frame markers, code glosses, transition markers, and conclusion markers) informed by Hyland's (2005) research on metadiscourse markers; and stance markers (deontic markers, epistemic hedges, epistemic boosters, and marker of beliefs) following prior research on stance by Berman (2004), Reill e al. (2002), and Uccell et al. (2013) (ee Table 2for Coding Manual). Organizational markers function as explicit guidelines that signal relations across sentences and discourse fragments therey creating cohesion within a text (Givon, 1992; Vande Kopple, 1985). Stance markers index writers use of language to express their attitudes toward their claims (Berman & Ravid, 2009).

All esays were coded by RAs who wereblind to the overall essay qualit assigned by the two raters. Intercoder reliabilit (ICR) for the essays was estimated following standards in the field (Bakeman & Gottman, 1997). After coding $2 0 \%$ of the entire sample, ICR was calculated for each coding category of discourse markers. At the completion of coding the entire sample, ICR was calculated again. The RAs agreed on $9 5 \%$ or more of the cases (Cohen's weighted Kappa of .84 or higher) for each category of discourse markers for the entire sample.

# 2.8. Rating definitional skills

Definition-based AW features were operationalized as the degre of adherence to the conventions of academic definitions along four dimensions: lxical precision; syntactic complexity; grammatical accuracy; and informativenes. The scale for measuring lexical precision and syntactic complexity were developed and previously used by Uccell and colleagues (Phillips Galloway & Uecclli, 2015; Uccelli et al. under review), and the informativenesscale-- also used in the researchers' studies-- was adapted from Snow et al. (1991). Moreover I developed the grammatical accuracy scale for this study (See Appendix A for detailed descriptions of the Definitin Scales). How each definitional skill was scored is summarized below in Table 3:

Two trained coders scored the definitions and every definition was double-rated. IRR was calculated for each dimension. Cohen's kappa coefficients for all four dimensions were above .90: lexical precision $=$ .96; syntactic complexity $= . 9 4$ ; informativeness $=$ .92;

Table 3 Scales for Definitional Skills: A single score is given for each definitional skill.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Definitional Skill</td><td>Scale</td><td>Description of the Scale.</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical precision</td><td>Five-point (0-4)</td><td>Measures the degree of precision of the term used to indicate the category to which a noun belongs (i.e., superordinate) given that the use of the most specific superordinate is a key feature of academic definitions. E.g., Labeling bicycle as &quot;vehicle&quot; receives a higher score than using a generic term, *thing,&quot; as the former superordinate is more precise (Snow, 1990).</td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic complexity</td><td>Seven-point (0-6)</td><td>Captures the level of morpho-syntactic complexity in definitions. Using the formal structure of definitions as a reference point-i.e., genus (superordinate) + diferentia (compact syntactic clauses or phrases) (Scott &amp; Nagy, 1997)-this scoring system captures various morpho-syntactic features (e.g., presence of extended noun phrases, embedded clauses, passive voice, and nominalization).</td></tr><tr><td>Grammatical accuracy</td><td>Four-point (0-3)</td><td>Measures the amount of grammatical errors in each definition ranging from no grammatical erors to serious grammatical errors that obscure meaning or an incomplete sentence.</td></tr><tr><td>Informativeness</td><td>Three-point (02)</td><td>Separate score is given to each of the content features (e.g., category, attribute or mechanism) necessary to describe each noun (Snow et al., 1991). Then, the average score across all content features is calculated.</td></tr></table></body></html>

grammatical accuracy $=$ .91. For each definitional skill, an average score across the three definitions was calculated.

# 3. Results

# 3.1. Performance on persuasive essays

Korean and Chinese students' performances on persuasive essays were compared using independent groups t-tests with a Bonferroni-adjusted alpha level of.025 (.05/20). As summarized in Table 4, the overall qualit of essays and the use of AW features in essays were largely similar for both groups. The average score was almost 3 (out of apossble total score of 5) for the entire sample according to the OEFL rubric, (Educational Testing Service, 2014). The only significant dfference between the two groups was that Korean students on average demonstrated a higher levelf yntactic complexity. Oveall, both groups differed minimally in their use of discourse markers as evidenced by small to moderate effect sizes (Cohen's d) with only significant differences in the use of deontic markers, epistemic boosters, and in the diversity of stance markers.

# 3.2. Performance on written definitions

Independent groups t-tests with a Bonferroni-adjusted alpha level of .0125 (.05/4) were conducted. Students' performance on written definitions, imilarly, did not reveal substantial ifferences by L1 in any of the four dimensions with the exception of infor. mativeness (Korean $\mathrm { M } = 1 . 0 8$ ${ \mathrm { S D } } = . 3 8 { }$ ; Chinese $\mathbf { M } = . 8 9$ ${ \mathrm { S D } } = . 3 5$ $\mathbf { E S } = . 5 3 $ as shown in Table 5. Students displayed a relatively high level of lexical richnessindicated by their ability to select the precise superordinate for each word, achieving almost 3 out f apossible total score of 4.In contrast, students typically demonstrated an elementary level f syntactic complexity. For grammatical accuracy, students typically made minor grammatical mistakes (2 out of a possible total core of 3) in their definitions that did not interfere with meaning. The results show, aditionally, that the prototypical student included a half (.97 out of 2) of the relevant information required to fully describe each word.

Examples of students writte definitions in able illustrat variability in defintional kills For instance, one student who wrote a definition for bicycle featuring a precise superordinate (vehicle) and grammatically accurate, complex syntax with a pre-modifie ecofriendly vehicle) and a relative clause (that moves by human force), as well as including all esential content features (categorization, attribute, components, function, mechanism), received a high score on all dimensions of definition writing quality; the student who provided a minimall informative definition using a general term (taffi thing), and simple syntax with a simple adjective and noun received a low score.

Table 4 Performance on persuasive essays: Comparisons by first language.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Total M (SD)</td><td>Korea (n=80)</td><td>China (n=100)</td><td>t</td><td>P</td><td>ES</td></tr><tr><td>Overall Quality (0-5)</td><td>2.88 (.89)</td><td>2.91 (.91)</td><td>2.87 (.88)</td><td>.08</td><td>.05</td><td>.01</td></tr><tr><td>Words</td><td>287.86 (129.02)</td><td>295.65. (155.83)</td><td>282.54 (107.47)</td><td>.51</td><td>.03</td><td>.08</td></tr><tr><td>Clauses</td><td>36.37 (15.98)</td><td>36.19 (19.06)</td><td>36.50(13.58)</td><td>-.27</td><td>.04</td><td>-.04</td></tr><tr><td>T-units</td><td>22.99 (9.52)</td><td>21.90. (10.99)</td><td>23.73 (8.35)</td><td>-1.41</td><td>.01</td><td>-.22</td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic complexity</td><td>7.94 (1.46)</td><td>8.26 (1.24)</td><td>7.73 (1.57)</td><td>2.24</td><td>.00*</td><td>.35</td></tr><tr><td>vocD (Lexical diversity)</td><td>70.30 (21.36)</td><td>67.32 (22.38)</td><td>72.35 (20.49)</td><td>-1.75</td><td>.00</td><td>-.27</td></tr><tr><td>Frequency of Discourse Markers</td><td>24.22 (11.39)</td><td>24.07 (13.68)</td><td>24.33 (9.58)</td><td>-.28</td><td>.04</td><td>-.04</td></tr><tr><td>Organizational Markers</td><td>11.78 (5.99)</td><td>12.64</td><td>11.19 (4.89)</td><td>1.44</td><td>.01</td><td>.23</td></tr><tr><td>Frame markers</td><td>1.45 (1.66)</td><td>(7.26) 1.80 (1.79)</td><td>1.21 (1.53)</td><td>2.25</td><td>.01</td><td>.36</td></tr><tr><td>Code glosses</td><td>1.19 (1.16)</td><td>1.39 (1.13)</td><td>1.05 (1.17)</td><td>1.84</td><td>.03</td><td>.29</td></tr><tr><td>Transition markers</td><td>8.80 (4.98)</td><td>9.04 (6.02)</td><td>8.63 (4.14)</td><td>.42</td><td>.03</td><td>.08</td></tr><tr><td>Conclusion markers</td><td>.34 (.53)</td><td>.38 (.57)</td><td>.32 (.51)</td><td>.68</td><td>.03</td><td>.11</td></tr><tr><td>Stance Markers</td><td>12.45 (6.99)</td><td>11.46 (7.74)</td><td>13.12 (6.37)</td><td>-1.65</td><td>.00</td><td>-.24</td></tr><tr><td>Deontic markers</td><td>2.06 (2.27)</td><td>1.46 (2.29)</td><td>2.47 (2.17)</td><td>-2.99</td><td>.00**</td><td>-.45</td></tr><tr><td>Epistemic hedges</td><td>3.22 (3.36)</td><td>3.45 (3.94)</td><td>3.06 (2.90)</td><td>.68</td><td>.02</td><td>.12</td></tr><tr><td>Epistemic boosters</td><td>3.85 (3.18)</td><td>2.94 (3.37)</td><td>4.48 (2.90)</td><td>-3.26</td><td>.00**</td><td>-.49</td></tr><tr><td>Markers of belief</td><td>3.31 (2.17)</td><td>3.61 (2.57)</td><td>3.11 (1.84)</td><td>1.39</td><td>.01</td><td>.23</td></tr><tr><td>Diversity of Discourse Markers</td><td>5.94 (1.40)</td><td>5.81 (1.33)</td><td>6.03 (1.45)</td><td>-1.34</td><td>.01</td><td>-.16</td></tr><tr><td>Organizational Markers</td><td>2.58 (.90)</td><td>2.70 (.88)</td><td>2.50 (.90)</td><td>1.29</td><td>.01</td><td>.22</td></tr><tr><td> Stance Markers</td><td>3.36 (.85)</td><td>3.12 (.85)</td><td>3.53 (.81)</td><td>-3.72</td><td>.00**</td><td>-.51</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. ES= Effect size ${ } ^ { * } \mathbf { p } < . 0 2 5 \ { } ^ { * * } \mathbf { p } < . 0 0 5$

Table 5 Performance on written definitions: Comparisons by first language.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Total M (SD)</td><td>Korea (n = 80)</td><td>China (n = 100)</td><td>t</td><td>p</td><td>ES</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical Precision (0-4)</td><td>2.78 (1.12)</td><td>2.82 (1.22)</td><td>2.75 (1.06)</td><td>.36</td><td>.19</td><td>.06</td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic Complexity (0-6)</td><td>2.15 (.99)</td><td>2.14 (1.1)</td><td>2.15 (.91)</td><td>-.00</td><td>.25</td><td>-.00</td></tr><tr><td>Grammatical Accuracy (0-3)</td><td>2.09 (.63)</td><td>2.07 (.75)</td><td>2.09 (.54)</td><td>-.15</td><td>.22</td><td>-.02</td></tr><tr><td>Informativeness (0-2)</td><td>.97 (.37)</td><td>1.08 (.38)</td><td>.89 (.35)</td><td>3.42</td><td>.00**</td><td>.53</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. ES $=$ Effect size. $^ { * * } \mathfrak { p } < . 0 1 2 5$

Table 6 Written definitions produced by adolescent EFL learners: Illustrative examples.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Bicycle</td><td>Anger</td><td>Winter</td></tr><tr><td>High Definition Writing Quality</td><td>A bicycle is an eco-friendly vehicle with several wheels attached that moves by human force. [Korean boy, Grade 8]</td><td>Anger is one of the human or animals&#x27;. emotion that comes from the sense they are ignored by others. [Korean girl, Grade 7]</td><td>Winter is the coldest season among the four seasons when you may see natural snow, ice, etc. in certain places. [Chinese boy, Grade 9]</td></tr></table></body></html>

3.3. Correlation of essay-based and definition-based academic writing features with overall essay quality

Pairwise correlation coeficients with a Bonferroni-adjusted alpha level of .004 (.05/14) revealed that ombined definition scores, as wellas several esay-based and defintion-based AW features were significantly associated with overll esay quality as shown in Table 7. The significant associations f al essay length variables with overallessay qualit indicated the need to control for essay length in the susequent regresson analyses. Ofesay-based AW feature, syntactic complexity (measured by words per clause), lexical diversity (vocD) showed significant correlations with overall essay quality $( \mathbf { r } = . 3 8 $ $\mathsf { p } < . 0 0 3 6 )$ . Moreover, the diversities of both organizational markers and stance markers, as well as the combined diversity of the two (diversty of discourse markers) were significanly ssociated with overallesay quality. I is important to note that combined definition scores acrossall three words showed a significant moderate association with overall essay quality $( \mathbf { r } = . 3 0 $ $\mathsf { p } < . 0 0 3 6 \AA$ . All definition variables, except for grammatical accuracy, also showed significant correlations with overallessay quality. It is worth noting that the syntactic complexit f esays and the syntactic complexity of definitions weresignificantly corrlated, suggesting that written definitions might reflect some key AW skill typiclly assesed through extended writing tass. Several definition-based AW features alsodisplaye significant moderat to strong associations with one another--e.g., between lexical precision and syntactic complexity $( \mathbf { r } = . 6 5 $ $\mathsf { p } < . 0 0 3 6 )$ , and between lexical precision and grammatical accuracy $( \mathbf { r } = . 4 4$ $\mathsf { p } < . 0 0 3 6 \AA$ highlighting that definitional skills are interrelated.

Table 7 Pairwise correlations among overall essay quality, esay-based features, and definition-based features.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>6</td><td>7</td><td>8</td><td>9</td><td>10</td><td>11</td><td>12</td><td>13</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>1. Overall Essay Quality</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. Words</td><td>.60*</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. Clauses</td><td>.58*</td><td>.93*</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4. T-units</td><td>.49*</td><td>.85*</td><td>.89*</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5. Syntactic complexity</td><td>.16*</td><td>.22*</td><td>-.13</td><td>-.05</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6. Lexical diversity (vocD)</td><td>.37*</td><td>.33*</td><td>.22*</td><td>.23*</td><td>.32*</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7. Diversity of Organizational Markers</td><td>.32*</td><td>.34*</td><td>.30*</td><td>.33*</td><td>.11</td><td>.14.</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8. Diversity of Stance Markers</td><td>.37*</td><td>.36*</td><td>.38*</td><td>.45*</td><td>-.07</td><td>.16*</td><td>.30*</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9.Diversity of Discourse Markers Definition-Based Features</td><td>.45*</td><td>.45*</td><td>.43*</td><td>.48*</td><td>.03</td><td>.19*</td><td>.82*</td><td>.79*</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10. Combined Definition Score</td><td>.30*</td><td>.23*</td><td>.15*</td><td>.10</td><td>.23*</td><td>.36*</td><td>.02</td><td>-.04</td><td>-.01</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>11. Lexical Precision</td><td>.25*</td><td>.17</td><td>.07.</td><td>.04</td><td>.14</td><td>.28*</td><td>.02</td><td>-.07</td><td>-.03</td><td>.92*</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12. Syntactic Complexity</td><td>.38*</td><td>.32*</td><td>.25*</td><td>.13</td><td>.22*</td><td>.36*</td><td>.02</td><td>.03</td><td>.03</td><td>.88*</td><td>.65*</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>13. Grammatical Accuracy</td><td>.12.</td><td>.10</td><td>.13</td><td>.04</td><td>-.01</td><td>.04</td><td>.04</td><td>-.00</td><td>.03</td><td>.44*</td><td>.45*</td><td>.31*</td><td>1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>14. Informativeness</td><td>.23*</td><td>.29*</td><td>.18*</td><td>.12</td><td>.30*</td><td>.33*</td><td>.28*</td><td>.01</td><td>-.04</td><td>.75*</td><td>.66*</td><td>.53*</td><td>.41*</td><td>1</td></tr></table></body></html>

$\mathfrak { ^ { * } p } < . 0 0 3 6$

# 3.4. Definition-based AW feature as predictor of overall essay quality

The next step in my analyses was to investigate whether the relationships found in the correlation analyses would remain sig nificant ater I tok ther factors into ccount. All esay-based and defintion-base predictors were irs standardized using -cores as the rubric for scoring essays and different dimensions of definitions were on different scales.In the first set of regression analyes, I explored whether definition-based AW features would explain variance in overall esay quality. The number of clauses, a reliable unit of text segmentation in expository texts (Berman & Verhoeven, 2002), was selected as a measure of length in my analysis L1 and essay length--the control variables in the regression analyses-- explained $3 2 \%$ of the variance in the quality of essays (Table 8). As shown in Table 7, even after controlling for L1 and essay length, the syntactic complexity of definitions contributed an additional $6 \%$ , explaining a total of $3 8 \%$ of the variance in overall essay quality.

# 3.5. Definition-based AW feature as predictor of overall essay quality beyond the contribution of essay-based predictors

I then examined whether the syntactic complexity of definitions would remain a significant predictor f overallessay qualit after controlling for L1, essay length, and essay-based AW features (Table 9). Variables that displayed significant corrlations with essay scores were selected to be included as covariates in the hierarchical regression analyses. The two essay-based AW features (., syntactic complexity of essays and the diversity of discourse markers) were used as covariates to examine if the syntactic complexit of definitions could measure additional AW skill that predict essay quality that are not captured through the AW features i essays.

Using Model 2, containing L1 and essay length, as a baseline model, the additional impact of the essay-based AW variables was explored in Models 3 and 4. The syntactic complexity of esays showed a significant main effct explaining an additional $4 \%$ of the variance in essay quality. Additionally, the diversity of discourse markers explained an additional $6 \%$ of the variance. Model 5 revealed that the syntactic complexity of defintions made a significant independent contribution to explain individual differences in overal essay quality accounting for an additional $6 \%$ of the variance in the essay writing quality over and above the contribution of students' L1, esay length, and essay-based AW features. The final model that included two essay-based AW features (syntactic complexity of essays and diversity of discourse markers) and the syntactic complexity of definitions accounted for $4 8 \%$ of the variance in the overall quality of essays. Interestingly, whether students had Korean or Chinese as their 1 did not have a significant impact on their essay quality. Regresson analyses revealed that higher-quality essays tended to be longer, more syntacticall complex and characterized by a wider range of discourse markers. Most importantly, students who wrote more syntactically complex definitions tended to produce persuasive essays of higher quality.

Illustrating Domains of Individual Variability in Adolescent EFL Learners' Persuasive Essays: Two Illustrative Examples

Two essays in Table 10 were selected to represent the higher and lower ends of the overal essay writig qualit ontinuum inthe corpus. Essay 1, representing high writing quality, received a score of 4 out of 5, while Essay 2, representing low writing quality, received a score of 1 on the holistic scale.

As displayed below, Essay 1 incorporates the two essay-based AW features that were found to contribute to overall esay quality. This essay is more syntactically complex featuring 11.29 words per clause on average, noticeably higher than the sample mean $( \mathbf { M } =$ 7.94) Essay 1 also features several different ways f creating cohesion using a wide range of iscourse markers: 6different categories out of 8. The deintions writen by the same student also demonstrates relatively well-delopd definitional skils reiving anoerall score of 3 out of 4.

In contrast, Eay 2 shows a noticeably lower level of syntactic complexity with an average of 7.28 words per clause, sightly below the sample mean $( \mathbf { M } = 7 . 9 4 )$ I, and features a narrower range of discourse markers (3 categories). The definitions produced by the writer of Essay 2 also illustrate lower definitional skills with an overall score of 1.5.

Table 8 Rereiom ttf  ti mptio rl qit   t  y length, (SE).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Parameter Estimates</td><td>M1</td><td>M2</td><td>M3</td></tr><tr><td>L1</td><td>-.04 (.14)</td><td>-.03 (.12)</td><td>-.07 (.13)</td></tr><tr><td>Essay length (Clauses)</td><td></td><td>.03*** (.00)</td><td>.03*** (.00)</td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic Complexity of Definitions</td><td></td><td></td><td>.15* (.06)</td></tr><tr><td>Goodness of fit: R2</td><td>.00</td><td>.32</td><td>.38</td></tr></table></body></html>

$^ { * } \mathfrak { p } < . 0 5 . ^ { * * } \mathfrak { p } < . 0 1 . ^ { * * * } \mathfrak { p } < . 0 0 1$

Table 9 Regression models eting the efect of syntactic complexit fesays, iversty of discorse marker, and syntactic complexit f definitins on overall essay quality: Controlling for students' first language, and essay length, (SE).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Parameter Estimates</td><td>M1</td><td>M2</td><td>M3</td><td>M4</td><td>M5</td></tr><tr><td>L1</td><td>-.04 (.14)</td><td>-.03 (.12)</td><td>-.06 (.12)</td><td>-.07 (.11)</td><td>-.07 (.11)</td></tr><tr><td>Essay length (Clauses)</td><td></td><td>.03*** (.00)</td><td>.03*** (.00)</td><td>.03*** (.00)</td><td>.02*** (.00)</td></tr><tr><td>Essay-Based</td><td></td><td></td><td>.02** (.01)</td><td>.02* (.01)</td><td>.01* (.01)</td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic Complexity of Essays</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Diversity of Discourse Markers</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>.24*** (.06)</td><td>.25*** (.06)</td></tr><tr><td>Definition-Based</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>.14* (.05)</td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic Complexity of Definitions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Goodness of fit: R2</td><td>.00</td><td>.32</td><td>.36</td><td>.42</td><td>.48</td></tr></table></body></html>

$^ { * } \mathfrak { p } < . 0 5 . ^ { * * } \mathfrak { p } < . 0 1 . ^ { * * * } \mathfrak { p } < . 0 0 1 .$

Table 10 Adolescent EFL learners' persuasive essays and written definitions: Two illustrative examples.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Essay 1: High Writing Quality (Score 4)</td></tr><tr><td>Most f t   e   t  f  e   ie e    are boy   &quot; an&quot;u  l o h vactio Th  fferet s h   mivation anasiout is not  might be ronsible fo his plan and hae hard work  corast, we cant deie if  would work hd or t. Sond, e ca undestand ou faults on dng methng y expiig chne, is, and faure. T knw fts  s tothe etr, d  y ord was an American insrilist the ounder of th Ford Mor omany, d the sonsor f the dlome f te asbly line tchque f ms poction. e cd            riee ea e    , that h   e    rie</td></tr><tr><td>[Korean girl, Grade 7]</td></tr><tr><td>: Syntactic complexity: 11.29 words per clause (M = 7.94) : 6 categories of discourse markers (max. 8)</td></tr><tr><td>Definition: Overall Score (3 out of 4)</td></tr><tr><td>Bicycle a kind of transportation that works when someone pushes the pedals. Anger is a kind of feeling that a person feels when something dissatisfies him or her.</td></tr><tr><td>Winter is one of the four seasons that has the lowest temperature.</td></tr><tr><td>Essay 2: Low Writing Quality (Score 1) hi  </td></tr><tr><td>because it i good at careful planning but you don&#x27;t have taking risks or changes than you aren&#x27;t success. [Korean boy, Grade 8]</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>: Syntactic complexity: 7.28 words per clause (M = 7.94)</td></tr><tr><td>: 3 categories of discourse markers (max. 8)</td></tr><tr><td>Definition: Overall Score (1.5 out of 4).</td></tr><tr><td>Bicycle is a transportation that can exercise or go another place. Anger is someone who get depress or mad..</td></tr><tr><td>Winter is cold weather. When winter come, it has snow and cold.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4. Discussion

This study investigated the potential of written definitions-a short writing task-to reflect some key AW skillstraditionally assesse through extended essays. I explored associations between skills in wrten definitions and the qualit f persuasive essays produced by 180 adolescent EFL students, to determine whether definitions could be used to asess an important subset of AW skills calld upon in persuasive essay writing. Findings indicate that, as expected, the syntactic complexity of definitions was suficiently sensitive to capture a sustantial part of the variability in the overal qualit of persuasive essys. The syntactic complexity of three brief definitions was a significant predictor of overall esay quality beyond the contributio of L1 essay length, and two essay-based

AW features (.., syntactic complexity and diversity of discourse markers). In the following section, I interret the findings in light of previous studies, discuss pedagogical implications, and propose areas for further research.

# 4.1. Definitional skills as predictors of essay quality

The present study revealed some significant associations between AW skill in written definitions and persuasive essays. Not surprisingly, three definitional skills(ie, lexical precision, syntactic complexity, and informativeness), as well as the combined definition score across the three nouns, demonstrated significant correlations with overallesay quality and with individual essaybased Aw skill (i.e. lexical diversity and syntactic complexity) confirming the hypothesis that definitional skill reflect some AW skills caled upon in persuasivesays. These results are in line wit prior reearch that has documented an association of definitional skills with other aspects of school literacy performance, namely reading comprehension and vocabulary (Snow et al., 1989, 2007; Uecell et al, 2015. Interestingly, the four dimensions of definitional skill showed strong ssociations with one another. Students who wrote definitions that were more syntacticlly complex also tended to demonstrate higher levels of lexical precision, grammatical accuracy and provide more content features in defining a noun. Extending prior findings that lexical and syntactic skills develop concurrently, the indings from this study indicate that kills that support precis, concise, grammatical and information-rich writing are intertwined (Berman, 204; Phillips Galloway & Uecelli, 2015; Uccelliet al., 2013). In mapping the relationship with persuasive essay writing, the variaility in students' syntactic skill in defintions was found to be especially releant to predicting overall essay quality.

# 4.2. Essay-based academic writing skills as predictors of essay quality

In this study, I identified some of the discrete language skills that contribute to overall essay qualit, thus going beyond holistic writing rubrics (e.g., TOEFL writing rubrics) that are toogeneral to inform strategic writing instruction. I ine with previous research findings, syntactic complexity (Bers & Nagy, 2007; McNamara et al., 2010; Jo, 2021) and the diversity of discourse markers emerged as significant contributors to essay quality in adolescent writers (Jo, 2021). In addition, the iversty of discourse markers was a key predictor of overallessay quality in this study, confirming prior findings on adolescents' persuasive essay writig (Jo, 2021). Not surprisingly, high-quality essays displayed various ways f presenting and comparing ideas ofsuccesby adopting several different categories of discourse markers to create logical and temporal cohesion. The raters also favorably evaluated students' use of a wide range of stance markers i essays that allowed expression of different degrees of certainty and possility of their claims. This study expands the currentl available data on the association between the diversit of discourse markers and the quality of adolescent essays.

# 4.3. Syntactic complexity across written definitions and persuasive essays

The results from the present study highlight that syntactc skills cut across written defintions and persuasive essays. Extending prior research, this study revealed that the syntactic complexities of both written definitions and persuasive essays are significantly associated with overall esay quality. Interestingly, not only was the syntactic complexit of wrie definitions found to be signifi cantly correlated with that of persuasive essays, the former was also found to significantly and independently contribute to overal essay quality beyond the contribution of esay-basd AW feature. This finding suggest hat writen defintions might ases both some aspects of syntactic complexity demonstrated in persuasive esays and measure an additional set of syntactic skill not captured through persuasive essys. My study echoes and extends prior examinations of syntactic complexity using the average number of words per clause in an eay as apredictor of writing qualit in argumentatie essays (Bees & Nagy. 2007; Jo, 2021). In addition to analyzing syntactic complexity in persuasive essays using the same measure, this study explored the syntactic complexit of a diffrent writing genre (i.e., written definitions) through the structural density scale.

The structural density scale used to asses the syntactic complexity of definitions in this study sems to have fered a precise tool to assess individual dferences in students syntactic skils. This scale not oly tkes into consideration the number of wordsthe way of measuring the syntactic complexit of essays in ths study--but also the complexity of the structures. To ilustrate, the 7-point structural density scale makes the distinction between a score of 3 and 4 on the basis of how complex the pre-modifier i, not the number of words per clause. For instance, a 3-point definition (e.g., Bicycle is a fun [Pre-modifier] vehicle that people ride) may contain an equal or a greater number of words than a higher-quality, 4-point definition (Bicycle is a two-wheed [Pre-modifier] vehicle). Furthermore, the highest quality score-6 definition on the structural density scale must met all requirements for a score-5 definition and additionall contain at last one nominalization or passive voice verb. The findings highlight the ability of written defintions to efectively analyze the complexity of the syntactic structures in students writing as a complementary tool using a precise, sophisticated scale.

# 5. Conclusions

This study shows the potential of written definitions to serve as a precise, reliable tol to assessome dimensions of adolecent EFI learners' ability to select language resources required for academic writing. To my knowledge, this i the firs study to capture EFLS' AW proficiency through writen dfintions as wellas the firs study to examine defintionl skils s n index of te broader A skils demonstrated in persuasive essays in adolescent EFLs. The potential of wrten definitions as a complementary writing task and assessment i particularly releant to the secondary school FL clases that ffer limited opportunities to asses and practice extended writing (Kang, 2005; Leedham, 2014; Shin et al., 2011). This short writing task could be incorporated into current classoom practices to provide feedback on some key language skill relevant to esay writing using specific rubrics (i.e, exical precision, syntactic complexity, grammatical accuracy, and informativeness and targeted instruction on the areas in which students are struggling. In addition, teachers could supplement esays scores with definitional writing scores using precise rubrics for separate definitional writing skillsto ensure a more accurate and comprehensive evaluation of students' writing performance than by using holistc essay rubrics alone. While dfinitions may not rflect the full pectrum of W skils that support persuasive essay writig, definitional sils could provide a valuable window into the wider repertoire of AW skill demonstrated in persuasive essays. Written definitions may serve as highy scaffoldd excies, ether s part f reular lssons or homework for teachersto aluate eral specific writing skill in order to offer instruction targeted to students' needs to promote their writing development.

# 5.1. Limitations and future research directions

While this study compared students of similar age and socio-economic status in similar English learning environments in East Asia writing proficiency in thei 1 may have varied. Since the EFLs in this stuy were from midde-cass families with aces to high-quality English education, their performance on the assessments may not be representative of average early adolescent EFL students from Korea and China. Students in this sample were on average \*independent learners" of English (Level 3 out of 6 levels) according to the CEFR scale (Council of Europe, 2021). Whether the pattern of significant asociations between skills in written definitions and persuasive essas is partcular to writers at this proficiency level r is geralizable crosss f  wide range of proficiency leels, or L1s, remains tobe investigated. Future studies employing older, more xperienced EFL writer i high school and atthe universty level would shed further light on this pattern. Future studies could als explore the association in writing skill between written definitions and diffrent types of extended acadmic writing other than persuasive essays investigated here, such as narrative essays and research reports, for a more comprehensive cross-genre analysis In closing, although ths study leave several questions sil to be answered by future studies, these findings offer an important entry point into the potential of written definitions to complement the existing AW instruction and assessment in secondary school EFL classrooms.

# Author statement

Claire W. Jo: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis,Investigation, Data Curation, Writing-Original Draft Preparation, Writing-Reviewing and Editing, Visualization.

# Acknowledgements

The research reported here was supported by the EF Education First Grant at the Harvard Graduate School of Education and a TOEFL Grant for Doctoral Research in Second or Foreign Language Assessment to Dr. laire W. Jo from Educational Testing Service (ETS). The opinions expressed are those of the author and do not represent views of F Education First or ES. I express my gratitude to the students who shared their valuable time with me, to the staf at EF for their suport in collecting data, with special thanks to steve Crooks, reearch asstants at Harvard and Reomi Mito for coding th essays, and to my mentors, Paola Uecelli Catherine Snow, and Terry Tivnan for thir guidance throughout ths study. Finall, this work is dedicated in honor and loving memory of my mother, the late Mikyung Myung. I thank her from the bottom of my heart for her unwavering support, love, and encouragementI couldn't have done it without you, Mami Kangaroo!

# Appendix A

# Essay prompt

"Some people believe that success in life comes from taking riss or chances. Others believe that success results from careful planning. In your opinion, what does success come from? Use specific reasons and examples to explain your position." Educational Testing Service. (2014). Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL)Sample Writing Topics.

# Appendix B

Scales for Definitional Skills: A single score is given for each definitional skill.

Superordinate Precision Scale (Adapted from Phillips Galloway & Uccelli, 2015).

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>Example</td><td>Point</td></tr><tr><td>Non superordinate (absence)</td><td>Bicycle: it has two wheels</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Hyponym (specific or subclass) or meronym (as a part of, specification)</td><td>Bicycle: a two-wheel and axle</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>General term</td><td>Bicycle: thing that has two wheels</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Superordinate (superclass) but not accurate or synonym</td><td>Bicycle: a machine that can get you to place to place without polluting the earth</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Superordinate (specific and accurate)</td><td>Bicycle: a two-wheeled vehicle</td><td>4</td></tr></table></body></html>

Structural Density Scale (Adapted from Phillips Galloway & Uccelli, 2015).

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>Example</td><td>Point</td></tr><tr><td>Non relevant definitional syntax (descriptive and narrative sentences)</td><td>Bicycle: you ride it all most like a horse</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Minimal definitional syntax (X is a) Y (equivalence relation)</td><td>Bicycle: a bike</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Simple definitional syntax (noun group: head noun + prepositional phase as post-modifier)</td><td>Bicycle: a vehicle with two wheels</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Complete definitional syntax (noun group: head noun + relative finite clause as post-modifier)</td><td>Bicycle is a vehicle that has two wheels and pedals</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Compact definitional syntax (structure with at least compact pre-modifier or relative clause non- finite)</td><td>Bicycle is a two-wheeled vehicle</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Complete academic definitional syntax (structure with both compact pre-modifier or relative clause)</td><td>Bicycle: two wheeled bicycle that has seat with peddles</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Complex academic definitional syntax (all conditions of 5 are fulfilled and the definitions presents at least one nominalization or passive voice verb)</td><td>Bicycle: a two or three-wheeled (sic) simple machine that is used for transportation</td><td>6</td></tr></table></body></html>

nformativeness Scale: A single score is given for each content feature of each word.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Bicycle</td><td>Anger</td><td>Winter</td><td>Point for Each Content Feature</td></tr><tr><td>Categorization (e.g., a means of transportation, vehicle) Attribute (e.g., convenient, energy</td><td>Categorization (e.., feeling, emotion, what erupts from the body) Attribute (e.g., aggressive, difficult to bear,</td><td>Categorization (e.g., season, period of year)</td><td>0 = No relevant information</td></tr><tr><td>provided by human legs) Components (e.g., two wheels,</td><td>powerful, strong) Mechanism (e.g., go through an adrenaline rush,</td><td>Attribute (e.g., cold, dry, between spring and autumn, starts in December) Mechanism (e.g., snows, some animals sleep,</td><td>1 = Partially relevant information</td></tr><tr><td>pedals, handle, brake) Function (e.g., to ride, to transport,</td><td>cause stress, get depressed) Cause (e.g., when someone has behaved in a.</td><td>water freezes, people stay at home)</td><td>2 = Fully relevant information</td></tr><tr><td>to move, to exercise) Mechanism (e.g., steer the handle,</td><td>certain way, stimulated by an insulting word)</td><td>Comparison (e.g., coldest season, lowest temperature, colder temperature) Cause (e.g., when Earth orbits the Sun, Earth</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Grammatical Accuracy Scale.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>Example</td><td>Point</td></tr><tr><td>Serious grammatical errors that obscure meaning/ Incomplete sentences</td><td>Bicycle: vehicle that two circle.</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Some grammatical errors that slightly obscure meaning</td><td>Bicycle is a transportation that can exercise or go another place.</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Minor grammatical errors that do not interfere with meaning</td><td>Bicycle is a transportation that doesn&#x27;t need any gases, help people stay healthy, and help the Earth stay green.</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>No grammatical errors</td><td>Bicycle is a vehicle with two wheels which you ride by sitting on it and pushing two pedals with your feet</td><td>3</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Appendix C

TOEFL iBT Test Independent Writing Rubrics. For each essay, a single qualit score is generated using the following widely-used rubric.

<html><body><table><tr><td>Score</td><td>Task Description</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Effectively addresses the topic and task. Is well organized and well developed, using clearly appropriate explanations, exemplifications, and/or details Displays unity, progression, and coherence Displays consistent facility in the use of language, demonstrating syntactic variety, appropriate word choice, and idiomaticity, though it may h ave minor lexical or grammatical errors An essay at this level largely accomplishes all of the following:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Is generally well organized and well developed, using appropriate and suffici ent explanations, exemplifications, and/or details Displays unity, progression, and coherence, though it may contain occasional redundancy, digression, or unclear connections Displays facility in the use of language, demonstrating syntactic variety and range of vocabulary, though it will probably have occasional noticeable minor errors in structure, word form, or use of idiomatic language that do not interfere with meaning. An essay at this level is marked by one or more of the following:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Displays unity, progression, and coherence, though connection of ideas may be occasionally obscured May demonstrate inconsistent facility in sentence formation and word choice hat may result in lack of clarity and occasionally obscure meaning May display accurate but limited range of syntactic structures and vocabulary</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Limited development in response to the topic and task Inadequate organization or connection of ideas Inappropriate or insufficient exemplifications, explanations, or details to sup port or illustrate generalizations in response to the task A noticeably inappropriate choice of words or word forms An accumulation of errors in sentence structure and/or usage</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>weaknesses: Serious disorganization or underdevelopment. Little or no detail, or irrelevant specifics, or questionable responsiveness to t he task Serious and frequent errors in sentence structure or usage</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>An essay at this level merely copies words from the topic, rejects the topic, or is otherwise not connected to the topic, is written in a foreign language, consists of keystroke characters, or is blank.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Bakeman, R., & Gottman, J. M. (1997). Observing interaction: An introduction to sequential analysis (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Pres.   
Bar-a   00t iioh   nii, 51 . //0.1515 LING.2007.001   
Bers    tt g 24(2), 183-202. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-010-9264-9   
Benell, B. lachi, ., i , Lngeli,  006). o din mens t  w you  but thins h dee f itio skis as metalinguistic acquisition. Journal of Child Language, 33(1), 71-97. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000905007312   
Bman, R00)    mstey Th o  uf la qstio  R an .),   s childhood and adolescence (pp. 9-34). Benjamins.   
Bean -0tie  n  e, 32, 79-120. https://doi.org/10.1080/01638530709336894   
ean  d0  ti .), Cambridge handbook of literacy (pp. 92-111). Cambridge University Press.   
ean .i ti  - a. 1 Org 10.1075/wll.5.1.02be   
Bhata,  2008. asis  a ptice.ish fr fic  2, 16174. /i./.1016/..2007.0705   
Biancarosa ow, C.006. Rig nx vision for cio d h in de d gh cho ict ttio f w York $2 ^ { \mathrm { n d } }$ ed.). Alliance for Excellent Education.   
Chen, Y. . u, . W. (2012).  ge-basd aproch to tchig L suary witing, E oal, 6(2), 184-192. hp/di.g/10.1093/lt/c061   
Cho, H & ifer, J (2015. Iad g d wtin  f ish aag r. g in  n ge 272, 2-261. Retrieved from http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/rfl/October2015/articles/cho.pdf.   
Council f o (2021).  ron Frmewr f reeee for laag (F). Rrie fro ht://.int///n-ropeanframework-referencelanguages/table-1-cefr-3.3-common-reference-levels-global-scale.   
Cowrst  1980ic lxt nion d m t t  el.d l f idde , 212) 185-201.   
Crowrst,  (197).i mplx nrtn d    d .  o   1) 6-13. https://doi.org/10.2307/1494634   
Crystal, D. (2003). English as a global language $( 2 ^ { \mathrm { n d } }$ ed.). Cambridge University Press.   
Duran ,   , h  00  d  . dsc 2, 20-2.10.1093 applin/25.2.220   
it    / 989563wt.pdf.   
EF Education First. (2015). EF English proficiency index ( $5 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ ed.). Retrieved from https://www.ef.com/assetscdn/WIBIwq6RdJvcD9bc8RMd/legacy/_/\~/media/ centralefcm/epi/downloads/full-reports/v5/ef-epi-2015-english.pdf. Writing, 20(3), 182-195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2011.05.006   
Enright,  ua . 010omemg man m f e wi  ish ang l th-a scog  eting 27(3), 317-334. https://doi.org/10.1177/0265532210363144   
Feez, S. (1998). Text-based Syllabus Design. National Centre for English language teaching and reearch (NCELTR). Macquarie Universty.   
Fez, . (002) e a ation n d tio   Jh (.),  n  l ctve . 369. wee Erlbaum Associates   
Ferris, D. R., & Hedgcock, J. S. (2013). Teaching L2 composition: Purpose, process, and practice (3rd ed.). Routledge.   
ad m 03 n w  i,  c i  e Writing, 22(2), 107-124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2013.03.005   
Geer, ., te,  00    civit  t of t  tht  .on Assessment, 8(1), 1-26. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15326977EA0801_01   
ion, . (199 f  m  ti ic, 301, 556. //515/9230.1.5   
utre-    9n k i  l 2 (1), 23-31. https://doi.org/10.1177/152574019902100104 3743(02)00091-7   
Hark 11.    .101 jslw.2011.05.003   
Hillocks, G. (2002). The testing trap: How state writing assessments control learning. Teachers College Press.   
Hunt, K. W. (1965).Gramatical stuctures witen at the gade lel. NCTE Rearch Report No.3.National Council f Teachers of English.   
Hyland, K. (2004). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. University of Michigan Press.   
Hyland, K. (2005). Metadiscourse: Exploring interaction in writing. Continuum.   
Hyland, 007  a, y d 2wg int.  of  n 6(3 148-164. /.g/0.106/. jslw.2007.07.005   
Hyland, K. (2009). Academic discourse: English in a global context. Continuum.   
Jo.. Scholarship at Harvard. http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:37705567.   
Jo, C. W. 2021). xpring  s aic nis proiciey as peorsf at  a wtin Wrien tio, 382), 208-246. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741088320986364.   
ang .005). nrtie a a nx  2  i  .  of  n wng 14), 29-27./o. 10.1016/j.jslw.2005.10.002   
Kiber,  (2010 ig tgh t aa: rt ai rit   f  ig 9(3, 21-142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2010.04.001   
Kiber 011.wit i a tht   t  ch an   ri   t  f  ngae Writing, 20(3), 211-226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2011.05.005   
rand,  ,  (197).   g in do k  f d 243, 603-65././10.1017 S0305000997003243   
Kyle  (2016).erig yctic dent in witing e aned indes of ytic comxit ad uad ndes of yctic pisticatin. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from http://scholarworks.gsu.edu/alesl_diss/35.   
Leedham, M. (2014). Chinese students writing in English: Implications from a corpus-driven study. Routledge.   
Lei . 20wn i wn, n th o   wing p. 315-331). Cambridge University Press.   
Light, R. (2001). Making the most of college. Harvard University Press.   
MacWhinney, B. (2011). The CHILDES project: Tools for analyzing talk. Carnegie Mellon University.   
Marinle,2010 ing  o t . d  2, 37. //0177 0265659009349970   
Martin, J. R. (1994). Macro-genres: The ecology of the page. Network, 21, 29-52.   
Martin, J. R., & Rose, D. (2007). Working with discourse: Meaning beyond the clause. Continuum.   
cara, ., Ce,  , 010 sti f in qult.  27(1) 786.h/./01177 0741088309351547   
ara    J   02 i ttring n wig sa. n P.cth, .onck .) Apl   pos d ont yis iin, investigation, and resolution (pp. 298-311). IGI Global.   
Nagao, A019T  wtin n . -ic of     ./.g 10.1186/s40862-019-0069-3, 4(1).   
Nipod,  -   205. iw c  af tcc pic development. Language, Spech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 36(2), 125-138. htps://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461(2005/012)   
se.  9 t - and Writing, 22, 545-565. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-008-9124 $\mathbf { \nabla } _ { Z }$   
rme  ht, 11 w   .  eond Language Writing, 20(3), 167-181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2011.05.002   
Paltridge, B. (2014). Gnre and scond-langage acadic writing. ngge echng, 473), 303-318.http:/oi.rg/10.1017/026144814000068 into later potive Lanag Skils tha uprt aadmic writing. Rg d Wiing 286), 797-828. htps:/i.g/10.1007/11145-015-9550-7   
Rel J ,   c  ./ doi.org/10.1075/wll.5.2.04rei   
ub  1  i  iat.   9751./ doi.org/10.1017/S0305000900004839   
Schleicher, A. (2010). The new global landscape of educational achievement. Issues in Science & Technology, 26(3), 81-85.   
Schl,  001sti   th f si i 315. /6/-8801) 00073-0   
Schleppegrell, M. J. (2004). the language of schooling: A functional linguistics perspective. Erlbaum.   
Scot, .  (004). tic ion ier n toe  ii  J.,   .) ok of  d iey Development and disorders (pp. 340-362). The Guilford Press.   
Scott, J. A., & Nagy, W. E. (1991). Understanding definitions. Technicadl report no., 528. (Center for the Study of Reading).   
Sco, .  . (997. thf a v. , ) 180/..1224   
Shi, . 11ieiy s    t fo  d it s hg 63) 123-148. Retrieved from http://journal.kate.or.kr/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/kate_66_3_6.pdf.   
Sincair,  (186)nsic ke ad  lment   rk, . hgar, J. D .), e nd g. th-Hollan   
Snow, C. E (1990). The dveloment of defintional sill Jounal f Child Language, 17(3) 97-710. htps:/di.og/10.1017/030500090010953   
Sw   19) bilingual children (pp. 90-112). Cambridge University Press.   
Sw, .    (198 :   .e . classrooms. Ablex.   
Sw . ll, . 2009. The chln of a ln o  .), Thi o  ic . 11213. Cambridge University Press. PsychoLinguistics. nel in tc   ii    . s 6 17-110. /. org/10.1017/S014271641400006X, 05.   
Uecell, , o,. & t  203 astring a aa otin nd stn in the esiv wing f hh sch st. ien Communication, 30(1), 36-62. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741088312469013   
Vande pp, . J. (195. o exar re n mer. iontin, 36(1) 82-93 h/./0307/357609   
Wrden 01ion   i w rs   f .       34 12-27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.02.005   
Yi, . 0 in i -f f n 91 . . org/10.1016/j.jslw.2009.10.001