# Don't become so much high sounding': Power dynamics in master's thesis viva

Madhu Neupane Bastolaa,1, Victor Hob,\*

a The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong b The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, AG428, Hung Hom, Hong Kong

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Master's thesis   
Viva   
Power dynamics   
Interests in knowing   
Graduate research

The viva is a crucial component of the master's thesis examination process. It offers students opportunities to defend their thesis and engage in scholarly dialogue with disciplinary experts. As the viva involves participants with unequal and hierarchical power relations, the possibility of a scholarly dialogue in the viva is primarily shaped by the positioning of the examiners in relation to the students. Although master's students writing a thesis outnumber those doing a PhD, the research on master's thesis viva is in the embryonic stage. This study set out to extend this research by examining ten master's thesis vivas at a comprehensive university in Nepal. The analysis of audio-recorded feedback sessions revealed that the vivas were primarily examiners' monologic and directive talk. There was little negotiation of power because the students contributed minimally to the dialogue. The examiners acted as custodians and gatekeepers of the discipline to ensure the reproduction of academic norms and conventions. The implications of the study for enhancing the effectiveness of the viva are provided.

# 1. Introduction

An examination of a thesis usually involves written (i.e., a thesis/dissertation) and oral components. The oral component is ariously eferred to as the viva (Li & Seale, 2007; Tinkler & Jackson, 200; Trafford, 2003), oral defense (Lau, Lin, & Ode, 2020; Lin, 2017, 2020), disertation defense (van der Heide, Rufas, & Supper, 2016), thesis defense (Lin, 2020), or disputation (Dobson, 2018). In the master's degre programs of the articipating university, the written and oral components are referre to asa thesis' and the viva, repectively. Therefore, we will use the termviva in the rest of the paper. Like at many universities in the world, the viva is a compulsory element of thesis examination in Nepal and it serves as a rite of passage (Jackson & Tinkler, 2001; Lovat et al., 2015) with a gatekeeping function (Dobson, 2018; Lau et al., 2020). The viva has a distinct function of assing verbal communication and forms of cognitive reasoning (Dobson, 2018). The conduct of the viva also involves an exercise of power, that is, \*the amount of influence that one person can exercise over another person' (Georgesen & Harris, 1998, p. 185). Power, an irreducible aspect of all communication, is expressed in various ways as a dynamic potential variably avalable for participants (Foucault, 1980). The viva creates the condition for \*the construction of interpersonal social relations through features such as interactional control, tun-taking, exchange structure, topic control, agenda-setting, formulating, modality and politeness" (Thornborrow, 202, p. 16). Closely asso ciated with power dynamics in the viva is the examiners' interests in the types of knowledge: empirical-analytical (examiners as an expert), historical-hermeneutic (examiners as a negotiator), and self-critical (examiner as a learner) (Lovat, 2004). Such interests profoundly impact examiners' positioning in relation to students.

Although the viva is commonly used as a component of master's thesis examination, it has atracted limited research attention (Mezek & Swales, 2016) partly because of the difficulty i gaining acces to the needed data (Dobson, 2018; Lau et al., 2020). A few existing studies on the PhD viva described their structure (van der Heide et al., 2016), documented anecdotal experiences (Duke, 2020), and examined the use of modality (Recski, 2005). Our extensive search of the literature could locate only four studies that examined master's thesis viva. Three of these studies (i.., Lin, 2017, 2020; Riekkinen, 2010) looked into pragmatic force modifiers while the fourth one (Lau et al., 2020) examined the use of engagement resources. The findings of these studies demonstrated that participants used various interactional devices to make their acts les face-threatening (Riekinen, 2010), form dynamic relationships between interactants (Lin, 2017), and modulate their degre of commitment to the propositions made (Lau et al., 2020). Notwithstanding the contribution of these studies to advancing knowledge, there is a dearth of research on the construction of English medium master's thesis viva discourse from the perspective of power relations and positioning of participants, in general, and in the context of Nepal in particular. To extend this research, the present study sought to answer the following question:

How does language function in the exercise of power in English-medium master's-thesis vivas, and what factors contribute to power dynamics in such discourse?

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. The viva: roles and its anxiety-provoking nature

Research on master's thesis viva is just beginning to emerge. Here an attempt is made to review the somewhat limited research on Ph.D. viva that is broadly relevant to the present study. For example, Tinkler and Jacson (2000) demonstrated that PhD viva was conceptualized in diverse ways in terms of the conduct, the line of questioning, power relations, the function and importance of viva, criteria for passing and failig, and the release of the provisional decision to the candidat. Despite contentions regarding the viva's role in the outcome of thesis evaluation (Jackson & Tinkler, 2001; Tinkler & Jackson, 2000; van der Heide et a., 2016), it has been reported to profoundly impact the candidate's and the universty's reputation (van der Heide et al., 2016). In addition, the viva has been shown to serve various purposes like ensuring authenticity, checking candidates' knowledge and ability, clarifying areas of weaknesses, deciding on borderline cases, testig oral skill, providing guidance, and ensuring the standardization of a theis (Jackson & Tinkler, 2001). In Lovat t al.'s (2015) large-scale study, examiners and candidates from Australia, New Zealand, and the UK viewed that the role of the viva expanded beyond asssment because it llowed for better communication, created an opportunity for providing more nuanced fedback in a dialogic and collgial manner, and offered a greater sense of closure for the student. Moreover, the viva was viewed as a reassuring event and a comfortable opportunity for the candidate to addres any ssues raised in the written report (Carter, 2008) and engage in scholarly discussion (Trafford, 2003).

Although the phases of the PhD viva (i.e., preclude, opening, consolidating, and closing) and the nature of questions in each phase (Trafford, 2003) can somehow be predicte, the viva has been reported to be an anxiety-provoking event for students irespective of their linguistic backgrounds. As a form of examination, the viva tended to foreground the atitudinall salient information (Recski, 2005) and assessed a candidate's personal qualities and abilitiesto defend their ideas (van der Heide et a. 2016). Other factors that caused significant anxiet, fear, heightening of emotions, humiliation, discouragement, and vulnerability in students were the students lack of prior experience, examiners hostil behavior (Dobson, 2018; Jackson & Tinkler, 2001), and irrlevant questions asked in a humiliating manner Channon, Savva, & Nygaard, 2021). Such experience resulted in \*much soul-searching and los of confidence regardless of the outcome of the examination itself (Carter & Whittaker, 2009, pp. 169-170). I is worth noting thatif the candidates perceived that some aspects of their research received more attntion at the cost of others, they felt isappointed despite the examiners non-confrontational, friendly, and welcoming behavior (Trafford, 2003). Therefore, it is necesar to explore viva dialogues to gain better insights and generate input for enhancing the role of vivas in promoting students' academic growth.

# 2.2. Exercise of power and strategies for mitigation

Although power has been conceptualized variously as repressive and productive force (Thornborrow, 2002), the concept of power as a productive force has gained prominence in recent decades. In Foucault's (1980) view, power i "a productive network which runs through the whole social body' (p. 119), exercised in multiple forms, can always be resisted, and i constantly transformed It can be derived from personal capabilities (.. personal power) or network of social relations (i.e., positional power) (Chiang, 2009). It is an integral aspect of allcommunications (Leezenberg, 2002) and isactualized in linguistic exchanges (Bourdieu, 1991) in the form of turn-taking, interactional space, and interactional accomplishment (Thornborrow, 2002) As a productiv force, power \*refers to how individuals work together to make social actions, such as learning, possible" (Zhang & Hyland, 2021, p. 37). Drawing on existing literature (Foucault, 1980; Thornborrow, 2002; Zhang & Hyland, 2021), we define power as a productive and contextual phenomenon represented, constructed, and negotiated through discourse.

The viva is agoal-oriented intitutional discourse that involves constraints on what counts as legitimate contributions and produces particular kinds of inferences. Moreover, the viva has asymmetrical power relations between participants regarding roles, identities and obligations (Thornborrow, 2002). As defined conventionall, the examiners have rights and obligations to ask questions, have more symbolic capital (Bourdieu, 91), and posses more personal as well as positional power (Chiang, 2009) than students. As the more powerful party in the interactions, the examiners alocate turns, ask questions, control the topic, and decide what constitutes legitimate information, whereas the students may need to be accommodative to the examiners voice. However, such power relations are mediated by various gender, age, ethnicity, culture, and context-related factors (Manathunga, 2007) and might shift in the course of interactions because they are collaboratively constructed (Zhang & Hyland, 2021).

Although the is littl research on power dynamics in master's thesis viva, extant reearch has examined power as an integral part of supervision pedagogy (Chiang, 2009; Manathunga, 2007). Previous research has shown that flexible, facilitive, inclusive, and culturall responsive postgraduate pedagogy empowered students to take agency and made their research experience enjoyable leading to sucessul completion (Bartett & Mercer, 200; Manathunga, 2007). The language of supervisory feedback could empower or disempower students. For example, Chiang (2009) revealed that the supervisors' use of $^ { \dag } \mathrm { I } +$ predicate' appealing to personal power informed by personal intention (e. I want tokeep you on the topic, I want to find out your reson]) fo intructional ongruity promoted more agentic interactions than their use of $^ { 6 } \mathrm { I } +$ predicate' constructions appealing to positional power or institutional obligations (e.g., I don't ned the jusication, I nee to get clear on [the question) to justify comment. Robertson (2017) found three forms of power. power-over (constraining and dominating), power to (empowering agency), and power with (collaborating) operating in parall in the team mode of doctoral supervision. While the greater exercise of power-over' by supervisors diminished student agency, power to' and power with contributed to collaborative knowledge-making. Zhang and Hyland (2021) identified three modes (i., power-over, power-gaining, and power-maintaining) of interactions in master's thesis supervisory metings. The study's findings showed that the frequent use of hedging, empathy, confidence-building, and expression of self-doubt contributed to trustful academic relationships, responsiveness, and mutual understanding. While supervisors took the agentic role in 'power-over' interactions, power-with interactions (i.e., power-gaining and power-maintaining) allowed students to exercise their agency.

By its nature, the viva involves face-threatening acts (Riekkinen, 2010) because it puts students under scrutiny (Neupane Bastola & Hu, 2021a). Therefore, it may be necessary to use politeness trategies for maintaining and preserving face, a positive socially approved value of a person Homes, Stubbe, & Vine, 199 asquez, 2004). Positive politeness stat such as expresof positive evaluation (e., good, nice, efective, cler), approval and agrement, and addrese-oriented pragmatic particles (e, you know, you see) can be used to express slidarit, riendliness common knowledge/attitude/understanding, and reciprocity among participants; whereas negative politenes strategies such as lexical hedges (e.g., perhaps, probably, seems, appears), epistemic modal verbs (e.g, might, ma),  c pr t  feg s fc  usatth f i r he sene of commitment, and minimize imposition (Brown & Levinson, 1987; Holmes et al., 199; Vasquez, 2004). If undertaken conscientiously with wisdom and humanity, the viacan be a powerful leaning experience for students. However, f it i used without care and integrity, it \*can harm the student, their supervisors, and the examiners, creating scars that can take a long time to heal (Carter & Whittaker, 2009, p. 177). Li and Seale (2007) found that the examiners employed various strategies (i.e., the delivery of praise, restorative work, humor, and sensitive abandonment) and used softening devices to make students fel at ease, minimize disagreements, mitigate episodes of resistance, maintain face, and achieve mutual positive regard. The examiners use of softening devies (e. , can, proably, might, I mean  ges, and you know reced the face-thrtening efft f explicit native evaluation and portrayed themselves as careful, thoughtful and resourceful human beings, minimized authoritative threats caused by a power imbalance, sidetracked discussion, and established a harmonious alliance (i.e., Lin, 2017, 2020). Lau et al.'s (2020) exploration of engagement resources employed in defense interactions of five MA in Applied Linguisic theses at a Taiwanese universt revealed that examiners utilized disclaim (i.e., reect) resources to express their authoritative stance by denying and countering premise. They also employed proclaim (ie, endorse, concede, or affrm) resources in the forms of suggestions and clarification to mitigate the effct of face-threatening acts, soften criticism, and build rapport.

Previous studies also examined the linguistic devices utilized by candidates during the viva. For example, the students used interpersonal devices of certainty (e, actuall, relly, should, and I belie to express their commtment to their main propositions, emphasize their laims, and refute strong criticism; they employed hedging devices to avoid giving direct answers to dificult and at times face-threatening questions as wel as provide sensible justification and possible explanation (Lin, 2017, 2020; Recski, 205). Lau et al.'s (2020) study demonstrated that the candidates frequently used non-commital presupposition to present themselves as humble and receptive to criticisms and suggestions. They also employed proclaim resources to defend their ideas.

# 3. Theoretical framework

Power in supervision pedagogy has been examined from various perspectives (Chiang, 2009; Robertson, 2017; Zhang & Hyland, 2021). Among these, we found Zhang and Hyland's (2021) framework appropriate for our purpose for two reasons. First, it was based on master's thesis supervisory interactions and showed how power could shift during interactions to promote students' agency and learning. Second, the interaction modes that the study identified can be related to examiners' interests in knowing (Lovat, 2004). Zhang and Hyland (2021) categorized supervisory interactions into power-over' interactions and power-with' interactions. Power-over interactions were characterized by asymmetrical power as evident in one-directional directives and instructions (con. taining should, need to, must, and have to), imperatives, and statements. Such interactions were always initiated by supervisors and offered a minimal opportunity for students to articulate their thoughts. In contrst, power-with interactions \*respond to and encourage the students increasing awareness f how they might orient, regulate and co-construct the direction of the talk, as well as their positioning of themselves in the encounter (Zhang & Hyland, 2021, p. 39). Power-with interactions are of two types: power-gaining and power-maintaining. Power-gaining interactions involved collaborative intersubjectivity and addresse markers, both of which allowed students to exercse their agency in the role of negotiator, facilitator, and collaborator. They also involved the co-construction of decisions. Power-maintaining interactions were characterized by caring and encouraging connections for promoting students

agentive roles and responding to the students' emotional needs.

The examiners' exercise of power can also be explained by their interests in knowing, which can be of three types: empirical. analytical knowing, historical-hermeneutic knowing, and selfreflective knowing (Habermas, 1972). The empirical-analytical knowing is assciated with \*cognitive interest in technical control over objectified processes" (Habermas, 1972, p. 309). Examiners' interest in empirical-analytical knowing is reflected when they provide obligatory instructions (e.g., Use appropriate transition markers; You need to rewrite your analysis and categorical statements e., Your analysis is wrong). The historical-hermeneutic knowing considers facts to be derived from the interpretation of culturally specific meaning mediated by the interpreter's initia situation and oriented towards intersubjectivity and mutual understanding for producing negotiated knowledge. Such interest in knowing is reflected when examiners take students' perspectives into consideration (e.g., Ok, if you were exempted, that i fine; If you have any questios please as us). The selfreflective knowing is concerned with self-criticalit for emancipatory understanding. It is reflected when examiners acknowledge their lack of knowledge or poition themselves as a learner (e.g., I don't know, should we include proper nouns in translation or not?). These diferent types of interes in knowing are reflected through the medium of work, language, and power. Lovat's (2004) examination of 303 examiner's reports of PhD dissertations in Australia showed the predominance of empirical-analytical knowing irrespective of the quality of the thesis, with the exainers positioning themselves as expert in relation to candidates. There were very few cases of historical-hermeneutic knowing characterizing examiners as more like partners, and critical-self-refectie knowing treating students as equals or more knowledgeable. The study concluded that the examiners interest in knowing was the most determinative factor of the nature of comments they provided (Lovat, 2004). Lovat, Monfries, and Morrison (2004) also found the predominance of the empirical-analytic way of knowing with largely negative comments even in disertations marked as excellent. The positioning of the examiners as an expert revealed their exercise of power. The present study drew on Zhang and Hyland's (2021) types of interactions and Lovat's (2004) examiners' interest in knowing as theoretical frameworks.

# 4. The present study

The study forms a part of a large-scale project examining supervisory feedback on English medium master's theses across four disciplines (i., English Education, English Studies, Phsics, and Enginering) at a large public university in Nepal. Data for the major study consisted of interviews with sixteen supervisor-student pairs, examination of supervisory feedback provided on 97 thes drafts, audio recordings of 89 proposal and thesis vivas, and questionnaire surveys with 434 students and 102 supervisors. In this study, we report on the data from 10 vivas of Master of Education in ELT (M.Ed. ELT hereafter) theses. These vivas were chosen because they represented varietie of students and supervisors. A six-credit thesis i a compulsory component of the M.Ed. ELT program. Students are required to produce a written thesis and defend their work before a research commitee comprising an external examiner, the chair of the research committe, and the supervisor. The viva in M.Ed. ELT is a public event, so other students and faculty members are welcome to participate. It is worth noting that the thesis writing students have limited access to state-of-art resources, academic writing support is not available, and the universty level mechanism for ensuring reearch ethics and integrity is yet to be established firmly.

Although extenal examiners of master's theses are provided with a copy of the thesis in advance, they are not required to produce a written report of their comments before or after the viva. Therefore, all the comments are provided orally. All the selected vivas. conducted entirely in English, were sucessfu, een if some apparentl required a major revision. The question-answer sessions of the vivas were audio-recorded (altogether four and half hours of recording) by the frst author with participants' permissin. The first author also took notes during the viva to facilitate interpretations. The sessions were tanscribed verbatim and analyzed using NVivo. All interactions were coded considering power dynamics, the examiners interests in knowing, and the role of the participants ., student, external examiner, supervisor, and research committe chair. This coding process was a combination of deductive and inductive content analysis using categories established by previous studies - categories of power dynamics (hang & Hyland, 2021) and examiners interests in knowing (Lovat, 2004; Lovat et al., 2015). For establishing intercoder reliability, four of the vivas were coded by a PhD student in applied linguistics and the first author. The measure of intercoder reliability $( \kappa = . 8 2 )$ indicated strong agreement between two coders (McHugh, 2012). All the disagreements were resolved through discussion.

Among ten candidates defending their viva, 8 were girls (Amy, Betty, Sally, Moll, Rachel, Helen, Sarah, and Suzane), two wee boys (Rhyan and Michael), and all of them were in their twenties. The Department of English Education conducts viva in groups. Therefore, two external examiners, Gavin and Bil, each conducted the viva of five candidates. The candidates were supervised by fie supervisors named Aaron, Christian, Grab, Paul, Robin, and Tom. Tom and Paul acted as research committe chairs on the frst and the second day, respectively. Both the external examiners held a PhD in applied linguistics and were in their 50s. They had more than 20 years of experience in teaching and supervision and were reearch-active. The ethic approvalfrthis study was obtained from the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong.

# 5. Findings

# 5.1. Power dynamics in the viva

The viva dialogues were highly dominated by external examiners (altogether 272 turns). The external examiners not only had more turns but also took the longest time per turn. The transcriptions f the ten vivas contained 20,601 words, with 12,578 words spoken by external examiners. The length of their turns extended from one to 645 words! Afer the external examiners, research committe chairs controlled the floor with 118 turns altogether. Their comments were also mostly monologic, with extended turns going up to five hundred words. Somewhat surprisingly, thestudents contributions were mostly limited to the range of couple of words (e.g, Yes, sir, No, sir) to a couple of utterances, the longest one containing 62 words, although they took more turns (altogether 171) than the research committe chairs. The supervisors, as expected, made limited contributions (altogether 3 tuns) to the viva. When they took the floor, they offeed  help the student ., k, we may ned to dius this later on) ad parahrased the examner's questions when the student failed to answer them (e.g., why were you interested in conducting this research?) or expressed frustration on the lack of students' seriousnes (e.g.,I told him to review that as well. Table 1 presents an overview of the use of power dynamics by roles.

As can be seen in Table 1, the use of power-over interactions was predominant (1357 out of 1511, or $8 9 . 8 0 \%$ in the viva dialogues, the overwhelming majority of which (1333 out of 1357, or $9 8 . 2 3 \%$ were used by the examiners. While the students never used powerover and power-maintaining interactions, they were engaged in power-gaining interactions in very few cases (7 out of 1511, or $0 . 4 6 \%$ The data suggests vivas were mainly about the examiners intructing and directing students. In what fllows, we discus various types of interactions.

# 5.1.1. Power-over interactions

There was a prevalence of power-over interactions in the present data set, with examiners presenting themselves as experts and providing authoritative input in the form of declarative statements, instructions, and questions. The declarative statements (used 686 times) were used by the examiners and the research committe chairs to indicate inadequate, inaccurat or ielevant information (1-3), locate problems in writing in terms of language, originalit, and qualit (46), indicat the lack of alignment (7), wan students of consequences (8), and express their perspectives (9):

1. There is no theory underlying techniques.   
2. That's a wrong thing you did.   
3. The first and second pages in the background are not necessary.   
4. Your language is horrible.   
5. You have copied from previous theses.   
6. There is no place for comments.   
7. There is no match between your objectives and research questions.   
8. Without correction, we will not approve your thesis.   
9. I am not sure why the system is not there in Magar.

The use of instruction was also frequent in the present data set. The examiners provided direct instructions in the form of obli gations using have to (31 times), imperatives (193 times), need to (83 times), should (71 times), and must (7 times). The instructions were about reviewing more literature and adding more information (10-11) following academic conventions in writing (12), substantiating analysis and discussion (13-14), and improving organization (15).

10. Read the books written in language functions.   
11. Now you need to write about teaching speaking.   
12. Use appropriate transition markers.   
13. You need to have data to support your claim.   
14. There should be examples of errors committed by learners.   
15. Merge discussion according to the theme.

The questions were raised to ask for clarifications (16), elicit justification (17), check students understanding (18), and assessthir knowledge (19). Knowledge-based questions were asked when the examiners were skeptical of the students' capabilities.

16. What do these numbers refer to?   
17. Why did you use purposive sampling?   
18. Did you understand the point?   
19. Do you know what triangulation means?

Some of the questions did not require students responses either because they were rhetorical (20 or formed a part of instructions

Table 1 The use of power dynamics by roles.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Categories of power dynamics</td><td colspan="3">Instances by roles</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Examiners</td><td>Supervisor</td><td>Student</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Power-over</td><td>1333</td><td>24</td><td>-</td><td>1357</td></tr><tr><td>Power with</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Power-gaining</td><td>11</td><td>-</td><td>7</td><td>18</td></tr><tr><td> Power-maintaining</td><td>134</td><td>2</td><td>-</td><td>136</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1478</td><td>26</td><td>7</td><td>1511</td></tr></table></body></html>

(21).

20. There should be a link between the sentences. What happens if bricks in a building are not firmly connected to each other?   
21. What do you think about those activities based on the ideas you have drawn from the itrature? That is what your research is about

Although the use of strategies to mitigate face-threatening acts was not very common, the examiners employed negative politeness strategies by using mental verbs (2-23), modals (24-26), lingustic hedges (27-29), and inclusive pronouns (31-32) to minimize the sense of imposition and manage rapport.

22. I think you need to be specific here.   
23. I feel like your research seems to reproduce stereotypes.   
24. You can reduce the sample size if you like.   
25. You may say it was convenient for me.   
26. There might have been others.   
27. In your findings, it looks like you are trying to generalize..   
28. Maybe if it were in context, it would be clear.   
29. Every term seems to be a cultural term.   
30. Let's rephrase that.   
31. We need to reframe them in the tone of recommendation.

In Extract 1, taken from Viva 4, Bill the external examiner, provides direction to Sally regarding background information, her motivation for the study, and her theoretical background.

5.1.1.1. Extract 1: Viva $4 ^ { 2 }$ .Bill: What is the population of Magar in Nepal?

Sally: I have written there.

Bill It might have been written there, but you must know. There is a joke: A person went for job interview. They asked him, "What is your name?", Hesaid, I have written there'. Then they failed him (laughs) .. What i the total population of the Magar Ianguage? You must know. You should provide a linguistic definition of the Magar language ..You should introduce the Magar language. So fr as I know, there is everything in the Magar language. You must alk. You must dscus. You must write So, unless you do that, your thesis does not look like a thesis on the Magar language. And in your background, you need to write not according to Chomsky. Not necessary Chomsky's definition.. $^ 3 S 0$ don't become so much high sounding. You may be (.) very very briefly (.) mmm () you may write something about the Kham language (.) That you need to write (.) And then you have written to compare and contras, ok but contrast is not seen there; compare is there. And then, if i is language comparison, you should mention the theory of comparison in literature review, you must write. ..Very general information is not necesary .. Kansakar is a Nepali author. You have cited Kansakar's ideas from Sharma's book. This is very bad. Nepali author's book, you have (.) umm (.) you have copied from others. You should consult the original sources as long as they are available.

Bill: Do you know what the literacy rate in the Magar language is?

Sally: (No response).

Bill How can you say you have written a thesis in the Magar language without knowing anything about the language?

Bill makes frequent use of model directives, that is, must (6 times) should (4 times), and need to (2 times), intructing the student to provide relevant background information, motivation of the study, and theoretical background. Bill explains at length what Sally is required to do and what information is necessary or relevant (see lines 5-21). Sally has very limited contribution to the discussion. There are instances of highly face-threatening comments (lines 9-10, line 11, lines 22-23). Bil's lengthy monologic evaluation identifies several weaknesses in Sall's thesis, including irrelevant information and the lack of necessary background information, motivation for research, and theoretical clarit. ill also checks Sally's knowledge by asking factual questions (lines 1 and 20). He exercises personal as well as positional powers through this didactic discourse. Like Extract 1, Extract 2 from Viva 2 is also highly instructional and didactic. However, Gavin tries to make his instruction less imposing.

5.1.1.2. Extract 2: Viva 2. Gavin: The third comment () so this is a narrative inquiry. You have collected stories of teachers, yes? Amy: Yes.

Gavin: You have got a big pile of data. Now in qualittive research, you do not you do not impose your themes in your writig. Do not fit the responses of teachers in predetemined themes. You need to generate themes from the iformation. Thats  major area of imrovement in your analysis. You havetranscribed the data very wel Read the daa carfully and generate themes based on patterns. You identify the themes, Right? or exple, ifyu se mry water, mrky water, mk water infifelace, that could  your thme. ht i callat you generate the theme from the information. So, my suggestion is to be creativein creting themes and subthemes from yor discussion. You have to work  ite harder in the diusson chapter to make it btter. And the next omment, you hae a very nice iteatre review, but you have nt co   yor ssio chter. h is yis, t th is nt ch nrtion r dussio his is wht techers have said. So how can you connect them? For example, you can say, \*in my () in ths articular clas, tachers used group work He followed thee stag, s miond in hi book". f the tcher ollowd the prcsof gou work, o old eat t t ite. oa thee are five phae f g work. If chr us them ou an eat ht toh itere. o e rntd nge i th prios section, the advantages of ICT. If you find that in teachers'stories, connect that to your findings. This is how you can make the link.

Amy: Earlier, in our research $=$

Gavin: $=$ earlier, whatever you have reviewed, bring those studies and connect it those with the $=$ Amy: [analysis]   
Gavin: [analysis]. Yes.

Unlike Extract 1, Extract 2 contains a positive evaluation (lines 7-8, line-14) of Amy's work. Gavin uses instruction (lines 5, 8, 11, and 12), declarative statements (lines 7, 14-16), modals of obligation, that i, ned to (line 6) and have to (line 13), and conditionl clauses (lines 19-22) to offer directive feedback. However, his pairings of statements with instructions containing pragmatic force modifiers can (lines 17, 21, and 23), and could (line 19) make the directies les imposing. Notwithtanding some diferences, both Extract 1 and Extract 2 represent power-over interactions.

Two factors seem to have contributed to the positioning of participants in extracts 1 and 2. First, the exercise of power-over' by examiners in providing obligatory instructions suggests that they were guided by empirical-analytical knowing with focus on the right' course of action (Lovat, 2004). Therefore, they positioned themselves as an expert and gatekeeper for ensuring that academic norms and conventions were followed. Second, the students did not ppear to be confident enough to engage in the scholarly dialogues to co-construct the direction of the talk. They might also have felt intimidated by the power-over' discourse, as can be sen in the folloing quote:

I infer simply a ceremonial in Thesis Defense' .. I have seen no student being given an actual chance to 'defend' their work. Instead, the Professors ceremoniously barrage the student with question after question, and the moment any student tries to defend their work, they shut them out with even more questions without giving them an opportunity to respond.(Interview)

Other students confided during the interview that the examiner's comments felt like an \*attack" and \*imposition'".

# 5.1.2. Power-with interactions

The power-with interactions involve students in the co-production of the direction of the interactions. However, in the present data set, very ittle collboration was observed. Power with interactions are separately discussed as power-gaining' and power-main taining' interactions.

5.1.2.1. Power-gaining interaction. Although students are expected to take the floor to defend their thesis in the viva, they did not appear to be well prepared to defend their work as they remained silent or provided very brief answers to examiners questions. There were only 17 instances where students appeared to gain some power to convince their examiners or ask for further information. For example, in extract 3, Tom accepts Betty's explanation for using non-random sampling in her survey research.

5.1.2.1.1. Extract 3: Viva 2. Tom: Why non-random sampling procedure in survey? Why did you use this?

Betty: Yes, sir I (.) I (.) had conducted this research in [a remote] district $=$ Tom: ${ \bf - Y } { \bf e s } = { \bf \Phi }$

Betty: $=$ and for the economic purpose .) for example (.) if I go to each and every corner of that district (..) ummm ..) it takes ore tie .. h  i is more exive n tems of time and money as el) and) h  i is graphcally divere area $=$ Tom: $\mathrm { = I }$ know $=$

Betty: $=$ it was not possible to go to each and every part of that area.

Tom: You need to mention that, ok? You need to give the reason and explanation in the sampling section. You may say it was convenient for me .. you can mention other reasons also. It is controversial. enerally, in survey research, we do not use purposive sampling. If so, then you have to give the reason. In a survey, usuall random sampling is used. Therefore, you need to provide an explanation. You can say because of this reason, I used purposive sampling..

Although the above extract contains Tom's authoritative input, some negotiation about the requirement is taking place. Tom waits for Betty's responses, acknowledges them, and asks her to accommodate her explanation in writing. Tom also accepts Betty's justification for the use of purposive sampling in her survey research (see lines 7-14). Betty's input based on an informed decision regarding the use of purposive sampling (see ines 47 and 9) repositions her in terms of the content, context, and Tom's questions t also performs the act of balancing the power indicating the negotiation of power in the proces of interaction. Tom uses I know to establish common ground with Betty and ok' to seek her greement. His employment of hedging devices (e.g., may, can, and generall) tones down the effect of his instruction. Tom positions himself as an understanding collaborator in the interaction rather than an authority figure.

In Extract 4from Viva5, Gavin is offring perspectives and an option rather than imposing his judgments on Molly's work when he says, \*it is not compulsor . line 1). Gavin also addreses Molly by using you' and your discussion' to engage her in the dialogue. Such addrese-riented discourse mpowers Moll t ask for more guidance for data analysis (lines 3-4). Although Gavin suggests she explores gender-based differences in perceptions (lines 5-7), Molly underscores the lack of required information for such an analysis (line 8) and further explains the nature of the data. Finally, Gavin considers Molly's perspective when he says, "do whatever you can do there .. n the given circumstances" (lines 12-13). Extract 4can be taken as an instance of power-gaining interaction because it has created more space for coregulation, a common understanding between Gavin and Moll, and a shared orientation to analyzing data (Zhang et al., 2021).

5.1.2.1.2. Extract 4: Viva 5. Gavin: It is not compulsory that you should take a position. However, your discussion depends on whether you take a position or not.

Molly: If I divided male students' perceptions of male teachers and female students' perceptions of female teachers $=$

Gavin: $=$ no no, both. How do male students perceive their male teachers and female teachers? How do female students perceive 1eir male teachers and female teachers? Whether there is any significant difference in their perceptions.

Molly: Some of the participants did not write their names also.

Gavin: Have they not written? Eh.

Molly: I asked them to answer the question based on their experience and from the very beginning, not only at the bachelor level

Gavin: Now, you cannot collect the data again. Revisit your data and do whatever you can do there (.) in the given ircumstances.

To some extent, instances of power-gaining interaction were also observed when commitee members asked if the candidates had any questions (e.g, If you have any questions, you can always ask; Do you have any questions for us?) and the students asked for clarification (e.g., Do I need to modify the questions? I am asking what I should write here).

These power-gaining interactions can be atributed to the examiners' interest in historical-hermeneutic knowing (Lovat et al. 2004), where their focus was not on what is right' or wrong but on interpretative and negotiated understanding through reciprocal interaction with students. In power-gaining interactions, the examiners positioned themselves as negotiators and collaborators, thereby empowering and engaging students to take agency in co-constructing the conversation (Lovat, 2004; Zhang et al., 2021). The students involved in power-gaining interactions seemed to feel more confident and comfortable during the viva, positioned themselves as the co-constructor of the dialogue, and contributed more to the discussion, thereby shaping the course of interaction. This suggests that power is not concrete but a dynamic phenomenon that constantly evolves in the process of interaction.

5.1.2.2. Power-maintaining interactions: atending to students emotiondl needs. In the present data set, there were 96 instances where power was maintained by examiners and reearch commitee chairs to encourage sudents, expres interest in students research work (e.g., This is also my area of intres.), praise their work (e., This is a new pie f work in the dearment), how empathy (e.., It is difficult o idenify our own problems, which thers can easily id), and indicate the possbilit of publishing their rearch (eg., You can make it a journal article). Gavin's encouraging and caring attitude is evident in extract 5.

5.1.2.2.1. Extract 5: Viva 1. Gavin: ICT is a common, important as well as interesting area. You have done a good job in documenting the experience of teachers implementing ICT in public schoos. You have investigated well and brought a lot of information in the form of data. You have tried your best to processthe information as much as possible from your side. What really like about your thesis is that you have done a thorough literature review and pulled the literature from national as well as international publications. This i a very interesting reading. Very nice. You have done a good job. You should be proud of what you have done. However, you need to make it bettr. There is always room for improvement. So, my focus wil be on how you can make it beter. I won't ask you to do much that you canot do. I will ask you to work litle more nd improve it to make a nice public document because this willstay in the library. You should be really very careful when you send it s a public document. So, the frst thing I would (.) the titleis fine. The background is ok. You have thre obectives, right? .) hat have you sad in th firs objective?

Amy: To explore the ICT-related issues.

Gavin: To explore the ...

Amy: [ICT relate issues]

Gavin: ICT-related issues] (.) To explore the isues while the implementation of ICTs .) while the implementation of ICT (.) this is a bit odd. Right? So, you (..) you rephrase that.

In the above extract, Gavin precedes his suggestions with a positive attitude to Amy's research topic by saying that her research is common, important, and interesting (line 1). Then he praises her work (lines 1-8) for documenting teachers experiences in public schools and reviewing literature thoroughly. Only then does he provide suggestions to improve her work again in a positive light by saying, \*there i always room for improvement" (line 9), and the improvement willnot be too demanding for her. This might have assured Amy that no work is perfect as such. Gavin's use of appreciation and empathy maintains his positional power by establishing solidarity and reciprocity with Amy and makes the requirement for revision les imposing. In addition, Gavin's statement that \*there is always room for improvement" repositions Amy as a practitioner engaged in the writing process for refining her writing through revisions.

The examples of power-maintaining interactions can also be observed in Extract 6 taken from Viva 6.

5.1.2.2.2. Extract 6: Viva 6. Paul: Congratulations, Rachel. I liked your research methodology because it is a case study. Most of the research here is thesurvey. Yours i a case study on one teacher, which is great. This is in-depth. This is what research should be. This is not superfil. liked it. However, I aee with Gavin that there is mismatch between your tite and the analysis and interpretation of data. You need to define a large class in our context. Where did you conduct your research?

Rachel: Kathmandu.   
Paul: What is the required student-teacher ratio in Kathmandu? I think 41.   
Rachel: Yes, sir. I guess.   
Paul: You need to verif. You need to get the profile of this teacher. How many students are there in this teacher's class? How many

were there?

Rachel: Sixty, above sixty.

Paul: That's a large clss. We are also interested in these areas of large classes and teaching in difficult circumstances. This is an interesting case study research. I am reading such research for the first time.

In the above extract, Paul uses a number of expressions to encourage Rachel. He appreciates the design of her research (lines 1 and 2) finds hr work in-depth (line 3, reeals his inteest in the are of her rarch (lines 1213), and admire the quality of her research as being the irt of its kind (14-15). Such type of interaction certainly boosts students' confidence. During an interview, Rachel said, My aim was to produce good quality thes. I received apreciation for my hard work I fl that have done justice to my work and learnt from it".

In rare power-maintaining instances, the examiners acknowledged the limitation of their knowledge, as can be sen in the following extract:

5.1.2.2.3. Extract 7: Viva 3. Bill I don't know .. should we include proper nouns in translation or not? Proper nouns cannot be translated. What do you think?

Ryan: Yes, sir, I think so.

Power-maintaining interactions involved the examiners' use of positive politeness strategies to express positive evaluation (e., good, nice, in-depth, detaild, not superficial, inteesting, new area) (Vasquez, 2004). The examiners also congratulated the students irrespective of the revision required. Despite the positive valence of their comments, the examiners mostly positioned themselves as expert with their interes in empirical-analytical knowing (Lovat et al., 2004). In very few cases, when the examiners acknowledged the limit of their knowledge, they relegated the customary power as expert and reflcted their interest in self-reflective knowing positioning themselves as equals to students (Lovat, Holbrook, & Bourke, 2008). Although the power-maintaining interactions created context for students to exercise their gency, they rarely took this opportunity by positioning themselves mostly as receivers. This shows that power-with relationships, as a dynamic phenomenon, depend on whether or not the participants choose to engage in co-construction of interactions.

# 6. Discussion

As indicated in the previous section, there was an abundance of power-over interactions. In such interactions while examiners positioned themselves as an 'expert or gatekeeper' and provided students with directions and instructions to improve their thees, students mostly assumed subservient position (Chiang, 2009; Zhang et al., 2021). However, some students found such interactions overwhelming. These findings can be atributed to various intitution, examiner, and student-related factors because viva dialogues tend to involve a highly situated, interested, contingent, and constantly evolving process" (Zhang et al., 2021, p. 41) irt, the nature of interaction and the positioning ofthe examiners in the converation was directly and indirectly shaped by institutional culture and mechanisms. The vivas, as goal-oriented institutional discourse, required the examiners to act as the gatekeepers of disciplinary re quirements (Lovat et al., 2004). Therefore, their comments and suggestions regarding research rigor, validity and reliability of findings, adequacy of information, and standard of a thesis aimed at ensuring disciplinary norms and conventions of research and academic writing (Lovat et al., 2004). This finding corroborates the results of previous studies (Lovat, 2004; Lovat et al., 2008). Although such power-over viva interactions seem to be imposing, they cannot be reduced to domination and coercion. Instead, they might reflect positive-sum power (Haugaard, 2012) constrained by structural requirements and done with the hope of promoting students' future agency by \*making explicit the kinds f research skills require of them' (hang et al., 2021, p. 40). However, the uptake of and engagement with such technically useful comments can be expected to be minimal because of students' limited participation in the co-production of the interactions.

Second, the examiners' role as an 'expert' in the present study was guided by their empirical-analytical interest in knowing emphasizing content or the control of facts and figure (Habermas, 1972; Lovat, 2004; Lovat et al., 2008) and appeared to be more oriented to research rather than the development of students (Zhang et al., 2021). lthough les frequently than reported in previous studies, the examinrs mplod various oitive olitenes (., dlivery f praise and native politenes strateies such as hedging devices (eg., may, can could) and inclusive pronouns to mitigate the face-threatening efect f negative evaluation, establish solidarity and bond with the candidates, and soften the power-over structure (Lau et al., 2020; Lin, 2017, 2020; Zhang et al., 2021). Limited instances of power with (i.e., power-gaining and power-maintaining) interactions can be associated with examiners historical-hermeneutic knowing (Lovat et al., 2004) for "communicating about meanings and negotiating about understandings' (Lovat et al., 2015, p. 11) rather than focusing on what isright and what is wrong. The examiners use of positive and encouraging comments implied "a modicum of partnership in the busines of asessing the value of the thesis (Lovat et al, 2008 pp. 74-75). As the power-gaining and power-maintaining interactions responded to students' emotional and intellectual needs, they appeared to help them in promoting ther elf-ssurance, respect, responsiveness, mutual understanding, and engagement with comments (Zhang et al. 2021). In very few cases, the examiners self-citical or self-reflective interest in knowing was evident when they acknowledged the limitation in their knowledge.

Third, the nature of interaction during the viva was influenced by students positioning and participation in the interaction. In most cases, the students did not appear to be confident regarding the rigor of conducting and reporting research. Consequently, they assumed the subservient roleas receivers of examiners comments. Co-productions of dialogues and negotiations were evident, with more confident students having better command over their research and related content (Lovat et al., 2008). The students' lack of agency in the viva dialogues, to some extent, semed to bear a relationship with Nepali academic culture largely informed by Hindu philoophy (Sharma, 2013). Although Hinduism advocates three means (i.e, shrawan [listening], manan [understanding], and nididhyasan [reflection]) for achieving meaningful and emancipatory knowledge, memorization of teacher-delivered knowledge has remained a major technique of learning (Sharma, 2013). The students oriented to such a tradition of knowledge-making might have found writing and defending a thesis an arduous task because it requires independent learning and decision-making.

Finally, the quality of theses being examined also contributed to power-over interaction to some extent (Lovat et al., 2008). Based on the examiners comments and the observation of students thesis draft, it could be inferred that the theses were significantly flawed. Not surprisingly, poor quality work elicited power-over interactions from examiners in the form of negative comments, judgments, and obligatory instructions. Perhaps the submission of a suboptimal thesis resulted from students' lack of preparedness (limited academic itracy and research competence), obligation to write a thesis regardless of students' preparedness, inadequate supervision, lack of academic writing support, and students' engagement in jobs away from the universty (Neupane Bastola & Hu, 2021a, 2021b; Harwood & Petric, 2017). As a result, students might have picked up undesirable "ethical standards and norms by observing faculty and peers" (Lofstrom & Pyhalto, 2015, p. 272), thereby setting grounds for power-over interactions.

# 7. Conclusion and implications

Master's thesis vivas are the sites for the exercise of power because they involve dialogue between participants with asymmetrical personal as well as positional powers (Chiang, 2009). However, whether the power is exercised over' or with' students was mediated by how the participants positioned themselves. Their positioning was informed by various structural, cultural, individual, and interactional factors. Most importantly, the study has revealed the interrelationship between power dynamics and examiners interests in knowing in master's thesis vivas. When examiners assumed empirical-analytcal interests in knowing, they positioned themselves as an 'expert' and tended to focus on technically useful knowledge for improving students' work without much atention to how the students would utilize such comments. In contrast, when they realized historical-hermeneutic interests, they positioned themselves as collaborator and negotiator, thereby taking students on board by seeking and considering their perspectives, praising what they did well, empathizing with their struggles, and offering a viable course of action. However, it should be noted that the examiners' positioning both influenced and was influenced by students positioning during the conversations. The study has several implications.

Given the gate-keeing functions of viva and examiners role as an expert', the predominance of power-over interactions may not be surprising (Lovat et l., 2004). However, the way comments are delivered may determine whether students would act on them and their subsequent impact on their learning (Neupane Bastola & Hu, 2021a). If examiners are required to play constructive roles in creating viva as scholarly dialogues, \*they must aso be given appropriate tols (i terms of adequate training and support to do their job effectively (Cryer & Mertens, 2003, p. 94). Therefore, they might benefit from training on interactional and communicative kils (Li & Seale, 2007) on using linguisticstrategies for demonstrating mutual respect as wellas preceding constructive criticism with praise, encouragement, and expression of caution (Lau et al., 2020; Lin, 2017, 2020; hang et al, 2021). The use of such stratgies wil allow both parties to exercise power, maintain face, achieve positive interpersonal relationships, and create "a trouble-free environment, in which the educational activities of criticism and disagreement can proceed without threatening social solidarity" (Li & Seale, 2007, p. 520). Transcriptions of actual viva can be used as material for such training (Robertson, 2017; Vasquez, 2004). Examiners might also record and reflect on viva dialogues for supporting students learning and their own professional growth. Such training can also be used to raise examiners awareness of various inteests in knowing so that they can postion themselves not only as 'expert judging what is right' and wrong' but also develop negotiated understanding to enhance the learning potentials of students through scholarly viva dialogues.

Although this paper has made an essential contribution to understanding interpersonal aspects of master's thesis viva as the site for the exercise of interactionally situated productive power for maximizing learning potential, caution is urged in making generalizations because of the modest sample size of vivas as well participants from a single discipline. We suggest further research incorporating a larger sample of master's thesis vivas from various disciplines. Stimulated recl and in-depth interviews with examiners and students regarding viva interactions might also be useful to gain insights into their perceptions of the use of discourse features and their subsequent impact.

# Declaration of competing interest

None.

# References

Bailey, J. (2008). Frs stes in qualitative datalysis: Transcring. Family Practice 252), 127-131. hps:/o.org/10.1093/ampra/m003   
Bar       n   50. 10.1080/135625100114849   
Bourdieu, P. (1991). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.   
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge University Press.   
Carter, . 2008). Exng the oral thesis dssin. Iins in cin  eching Inio, 45(4, 65-37. tp/doi.org/0.1080/ 14703290802377208   
Carter, s., & Whitaker,K (2009). Examining the British PhD viva: Opening new doors or carring for life? Conteporay Nurse, 32(1-2), 169=178.   
ha   1) .)s cultural reflections on identity and agency in an education doctorate (pp. 71-88). London: UCL Press.   
Chin, . 09.  r  o r er- us on 3 (3), 255-271. https://doi.org/10.1177/1750481309337199   
Cryer,   003he Ph  a r u   i  . /. org/10.1108/09684880310471515   
bson, . 0 t   . 018  //0007 978-3-319-64016-7   
ke . 2020h il e g  g viri-up. ed,dr,  d rrin s.)    o doctorate on track: Insights from students' and supervisors' experiences (pp. 345-355). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.   
Foalt,  (1980     .)    w, 1972-197t mrican ed). New York: Pantheon Books. trans.   
Gege  is,  19  a  i  e e . Psychology Review, 2(3), 184-195.   
Habermas, J. (1972). Knowledge and human interests. Boston: Beacon Press.   
Hrd i  17er s o i s    or Francis Group.   
Haugaard, . (2012). Rikng th fur mions of power nion nd mowment. Jol of olicl Power, 51, 3-5. htps:/oi.org/10.100/ 2158379X.2012.660810   
an e  06      (4, 473-495. https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2016.1183610   
Hn 1   i.)  p 57-76). Wiley-Blackwell.   
He        , Talk, work, and institutional order: Discourse in medical, mediation, and management setings (pp. 352-385). Mouton de Gruyter. doi.org/10.1080/02602930120063501   
La,      200. m jut  e   in .    1./0.1080 09500782.2020.1828450   
Leezenberg, M. (2002). Power in communication: Implications for the semantics-pragmatics interface. Jounal of Pragmatics, 32, 893-908.   
Ln, .      h of English for Academic Purposes, 28, 14-24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2017.05.001   
Li 0    in - me t  n  .h or i  8, 302. /o. org/10.1016/j.esp.2019.12.004   
Li ., . 20 n cci i . uiso itie    gion (, 51./.0.1080 03075070701476225   
Lovat T.(204). Ways f wing indcal extio: w exars otion hemseles in etin to th ctoral nddat.in o Educational and Developmental Psychology, 4, 146-152.   
Loat T oo  rke, . 00. Ws o n in rl tio   s the r i hee 31, 66-7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2007.06.002 Review, 47(3), 5-23.   
Lovat  ie, rio (204). Wf kin  wr dire ind xtio nil Jo of i c, 2) 163-177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2005.04.011   
anga. 207).  ui: trh  f it  e  man.id .  nd teaching across cultures in higher education (pp. 93-113). Basingstoke ; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.   
McHugh, M. L. (2012). Interrater reliability: The kappa statistic. Biochemia Medica, 22(3), 276-282.   
eek, ., wae, J 2016). Ph  ia. n ld .  d., The  o  Esh fo c e (.361-375) London: Routledge.   
Neupane Bastoa,  H, . (2021a). "ommentig on your work i a waste of time only!: An appail-based study f ealuative langag n supervisory feedback. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 68, 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2020.100962   
epane k   ion 4 (3), 407-423. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2020.1780562   
Reki  5.  .  r  ,23 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2003.07.001   
Rie 0 i  cci  ci f     sh, 6,7587   
Roberso, J 017 m md a : isiof d sts. ghion  d , 362), 358371. t/o.g 10.1080/07294360.2016.1208157   
Thornborrow, J. (2002). Power talk: Language and interaction in institutional discourse. Harlow: Longman. Repr., 3. pr.   
Tkr, , o. 00 n the t olic dthe Phon p  ri in geio, 52, 167-180.   
Trafford, . (203). Quetions in dctal viv: Vis from the inid Quity Aace in Ectio, 11(2), 114122. hp/oiorg/10.1108/ 09684880310471542   
Vasquez, . 004  c m e tio n tn mtin. sis  i, 5, -58. /i.g 10.1016/j.linged.2004.10.004   
Zhang,  livi)  lan, (2021). ievig, pwr and r in t upeisio. l f Pramtic, 172, 35-45. tps:/i./10.1016/. pragma.2020.11.002