# Scaffolding for multilingual learners in elementary and secondary schools

edited by Luciana C. de Oliveira and Ruslana Westerlund, New York, Routledge, 2022, 238 pp., £31.19 (Ebook), ISBN: 9781003196228

# Elih Sutisna Yanto

To cite this article: Elih Sutisna Yanto (2024) Scaffolding for multilingual learners in elementary and secondary schools, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:10, 1437-1440, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2024.2394862

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2024.2394862

# BOOK REVIEWS

Scaffolding for multilingual learners in elementary and secondary schools, edited by Luciana C. de Oliveira and Ruslana Westerlund, New York, Routledge, 2022, 238 pp., £31.19 (Ebook), ISBN: 9781003196228

Scaffolding metaphor has been widely used in education since it was first proposed by Bruner in 1976, as a practical application of Vygotsky’s concepts of targeted support in teaching and learning (Vygotsky 1962, 1978). Scaffolding is an essential concept for all Multilingual Learner (ML) teachers. Scaffolding has been recognized in the scientific literature and has recently been used in educational practice. Scaffolding discussions have sometimes oversimplified how complicated it is (Athanases and de Oliveira 2014). However, scaffolding, should not be viewed as the mere equivalent of helping. It is a special form of support that helps individuals to acquire new skills, concepts or levels of understanding. Scaffolding refers to the practice of offering temporary support from a teacher to help a student understanding a particular activity, with the ultimate goal of enabling the learner to complete similar tasks independently in the future (Gibbons 2002). According to Vygotsky, what a child can do today with help, he or she can do independently tomorrow. This notion has been interpreted in many ways, from using fixed tools such as graphic organizers, word banks, and simplified language to facilitate learning to providing interactive support to adaptive and responsive instructional strategies (de Oliveira and Westerlund 2022).

The book consists of three different sections, each with a total of twelve chapters. The first section includes the theoretical justification and re-evaluation of scaffolding. Section II contains specific illustrations and case studies drawn from different classroom settings. Section III provides an opportunity to delve into the issue of professional development, focusing on the efforts of both pre-service and inservice teachers. This section aims to examine how these educators develop their knowledge and skills to successfully teach multilingual learners. The book begins with Section 1 entitled Theories and Approaches to Scaffolding for Multilingual Learners. This section includes chapters that examine the developmental trajectory of the scaffolding metaphor, reconceptualization of scaffolding in the context of multilingual learners, strategies for promoting equitable participation in issue-based classrooms through scaffolding, and the application of scaffolding in bilingual education classrooms.

In Chapter 2, Hammond examines the concept of scaffolding and its impact on diverse learners in mainstream classes. The author covers various topics related to the scaffolding metaphor. In addition, Hammond examines scaffolding in education and its potential benefits for multilingual students. This chapter builds on the work of Vygotsky, Bruner, Mercer, and others and presents a model that shows how sophisticated programs work and what support multilingual learners (MLs) need to participate fairly in them. In this chapter, Hammond focuses on three related topics, namely addressing the goals and methods of scaffolding, such as what and how to scaffold, the consideration of program design levels and local interactions, including macro-level goals, when planning and implementing scaffolding at the micro-level, and understanding scaffolding as cumulative, not just as a completed single task but as a contribution to learning over sequences of tasks, interactions, and responses over time. In Chapter 3, Reconceptualizing Scaffolding: Promoting Learner Autonomy Using Ecological and Sociocultural Approaches, Aída Walqui and Mary Schmida discuss five commonly misinterpreted applications related to the concept of scaffolding, with a particular focus on promoting learner autonomy in one socially responsible framework. This chapter also addresses key issue question related to the interpretation of scaffolding that teachers adopt in their work as educators concerned with developing the professional practices of English Language Learners. In addition, the authors examine the implications of these applications for both current and future classroom practices.

In Chapter 4, Scaffolding Multilingual Learners’ Equitable Participation in Discipline-Based Learning: A Discussion of Concepts and Tools, Jennifer Wilfrid and Daniella Molle discuss equitable instruction for multilingual students in the context of scaffolding, focusing on three sociocultural theory concepts: participation in sociocultural activities, appropriation and implementation. They explain how these notions affect scaffolding and equal learning opportunities of MLs. The chapter ends with a discussion of the WIDA Framework for Equitable Instruction, which supports equal participation of MLs in subject learning through scaffolding. Using cultural-historical activity theory (CHAT), this chapter examines scaffolding metaphors. The authors examine how perceptions of learning as appropriation, sociocultural engagement, and student agency can change their view of the purpose of scaffolding. They serve as an example of how the WIDA Framework for Equitable Instruction, a teaching tool, integrates the highlighted framework elements of CHAT. This discussion intended to encourage readers to reflect on their scaffolding approach and make specific suggestions for classroom practices that could benefit from a CHAT-based understanding of scaffolding.

In Chapter 5, ‘Making Science Multilingual: Scaffolding for Equitable Engagement in Science’, Rita MacDonald and David T. Crowther focus on science. They seek to challenge the idea that scaffolding merely simplifies concepts through generic strategies that do not adequately support multilingual learners (ML). The text emphasizes the use of the Design Principles for Equitable Engagement in Three-Dimensional Science, developed jointly by NSTA and WIDA science and language education experts. These principles help teachers use Hammond and Gibbons’ (2005) conceptualization of macro- and micro-scaffolding techniques to teach science adaptively and responsively. This facilitates the active participation of multilingual students in the science learning process. The authors of this chapter argue that improving the equity of marginalized populations to participate in science is paramount both to our shared future and to the advancement of scientific knowledge. Consciously and seriously engaging with ideas and issues that come from diverse or historically marginalized groups can lead to questions that may not have been asked before.

Section 2, ‘Examples and Case Studies of Scaffolding,’ provides specific examples and case studies of classroom scaffolding to demonstrate various dimensions of scaffolding in practice. In Chapter 6, Scaffolding in the DLBE Secondary Social Studies Classroom: Re-envisioning Equitable Teaching Practices, Katherine Barko-Alva, Stephen Masyada, and Claudia Norez focus their work on a critically important topic: dual language bilingual education (DLBE) programs at the secondary school. This chapter examines how meaningful scaffolding strategies are implemented in secondary DLBE social studies classrooms to promote biliteracy, bilingualism, and intercultural communication. They describe how to design a lesson plan with an emphasis on scaffolded approaches that focus on public policy, civic engagement, and social justice, and how to provide bilingual (i.e., SpanishEnglish) resources and incorporate the disciplinary literacy dimension of the College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework. In Chapter 7: ‘Oh, I Was on the Scaffolding!’ Megan Madigan Peercy and John Chi describe the need for more support for novice teachers in scaffolding, such as implementing it in the classroom. They identify scaffolding as one of several essential practices for teaching multilingual students that could help teachers implement and reflect on humanizing pedagogy. They conclude with implications for structuring teacher education and induction experiences to support the development of novice teachers. The main practices of interest are that they provide core practices for multilingual students: getting to know students, learning environment, content and language instruction, language & literacy development, assessment, and relationships and advocacy. The authors believe that teacher education does not adequately support NTs to recognize their full humanizing potential. To meet this challenge, novice teachers should be provided to observe constructs such as scaffolding in action by: identifying scaffolding in different contexts; consider building scaffolding to engage students. Recognize, experience, and practice scaffolding with students.

In Chapter 8, Aída Walqui discusses Sustaining Quality Interactions for English Learners in Virtual Learning Formats. This is about the context of distance learning and the need for high-quality learning opportunities, especially due to the corona pandemic, which brought about a rapid change from face-to-face teaching to distance learning. Using a sociocultural and ecological framework. This chapter outlines key parameters for improving the dept and interactivity of learning through the use of appropriate scaffolding. Walqui describes the type of curriculum designed for distance learning and how educators continually implement these designs by combining synchronous experiences in oral to written modalities with asynchronous engagement that is still interactive. In Chapter 9, Multimodality and Translanguaging as Scaffolding: Sense-Making in a Bilingual Kindergarten, Laura Schall-Leckrone examines how a bilingual kindergarten teacher in a multilingual school used multiple modalities of communication to scaffold language and literacy development. This case analysis illustrates the teacher’s use of multimodal ensembles, including named languages (Spanish and English), written and auditory language, drawings, objects, and gestures, to facilitate students’ sense-making. She reports that translanguaging should be integrated into multimodal approaches to support the literacy development of multilingual children.

In Chapter 10, using a comparative case study of four exemplary teachers’ reading instruction with emerging bilingual middle school students, Erika Johnson explains how these teachers used interactive scaffolding (current language and content supports) to generate and maintain their students’ engagement with difficult English texts. It shows how teachers use a different of interactional scaffolds to support students with challenging content in multilingual classrooms. She emphasizes that the power of the interactive scaffolding is often found not in a single move, but in a series of moves that, as a whole, respond to the needs of students in the present and motivate them to do challenging work.

The final section 3 concludes with a discussion of Professional Learning with Teachers, which encourages readers to work with pre-service and in-service teachers to demonstrate the continuing need to support those teachers in teaching multilingual learners. Drawing on nearly a decade of professional development and interviews with participants $( n = 1 5 )$ , in Chapter 11, Kara Mitchell Viesca, Cindy Linzell Peiwen Wang, Molly Heeren, Jessica Mitchell-McCollough, and Alexa Yunes-Koch examine the principles of agency, leadership, and collaboration in teacher development. Specifically, this chapter examines the role these principles play in supporting the advancement of educators in their theories, values, beliefs, and practices when working with multilingual students and families. The authors claim that these principles act in combination as critical scaffolding practices or conditions for teacher learning and are promising principles for replication in different contexts to support effective teacher learning. The factors of agency, collaboration, and leadership have been found to be helpful not only in promoting overall adaptability and application of instruction in the classroom, but also in adapting education to the diverse learning resources and skills of their students.

In Chapter 12, Haiwen Chu and Leslie Hamburger describe curriculum materials for in-service teachers. The materials are intended to enhance the knowledge of the educators who use them. They focus on the participatory structure of the tasks and describe the annotations that provide teachers with ways of how intensively they can support English language learners in completing a task and emphasize the design framework for these scaffolding intensities. In this chapter, the authors propose rapid improvement cycles for a variety of activities, each based on a practice problem that generates descriptive questions about what students are doing and improvement questions about how materials and activities can improve student learning opportunities. In the first year, rapid improvement cycles will improve the flow and design of student activities while testing the intensity of scaffolding in practice.

As a standard work on scaffolding, the book has three notable achievements. First, this book begins by highlighting the significant work still required for educators to develop improved understandings and practices to support multilingual learners. Second, this book contributes to the existing literature by addressing misconceptions about scaffolding and how it can be used to support multilingual learners and enhance their learning opportunities, rather than simplify instruction for them. Third, this informative and contemporary volume explores how scaffolding can be used to enhance the learning abilities of multilingual students. Therefore, the book argues for more scholarly discussions of how scaffolding is an effective teaching strategy to support multilingual learners in acquiring new skills and knowledge and to help them feel more successful in the classroom. A potential limitation of the book is that it provides limited examples of implementing scaffolding techniques in skills-based classes, such as those that focus on teaching speaking, writing, and reading in the context of English language learning. Providing additional examples would greatly benefit teachers of English as a foreign or second language as they seek to effectively integrated scaffolding strategies into their teaching practices.

# Notes on contributor

is faculty member of Teacher Training and Education, The Universitas Singaperbangsa Karawang, Indonesia. His research interests include language teacher professional development, Systemic Functional Linguistics in language education, and qualitative research in ELT. Email: elih.sutisna@fkip.unsika.ac.id.

# References

Athanases, S. Z., and L. C. de Oliveira. 2014. “Scaffolding Versus Routine Support for Latina/o Youth in an Urban School.” Journal of Literacy Research 46 (2): 263–299. https://doi.org/10.1177/1086296x14535328.   
de Oliveira, L. C., and R. Westerlund. 2022. “Scaffolding for Multilingual Learners.” In Scaffolding for Multilingual Learners in Elementary and Secondary Schools, edited By L. C. de Oliveira and R. Westerlund, 1–6. Taylor & Francis Ltd. https:// doi.org/10.4324/9781003196228-1.   
Gibbons, P. 2002. Scaffolding Language, Scaffolding Learning. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.   
Hammond, J., and P. Gibbons. 2005. “Putting Scaffolding to Work: The Contribution of Scaffolding in Articulating ESL Education.” Propesct 20 (1): 6–30.   
Vygotsky, L. S. 1962. Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Vygotsky, L. S. 1978. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Studies in Italian as a heritage language, edited by Francesco Bryan Romano, Berlin, Boston, De Gruyter Mouton, 2023, iv + pp. 324, €114.95 (Hardback), ISBN: 9783110759587

# ABSTRACT

Studies in Italian as a Heritage Language represents the first edited volume that brings together a wide range of perspectives on the acquisition of Italian in different socio-linguistic context and in contact with languages such as Swedish, German and English. The volume provides a valuable contribution to our broader understanding of heritage language competence and encourages the reader to reflect on some of the key variables that can impact heritage language acquisition and performance. The range of methodologies employed in the nine empirical studies shows that studying Italian heritage language speakers requires a multi-faceted approach that takes into consideration linguistic and extra-linguistic factors.

# KEYWORDS

Heritage language; Heritage language; bilingualism; la