Researching EAP Practice

# Using the knowledge and expertise of English language specialists to enhance L1 English speaking lecturers' lectures: A professional development project

Fiona Aish\*,1, Jo Tomlinson1

Target English, Plaza de la Administracion Vieja, 1, 1izq, 04003, Almeria, Spain

# ABSTRACT

This paper rorts on arofesiol deen roect btwe trr n  niversit ad w AP practitionr. he a ws ts the extent to which EAP practitioners knowledgef academic English and teaching strategies common to the AP and  sectors could be harnesse to nhance the lectures of an L1 English lecturer for intenational students. The methodology included recording and reviewing sample lctures, conducting fous groups with students and a relection discssion with the lecturer. t provided the lecturer with an opportunit to engage with practices drawn from the ELT and EAP sectors in order to develop her lecturing stylefor these students. The project explored ideas relating to lecturing skils, features of lecture language and discourse, and adopting EAP and ELT teaching techniques in higher education.

# 1. Introduction

The intenationalisation of higher education has resulted in a more iverse student body, both culturally and linguisticall. This has presented both opportunities and challenge for lecturers with English as their 1 and has foregrounded the need for training in both Ianguage use and teaching techniques. In countries where English is an L1, training can be provided by institutions and educational advisory bodies and tends to be situated more in pedagogy and approaches to teaching rather than language (see De Vries & Van Geyte, 2019; Leask & Carroll, 2013; Lynch, 2015; Scudamore, 2013).

Some universities provide training in lectring sills for L1 English lecturers to help them make their lecturers more accessible for students who do not have English as an 1. The ams of this training areto draw attention to the challenges of listening to lectures in English and to highlight the need to develop effecive lectring skills approaches and strategies for students with Englishas an aademic lingua franca. However, there are issues with the provision of this kind of traning. Interest can vary considerably among these lecturers, despite the fact that research such as SCcudamore (2013) and Leask and Caroll (2013) highlights how training can be effective. In addition, intitutions may prioritis other forms of academic staff development or it may not be immediatly clear as to who should provide such training. I could be argued that AP practitioner are well positioned to provide such asstance, especially to those L1 English lecturers without teaching qualifications or a strong awareness of international students' language abilities.

This paper explores how a collaborative observation project between EAP practitioners and a lecturer could contribute to lecturer training in this area. t outlines the project processe, rports on the beefits from the persectives of the lecturer and the students and discusses its implications.

# 2. Listening in lectures: a specific and challenging context

Listening to lectures is an integral part of higher education and can be a challenging form of itening for many students. It can be particularly challenging for those students who are not first language English speakers. Although they must provide evidence of language competence to embark on higher education programmes at UK universities, their linguistic competence may not be sufficient to listen to long lectures from L1 English lecturers. Research such as Weir (2005) has highlighted how the linguisic content of in. formation and the delivery by the speaker contribute to the cognitive load for the listener and affect their understanding. Field (2003) explored the importance of listening strategies such as determining word boundaries and understanding assimilation and elision. However, he lat otind how eve wth th tratgies listenng to ltre s acomple proces (Fid, 2011). In adtion, Andade (2006), Nesi (2012), Lynch (2015) and Arkoudis (n.d) have reported on the sues that make listening to lectures challenging for international students such as pace, accent, humour, and the use of culturally specific examples, as well as the difficulties of note-taking whilst listening and asking and answering lecturer questions.

Another isue with lecture comprehension is that students may lack the necessary vocabulary to fully understand the content. Van Zeeland and Schmitt (2013) noted that knowing over $9 0 \%$ of the vocabulary contributes significantly to understanding informal narratives, which are considered simpler than academic lectures. Hyland and Tse (2009) suggest that the highly specific nature of disciplinary academic vocabulary presents significant barriers for students, which suggests that coverage of $9 0 \%$ of the vocabulary or more could be required. More recently, Dang (2022) conducted a study into the vocabulary coverage required for academic lectures in EMI and non-EMI contexts. She observed that in non-EMI contexts, in other words those with more L1 English lecturers and students, lectures were more lexically demanding than EMI contexts, where a higher proportion of lectures and students are likely to be using English as an academic lingua franca. A further isue relating to vocabulary is that of metaphor. A study by Littlemore et al. (2011) observed that 1 English lecturers use metaphor for a range of functions such as clarification, evaluation and to make comprehension easier. Yet, conversely, for international students, metaphors are often more difficult to understand because even if the content words are lexically familia, students may misunderstand or misinterpret the contextual meaning or fil to draw the inferences intended by the lecturer (Littlemore et al., 2011). This suggests that lecturers would benefit from reflecting on the type of language they use in lectures.

The above issues mean that intenational students may fail to get as much out of lectures as they should and therefore it is important to raise awarenessof this among L1 lecturers. Although some universities provide guidance for L1 English speaking lecturers working with international students, it may not be immediately obvious how to implement such guidance. For example, Carl and Cox (2013) in their guide for lecturers suggest that lecturers . avoid complex sentences, jargon, and unnecesary terminology' (p.26). However, lecturers may be unaware of these terms and how to avoid them. EAP teachers are more experienced in avoiding complex sentences in speech or disambiguating complex ideas for students with English as an additional language (EAL) and could therefore contribute to lecture training. Bond (2018) writes that incorporating EAP specialists into curriculum planning aross intitutions can help make programmes more accessible. She calls for shared Continuous Professional Development programmes for "content teachers to incorporate language awareness in their academic content teaching, and EAP teachers to highlight language and discourse through relevant academic content (p.4, author's emphass). This is supported by Leask and Caroll (2013) who advocate that teachers should "seek guidance and support from language professionals" (p.39). This collaboration could be taken further by EAP researcher-practitionrs whose studies shed ight on actul language use in lectures and report on the frequency of specific excal items or grammatical structures. An example is the work of Deroey (2015) and Deroey and Taverniers (2012), who analysed the language lecturers use to mark importance in lectures. Their findings show that lecturers use a wider variety of importance markers than was previously thought, and that they are not always explicit, which makes it difficult for students to notice them.

# 3. The project: contextualisation and necessity

This project took place at a smal postgraduate university in London. The university has a Strategy for Learning' embedded within all courses with a remit to incorporate international and intercultural dimensions into currculums to develop students' global citizenship. A large proportion of the student body isintenational, and the academic saff are diverse in terms of whether English is their L1 or an additional language. Some students arive at the universit via the presessional and others through direct entry based on test scores such as IELTS.

This project arose from a lecturer's experience with a specific course. The course was in part successful, but she noticed that the international students, who were mostly from Asian cultures, sometimes had difficulty understanding lectures, even though their English level met the universty requirements for their courses. The lecturer started to reflect on this situation, as well as on ways to mitigate this communication gap. As part of this reflection, she aked two insessional EAP practitioners at the universty (the authors) to provide some personal professional development. The practitioners are experienced in EAP teaching, course management and design, as well as being materials and asessment writers. fter some discussion, an intervention style project was agreed upon in which the two EAP practitioners observed the lecturer and provided feedback on her use of language, materials and classroom management techniques.

# 4. The project: outline, aims and methods

The main aim of the project was to use the linguistic and pedagogic expertise of the EAP practitioners to evaluate the lecturer's approach to lecturing for an international audience and provide guidance where appropriate. A subsidiary aim was to provide a collaborative opportunity for the lecturer to adapt her lecturing if desired It was agreed that the EAP practitioners would identify any areas which they felt could be developed and they would draw on language knowledge and teaching strategies commonly used in EAP and ELT. The proect fllowed three stage iscussed and agreed between the lecturer and the EAP practitiners, but due to its informal nature, did not employ any specific published framework or research model. In total, the project took approximately $^ { 1 0 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$

Stage 1: Practitioner One videoed a 1-h lecture (with student consent) and made unstructured notes of the main point, as well as any moments or specific language which may have caused comprehension problems. There were approximately twenty students present and the lecturing style was monologic, with the lecturer asking the students some questions. Directly after each lecture, she conducted two student focus groups of $3 0 \mathrm { m i n }$ for each one. The focus groups comprised 12 students and were recorded with student consent. The role of Practitioner One was to guide the students to describe their lecture experience, prompting them to expand and clarify ther contributions to the focus group. Student irst wrote short lecture summary to help them self-sses their understanding. She then asked the students to explain what makes lectures easier or more dificult to understand in general. The next stage was to check the meaning of some vocabulary the EAP practitioner thought may have caused comprehension problems. This selection included multi-word verbs, idiomatic language, and culturall specfic or low frequency lexis. Finall, the students sugested ways in which their lecturers could make lectures more comprehensible. These steps were designed to help the students think about ifferent aspects of the lecture and to provide a more comfortablenvironment for the students to share their ideas. The practitioners thought that giving tasks and eliciting feedback would seem familiar and unthreatening.

Stage 2: Practitioners One and Two watched the video twice individual, making notes in a more structured format under four categories: language, material, techniques and lecturing styl. These were then entered into an Excel spreadsheet for ease of comparison. In an effort to strengthen the analysis, each practitioner cross-referenced the spreadsheet and notes and highlighted specific areas of disagreement The practitioners' discussion was structured so that each point was discussed and any disagreements were noted. Overall both practitioners notes agreed on areas to feedback to the lecturer and it was decided to focus on the core language and techniques that both practitioners had noted and thought would be most useful tofeedback on. The practitioners worked together to categorise the areas into broad themes which could structure the fedback session and agreed on vocabulary, the use f examples and lecture structure as thethemes. A 1-h feedack meeting wasarranged for Practitioner One to discuss the analysis wth the lecturer. The feedback session was conducted in an informal environment and consisted of a semistructured discussion based on the practitioners' notes.

Stage 3: In the third stage, Practitioner Two conducted a second observation and student focus groups (essentially repetition of stage 1) to assess how the lecturer had implemented the sugestions and thir impact. After stage 3, the project was written up by Practitioner One, reviewed by Practitioner Two and the lecturer added her personal reflections and a description of the potential wider applicability of the project to the university's Strategy for Learning.

The following section will explore the points which emerged from the lecture observations, student focus groups and the EAP practitioner and lecturer discussion.

# 5. The project: findings and discussion

# 5.1. Stage 1: feedback from student focus groups

Overall most students reported a general grasp of the lecture content and assessed their comprehension as medium to high; none were worried that they had not understood enough. The emerging themes from both focus groups cover three broad areas.Firstly, students said vocabulary was problematic because not understanding a specific term in the lecture made them worry about their comprehension of the overarching mesage. Students said that they would benefit from a list of key vocabulary and definitions before the lectures. Secondly, the students were keen to have more examples. They articulated very clearly how useful examples re for them as EAL speakers but highlighted that the examples should be real world examples from the fashion industry given the practical aspects of the course, and that they hould be culturall relevant as UK centric examples can be confusing. This chimes with Lynch's student survey (2015), where adapting examples for the audience was a key recommendation for lecturers. Finally, they suggested breaking lectures up into smaller chunks for additional processing time. The students stesed that staging and integrating discussion questions can help with lectures due to the dense content and the cognitive load of listning at length in another language. However, students also said that they preferred short group discussions as they want time to listen to the lecturer's input.

# 5.2. Stage 2: EAP practitioners' evaluation and feedback

At the beginning of the feedback session, Practitioner One described the areas that had arisen inthe focus groups and then provided observations and suggestions for each of the four categories used in the analysis. The following is a summary of these observations and suggestions, based on the practitioners' own professional practice.

# 5.2.1. Language

The areas that emerged were asking and answering questions, collquial language and discourse markers. The lecturer noticed that students rarely ask or answer questions in her lectures. However, the lecturer was unaware of the dificultie of questions for students, which Practitioner One explained. As Lynch (2015, p.6) states, \*question-asking is culturall complex, of course, and the relatively difficul yntax f English interrogatives can also inhibit participation. Thisis an area in which English language pecialis could raise lecturers awareness of the dificulties of question formation for students and the effct of this on student engagement in lectures.

With regard to lexi, the EAP practitioners noticed the use f the discourse marker, So, to reiterate,  ven though it could be argued that it is possible to deduce the meaning from context, the students reported not knowing this ver. This could be attrbutable to idiolect, and whil this is not inherently problematic, collaboration with EAP practitioners can highlight when lecturers are using language which might be inaccessil to students and easily providealtenatives such as repeat or review. Other unknown lexs selected by Practitioner 1 included aked beans, ru of the mil I'mnt md about it thashed ut and some multiword verbs, for example,crry on with. Practitioner One explained why these items could present comprehension difficulties. She mentioned that one-word verbs such as continue can be easier for students to understand because the meaning of multiword verbs is often more opaque. The lecturer was surprised by this as she had presumed that the short words in multi-word verbs would be easier to understand. As suggested by Bond (2018) and Leask and Carrll (2013), the knowledge of English language specialis could help lecturers understand which aspects of English students may find more challenging and suggest strategies to mitigate this.

# 5.2.2. Materials

The lecturer's slides were intentionally quit text heavy, the rationale being that students could read the slides if they found listening difficul. The EAP practitioners highlighte the difficulty of istening and reading together and suggested that reducing text would help students isten more actively and perhaps adding images could help. In addition, they suggested including pauses for students to proces the information. They mentioned that language teachers are more acustomed to silence in the classoom because students often need extra time to process information. The handouts were simply a print version of the lecture sides. The EAP practitioners pointed out that handouts can be used as ascafolding opportunit by including supporting material such as a glossary of terms, a lit of key points or links for follow up reearch. Although such guidance may be easily discoverable via resource such as De Vries and Van Geyte (2019) lecturers may not be aware of them and EAP practitioners could be influential in raising their awareness and then assisting with any associated development.

# 5.2.3. Staging and lecture management

The students were clearly engaged in the lecture, but there were no obvious breaks for thinking time or reviewing, and discussion was reserved until towards the end. The cognitive load of istning in another language was raised again and Practitioner One sug. gested signposting sections more cearly and including mini breaks for note taking or per discussion of key points or ssues. In terms of question styles, the lecturer asked mostly open questions such as \*What do you think?" and few students responded. Practitioner One explained the challenge for students to think on their feet to answer this type of question, and that without processing time they may not feel confident enough to reply. She showed how questions can be scaffolded by providing options or by being more specificsuch as "Do you think ....or ....?"; "Can you give me another example of ..?"; "Which ... . .. do you agree with most and why?"; and "There are three things wrong with ... Can you guess what they might be?" and reinforced the need to give students time to reply.

She also suggested focusing on the clarit of instructions and giving students time to rehearse their answers. The following language was sugsted. llgieyo 0s t is. wth the erson nxt to you." " an ou to get ino goups of thre and diss his questin. You have 2 min. After this, I will ask you to share your ideas with everyone".

The final recommendation was to repeat students' answers and contributions to check understanding and make sure the whole group can hear the contributions, eecially those of shy or quiet students. Phrases such as, "'So, you said tht ." Okay, you think.." "Let me just repeat your idea" fllowed by "Is that correct?" can give the students time to processte comment and reair any errors.

# 5.3. Stage 3: the second observation

In order to asss the impact of the observation and feedback a second observation was arranged six weeks lter. The lecturer and EAP practioner discussed the importance of the timing of the second observation, there should be sufficient time for the lecturer to review the feedback and make changes, but not so much time that the lectrer and students cannot rcall the salient point raised from the first observation. The procedure for the second observation followed the first (video recording, analys and student focus groups) so as to observe and assess any changes implemented by the lecturer and their impacts.

# 5.4. Lecturer changes and student responses

The lecturer had made some clear changes in the second observation, most noticeably to the materials, structure and organisation. Although the lecturer mentioned having started to adapt her language and questioning techniques, she stressed that this aspect had been the most challenging and would require more thought and attention. She mentioned the importance of the EAP practitioners feedback and noted that she would potentially be interested in further guidance sesions on language use and questioning techniques.

# 5.4.1. Language

It was clear that the lecturer had thought about her language and the reduction of colloquialisms and idiomatic language was noticeable. She had also paid some atention to the language of instructions and questions, which included some of the examples mentioned above in the edback section. In the reflection section of the final projec report, the lecturer mentioned that the feedack discussion about language with Practitioner One had been particularly informative and raised her awareness of the role played by language in creating clear lectures. She noted that using clear language in questions and instructions was fairly easy to adopt, but also highlighted the need to think and plan more with regard to language use, especially in signposting and colloquial language. The students agreed that the lecturer's questions and instructions were clearer, and they felt that her signposting language was more

obvious than before.

# 5.4.2. Materials

The slides had les text and included written definitions of key words. In addition, the handouts provided more space to add notes and contained links and extra information to follow up on afer the lecture. The students noted that the lecturer had changed the approach to both the slides and handouts and that these changes had helped them to prepare for the lecture follow the content and take notes. They especially liked the new handouts because they gave extra information rather than being just aprint version of the slides.

# 5.4.3. Staging and lecture management

The lecture was structured into more obvious mini sections, which better scaffolded students understanding. The lecturer also allocated some time for short discussions throughout and gave clear instructions with a time limit. As the lecture progressed, the lecturer gave mini conclusions before moving on to the next point, signalling these by So, ' with rising intonation and gave more explicit reerences t rious lectres and asments tomonstate theance fth ere tothe corse. The tds reorted that this helped them to process the information and apply the knowledge directl to their assessments. They also noticed that the lecturer spoke more slowly, (although this was not explicitly advised by the EAP practitioners) which helped them focus on the content, gave clearer discussion instructions, and used more signposting when recapping.

Overall, the EAP practitioners, the lecturer and the students reported clear changes to specific aspects of the second lecture when compared to the frst and all participants in the project concluded that these changes had had a positive impact on the students learning.

The next section will describe the positive impact of the project and explore wider applications.

# 5.5. The benefits of the project

The feedback from the lecturer was overwhelmingly positive and she reported having learned some valuable skill from the EAP practitioners. The lecturer noticed that implementing some of these skill was not too time consuming and provided positie results relatively quickly and the EAP practitioners believe that these points are important. Academic staff have a considerable workload and as such even the kenest on profeional deloment fte struggle to st aide ime to iestgte their ractice This proect provides a simple, yet effective framework which does not involve extensive reading or tasks and offers rapid solutions which are not too onerous to implement.

The lecturer noted that she had started to attend to aspects of her lecturing style which she had previously not focused on. These included being mindful of clloquial language, drawing on examples from students cultures, reducing text on presentation materials, giving instructions and using techniques for managing questions and discussions. The lecturer's reflections ended with a recommendation to colleagues to engage with this kind of project. In addition, the EAP practitioners found the experience enriching by contributing their knowledge and experience, and the students reported that being included in the focus groups made them feel more valued by the university. However, it should be noted that whil some of the practitioners observations were specific to language use and teaching strategies, others were associated with general lecture skill which could be addressed with a less resource intensive approach such as short workshops..

# 5.6. The limitations of the project

The most noticeable limitation is that the project is resource heavy. Time must be allocated to conduct it effctively, otherwise it risks becoming superficial and it positive effcts willikely e short-lived. Scheduling the various observations and feedback sessions needs to be timely so that the intervention does not lose momentum. In addition, there is scope for the project to be embedded in a more structured training programme, or a formal framework where observation is used as a form of evaluation and further training. Herington (2020) provides auseful iscussion of structured observations in which specific categorie and protocols are used as a basis for observation and lecturer rflections. Although the context in his study involved lecturers for whom English is an aditional lan. guage, it i clear that a more tructured aproach could enefit L1 English lecturers by personalising the experience and providing clear aims and objectives. Herington concludes that observation instruments should be developed to match the needs of the lecturers engaging in this type of training.

Finally, there may be institutional barriers to its implementation and varying levels of interest and engagement from academic staff, especiall from those in most need, who may be reluctant to take part. As such there is a need for this kind of training to be supported by institutional leadership teams and advocated by teaching and learning practitioners as wellas EAP practitioners.

# 6. Conclusion: towards a wider application

It can be argued that a personal intervention project such as this has clear benefits for L1 English speaking lecturers. The stages are simple and easy to set up and the results can be a useful awarenes raising exercise. While the practioners guidance overed some generic lectring kills other suggestions were based on individual language use and specific questions and observations raised by the lecturer regarding areas for development. It is important to stress that the proect was voluntary on the part f the lectrer, inclusive and transparent i terms of adding the student focus groups, and the EAP practitioners role was one of constructive and empowering support rather than a critical evaluation. The authors believe that these aspects contributed to its overallsuccess.

The authors suggest that this project may be of interest to other lecturers and EAP practitioners to work towards trengthening their collaboration with academic staff and contribute to teaching and learning strategies. Lecturers and staff in teaching and learning departments may not be aware of resources, materials and techniques which are commonly used by EAP practitioners to support student learning; therefore AP practitioners could be influentia i addresing these kinds of training gaps. While this proect explores how this can be done on a small cale, there could be much wider benefit for universities if this kind of project were scaled up. It appears that projects and collaborations of this nature are currntly ad-hoc and often the result of forging relationships with colleagues, rather than structured and part of an institutional approach to training where suficient time and resources are allocated. pro-active atitude to improving the international experience and recognising the role EAP practitioners could play in this could strengthen an institution's commitment to internationalisation.

Further research could take this project in a variet of directions including exploring the efectivenessof more formal observation frameworks or models, developing mentoring programmes or longer collaborations between lecturers and EAP practitioners or perhaps creating disciplinary based workshops or short courses for lecturers. In addition, it would be useful to explore mechanisms by which instiutions could track and evaluate the efects of this kind of training on lecturers' practice and job satisfaction, as well as students' subsequent lecture experiences.

# Author statement

The authors acknowledge that the material presented in this manuscript has not been previously published, nor i i simultaneously under consideration by any other journal.

# References

Andrade, . . 006.io t in ish i  f.  of h  no io 2), 131154.   
Ardi    t g melbourne-cshe.unimelb.edu.au/_data/assets/pdf file/0004/2299045/international.pdf. (Accessed 18 January 2018).   
nd, .  f          chg Excellen ie  /n/t/9/0171/md 27 ly 2018)   
Car, J.,  . 13. n i st n   . ist   le a / southampton.a. uk/aset/mporte/tansfoms/ntent-blockefulDownlods Download/8AED2F5368814BD1B168D6C99E1FEB6/Car1%20and%20Cox% 20(2013)%20Supporting International students_in_the_classroom.pdf. (Accessed 17 December 2017).   
ng, Thi e 2022 n a l.  f Egsh for c  58, 110. /./0.1016/ja.202.123 101123.   
De Vrie,   t 2019: iv n ste fr ini st. tf ailae h/. birminghm.c.k/univrsty//ns/2019/02/icro-Iclusie-trin-sti-fr-inational-dns a. Ae 30 Agst 2021).   
Deroey, K. (2015). Marking importance in lectures: Interactive and textual orientation. Applied Linguisics, 36(1), 51-72.   
Droey, , & rnir,  (2012) Jst reer his xioraatl eleanc markrs in cte. ish for Sic Pses, 31(4), 21-23   
Field, J. (2003). Promoting perception: Lexical segmentation in L2 listening. ELT Journal, 57(4), 325-334.   
Field, J. (2011). Into the mind of the academic listener. Journdl of English for Academic Purposes, 10(2), 102-112.   
Hrgto   er trainee perspectives. In M. L. Carrio-Pasto (Ed.), IGI globallnternationalising learning in higher education (pp. 65-82).   
Hyland,   s, . (209.  is adciliy prtic s i fr it. o J of Esh e, 92) 111-129   
Lesk  l,  (013 prcte rcis  ti h a  qk  ih  k ti Education Association of Australia. Available at: https://www.iea.org.au/documents/item/128. (Accessed 20 February 2018) not English. Applied Linguistics, 32(4), 408-429.   
Lynch . 5  t  h    1)./.ly. uploads/1/6/3/1/16311372/isej_028.01.15_tony.pdf. (Accessed 8 August 2019).   
Nesi, H. (2012). Laughter in university lectures. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 11(2), 79-89.   
Sre13)       / RachelScudamoreReportFeb2013.pdf. (Accessed 17 December 2018).   
an d 13 s 34(4), 457-479.   
Weir, C. J. (2005). Language testing and validation: An evidence-based approach. Palgrave Macmillan.