# The Role of English in Global Citizenship

Article · July 2020

# The Role of English in Global Citizenship

Claire Cavanagh, Ph.D. Independent Researcher Canada

Keywords: global citizenship; language policy; English as a Lingua Franca; language ideology; South Korea; internationalization of higher education

ABSTRACT: Despite scholars’ attempts to define and conceptualise global citizenship, the literature tends to ignore the role of English as the global lingua franca. In this paper, the author argues that ignoring English as the global lingua franca is a gross oversight, particularly in internationalised higher education where global citizenship is often presented as an aspiration for students. Websites of two South Korean universities were analysed regarding how the respective institutions intend to develop global citizens. Twenty students enrolled in the universities participated in interviews regarding their conceptualizations of global citizenship and how they frame their relationship with global and Korean identities. The findings reveal that global citizenship is generally conceived in terms of English with a strong adherence to fluency norms and in opposition to Korean identity. This influences how the students position themselves in relation to a global community and affects their conception of national identities. The paper ends with both theoretical and practical recommendations regarding the role of English in global citizenship.

# Introduction

The rapid expansion of internationalisation in higher education has led to much active research and theoretical debate regarding the aims and practices of institutions in preparing students for globalisation. One area of interest for scholars is global citizenship, where there is an agreement that higher education institutions (hereafter HEIs) should play a role in developing students for inclusion in a global society (e.g. Rhoads, 1998; Caruana, 2010; Rhoads & Szelenyi, 2011; Torres, 2015). Recent research suggests that HEIs are ‘rhetorically at least’ explicit in their aims to connect their institutions to a global environment and attempt to present a wider view of citizenship beyond that of local/national (Rhoads & Szlelenyi, 2011:22), particularly via websites (Saarinen & Nikula, 2013; Author, 2017). Bourn (2010) investigated student perceptions of globalisation and global citizenship in a UK HEI and found that these students tended to frame the concept of globalisation positively, yet did not relate it to the HEI per se. Many participants were sceptical of the HEI’s use of terms such as ‘global citizens’ and had difficulty defining themselves within such contexts. This research suggests that while HEIs are using such keywords to promote their global credentials and internationalisation activities, global citizenship is not necessarily a dominant aim in practice.

Compounding the complication of identity in global citizenship education, one aspect of internationalisation that is often ignored by global citizenship scholars is the status of English as the global lingua franca and the inequalities which arise from the spread of English. This has particular relevance in the globalised higher education context where an ideology of internationalisation as ‘englishization’ has become commonplace through the application of English language policies such as English as a Medium of Instruction (EMI; e.g. Botha, 2013; Botha, 2014; Kirkpatrick, 2011; Piller & Cho, 2013). A further complication regarding English and global citizenship is the tendency by both Anglophone and non-Anglophone institutions to insist on promoting ‘native’ English as the ideal English for internationalisation and global citizenship (Jenkins, 2014; McNamara, 2014; Saarinen & Nikula, 2013; Cavanagh, 2017).

The current study investigates in-depth the role of English in global citizenship as perceived by two South Korean institutions and Korean students immersed in internationalisation policies. This paper will first provide a brief description of some definitions and conceptualisations of global citizenship. This description includes an acknowledgement of the criticisms of the concept and I will suggest that the status of English as the global lingua franca should be included in these conceptualisations and criticisms. Following this, I will examine global citizenship as an objective in higher education internationalization with a more thorough focus on the role of English within academic sites. After I outline my methodological process and analytical tools, I share my findings from a website analysis which investigates how these institutions are promoting and presenting global citizenship. Finally, I describe how students conceptualise global citizenship and how they negotiate and reconcile their perceptions of global citizenship with their national Korean identity.

# Global Citizenship: Definitions and Conceptualisations

One of the major issues surrounding the concept of global citizenship is the ambiguity inherent in the term. This is often reflected through the literature on global citizenship which can be incoherent and often depends on ‘vague rhetoric’ (Jooste & Helena, 2016:1) instead of solid definitions. There are also differing perspectives within various disciplines regarding global citizenship and this has led to the use of various terms used to describe the same thing, such as universal citizenship, transnational citizenship or intercultural citizenship. One complication is that the notion of citizenship generally denotes a legal construct regarding an individual that is bound to a specific community with certain privileges and rights in exchange for certain duties and responsibilities. Rhoads & Szelenyi (2011) attempt to conceptualise the complexities of citizenship through a framework which situates an individual’s ‘rights and responsibilities’ within three dimensions: political, economic and social. The framework extends beyond that of one’s political or civic duties as a ‘legal’ citizen of a specific nation and emphasises the relevance of the social and economic dimensions of society.

In this globalised era, the foundation of citizenship has been reimagined from national or local spheres towards global spheres. With this context in mind, global citizenship is instantly problematised as it has neither a legal foundation nor a central authority. Global citizenship therefore becomes a kind of discursive construct which tends to involve notions of global awareness and an active commitment to justice, peace and equality. Scholars have attempted to reconcile the discursive construct of ‘global citizenship’ with the shift from local and national to global. For example, Guarasci (1997) states that contemporary society should embrace ‘interculturalism’ which will allow citizens “to reconcile the social realities of an intercultural and multicentric society” (p.20). Heater (2002) views global citizenship definitions on a continuum with precise definitions on one end and more vague definitions on the other. Falk (1993) provides another perspective by categorising global citizenship into five areas: global reformers, global environmental managers, politically conscious regionalists, transnational activists and elite groups of business people. These are but three examples of the many conceptualisations of global citizenship, nevertheless these three do reflect Lilley et al.’s (2016) caveat that the terms used to describe the concept “are of less consequence than the underpinning values and mind-set they represent” (p.1).

Also evident in these conceptualisations is the lack of connection between global citizenship and travel, as Schattle (2007) notes, “these days you don’t have to leave home to be a global citizen…or see yourself as a global citizen in continual formation” (p.3). Rhoads & Szelenyi (2011) use this mindset to expand their citizenship conceptualisation to reflect the influence of globalisation, whereby an individual’s ‘rights and responsibilities’ are shaped by local, national and global perspectives. Their ‘Citizenship/Global Citizenship Typology’ (Rhoads and Szelenyi, 2011) moves between individualist to collectivist and between locally informed to globally informed, which results in four types of citizenship. It is the second type, the ‘globally informed collectivist’, which the authors deem as constituting global citizenship. According to Rhoads & Szelenyi (2011), therefore, global citizenship must involve a consideration of national citizenship. The two kinds of citizenship should not be viewed in opposition to one another, but rather as an enhancement to each other.

Criticisms of global citizenship are abound in the literature, usually involving Western imperialism and the inequalities presented by globalisation. For example, Balarin (2011) notes that “marginality appears to be the hidden other of global citizenship” (p.355) and states that the emerging inequalities within globalisation “can obstruct access not only to citizenship rights but also to the imagination of citizenship” (Ibid:358). Jooste & Heleta (2016) question “whether privilege and affluence are requirements for global citizenship and whose values and norms will guide global citizens” (p.2). Bowden (2003) argues further that global citizens are ultimately citizens of a Western society which dictates the values of global citizenship, a concept he sees as “modern, affluent global bourgeoisie” (p.360).

Despite all the theorising and conceptualising of global citizenship, including valid criticisms surrounding the concept, there is little mention of language in the literature, nor, consequentially, of linguistic rights. The spread of English globally involves powerful historical, cultural and social institutions. This power balance should be addressed when analysing the use of English, particularly in its role as a “gatekeeper to positions of prestige” (Pennycook, 1994:18) in a global society. Considering this, Torres (2015) believes that contextual influences, notably the pursuit of English in Asian society, may result in “contradictory cultural effects” (p.269) and global citizenship in these contexts could equate to westernisation. Rhoads & Szelenyi (2011) highlight contextual influences, such as post-communism in Hungary and neoliberalism in Argentina, in their study on how global citizenship is enacted in four specific sites. In a Chinese university the role of English takes precedence. The pursuit of English, the authors note, “represents major changes taking place in Chinese Society…which is recasting the notions of citizenship” (Ibid:52). It is also suggested that the status of English in this context reflects an openness towards the West and globalisation in Chinese society. Therefore, the authors position English as property and representative of Western society without acknowledging the inherent issues as to how such ideologies may shape and represent global citizenship for these students. Huddart (2014) supplies one of the few conceptualisations of the role of English in global citizenship and notes that, “if there were to be a language of global citizenship, it could not be an English that imposes itself and is imposed as an alternative to local language” (p.56). However, given the ideologies of English that are currently entrenched in higher education policies worldwide (e.g. Jenkins, 2014), there is ample evidence to suggest that specific kinds of English are held up as ideals for global citizenship.

# Global Citizenship, Higher Education and English

Preparing students for global citizenship has become a key strategic objective for HEIs within their overall internationalisation agendas. While research into how HEIs are achieving this in practice is scant, Schattle (2007) describes student experiences which may enhance global citizenship. He notes that international travel, experience in diverse communities, study abroad, aspirations, political activism and expanding one’s cultural horizons as experiences which develop global citizenship. Caruana (2010) states that these experiences can be accessed through participation in international activities on campus, however, she also believes that, while HEIs can help facilitate these activities, becoming a global citizen requires individual motivation. Students may also avail of such activities and experiences to further professional goals or as a chance to experience a particular lifestyle without any critical reflection on a global society and transformative international experiences. Global citizenship therefore shifts from a HEI internationalisation approach to one which involves student agency in the process. The concept of student agency is worthy of critical examination particularly when examining the policies which are implemented by HEIs, such as EMI, in the pursuit of global citizenship. In South Korea, for example, the linguistic capital afforded to English within the domestic employment landscape (Park, 2011; 2016) and the ‘social and economic prestige’ (Hu & McKay, 2012, p. 259) afforded to English proficiency may give rise to educational and social inequalities which can have adverse effects on student agency in the process of global citizenship.

Critics of internationalisation (e.g. Altbach, 2004, 2012; Mok, 2006; Phillipson, 2009; Ennew & Greenaway, 2012) do tend to note the over-dependence of English in higher education which can “perpetuate inequalities and function as an extension of older forms of colonialism” (Huddart, 2012:55). It is within this ideology of internationalisation as ‘Englishization’ that the link between language policy and rights has been examined. Shohamy (2006) provides a thorough view of language policy and how it can be an influence on and influenced by language ideology, developing five mechanisms which affect language practices. Jenkins (2014) utilises three of these mechanisms in her study of English language policy in ‘international’ universities worldwide: Rules and Regulations, Language Education and Language Tests. With regards to the first mechanism, she finds that HEIs tend to refer to standard models of English in their policies which in turn impose ‘rules and regulations’ on students regarding language practices. In the context of global citizenship, such ‘rules and regulations’ are problematic. Common sense dictates that global citizenship requires a global conception of English because, in these contexts, English does not solely belong to native English speakers1. This is further emphasised by Shohamy (2006) in her ‘language education’ mechanism in which EMI policies are given critical attention. The author explains that “in this transnational and global world people constantly move back and forth from one entity to another and from one area to another and use different codes and languages within these contexts” (p.82/83). As can be gleaned from this quote, Shohamy (2006) not only questions the type of English which is appropriate in global contexts, but questions the over-reliance and promotion of English as the global language when authentic language practices are more complex than the Englishonly policies suggest.

A third mechanism, ‘language tests’ is also examined critically within international university settings (e.g. Baker, 2016; Davidson, 2006; Hu, 2012; Jenkins, 2014; van der Walt, 2013). The English language now functions as a gatekeeper to higher education institutions via entry requirements not only in traditional Anglophone sites, but also in global institutions that offer EMI classes. However, English language tests such as IELTS,

TOEFL, TOEIC, etc. are based on standard English norms2, a state which not only challenges the tests’ worth as gatekeepers to international institutions, but also reveals an ideology inherent in the role of English in higher education as one which perpetuates native English as ideal for international intelligibility (Jenkins, 2014; McNamara, 2014; Saarinen & Nikula, 2013). These mechanisms expose the influence language policies in higher education institutions may have on ideologies which will affect identities, rights and self-perceived identification as a global citizen within a global community.

# Methodology

Two South Korean HEIs were included in this study (hereafter UNI/A and UNI/B), both of which are located in a small city in the South-East of the peninsula. These institutions were chosen due to the explicitness with which internationalisation strategies are discussed on their websites and the English programs that were offered in both.

Prior to fieldwork, the websites of each HEI were analysed using a combination of multimodal discourse analysis (MDA) and discourse analysis (DA). The use of DA follows previous researchers (Hashimoto, 2013; Jenkins, 2014; Saarinen & Nikula, 2013), each of whom examined English policies and opaque ideologies within higher education promotional material. My use of DA allowed me to investigate the text and discourse as well as the wider context in which they were situated. Fairclough’s (2001) threedimensional framework for the analysis of texts proved a useful analytical tool as it combines the linguistic features of the text (Stage 1), assumptions about the text (Stage 2) and the social structures which allow for specific discursive practices (Stage 3). The multimodal nature of websites must also be accounted for, therefore Pauwels’ (2012) multimodal framework provided a clear 6-point guideline for analysis. Following Jenkins’ (2014) large scale study, I utilized three of the phases that were appropriate for the study at hand (Phases 2, 3 and 4). I focused on Phase 2 of the framework in order to collect and organise the large amount of data on the websites. Phase 3 involved a more in-depth analysis of these relevant features and topics and highlighted the multimodal nature of the websites. Finally, Phase 4 allowed for the analysis of embedded points of view and ideologies. As my study focuses exclusively on Korean home  students, I deemed it necessary to analyse the Korean versions of the websites along with the English versions. A Korean postdoctoral candidate also researching English in Korea aided me in this analysis, and, while not done to the same rigor as the English versions, the analysis of the Korean versions of the websites acknowledges what information is presented to a Korean audience.

The fieldwork took place over the course of three months. Twenty undergraduate students4 (8 from UNI/A, 12 from UNI/B) from two Korean universities participated in the research. The students participated in two interviews and all interviews were conducted in English. The first interviews were semi-structured in nature, which allowed me to explore concepts such as internationalisation with an open mind, but with a clear set of interview topics. The second round of interviews were more unstructured in nature, which allowed for a more personal and individual approach. As I had no knowledge of how the students would relate to and associate with global citizenship, the research involved building knowledge from the bottom up. I therefore took the role of ‘traveller’ (Kvale & Brinkman, 2009) whereby “interviewing and analysis [are] intertwined phases of knowledge construction, with an emphasis on the narrative to be told to the audience” (p.49). I also accounted for the ambiguity present in the global citizenship construct. I followed Lilley et al.’s (2017) approach of the ‘ideal type,’ which allows a concept to be observed as an idea rather than a perfect thing. Using this method, I could employ a bottom-up approach to the research, allowing the participants as much latitude as possible without imposing any preconceived definitions or conceptualisations.

The interviews were analysed using a combination of thematic analysis - specifically following Braun & Clarke’s (2006) six phase framework - and discourse analysis. This mixed approach allowed me to provide a “detailed account of a particular data set,” (Ibid:11) but also a focus on ‘the processes whereby the social world is constructed and maintained’ (Phillips & Hardy, 2002:2) through text and discourse. Taking the view that global citizenship provides an avenue to think about our relationship to others and our location in the world (Karlberg, 2008), I conceived of global citizenship within an identity framework. Following a sociopsychological approach to identity (e.g. McCall & Simmons, 1978; Stets, 2006), I viewed global citizenship as a ‘role identity’ (McCall & Simmons, 1978; Stets, 2006; Stets & Serpe, 2013) whereby meanings are the characteristics and/or behaviours one attaches to a specific role. I also analysed the data with respect to Social Identity Theory (e.g. Tajfel, 1978) with an emphasis on in-group and out-group selfcategorisation.

With this contextual information in mind, the following research questions were conceived to explore global citizenship:

How do two South Korean HEIs present the role of English with regard to internationalisation and global citizenship on their websites?

How do students from two South Korean universities conceptualise global citizenship identity?

A. What meanings do they attach to global citizenship identity? B. How do they negotiate and reconcile their Korean identity with global citizenship identity?

# Findings

# Website Analysis

Immediately obvious on each of the websites is the regularity with which internationalisation is referenced, however it is much more visible on the English versions of the websites. These versions contain headlines such as ‘A Global Campus’ and provide ample information on international activities and endeavours. The Korean versions of the websites tend to involve more references to national aspects, such as employment. A pattern is visible here whereby ‘English’ is instantly associated with ‘global’ and synonymous with internationalisation. An in-depth analysis of the discourse featured on the websites reveals more national ideologies regarding internationalisation. A theme which is developed throughout both websites is the positioning of internationalization as non-Korean. For both institutions, their founding narratives are located within South Korea’s founding narrative and connect with Korean tradition, culture and history. This position is then used as a platform on which to construct their institution’s global futures. Despite the connection to Korean identity, the global futures the institutions wish to construct is often presented as external to these traditional Korean values. The following example from UNI/A is indicative of this perspective:

…[UNI/A], which has a proud historical background and university ideals, has led university innovation movement and today continues its vigorous efforts to meet the global standards of the university. Please watch [UNI/A] plan the future based on tradition and history…as a tree with deep roots does not sway in the wind (UNI/A)

In this extract, UNI/A’s founding narrative is directly linked to globalization, and Korean ‘tradition and history’ is used as a reference point from which an internationalization agenda will be constructed. The metaphor utilized in the final line allows for a correlation of the ‘tree’ as the institution, the ‘deep roots’ as the history and culture and the ‘wind’ as the future. The use of the adjective ‘deep’ signifies the importance attached to history, heritage and culture, which are presented as an organic part of the institution. On the other hand, the institution’s future is presented as an external force and there is an implication that the force poses a potential threat. The future, in this context, appears to be linked to internationalization or, at least, the institution’s attempt to reach ‘global standards’. There is no doubt that UNI/A believes that retaining and honouring their Korean identity will aid them in confronting the changes brought on by globalization.

The references to students and how the institutions intend to cultivate and develop global citizens are additional recurring themes on the websites. The statements below are indicative of these references:

We nurture global citizens who will be active in global stages with global views (UNI/A)

Fostering Global Leaders with International Perspectives (UNI/B)

The emphasis here is on the intention to prepare students for the global labour market. Statements like the two quoted are often used as headlines in order to specify the overarching aims of the respective institutions. In order to ‘nurture global citizens’ and develop ‘international perspectives’, each institution presents English language courses as the only (UNI/A) or main (UNI/B) approach to internationalization for Korean home students. UNI/A showcases their ‘Language Education Institute’ which only presents English language programs and also highlights an ‘Intensive Foreign Language Program’ which includes both English and Chinese. The inclusion of Chinese here suggests that internationalization is not confined to English, however English is afforded much more prominence on the websites. Both of these programs, the website notes, will provide UNI/A students with the skills for ‘global leadership’ (UNI/A, Brochure p. 26-27) The description of these classes notes that students have no need to travel abroad to learn English as they are ‘instructed by native English teachers who have completed their degrees in foreign countries’ (UNI/A, Brochure p. 26-27). While there are several assumptions inherent in this statement, the most relevant assumption to this paper is that improved English language skills will develop skills for global citizenship and that ‘native English’ is the ideal English with which to accomplish this goal.

UNI/B also lists a number of English language programs within their international strategies for Korean students which includes, for example, a course entitled ‘English for Global Communication’. A description for these courses notes that they have been ‘designed to be in step with the ever-evolving global society in which we live’ (UNI/B) which denotes an acknowledgement of diversity and flexibility in their approach to ‘global English’. The description continues to note that, in order to achieve these diverse, flexible communication skills, the classes are instructed by ‘high-calibre native English teachers (UNI/B). Yet again native English is presented as the most suitable English for interaction within a global society and presumably the ‘international perspectives’ UNI/B highlighted will be gained through native English instruction. Furthermore, there is a specific denigration reserved for Korean-influenced English:

Some emphasis is placed on breaking the Konglish5 factor in that effort is made to correct the common errors that all beginner Korean-English students make (UNI/B)

It is thereby clear here that, for this institution, the English many of these students may speak is not acceptable in a wider global society, and, in fact, any influence of the L1 (first language) should be eradicated. While this institution emphasises its Korean identity as a means to confront globalization, this strong national identity does not extend to the type of English their Korean students will perhaps use. The emphasis on native English as ideal is further promoted through entry requirements involving such normative English ‘proficiency’ tests as TOEFL, TOEIC or iBT. Similar to findings from previous studies (e.g. Saarinen & Nikula, 2013), there is a stipulation that students from six countries6 within the Anglosphere are exempt from such requirements. The implication is that citizens or nationals from these countries have the appropriate English language skills to automatically navigate a multilingual, multicultural academic environment. This situates native English at the top of a language hierarchy. Overall, the website analysis clearly portrays that English language acquisition or native English is a prerequisite for global citizenship.

# Global Citizenship Meanings: The Role of English

All of the participants noted that the ability to speak English was a behaviour they associated most with global citizenship7. While English is without doubt the global language and the current choice of a lingua franca in the world, its dominant presence in my study presents complicated findings regarding identity. Virtually all students stated they could not identify as global citizens due to their self-defined lack of English ‘proficiency’. The following example is taken from a UNI/A student and is representative of students’ opinions:

I Do you think you are a global person?   
S5: I’m not yet global person   
I: Why?   
S5: (pause) I can’t speak English very well Yes I think (pause)   
communication is the most important thing in globalisation

This example demonstrates the importance that is attached to ‘good English’ in order to identify as a ‘global person’. S5 took a pause after my question which implies that her self-identification as a ‘global person’ is somewhat complicated. Her eventual response leads me to conclude that S5 believes that she will one day achieve membership of a global community, perhaps once she improves her English skills. She qualifies this opinion by her assertion that communication is vital to globalisation. It is important here to remind oneself that S5, like most students, participated in my study through English. While she communicated her perceptions and opinions through English in interviews, she believes her own English is not sufficient for self-identification as a global citizen.

Some students were explicit that native or native-like English was their ultimate goal when engaging with English for a future in a globalised context:

S16: To be international we have to try I think speak like native to be native I think   
S9: […]Well (pause) for me I want to be a journalist (pause) so maybe structure and grammar must be important (pause) and I’m still not a native speaker and I want to be perfect in my writing

As the first example from S16 illustrates, speaking ‘native’ is not enough, but in order to enact the role of global citizen, she must enact the role of a ‘native speaker’. As is evident, she neither supplies information on what is ‘native speaker’ speech nor how one acts like a ‘native speaker’. S9 on the other hand associates ‘perfect English’ with grammar and structure. This is due to S9 locating her global citizenship identity within an imagined professional context as a journalist who will need to write in English. She equates native English with being ‘perfect’, suggesting that anything less than native English is imperfect.

Over half of the students equated ‘native English’ with pronunciation and accent and many professed a view that Korean accents were undesirable. There was often considerable ambivalence surrounding how students perceived their own accents. The following extract provides an example of this mindset:

I: Are you happy to have a Korean accent when you speak English?   
S4: Yeah American accent   
I: Really?   
S4: Yeah cause native Korean don’t like native accent   
I: Why?   
S4: Korea accent is Konglish   
I: Yes but people can understand you that’s what matters no?   
S4: (pause) Some native speaker can’t understand

As the extract illustrates, even within the context of globalisation students still adhered to a native speaker ideology. This extract also reveals ideologies regarding the Korean accent, which is undesirable for this student and characterised negatively as ‘Konglish’. While his first explanation for wanting an American accent is based on Korean sociocultural values (Park, 2012), the emphasis shifts to being understood by ‘native speakers’. This is notable here as it reveals this student believes that communicating with ‘native speakers’ is paramount. Of course, in reality this is a false assumption, as non-native users of English vastly outnumber native speakers (e.g. Crystal, 2003).

This native speaker ideology was particularly interesting as, within a global citizenship context, students tended to emphasise English as a tool for communication in diverse settings, i.e., English as a lingua franca (ELF) communication. The example below illustrates this:

S13: we then need a language to communicate with foreign people so yes? in this regard English appeared so mind is just mind if we can understand foreign people yes that is enough I can understand yes that’s enough but put put in the site we should communicate with foreign people (pause)

While S13’s explanation of why English has become the global language is simplistic, he does convey the opinion that, ultimately, English will be used as a tool for communication to a wider global community outside of Korea. Despite an emphasis on using English as a tool to communicate, most students still ultimately subscribed to an ideology which views ‘native’ English as the most intelligible English for global communication which unsurprisingly reflects the ideologies perpetuated by the institutions themselves.

This link between policy and ideology was evident in conversations with the students about their relationships with international students. Language issues have previously been found to be a deterrent to interaction between home and international students (e.g. Cho, 2012; Cho & Palmer, 2013; Jon & Kim, 2011; Moon, 2016), and studies tend to report that international students perceive Korean students as poor English speakers. In my study however, students tended to note their fear at using English ‘incorrectly’ in an intercultural interaction:

S3: when I met foreigner I feel a little bit afraid to use English because of grammar and pronounce…from elementary school and university I only study grammar and pronounce so I just think oh grammar is most important thing

As this extract illustrates, there has been a preoccupation with grammar and pronunciation throughout S3’s academic life. Language policies at institutions have emphasised standardisation, which is having an effect on contemporary language practices. It must be acknowledged that this standardisation is often emphasised for testing purposes. For example, the TOEIC is essential for entering the domestic job market in Korea. This creates somewhat of a paradox regarding English in Korean higher education, with English as a communication tool for intercultural interaction on the one hand, and standardised English for testing purposes on the other.

# The Relationship Between Global and Korean Identities

From the data, I determined that the students’ identification with a global community and their Korean community could be situated on a three-point scale with fluctuating position points within. Two points on the scale relate to global identity and Korean identity as two distinct components: one point is those who self-identify as global, but feel they must lower their identification as Korean. The second point is for those who strongly selfidentify as Korean and not as global, as they feel the two categories as completely distinct. Finally, there are those students who believe the two identity positions can be negotiated and self-identify with both groups. Most students moved between these identity positions, however these distinct categories were observable among a small group of students.

While most of the students did not identify as global citizens, usually based on their self-perceived evaluation of their English, some students did perceive themselves as global citizens in formation. One student, S9 from UNI/B, self-categorised as a global citizen in formation and she was clear that global and Korean identities could not co-exist. S9 received positive self-esteem when associating with a global community and was evidently emotionally involved with the idea of an imagined global community8. However, this was at the expense of her Korean identity:

I: Do you ever feel a struggle between your Korean and global identities?   
S9: Yes oh yeah! I mean uh uh (pause) when I speak Korean I I whenever I speak English I lose my Korean (pause) REALLY it does happen[…]I’m losing my identity really (pause) […]now I can’t write Korean (pause) I forgot my vocabulary and […]It’s difficult to go back if I lose my English (pause) I learned painfully English writing essays and I don’t want to have a rerun

From this extract, it is clear that this student’s nurturing of a global identity means sacrificing her Korean identity. The first interesting point in this extract is that S9 instantly equates ‘Korean identity’ and ‘global identity’ with ‘Korean language’ and ‘English,’ respectively. Perhaps most interesting is how S9 cannot conceive using both Korean and English. She implies that she has put in a lot of work to learn English to a high level and if she uses Korean too much, her English may suffer. This may be due to the fact that she seems to believe that is what happened to her Korean due to over-use of English. Ultimately her global identity is more salient due to the imagined future profession she believes she will access through speaking English.

When the students were presented with three identity positions (Global, Local, Asian9), all but one of the students (S9 above) chose Korean identity as the most central to their lives. A small group of students seemed to be of the opinion that if they self-identified as global, they would be disregarding their Korean identity. This duality was particularly evident for S15, who stated that she had no desire to become global and was not particularly interested in internationalisation. S15 positioned global citizenship and the pursuit of English as ‘non-Korean’. This is evident in the example below:

I: Do you think you’re a global person?   
S15: No! Because I’m not good at English (pause) I’m ordinary Korean people (pause) so I don’t think so, but in USA (pause) USA ah, in the last semester I learned American society and culture it was really interesting (pause)

In response to my initial question, S15 answers without pause implying a degree of certainty in her beliefs. Her laughter which follows gives the impression that the assumption that she would identify as a global citizen was almost ridiculous. She selfidentifies as ‘ordinary Korean’, which she positions in opposition to good English and global citizenship. In other words, a Korean who was good at English or identified as ‘global’ would be extraordinary. Her example of American society which follows led me to believe that she tended to equate America with globalisation, which could easily influence her opinions on global citizenship.

A very small number of students stated that they thought the two identities could coexist. Interestingly these students also displayed indifference to acquiring native-like English. One of these students emphasised the use of English as a tool to achieve communication within multilingual groups (i.e. ELF communication). She self-identified as global and Korean simultaneously and, unlike other students, she did not feel pressure (or at least admit to feeling pressure) to achieve native-like English proficiency. Another student, S10, viewed global and national citizenship as existing in symbiotic relationship. Notably, S10 was one of the few students who had developed successful friendships with international students and her views on English had changed through interaction:

S10: I met the foreign international friends (pause) before I couldn’t speak English AT ALL…BUT after taking classes with them I (pause) my English also improved a lot (pause) but not just for that (pause) just I know my mind was changed […] after that I could figure out the Korean English also can be English […] everything can be English like every style can be English

S10 notes her growth in language skills through confidence in using English, and most notable are her expanding views on English. Through interaction, she discovered different types of people, behaviours and, as she notes, Englishes. She no longer perceives nonnative English pronunciation as inferior and feels more secure about her own use of English. This pluralistic view of English stands in contrast to S9 and S15, for example, who viewed English as American and consequentially viewed global citizenship as nonKorean. From the data, it appears that those students who do not associate global citizenship with a specific area or a specific type of English found it easier to associate with a global community and identify as global citizens.

# Summary and Conclusion

While global citizenship has become an aim for universities worldwide, literature on the topic tends to ignore the role of English and does not critically analyse the role English plays in global citizenship (e.g. Henry & Goddard, 2015; Roger, 2010; Sung, 2014). The dominant position English played in my findings is worthy of examination within a global citizenship framework. This is mainly due to the fact that, while students accepted the notion of global citizenship, they could not self-identify as global citizens due to a selfperceived lack of English proficiency. It can also be said that for these students, language reflects not only who they are (Llamas & Watt, 2010), but who they will become if they acquire a certain level or type of English. Considering how institutions perceive the role of English, it could be suggested that these institutions have “the power and expertise to navigate students’ learning towards imaginary communities” (Kanno, 2003:287).

As evidenced by the website analysis, English classes are seen as the only or main strategic response to internationalization by the HEIs in this study. This fails to acknowledge the complexity of language practices in a transnational context. In addition, native English is presented as the ideal English for global citizenship and Korean English is viewed as inferior. So, while each of the institutions view their Korean identity as integral to globalization, this does not appear to extend to Korean-influenced English. In addition, the emphasis afforded to ‘native’ teachers portrays them as representative of English language and global communication ideals. As these teachers are identified by their citizenship and ethnicity, it follows that their students will inevitably understand the language and culture of English in narrow terms (Ahn, 2015). While this shows complete disregard for the socio-lingual realities of how English is used in contemporary, global society, it does facilitate understanding of why students believe they cannot identify as global citizens based on their self-perceived inferior English. As universities have a “vital role in framing particular visions of citizenship” (Rhoads & Szelenyi, 2011:28), it appears the institutions’ vision of global citizenship as equated with native English has ultimately served to undermine students’ positioning of themselves as global citizens. Since there is no link between native English and global communication (Jenkins, 2014; Mauranen, 2013; Seidlhofer, 2005; Seidlhofer, 2011;), it is perhaps inevitable that these unrealistic and inadequate standards of English imposed on students are affecting their confidence to communicate. In addition, if English denotes membership of a global community, then individuals who possess English as a native language may be at an advantage and perhaps inevitably dictate the values attached to global citizenship, echoing criticisms from, for example, Balarin (2011), Bowden (2003) and Jooste & Helena (2016).

It follows that policies which imply that native English is the benchmark for global citizenship become problematic in the context of identity construction. The findings also show that those students who had experience using English as a lingua franca tended to be more open towards diversity in English and could identify more with global citizenship against the backdrop of their Korean identity. This implies that actual linguistic practice may be more beneficial in developing global citizens and raising awareness of linguistic diversity can allow for a negotiation of the multiple identities inherent in identity construction.

While theories of global citizenship attempt to reconcile local and global identities (Rhoads & Selenyi, 2011; Torres, 2015), my findings indicate that, for most students, the two are somewhat incompatible. What is also apparent from my findings was that students conceptualised English as the language of an ‘out-group’, which affected their identity construction. The resulting tensions between Korean and global identities are perhaps somewhat inevitable. Such an ideology reflects how globalization is understood on school websites as an entity which is threatening to Korean traditional values. National varieties of English are presented as the means to which global citizenship and globalization will be achieved, which locates the internationalization process as something non-Korean. However, it must be reiterated that the Korean versions of the websites tended to emphasise English as a means to gain employment nationally. This perhaps suggests that the large multinationals which dictate the employment landscape in Korea and demand certain levels of English for employment have an influence on the promotion of native English.

With this in mind, I recommend that Korean HEIs critically examine the role English plays in their internationalization agendas with the aim of adopting a more realistic view of how English is used within a global environment. Such critical examination would highlight cultural and linguistic diversities within a global setting. As my findings showed, those few students who had experience communicating with international students were more open to different styles of English, including orientations to their own English. This requires a reconceptualization of what ‘ideal English’ actually means within these communication practices. Due to the emphasis on standardisation in Korea, particularly in testing that is a criterion for national employment, such a recommendation becomes more complex and subject to local sociocultural and political influences. Such influences make it difficult to envision how “any form of English different from ‘good English’” (Yoo, 2013:5) can gain status in Korea unless it is used as a ‘communication tool locally’ argues Yoo (2013). I would argue that it is precisely this use of English as a communication tool that needs to be recognised and encouraged, especially in complex linguistic landscapes such as university campuses. This may require a complete reconceptualization of English and the global citizenship concept used within internationalization aims, policies and practices. One specific way of doing this may be to focus on Byram’s (2008) notion of ‘intercultural citizenship’ which, as the author states “would involve not only the competences of citizenship itself…but also the competences of intercultural communication” (Ibid, 2012:95).

Finally, I emphasise once more that global citizenship scholars tend to ignore the vital role English plays in global citizenship. The findings obtained from my qualitative study illustrate that language must be considered within literature on global citizenship, as both language policies and language ideologies shape conceptualisations of global citizenship. Going forward, I strongly urge scholars in this area to emphasise the role of English in global citizenship and furthermore urge that the resulting frameworks of global citizenship are reimagined with language practices at the forefront.

Ahn S-Y. 2015. ‘Criticality for global citizenship in Korean English immersion camps’, Language and Intercultural Communication, 15/4:533-549.   
Altbach P. 2004. ‘Globalization and the university: myths and realities in an unequal world’, Tiertary Education and Management, 10/1:3-25.   
Altbach P. 2012. ‘Franchising: the McDonaldization of higher education’, International Higher Education, 66:7-8.   
Baker W. 2016. 'English as an academic lingua franca and intercultural awareness: student mobility in the transcultural university', Language and Intercultural Communication, 16/3: 437-451.   
Balarin M. 2011. 'Global citizenship and marginalisation: contributions towards a political economy of global citizenship', Globalization, Societies and Education, 9/3-4:355- 366.   
Botha W. 2013. 'English-medium instruction at a university in Macau: policy and realities', World Englishes, 32/4:461-475.   
Botha W. 2014. 'English in China's universities today', English Today, 1/30:3-10.   
Bourn D. 2010. 'Students as global citizens' in Jones E. (ed.) Internationalisation and the Student Voice. Routledge. pp. 18-29.   
Bowden, B. 2003. 'The perils of global citizenship', Citizenship Studies, 7/3:349-362.   
Braun V. and Clarke V. 2006. 'Using thematic analysis in psychology', Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3:77-101.   
Byram M. 2008. From Foreign Language Education to Education for Intercultural Citizenship. Multilingual Matters.   
Byram M. 2012. 'Conceptualizing Intercultural (Communicative) Competence and Intercultural Citizenship' in Jackson J. (ed.) The Routledge Handbook of Language and Intercultural Communication. Chap.5.   
Caruana V. 2010. 'Global citizenship for all: putting the 'higher' back into UK higher education in Maringe F. and Foskett N. (eds.) Globalization and Internationalization in Higher Education. Continuum. pp.51-64.

Cavanagh, C. 2017. 'The Role of English in Internationalisation and Global Citizenship Identity in South Korean Higher Education', PhD Thesis: The University of Southampton.

Cho J-H. 2012. 'Campus in English or campus in shock?', English Today, 28/2:18-25.   
Cho J-H. and Palmer J. 2013. 'Stakeholders' views of South Korean higher education internationalization policy', Higher Education, 65/3:291-308.   
Crystal D. 2003. 'English as a Global Language', Cambridge University Press.   
Davidson F. 2006. 'World Englishes and test construction' in Kachru B.B. Kachru Y. and Nelson C.L. (eds.) The Handbook of World Englishes. Blackwell. pp. 709-717.   
Davies, A. 2003. ‘The native speaker of World Englishes’ Journal of Pan-Pacific Association of Applied Linguistics, 6/1:43–60.   
Ennew C.T. and Greenaway D. 2012. 'Introduction and overview' in Ennew C.T. and Greenaway D. (eds.) The Globalization of Higher Education. Palgrave Macmillan. pp.1-18.   
Fairclough N. 2001. Language and Power. Pearson Education.   
Falk R. 1993. 'The making of global citizenship' in Brecher J. Brown Childs J. and Cutler J. (eds.) Global Visions: Beyond the New World Order. New World Press.   
Guarasci R. 1997. 'Community-based learning and intercultural citizenship' in Guarasci R. and Cornwell G.H. (eds.) Democratic Education in an Age of Difference: Redefining Citizenship in Higher Education. Jossey-Bass. pp.17-49.   
Hashimoto K. 2013. ''English-only', but not a medium-of-instruction-policy: the Japanese way of internationalising education for both domestic and overseas students', Current Issues in Language Planning, 14/1:16:33.   
Heater D. 2002. World Citizenship: Cosmopolitan Thinking and Its Opponents. Continuum.   
Henry A. and Goddard A. 2015. 'Bicultural or hybrid? The second language identities of students in an English-mediated university program in Sweeden', Journal of Language, Identity and Education 14:255-274.   
Hu G. 2012. 'Assessing English as an international language' in Alsagof S. McKay L. Hu, G. and Willy R.A. (eds.) Principles and Practices for Teaching English as an International Language. Routledge. pp. 123-143.   
Hu, G. & McKay, S. 2012. ‘English Language Education in East Asia: Some Recent Developments’ Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 33, 345- 362.   
Huddart D. 2014. 'English in the conversation of mankind: World Englishes and global citizenship', in Huddart D. (ed.) Involuntary Associations: Postcolonial Studies and World Englishes. Liverpool University Press. pp. 52-74.   
Jenkins J. 2014. English as a Lingua Franca in the International University. Routledge.   
Jon J-E. and Kim E-Y. 2011. 'What it takes to internationalize higher education in Korea and Japan: English-mediated courses and international students' in Palmer J.D. Roberts A. Cho Y-H. and Ching G.S. (eds.) The Internationalization of East Asian Higher Education: Globalization's Impact. Palgrave Macmillian. pp. 147-171.   
Jooste N. and Heleta S. 2016. 'Global citizenship versus globally competent graduates: a critical view from the south', Journal of Studies in International Education, 1-13.   
Kachru, B. 1981. ‘Models for non-native Englishes’ in B. Kachru (ed.), The other tongue: English across cultures. Chicago: University of Illinois Press. pp. 31–57.   
Kanno Y. 2003. 'Imagined communities, school visions, and the education of bilingual students in Japan', Journal of Language, Identity and Education, 2/4:285-300.   
Karlberg M. 2008. 'Discourse, identity and global citizenship', Peace Review: A Journal of Social Justice, 20/3:310-320.   
Kirkpatrick A. 2011. 'Internationalization or Englishization: Medium of instruction in today's universities', Hong Kong, Centre for Governance and Citizenship, The Hong Kong Institute of Education.   
Kvale S. and Brinkman S. 2009. 'InterViews: Learning the Craft of Qualitative Research Interviewing'. SAGE Publications Ltd.   
Lilley K. Barker M. and Harris N. 2017. 'The global citizen conceptualized: accomodating ambiguity', Journal of Studies in International Education, 21/1:6-21.   
Llamas C. and Watt D. 2010. 'Introduction' in Llamas C. and Watt D. (eds.) Language and Identities. Edinburgh University Press. pp. 1-8.   
Mauranen A. 2012. Exploring ELF: Academic English Shaped by Non-native Speakers. Cambridge University Press.   
McCall G. and Simmons J. 1978. Identities and Interaction. Free Press.

McNamara T. 2014. '30 years on - evolution or revolution?', Language Assessment Quarterly, 11/2:226-232.

Mok H. 2006. Education Reform and Education Policy in East Asia. Routledge.   
Moon R.J. 2016. 'Internationalization without cultural diversity? Higher education in Korea', Comparative Education, 52/1:91-108.   
Park, J.-Y. 2011. ‘The Promise of English: Linguistic Capital and the Neo-liberal Worker in the South Korean Job Market’ International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 14/4:443-455.   
Park, J.-Y. 2016. ‘English as Pure Potential’ Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 37/5:453-466.   
Paikeday, T. 1985. The native speaker is dead! Toronto: Paikeday Publishing.   
Pauwels L. 2012. 'A multimodal framework for analysing websites as cultural expressions', Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 17:247-265.   
Pennycook A. 1994. The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language. Longman Group Ltd.   
Phillips N. and Hardy C. 2002. Discourse Analysis: Investigating Processess of Social Construction. Sage Publications Ltd.   
Phillipson R. 2009. 'English in higher education: panacea or pandemic?', Angles on the English Speaking World, 9:29-57.   
Piller I. and Cho J-H. 2013. 'Neoliberalism as a language policy', Language in Society, 42/1: 23-44.   
Rampton, M. B. H. 1990. Displacing the ‘native speaker’: Expertise, affiliation, and inheritance. ELT Journal, 44/2:97–101.   
Rhoads R. 1998. 'In the service of citizenship: a study of student involvement in community service', Journal of Higher Education, 69/3:277-297.   
Rhoads R.A. and Szelenyi K. 2011. Global Citizenship and the University. Stanford University Press.   
Roger P. 2010. 'Reluctant and inspiring global citizens: ideal second language selves among Korean graduate students', TESL-EJ, 14/3:1-20.   
Saarinen T. and Nikula T. 2013. 'Implicit policy, invisible language: policies and practices of international degree programmes in Finnish higher education' in Doiz A. Lasagabaster D. and Sierra J.M. (eds.) English-Medium Instruction at Universities: Global Challenges. Multilingual Matters, pp. 131-150.   
Schattle H. 2007. The Practices of Global Citizenship. Roman & Littlefield.   
Seidlhofer B. 2005. 'English as a lingua franca', ELT Journal, 59/4:339-341.   
Seidlhofer B. 2011. Understanding English as a Lingua Franca. Oxford University Press.   
Shohamy E. 2006. Language Policy: Hidden Agendas and New Approaches. Routledge.   
Stets J. 2006. 'Identity theory' in Burke P.J. (ed.) Contemporary Social Psychology Theories. Stanford University Press. pp. 88-110.   
Stets, J. E., & Serpe, R. T. (2013). ‘Identity Theory’ in J. DeLamater, & A. Ward (Eds.), Handbook of Social Psychology. New York: Springer. pp. 31-60.   
Sung C.C.M. 2014. 'English as a lingua franca and global identities: perspectives from four second language learners of English in Hong Kong', Linguistics and Education, 26: 31-39.   
Tajfel H. 1978. 'Social categorization, social identity and social comparison in Tajfel H. (ed.) Differentiation between Social Groups: Studies in the Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Academic Press, pp. 61-76.   
Torres C.A. 2015. 'Global citizenship and global universities: the age of global interdependence and Cosmopolitanism', European Journal of Education, 50/3:262- 279.   
van der Walt C. 2013. Multilingual Higher Education: Beyond English Medium Orientations. Multilingual Matters.   
Yoo I.W. 2013. 'Nonnative teachers in the expanding circle and the ownership of English Applied Linguistics, pp. 1-6.

# Author Biography

Claire Cavanagh received her PhD in Applied Linguistics from The Centre for Global Englishes at the University of Southampton. She currently lives in Toronto where she has worked as an English for Academic Purposes instructor. Her research interests include Global/Intercultural Citizenship, English as a Lingua Franca, EMI, EAP and intercultural communication.