# Critical Thinking in ESL: An Argument for Sustained Content

MARCIA PALLY

City University of New York

This article suggests that in adult ESL learners, development of critical thinking skills, as defined by EAP, cognitive psychology and transformative pedagogy, benefits from sustained content study (or studying one area over time). Sustained content study is recommended because: it allows students to accrue information, without which they are less able to question, synthesize, and evaluate what they read; it allows students to become familiar with the rhetorical conventions of a discipline; and, as these are the skills needed for university study, today's workplace and to understand the socio-political factors that affect students' lives, sustained study allows students to practice in the ESL class what they will need outside it. This article: defines critical thinking, discusses who should learn it and why, reviews the role of content in ESL and the literature supporting sustained study, and discusses content that engages ESL students with varied majors and goals. Three courses are described, one on selected economic/political issues, one on language acquisition itself, and one on film and society. Selections from student discussion and writing are examined.

The effectiveness of language teaching will depend on what is being taught, other than language, that will be recognized by the learners as a purposeful and relevant extension of their schematic horizons.

---Widdowson, 1990, p. 103.

In the dirty, damp and stinking sewer which is full of rats, there is a young man who suffers from his nature of enjoying too much pleasure and from guilt based on his moral code. Meanwhile, by contrast, there is a man who addicts same pleasure in the beautiful luxuary mension. He always seems that he enjoys too much fun with no guilt and he let himself in depths of his own sensuous nature... If you were in the same situation, what would like to be? The first one or the latter one? [surface errors retained]

This introductory paragraph begins an essay by a high intermediate adult ESL student referring to the film Interview with a Vampire. The film offers, she continued, a place to act out the conflict between pleasure and guilt, and is a Rorschach for American ambivalence about sex. The essay was written for a course designed to develop critical thinking skills in university ESL students through sustained study of one content area throughout an academic term.

The role of content--how much belongs in language classes, what kind, who should teach it, how language teachers might learn it---has been a subject of debate in the ESL literature (Braine, 1988; Horowitz, 1986c; Liebman-Kleine, 1986; Reid, 1984; Shih, 1986; Spack, 1988). Language teachers have responded with a range of approaches including theme-based language classes, sheltered courses (writing courses open only to ESL students or content classes where the language is adapted to suit ESL students), adjuncted classes (ESL classes linked to "mainstream" classes) (Brinton, Snow & Wesche, 1989), and the use of expressive writing which, in addition to having many other advantages, allows students with varying backgrounds and goals to share curricula.

Also, in response to debates over content, this paper suggests that sustained study of a subject area is key to critical thinking and useful to language development. Sustained content study is recommended because it allows students to accrue information, without which they are less able to compare, question, synthesize, and evaluate what they read. It allows students to become familiar with the rhetorical conventions of a discipline and

it seems clear that ESL teachers have a responsibility to teach the expectations of the English audience to L2 writers. Research in reading shows that readers understand better what they are familiar with and that applies both to content and to form, that is, to rhetorical patterns of development (Leki, 1991, p. 138).

Finally, as these are skills needed for university study, today's workplace and to understand the socio-political factors that affect students' lives, sustained study allows students to practice in the ESL class what they will need outside it.

Other curricula--such as theme-based courses where topics rotate frequently or courses organized around modes of discourse (narrative, argument)--may also benefit language and critical thinking development. I am not making the zero-sum argument that the usefulness of one approach means the uselessness of others, rather I am proposing that sustained content study (a half to full semester) has significant advantages for critical thinking development, and I will suggest ways to bring sustained study to the ESL classroom.

Professional/technical and university training in mother-tongue settings promote critical thinking through the accretion of information, research protocols, and opposing points of view; in ongoing discussion, synthesis, and questioning of received wisdom; with familiarization with the rhetorical conventions of a genre; and by writing over a period of time long enough so that both ideas and prose may be revised. By contrast, the accretion, examination, and evaluation of information for a term or longer and extensive practice in the rhetorical conventions of a genre are not standard strategies of ESL curricula, save in adjuncted or sheltered content-based classes. Yet, if it is a goal that students emerge from ESL programs with the language and critical thinking skills needed in academic/professional pursuits and to understand news and politics, perhaps they would benefit from rehearsing these skills before they are expected to perform commensurately with native speakers. If technical, professional and university training promote critical thinking through sustained study, ESL students may benefit from similar efforts.

# THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

# Definition of Critical Thinking

Critical thinking has been defined by several research areas; three predominate: 1. English for Academic Purposes (EAP), which stresses comparison and contrast; description, categorization and differentiation; skimming; scanning; and the ability to write in the conventions of an academic or professional discipline (Carson & Leki, 1993; Collier, 1987; Collier & Thomas, 1988; Hamp-Lyons, 1986; Horowitz, 1986a, 1986b, 1986c; Johns, 1990a; Reid, 1984, Saville-Troike, 1984; Shih, 1986; Swales, 1971, 1982, 1985, 1987); 2. cognitive psychology (Cummins, 1981, 1984; Vygotsky, 1962; Widdowson, 1990), which stresses understanding the principles of cause and effect, temporal sequence, criteria for judgment, and choice (Mohan, 1990); and 3. transformative pedagogy, which helps students "examine the deep meanings, personal implications, and social consequences of any knowledge, theme, technique, text, or material. Critical thought about a subject reveals its internal structure and its connections to self and society" (Shor, 1992, p. 169; see also, Aronowitz & Giroux, 1988; Benesch, 1992, 1993a, 1993b; Cope & Kalantzis, 1993; Cummins, 1989; Freire, 1974; Freire & Macedo, 1987; Tollefson, 1991). Some researchers use the term "critical pedagogy" as well as "transformative pedagogy," but "transformative pedagogy" is used in this paper to avoid confusion with "critical thinking," which here includes skills in all three areas.

This article joins these skill areas because of their interlocking nature in higher-level work. To write an English-language paper questioning a political practice (a goal of transformative pedagogy as well as other academic approaches), one must read, skim and scan a range of material about it, differentiate it from and compare it to different political practices (skills flagged by EAP and transformative pedagogy), understand the genesis and history of the practice (skills earmarked by Mohan and transformative pedagogy), evaluate it (Mohan, transformative pedagogy and other academic approaches), and present one's ideas within the conventions of English academic/expository writing. In describing sustained content courses, I note which student activities stress the various aspects of critical thinking, though they are not mutually exclusive and frequently overlap and combine. It is possible both to learn the rhetorical forms of a genre and examine their socio-political context. Indeed, it is necessary to learn a form before investigating it (see Cope & Kalantzis, 1993, for a discussion of genre analysis and transformative pedagogy). These aspects of critical thinking can work cyclically and synergistically, and often do in the classroom where a variety of approaches to reading, writing and critical thinking are used to help students reach a desired end.

# Student Populations

These interlocking skills are what counts as critical thinking among the "mainstream' cultures of the English speaking world. Teaching them to students from other traditions---where discoveries and insights may be arrived at and expressed differently (see Leki, 1991, for an overview cf contrastive rhetoric research)-- raises cultural, political, and psycho-social issues examined by authors in transformative pedagogy (above), in other areas (Al-Abed Al-Haq & Ahmed, 1994; Delpit, 1991, 1995; and Fox, 1994), and in a TEsOL Quarterly special issue (Hornberger & Ricento, 1996). Yet ESL/EFL students who are in or communicate with the English speaking world benefit from command of these skills, to succeed in that world and challenge it. At least such skills are arrows worth having in the quiver. Additionally, teaching "what counts" as critical thinking in L2 may raise students' awareness both that texts take their meaning from discourse communities and from the conventions in their L1s and L2s. They may more readily see that writing--by others or by themselves--is a series of choices and decisions, an awareness that benefits writers in any language. This article proceeds with the assumption that teaching Anglo-American critical thinking is politically and emotionally provocative, but, for students who want or need to master it, it is worth teaching well.

It may also be worth teaching not only to ESL students bound for the university or professional work but to all students who want to understand the factors that affect their lives--especially to students who did not learn Western protocols of power at home. "If you are not already a participant in the culture of power, being told explicitly the rules of that culture makes acquiring power easier"' (Delpit, 1991, p. 486). Moreover, \*to act as if power doesn't exist is to ensure that the power status quo remains the same" (p. 496). Similarly, Chamot (1995) writes that teaching critical thinking builds student confidence in the "power" of their thoughts (p. 4) and boosts student motivation "because when teachers value thinking in the classroom, they are also valuing their students' identities, and this is perhaps the greatest motivator of all' (p. 4).

The concerns of Delpit and Chamot are echoed in the debates on Black and standard English. \*The legitimization of Black English as an educational tool does not..preclude the need to acquire proficiency in the linguistic code of the dominant class"' (Freire & Macedo, 1987, p. 127; see also Aronowitz & Giroux, 1988, pp. 102-103). Students from other traditions may have an advantage in learning the rhetorical and grammatical conventions of the "culture of power"'-- and the assumptions behind them. Since these conventions are "unnatural" to them (Cope & Kalantzis, 1993), they may more easily see the social/political functions of, for example, the passive-voiced, "authorless"' style of much academic writing and news reports.

Indeed, far from being disadvantaged, students whose first languages are not derived from socially dominant discourses are in a uniquely advantageous position to deconstruct the grammar of dominant discourses simply because they are less influenced by the cultural assumptions of literate culture...They have a critical and linguistic distance. (Cope & Kalantzis, 1993, p.86)

# Review and Discussion of the Literature

Support for sustained content study begins with content-based ESL, itself a response to the call for contextualized language curricula built around meaningful, comprehensible input (Brinton, Snow & Wesche, 1989; Crandall, 1993; Crandall & Tucker, 1989; Short, Crandall & Christian, 1989). Researchers of content-based ESL suggest that meaningful input might include academic subjects studied in sheltered or adjuncted classes--both providing sustained content study. Where this is not possible, themed classes are suggested where students study content themes long enough to allow reading from a number of sources, discussion and writing.

The advantages of sustained content study are linguistic, pedagogical and psychological. The linguistic benefits include the provision of meaningful input of both quotidian and cognitively demanding language (Cummins, 1981, 1984; Mohan, 1990; Spanos, 1989; Tarone, 1983) that exposes students to a wide range of vocabulary, form, registers and pragmatic functions (Snow, Met & Genesee, 1989; Swain, 1985, 1988) and asks that students use them in the "pushed output" of discussion and writing (Ellis, 1992; Mohan, 1990; Swain, 1985, 1988). Krashen (1981, 1991) has long stressed "narrow reading," or reading intensively in one area, as a way to recycle vocabulary and genre conventions. Ponder and Powell (1989) recommend a program of "narrow reading" in second language acquisition:

Reading at length and in depth about a single topic enhances the ability to deal with the linguistic elements of a novel text; as more and more texts on the topic are attempted, vocabulary and associated structures become increasingly familiar. Repeated reading on a topic also contributes to a store of information on the topic... Schema research and psycholinguistic approaches to reading have emphasized that linguistic and cognitive structures are closely related in the process of comprehension. (Ponder & Powell, 1989, pp. 7-8; see also Mayer & Mayer, 1991)

The pedagogical advantages of content-based ESL include the learning that students accomplish while acquiring a new language so that they don't fall behind their peers (K-12), significantly interrupt their higher education (Crandall & Tucker, 1989; Saville-Troike, 1984; Short, 1991b, 1993; Wong-Fillmore, 1983), or misunderstand the political and economic factors that affect their lives. The most salient psychological benefit is student interest and motivation (Burger, 1989; Ponder & Powell, 1989; Short, 1991a; Snow & Brinton, 1988; Snow, Met & Genesee, 1989).

In sum, the central tenet of content-based ESL is that students learn language when they use it to study something else in a sustained way. Students advance their knowledge of two disciplines: the L2 (the linguistic benefits of contentbased ESL) and the content area (the pedagogical benefits). Yet if students are to grasp fully the target language and culture (beyond survival or social-conversational skills), they need learn in their L2s not only the "information' of content areas but how to gather, synthesize and evaluate it. Embedded in learning L2 content is not only L2 vocabulary and forms but L2 critical thinking. As researchers of content-based ESL note (Blanton, 1992; Horowitz, 1986a, 1986b, 1986c, 1990), sustained content study allows students to boost language skills, strengthen content knowledge, and "to strengthen their higher order cognitive skills" (Short, 1991b, p. 168).

Additional support for sustained content study can be found outside the content based literature. Focusing on EAP skills, Fredrickson, Hagedorn and Reed (1991) write that critical thinking develops when: 1. one subject is studied through the term; 2. the language and content increases in sophistication such that comprehension of later material depends on a grasp of earlier material; 3. students become familiar with the requisite technical terms and rhetorical devices; and 4. students are encouraged to develop theory by assessing how well existing theories account for data. Also focusing on EAP, Ferris and Tagg (1996), in their survey of the requirements of 900 university classes, found that ESL students are helped by opportunities to learn in their ESL classes the skills specific to their mainstream ones. Similarly, Mustafa (1995) found that teaching the conventions of term papers improved student ability to write them in both L1 and L2.

These researchers are supported by text analysis studies in mother-tongue classes (Connor, 1990) and in second-language programs (Bardovi-Harlig, 1990; Connor, 1994; Connor & Farmer, 1990; Connor & McCagg, 1983; Schneider & Connor, 1991), which suggests that ESL students practice the organization and argumentation of genres in which they hope to write. "In addition to treating style and mechanics, the results of the present study suggest that it may be advisable to emphasize argumentative structure and the use of persuasive appeals in the teaching of argumentative/persuasive writing" (Connor, 1990, p. 85).

Focusing on EAP, transformative pedagogy and language skills together, Cope and Kalantzis (1993) suggest similar course requirements. They describe conceptual, literate English as subordinative, analytical, minimally redundant, distancing, and either genuinely or disingenuously attempting balance and objectivity. In order to learn these rhetorical devices and question their political uses, students need to "work their way through explicit analysis of genre features," (p. 85) and teachers need to organize their courses so that the various areas of study "build on each other to form an increasingly more sophisticated theory of language" (p. 89; for a comparison of literate/conceptual and oral thinking, see Ong, 1982, pp. 37- 49). These researchers use sustained examination of a genre to study both language and the power structures it reflects and maintains. Kutz, Groden, and Zamel (1993) emphasize student experience and voice as a way to develop language and transformative pedagogy skills, and they too argue for "a coherent framework of knowledge, focusing on a particular topic" (p. 85).

Critically, Cummins (1981) argues that language learners cannot acquire from quotidian L2 conversation what he calls cognitive academic learning proficiency (CALPs). Complex, synthetic reasoning needs to be practiced in the L2 in order for students to master--and challenge---L2 language and argument. But to practice higher-level reasoning in their L2s, students must engage in projects complex and enduring enough so that argumentation and rhetorical conventions can be identified, studied, practiced, and questioned.

Applying this literature to critical thinking, these studies suggest that, as students must know how to extract, question, and evaluate the central points and methodology of a range of material, and construct responses using the conventions of academic/expository writing, these are the skills that need to be rehearsed in ESL courses. These skills are needed in the university and workplace and to understand society and politics. They require study over time, as does training in critical thinking for native speakers.

Students, of course, come to the ESL classroom with a variety of critical thinking skills developed in their L1s and they gain L2 critical thinking skills outside formal study. It is at least one job of ESL courses to assist them. For absent adequate practice in L2 critical thinking, students lack a full scaffold (Vygotsky, 1962) to academic study and the workplace, to advance up its ladders or to challenge them. Those who have friends or family that can help with these skills (or who can pay for assistance), will acquire them. Students who don't have as much help--who often "are not already a participant in the culture of power' (Delpit, 1991, p. 486)--may find it harder to learn them or gain the leg-up into and over "power" cultures that these skills introduce.

# Challenges for the ESL Class

While sustained content study may benefit language and critical thinking skills, it is often limited to English for Specific Purposes (ESP), sheltered or adjunct classes where students and teachers have the interest and expertise to explore one subject in detail. Some universities have created special language classes for subjects with high concentrations of ESL students, yet this approach is often not feasible and neglects ESL students interested in other content areas, with no declared major, and those not bound for university work. As ESL classes are often filled by students with wide-ranging goals, teachers who wish to pursue sustained content need to devise curricula that sustain the interest of a wide range of students. In short, sustained content study in ESL asks for "universal donors" of content; a few examples are described in the section below.

Once a "universal donor' is chosen, teachers must determine how much discipline-specific language should be included in course materials. In classes not earmarked as ESP, discipline-specific language is secondary to the critical thinking skills targeted in this paper. Learning these, students are in a better position to work with a range of academic/professional requirements (Belcher, 1995; Benson & Heidish, 1995; Braine, 1995; Dudley-Evans, 1995, Swales, 1990). Disciplinespecific terms may be useful only to students pursuing that discipline, may not provide others with transferable language (Flowerdew, 1993; Widdowson, 1993), and may be more appropriately added in content classes (Cope, Kalantzis, Kress & Martin, 1993; Hyon, 1996). With this in mind, vocabulary commensurate with introductory texts for non-majors in sustained content courses may be the best choice in sustained content classes.

# SUGGESTIONS FOR CURRICULA OF SUSTAINED CONTENT STUDY

To illustrate briefly how sustained content courses might work, three subject areas are described as examples of "universal donors" of content: pop culture, selected political and economic issues, and second language acquisition (SLA) itself. A fourth, topics suggested by students themselves, is perhaps the most universal of subjects, though it presents particular challenges in course preparation not described here.

1. As ESL students grapple with a new language, they may bc interested in the linguistic, psychological, and sociological aspects of the process that occupies much of their time and energy. Shor (1992) suggests a model for such a curriculum with his journalism classes that begin with the question, "What is good journalism?" or "What is a good journalism class?" ESL teachers might begin by asking students, "What is a good ESL class?" and study the components that produce one---from the structures of English to discussions of language and cultural difference to classroom organization (teacher-fronted vs. student-fronted, for example). In another use of SLA as content, Johns (1990b), Liebman (1988), and Kutz, Groden and Zamel (1993) taught ESL students to become ethnographic researchers of the language used in their home communities. Student papers included discussion of sociolinguistic forms and the social and emotional contexts in which they occur as well as personal reactions to differences in language use and pragmatics.

Following Johns et al., I developed ESL classes which look at differences in critical thinking and expository writing among the cultures of students in class. Texts include Fox's (1994) Listening to the world: Cultural issues in academic writing and selected articles on contrastive rhetoric. Fox's book, meant for English-speaking teachers of international ESL/EFL students, analyzes the assumptions and rhetorical requirements of English writing compared with those of other cultures, and describes how the differences emerge in student work.

Class discussions and compositions include identification and evaluation of L1 and L2 writing conventions, the assumptions on which they are based (for instance, reader-responsiblity vs. writer-responsbility), and Fox's claims about the worldviews, education, and rhetorical conventions of international students. Fox, for instance, makes much of the difference between the writing in societies that emphasize individualism and novelty and in those that stress received wisdom and collectivity. Yet some students claim Fox exaggerated the difference and failed to see how people in "collectivist" cultures develop and express individual and novel ideas. Other students have noted that Listening to the World reveals more about American assumptions about other cultures than about the cultures themselves.

Student analysis of Fox's book provokes aspects of critical thinking aimed at by transformative pedagogy; putting their critiques to paper in English requires skill in the conventions of English academic/expository writing (a focus of EAP). To practice these, students investigate the organizational patterns and rhetorical conventions of their readings. This practice itself raises questions--as suggested by the cyclical nature of the aspects of critical thinking--and heightens student awareness of the interdependence between writing and discourse communities. For instance, students notice in their readings the American penchant for frequent, concrete examples, discuss what may have contributed to this method of proof, and compare it to proof mechanisms in their L1s. They then use the organizational and rhetorical forms of the readings to organize their writing so that they may practice them, see how they differ from their L1s, and note their advantages and limitations, which are also discussed (as suggested by transformative pedagogy, especially in concert with genre analysis).

2. In another course comprised mostly of economically disadvantaged, immigrant students in New York, I developed a curriculum using Herbert Gans's The War Against the Poor (1995); supplemental texts included articles on New York's housing, welfare, and health care policies, some of which present views opposing Gans. The War Against the Poor provides a historical overview of labels applied to the poor ("pauper," "undeserving," "underclass,' among others), an analysis of the process of labelling, and an examination of the links between labels and policy. Following this topic through the term, students read and discuss the texts and use them to learn both language and critical thinking skills. The former include pronunciation (by working out the pronunciation of the texts' vocabulary) and grammar (by analyzing the noun phrases, verb phrases, and clause combining found in the reading). The critical thinking skills include, examining the content and organizational structures of the assigned texts and linking them to note-taking techniques and evaluating the arguments of each reading against other readings and experience.

3. One of the most universally popular subjects among students (and teachers) is pop culture (movies, tv, pop music, graffiti art), leading me to try Film & Society as semester-long content. Because of its wide appeal, film has long been used as a spark for student discussion and expressive writing (Cooper, Lavery, & Rinvolucri, 1991; Morley, 1981; Stempleski, 1990, 1992; Stoller, 1992). Yet as an art form that contains the myths and assumptions of society, film also lends itself to rigorous investigation of a nation's politics, economics, and social relations--and to the critical thinking and writing used to explore these issues (a focus of transformative pedagogy and other academic approaches).

In the Film & Society class, students read about the ways in which society's assumptions, conflicts and unresolved issues appear in its films. To develop these ideas, students watch movies, discuss their assumptions and unresolved issues, and investigate their propositions about life, comparing them to their own experience and cultures. A proposition might be, to return to Interview with a Vampire, that beauty and sexual satisfaction come at a cost and that pleasure must be paid for. Students discuss why these would be propositions of an American film (what historical, economic, social, religious, factors might have contributed to such a view), how it is like or different from propositions about beauty and pleasure in their cultures, and what tensions, hopes and unresolved issues in American society this proposition reflects. Other conflicts that students have found in American films include: between individual liberty and community; between needing order/ authority/government and suspicion of authority's incompetence or corruption; between the myth of the melting pot and suspicion of newcomers; and between the dangers of violence and its effectiveness. In a paper on The Untouchables, for instance, the writer describes the contradiction between the belief that government solves society's problems and the belief that clever individuals circumvent the law. She also questions the notion that immigrants to the U.S. work happily together.

The film The Untouchables arrests audience's attention from the very first minutes because it touches upon the problems wich society has not been able to resolve for many ages. Specifically, society consists of groups of people who make laws and enforce them against individuals. The main fantasy of The Untouchables is that good, law, government wins over evil and outlaws. Also, the secondary fantasy is that the smart individual should go outside the law and that groups of immigrants solve problems to work together.

Critically, students in the Film & Society classes link their movie analyses to predicaments outside the classroom, a key element in the transformative pedagogy aspects of critical thinking (and other academic approaches, as well). For instance, after studying the presentation of law and outlaw in The Untouchables, two students asked whether citizens of their home countries should obey laws that they knew were "stupid' and "corrupt." A student writing about Taxi Driver explored "the damage of human occurring from the lack of human connection as well as usefulness of rugged individualism." Conflicts between community and individualism were explored in papers on Edward Scissorhands and The Age of Innocence, where a student also examined \*the conflict between women's desire for independence and for equal opportunities to those of men at the risky of losing male societal protections and men's desire for the thrill of possessorship at the risky of losing challenging, exciting relationship with women." Two students, one writing on Fatal Attraction and one on Wall St., looked at the conflict between ethical conduct and success or pleasure--between the desire to be good and the desire to get what one wants.

As in courses where the sustained content is SLA or society's relationship to its poor, students in the Film & Society classes put their ideas to paper utilizing the conventions of academic/expository writing. They study the texts they read both for language and argumentation, discuss and evaluate the authors' claims and methods of proof, and recycle the rhetorical and organizational structures they discover in the readings into their written work.

Central to these curricula is one content area followed over time and studied through a range of materials that students use to develop language and critical thinking skills, including challenges to received wisdom and academic/expository paper organization. Short segments of student work adequately illustrate neither its strengths and weakness, but the representative excerpts below hint at them, taken from student discussion and papers [surface errors retained].

From a discussion of The Untouchables:

Christiana: I like the film, the actor were really great, especially De Niro. But Kevin Costner, he was not so strong, just pretty. He should be stronger even if he is not the real hero.

Hisato:

Is surprise for me, Kevin Costner is a big star, very famous, but Sean Connery is real hero.

Antonio: The story is very fast, very well put together, but maybe too fast. I ask myself if story was written too fast because it is just black and white, good guy bad guy like you always see in American movie.   
Choong-yul: You know, this is regular American movie idea.   
Antonio: What?   
Choong-yul: That you see one part the good guys and one part the bad guys.   
Antonio: And the good guys punish the bad guys, that's really a crazy idea.   
Sung-hee: No no. It is not so simple. The good guys do many bad things.   
Antonio: Okay okay, but still Costner is still the cop guy and Capone is the bad guy and the cop guy punish the bad guy.   
Christiana: But Costner is not the real hero, this is Sean Connery and this is the important thing.   
Hisato: What is?   
Sung-hee: The important is that the good guys can do anything to get the bad guys. Okay, so it's get the bad guys, but still...   
Christiana: It's al...alibi?   
Sung-hee: We never have this in Korea. The cop have no gun. We never use this in movie. The idea that good guy get bad guy, this is in all places, but the idea that good guy do bad thing, this is strange.   
Hisato: It's America--alibi?--for violence. Violence is very big problem but America think it is also strong. This is history, since 50 years.   
Antonio: More. Oh Hisato, you are Japanese...   
Sung-hee: So this is Sean Connery. He knows what to do and he does things by self. He is American hero. He knows to use violence, how to punish Capone.   
Christiana: So of course it's okay what he does. Everybody love him. This is American hero.

In this discussion, what began as simple comments about Kevin Costner became an exploration of how good guys do bad things-of the conflict between ethics and efficacy and how American movies justify violence. Also examining ethics and efficacy, the student commenting on Wall Street wrote,

Successful and powerful people become heroes and symbols of the American dream. Society seems willing to forget all the bad things they have done and remember the good things and that they are powerful. Why can some people do illegal and immoral things and still become symbols of a dream? According to Benjanmin R. Barber in his book An Aristocracy of Everyone (p. 48): "To become a new man was to forget the old. Americans became skilled forgetters, deriving their new identities from imagination through a laborious exercise in studied obliviousness." This obliviousness makes it possible for people to be heroes even if they have done many bad things to reach their goals.

In another paper, on Like Water for Chocolate, the writer explores quite a different but powerful topic, the appeal of true love that transcends all bounds including death. She then moves to a discussion of tradition, saying that we want it for its link to community but we don't want it to impinge on our freedom.

The main fantasy of the film Like Water for Chocolate, adapted by Alfonso Arau from Laura Esquivel's novel, is that true love cannot be destroyed by evil. The power of this true love wins against all odds: society's rules, time, illness, difficulties. However, if there is no place for this love in this world, the lovers will be together not in life but death.

This "Romeo and Juliet' myth takes place in turn-of-the-century Mexico. As Shakespeare prophesizes, "For never was story of more woe than this of Juliet and Romeo' (Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet), the story of Like Water for Chocolate does not focus only on sorrow but it is shown in a beautiful way, sometimes funny, sometimes sensual, and often quite fantastic.

The secondary fantasy is the necessity of women to break traditional rules while keeping some traditions wich belong to the culture like the importance of family cooking. Faith in freedom is part of this fantasy, and in the end, only a good tradition is passed onto the next generation.

These excerpts were chosen to show students taking on the sorts of socio-political critique aimed at by transformative pedagogy and organizing their ideas within English rhetorical conventions, for example by presenting their central ideas in clear introductory statements. Following these, students support their claims with examples from the films and readings, but a longer analysis of their work exceeds the present article, which seeks more narrowly to present an argument for sustained content study.

# CONCLUSION

In adult ESL learners, development of critical thinking skills-as defined by EAP, cognitive psychology and transformative pedagogy-benefits from sustained content study. Support for sustained study comes from research in contentbased ESL, text analysis of mother-tongue and second-language writing, the development of student "voice" in ESL writing, and from the work of Krashen, Cummins and Mohan.

In order to succeed at the university and in today's workplace, and to understand the political/economic factors that affect their lives, ESL students must be able to identify the central points and methodology of a range of material, question and evaluate them, and organize persuasive responses in English. They must grasp received wisdom and challenge it, practice standard rhetorical conventions and study their assumptions, advantages and limitations. Without experience in employing these skills in English, ESL writers may not develop the tools they need for success and advancement in their academic studies and in the workplace. These skills require studying a subject over time, as does training in critical thinking for native speakers. Those who have friends, family or tutors to help them with these skills will acquire them. However, as stated previously, students who don't have as much help--who often "are not already a participant in the culture of power" (Delpit, 1991, p. 486)--may find it harder to acquire them or the leg-up into and over "power"' cultures that these skills introduce.

This argument neither supports nor detracts from other approaches to critical thinking development but rather suggests that sustained content study is useful. It proposes that teachers pursue a subject long enough (a half to full semester) to allow for the synthesis, questioning and evaluation of information, the study of rhetorical conventions of a genre, and a recycling of those conventions into student writing so that students may practice them "hands-on' and see their advantages and limitations.

Widdowson (1990) writes that the "effectiveness of language teaching will depend on what is being taught, other than language, that will be recognized by the learners as a purposeful and relevant extension of their schematic horizons" (p. 103). He favors English for Specific Purposes classes where appropriate, but where students do not share a specific purpose or major he recommends taskbased, problem-solving curricula because they allow students to rehearse the critical thinking skills required at the university or on the job.

The challenge lies in finding content that allows for the needed rehearsals and that is purposeful. It cannot be makework; students know it when they see it. Whatever content ESL teachers choose, we must ask that students do with it what they do in courses, jobs and predicaments outside the ESL classroom. In so doing, they practice the skills they will need and may be better prepared for the demands that await them.

# REFERENCES

Al-Abed Al-Haq, F., & Ahmed, A. (1994). Discourse problems in argumentative writing. World Englishes, 13(3), 307-323.   
Aronowitz, S., & Giroux, H. (1988). Schooling, culture and literacy in the age of broken dreams: A review of Bloom and Hirsch. Harvard Educational Review, 58(2), 172- 194.   
Barber, B. (1992). An aristocracy of everyone. New York: Random House.   
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1990). Pragmatic word order in English composition. In U. Connor & A. M. Johns (Eds.), Coherence: Research and pedagogical perspectives (pp. 43- 66). Alexandria, VA: TESOL.   
Belcher, D. (1995). Writing critically across the curriculum. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 135-154). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Company.   
Benesch, S. (1992). Sharing responsibilities: An alternative to the adjunct model. College ESL, 2, 1-10.   
Benesch, S. (1993a). Critical thinking: A learning process for democracy. TEsOL Quarterly, 27(3), 545-548.   
Benesch, S. (1993b). ESL, ideology, and the politics of pragmatism. TEsOL Quarterly, 27(4), 705-717.   
Benson, P., & Heidish, P. (1995). The ESL technical expert: Writing processes and classroom practices. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 313-330). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Company.   
Blanton, L. (1992). A holistic approach to college ESL: Integrating language and content. ELT Journal, 46(3), 285-293.   
Braine, G. (1988). Comments on Ruth Spack's "Initiating ESL students into the academic discourse community: How far should we go? TEsOL Quarterly, 22(4), 700-702.   
Braine, G. (1995). Writing in the natural sciences and engineering. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 113-134). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Company.   
Brinton, D., Snow, M., & Wesche, M. (1989). Content-based second language instruction. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle.   
Burger, S. (1989). Content-based ESL in a sheltered psychology course: Input, output and outcomes. TESL Canada Journal, 6(2), 45-59.   
Carrell, P. (1984). The effects of rhetorical organization on ESL readers. TEsOL Quarterly, 18(2), 441-469.   
Carson, J.G., & Leki, I. (1993). Reading in the composition classroom. Boston: Heline & Heinle.   
Chamot, A. (1995). Creating a community of thinkers in the ESL/EFL classroom. TESOL Matters, 5(5), 1,4.   
Collier, V. (1987). Age and rate of acquisition of second language for academic purposes. TESOL Quarterly, 21, 617-641.   
Collier, V., & Thomas, W. (1988, April). Acquisition of cognitive-academic second language proficiency: A six-year study. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans.   
Connor, U. (1990). Linguistic/rhetorical measures for international persuasive student writing. Research in the Teaching of English, 24, 67-87.   
Connor, U. (1994). Text Analysis. In A. Cumming (Ed.), Alternatives in TESOL research: Descriptive, interpretive, and ideological orientations (pp.682-684). TEs0L Quarterly, 28(4), 673-703.   
Connor, U., & Farmer, M. (1990). Teaching topical structure analysis as a revision strategy. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 129-135). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Connor, U., & McCagg, P. (1983). Cross-cultural differences and perceived quality in written paraphrases of English expository prose. Applied Linguistics, 4, 259-268.   
Cooper, R., Lavery, M., & Rinvolucri, M. (1991). Video. New York: Oxford University Press.   
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (1993). The power of literacy and the literacy of power. In B. Cope & M. Kalantzis (Eds.), The powers of literacy: A genre approach to teaching writing (pp. 63-89). Pittsburgh, PA: Pittsburgh University Press.   
Cope, B., Kalantzis, M., Kress, G., & Martin, J. (1993). Bibliographical essay: Developing the theory and practice of genre-based literacy. In B. Cope & M. Kalantzis (Eds.), The powers of literacy: A genre approach to teaching writing (pp. 231-247). Pittsburgh, PA: Pittsburgh University Press.   
Crandall, J. (1993). Content-centered learning in the United States. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 13, 111-126.   
Crandall, J., & Tucker, G. R. (1989). Content-based language instruction in second and foreign languages. Paper presented at the Regional Language Centre Regional Seminar of Language and Teaching Methodology for the Nineties, Singapore. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 312 895).   
Cummins, J. (1981). The role of primary language development in promoting educational success for language minority students. In California State Department of Education (Ed.), Schooling and language minority students. Los Angeles: Evaluation, Dissemination, and Assessment Center.   
Cummins, J. (1984). Bilingualism and special education: Issues in assessment and pedagogy. Clevedon: England: Multilingual Matters; San Diego: College-Hill Press.   
Cummins, J. (1989). Empowering minority students. Sacramento, CA: California Association for Bilingual Education.   
Delpit, L. (1991). The silenced dialogue: Power and pedagogy in educating other people's children. In M. Minami & B. Kennedy (Eds.), Language issues in literacy and bilingual/multicultural education (pp. 483-502). Cambridge, MA: Harvard Educational Review.   
Delpit, L. (1995) Other people's children. New York: The New Press.   
Dudley-Evans, T. (1995). Common-core and specific approaches to the teaching of academic writing. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 293-312). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Company.   
Ellis, R. (1992). The classroom context: An acquisition-rich or an acquisition-poor environment? In C. Kramsch & S. McConnell-Ginet (Eds.), Text and context: Cross-disciplinary perspectives on language study (pp. 171-186). Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath.   
Ferris, D., & Tagg, T. (1996). Academic oral communication needs of ESL learners: What subject-matter instructors actually require. TESOL Quarterly, 30(1), 31-58.   
Flowerdew, J. (1993). An educational, or process, approach to the teaching of professional genres. ELT Journal, 47, 305-316.   
Fox, H. (1994). Listening to the world: Cultural issues in academic writing. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.   
Fredrickson, T., Hagedorn, J., & Reed, H. (1991). The content-based curriculum at ITM/ MUCIA. Cross Currents, 18(2), 200-205.   
Freire, P. (1974). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Seabury.   
Freire, P., & Macedo, D. (1987). Literacy: Reading the word and the world. South Hadley, MA: Bergin and Garvey.   
Gans, H. (1995). The war against the poor. New York: Basic Books/Harper Collins.   
Hamp-Lyons, L. (1986). No new lamps for old yet, please. TEsOL Quarterly, 20(4), 790 796.   
Hornberger, N., & Ricento, T. (Eds.). (1996). Language planning and policy [Special issue]. TEsOL Quarterly, 30(3).   
Horowitz, D. (1986a). Process, not product. Less than meets the eye. TEs0L Quarterly, 20(1), 141-144.   
Horowitz, D. (1986b). What professors actually require: Academic tasks for the ESL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 20(3), 445-462.   
Horowitz, D. (1986c). The author responds to Liebman-Kleine. TEsOL Quarterly, 20(4), 788-709.   
Horowitz, D. (1990). Fiction and nonfiction in the ESL/EFL classroom: Does the difference make a difference? English for Specific Purposes, 9, 161-168.   
Hyon, S. (1996). Genre in three traditions: Implications for ESL. TEsOL Quarterly, 30(4), 693-722.   
Johns, A. (1990a, March). Process, literature, and academic realties: Dan Horowitz and beyond. Handout for paper presented at the 24th Annual TEsOL Convention, San Francisco, CA.   
Johns, A. (1990b). Coherence as a cultural phenomenon: Employing ethnographic principles in the academic milieu. In U. Connor and A. Johns (Eds.), Coherence in writing: Research and Pedagogical Perspectives (pp. 209-226). Alexandria, VA: TESOL.   
Krashen S. (1981). The case for narrow reading. TEsOL Newsletter, 15(6), 23.   
Krashen S. (1991). Sheltered subject matter teaching. Cross Currents, 18(2), 183-189.   
Kutz, E., Groden, S., & Zamel, V. (1993). The discovery of competence: Teaching and learning with diverse student writers. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.   
Leki, I. (1991). Twenty-five years of contrastive rhetoric: Text analysis and writing pedagogies. TESOL Quarterly, 25(1), 123-143.   
Liebman, J. (1988). Contrastive rhetoric: Students as ethnographers. Journal of Basic Writing, 7, 6-27.   
Liebman-Kleine, J. (1986). In defense of teaching process in ESL composition. TESOL Quarterly, 20 (4), 783-788.   
Mayer, L., & Mayer, M. (1991). 4 years later--Are we content with content? Cross Currents, 18(2), 206-209.   
Mohan, B. (1990, September). LEP students and the integration of language and content: Knowledge structures and tasks. In Proceedings of the Research Symposium on Limited English Proficient Students' Issues (pp. 113-160). Washington, DC: Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Language Affairs.   
Morley, J. (1981). Using films and videos as English language instructional materials: Theoretical principles and pedagogical practices. Languages, Linguistics, and Literature: Round Table Journal, 4(1), 1-17.   
Mustafa, Z. (1995). The effect of genre awareness on linguistic transfer. English for Specific Purposes, 14(3), 247-256.   
Ong, W., (1982). Orality and literacy: The technologizing of the word. London: Methuen.   
Ponder, R., & Powell, W. (1989). Sourcebooks as content-bearing instruction in intensive ESL programs. Tallahassee, FL: Florida State University, Center for Intensive English Studies. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 307 805).   
Reid, J. (1984). Comments on Vivian Zamel's \*The composition processes of advanced ESL students: Six case studies." TEsOL Quarterly, 18(1), 149-159.   
Saville-Troike, M. (1984). What really matters in second language learning for academic purposes? TEsOL Quarterly, 18(2), 199-219.   
Schneider, M., & Connor, U. (1991). Topical structure in ESL essays: Not all topics are equal. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 12, 411-427.   
Shih, M. (1986). Content-based approaches to teaching academic writing. TEsOL Quarterly, 20(4), 617-648.   
Shor, I. (1992). Empowering education: Critical teaching for social change. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
Short, D. (1991a). Content-based English language teaching: A focus on teacher training. Cross Currents, 18(2),167-173.   
Short. D. (1991b). How to integrate language and content instruction: A training manual. Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.   
Short, D. (1993). Assessing integrated language and content instruction. TEsOL Quarterly, 27(4), 627-656.   
Short, D., Crandall, J., & Christian, D. (1989). How to integrate language and content instruction: A training manual. (Report No. CLEAR-ER15). Los Angeles, CA: California University, Center for Language Education and Research. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 305 842).   
Snow, M., & Brinton, D. (1988). The adjunct model of language instruction: Integrating language and content at the university. (OERI Contract No. 400-85-1010). Los Angeles: Center for Language Education and Research, UCLA. Washington, DC: Office of Educational Research and Improvement. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 298 764).   
Snow, M., Met, M., & Genesee, F. (1989). A conceptual framework for the integration of language and content in second/foreign language instruction. TEsOL Quarterly, 23(2), 201-217.   
Spack, R. (1988). Initiating ESL students into the academic discourse community: How far should we go? TEsOL Quarterly, 22(1), 29-51.   
Spanos, G. (1989). On the integration of language and content instruction. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 10, 227-240.   
Stempleski, S. (1990, March). Video in U.S. classrooms: Culture in context. Paper presented at the 16th annual international conference of the Japan Association of Language Teachers, Omiya, Japan.   
Stempleski, S. (1992). Teaching communication skills with authentic video. In S. Stempleski & P. Arcario (Eds.), Video in second language teaching: Using, selecting, and producing video for the classroom (pp. 7-24). Alexandria, VA: TESOL.   
Stoller, F. (1992). Using video in theme-based curricula. In S. Stempleski & P. Arcario (Eds.), Video in second language teaching: Using, selecting, and producing video for the classroom (pp. 25-46). Alexandria, VA: TESOL.   
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible output in its development. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 235-253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.   
Swain, M. (1988). Manipulating and complementing content teaching to maximize second language learning. TESL Canada Journal, 6(1), 68-83.   
Swales, J. (1971). Writing scientific English. London: Nelson.   
Swales, J. (1982). Examining examination papers. English Language Research Journal, 3, 9-25.   
Swales, J. (1985). Episodes in ESP. Oxford, Pergamon.   
Swales, J. (1987). Utilizing the literatures in teaching the research paper. TEsOL Quarterly, 21(1), 41-68.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Tarone, E. (1983). On the variability of interlanguage systems. Applied Linguistics, 4, 142-163.   
Tollefson, J. (1991). Planning language, planning inequality: Language policy in the community. New York: Longman.   
Vygotsky, L. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Widdowson, H. (1990). Aspects of language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Widdowson, H. (1993). The relevant conditions of language use and learning. In M. Krueger & F. Ryan (Eds.), Language and content: Discipline and content-based approaches to language study (pp. 27-36). Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath.   
Wong-Fillmore, L. (1983). The language learner as an individual: Implications for research on individual differences for the ESL. teacher. In M. Clarke & J. Handscombe (Eds.), On TEsOL 82: Pacific perspectives on language learning and teaching (pp. 157-174). Washington, DC: TESOL.