# How educators navigate language ideology and pedagogy in refugee education

Celia Reddick

To cite this article: Celia Reddick (2024) How educators navigate language ideology and pedagogy in refugee education, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:10, 1309-1323, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2024.2318443

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2024.2318443

# How educators navigate language ideology and pedagogy in refugee education

Celia Reddick $\textcircled{1}$

Department of Education Policy and Leadership Studies, Learning Systems Institute, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA

# ABSTRACT

There are over 30 million people living as refugees today, nearly half of whom are under 18. For most young people fleeing conflict and persecution, their only option is to pursue education in alreadystretched national school systems in host countries neighboring those they have left, often in unfamiliar languages. Despite the pressing issue of refugee education globally, there is little research about the educational inclusion of refugees in the Global South, not least related to language. This study begins to address this gap. Through a comparative case study, I draw on school-wide and classroom observations and interviews with educators across three schools in Kampala, Uganda to understand how educators navigate the linguistic inclusion of refugees at school. I find that, in the absence of guidance or training, school leaders draw on their ideological beliefs about multilingualism and migration to determine how to approach linguistic diversity at school. In turn, classroom teachers navigate constrained implementation spaces, balancing policies that require a dominant language as the language of instruction with multilingual realities in classrooms.

ARTICLE HISTORY Received 13 June 2023 Accepted 7 February 2024

# KEYWORDS

Refugee education;   
language ideology;   
language-in-education;   
Uganda; educators;   
implementation space

# Introduction

Lucy1 teaches classes of nearly 100 second graders at Mary Magdalene Primary School (MMPS) in Kampala, Uganda. Her students’ families have come to the capital from across Uganda and surrounding countries, and Lucy works hard to include refugee and Ugandan students in her teaching, navigating an English-only instructional policy in the context of growing multilingualism. But she faces a key tension in doing so: while she understands that official policy requires English at school – and while she knows that teachers are expected to punish children who speak languages other than English in class – Lucy also feels that without acknowledging children’s other languages, they are unable to learn. She elaborated,

When they use mother tongue, they learn more from one another, making their toy cars, making their play materials … mother tongue is the key to other languages … [it] is the one which helps you to do all your work, to do everything you want.

Lucy is just one of many teachers navigating policies of refugee education inclusion across schools in Kampala and globally. Over the last 8 years, there has been a shift toward the inclusion of refugees in host country schools rather than segregation in parallel camp schools given growing rates and length of displacement, with Uganda a leader in this approach (UNHCR 2022). Despite this orientation, however, there is little formal guidance for host governments and educators about how to facilitate this inclusion, with only sparse attention to the growing multilingualism across schools attended by both refugee and national children (Dryden-Peterson et al. 2019; Reddick and Chopra 2021). In Uganda, for example, even as schools across the capital city become more multilingual, educators are nonetheless expected to teach in English (NCDC 2020). This policy does little to help educators respond to increasingly multilingual classes and often undermines refugee young people’s efforts to engage meaningfully at school (Reddick 2022).

In this study, I explore how educators navigate multilingualism in urban classrooms attended by refugee and national students together. Through a comparative case study across three schools, I find that, in the absence of formal training or guidance, Head Teachers (school principals in Uganda, referred to as HT in the manuscript) draw on their own ideological beliefs about language and migration to develop school-wide approaches to language, and classroom teachers (CTs) then work to balance these expectations with the multilingual realities of their classes. The issue of language in refugee education is a pressing but understudied topic affecting millions of children globally, and this paper contributes new knowledge about this urgent concern.

# Refugee education in Uganda

Fully 32.5 million people live as refugees around the world, with half of these under the age of 18 and 72 percent living in countries neighboring those they had fled. Within this global context, Uganda is the fifth-largest refugee hosting country in the world with 1.5 million refugees living across the country (UNHCR 2023). In 2017, Uganda officially formalized refugees’ right to education through public and private schools that are staffed by Ugandan teachers and that make up the national education system (Ministry of Education and Sports 2018). A large part of the institutional acceptance of this approach likely stems from Uganda’s commitment to a 70/30 split of any resources targeting refugees, with at least $30 \%$ benefiting national students (for more on refugee policy uptake, see Carvalho and Haybano 2023). Isabel, the HT at City Center Primary School (CCPS), one of the largest refugee-serving schools in Kampala and a focal school in this study noted, for example, how beneficial support from UNHCR (the UN agency for refugees) and other organizations had been for all pupils, not just those from refugee backgrounds.

There are of course limitations to Uganda’s official inclusion of refugees in the national school system, which include discrimination against refugees in Ugandan schools and workplaces (Hovil 2016). Additionally, the country’s refugee response, while predicated on the idea of inclusion into national systems, in many respects recreates the segregated camp system through the use of refugee ‘settlements’, which are different than camps in little more than name (IRRI 2018a). Furthermore, for refugees who have chosen to live in cities rather than settlements, as is the case among students in this study, there are very limited financial supports available, the expectation being that anyone who relocates to the capital city can manage on their own, which is widely untrue (Betts et al. 2019). The fact that only refugees in rural settlements are assisted institutionalizes ‘the practice of settlement-based aid provision’ (IRRI 2018b, 13), undermining official gestures toward integration.

# Multilingual, urban classrooms attended by refugee and national students

Uganda’s educational inclusion of refugees as well as its approach to language diversity make Uganda a particularly relevant place to study questions of language-in-education for refugees. There are 44 languages spoken across communities in Uganda in addition to English and Kiswahili, the official languages (Eberhard, Simons, and Fennig 2021), and approaches to language at school vary between urban and rural schools. Through what is called the Thematic Curriculum, which was introduced in 2006 and guides educational practices in schools across the country, instruction in rural areas is to be conducted in ‘a familiar area language’. In these settings, English is to be taught as a subject and serve as the language of instruction (LOI) beginning in fourth-grade. In contrast, in multilingual city schools without a shared ‘familiar area language’, like those I examine in this article, teachers are to use English as the LOI through all years of schooling, and are permitted to include another language as a class subject (but not an LOI) (NCDC 2020).

This means that in Kampala, the capital city and the site of this study, elementary schools are expected to implement English as the language of instruction despite immense linguistic diversity (Altinyelken, Moorcroft, and van Der Draai 2014). In this sprawling urban center, the number of refugees has nearly doubled since 2012. The more than 100,000 refugees in the city come from 25 different countries, contributing to the linguistic diversity of the schools they attend (UNHCR 2021). Despite these rising numbers, there is not a centralized system for tracking where refugees are attending schools and what educational supports they might need (Reddick 2022).

# Educators navigating LOI policies

Within contexts of refugee education inclusion like Kampala, educators receive little support, often left to their own devices to translate ambiguous policies into classroom pedagogy (Mendenhall, Russell, and Buckner 2017). In the absence of pedagogical or policy guidance related to growing linguistic diversity in contexts of forced migration, teachers are caught between language policies that privilege dominant languages like English, and refugee students’ existing linguistic abilities and aspirations (Reddick and Chopra 2021). This tension also emerges in multilingual settings without large populations of refugees, but where teachers and learners are expected to use English at school rather than communities’ multilingual repertoires (O’Regan 2021). In the following sections, I discuss the many ways educators have been shown to resist these forces and act as policymakers for language use at school. I also discuss ways policy, ideology, and uncertainty can limit educators’ agency – a set of factors with particular relevance for the teachers of refugees, an understudied but ever-growing population.

# Educators as policymakers

Despite many systemic constraints, educators have long been key stakeholders in the creation and implementation of education policies. As government employees, teachers are often families’ first point of contact with the state, making them public-facing ‘street-level bureaucrats’ who administer – and in many cases, make decisions about the limits of – national education policies (Lipsky 2010). This is particularly relevant for refugees, who can make few official claims on the host settings where they seek education. Across settings, there is a constant push–pull between the structure of policies and the agency of educators who are enacting, shifting, and reimagining them (Bouchard and Glasgow 2018).

This is particularly the case in language policy and planning at school. Educators have been shown to play a vital role in creating and reforming national, local, and school-wide language policies (e.g. Johnson 2010; Menken and García 2010). In their foundational work, Ricento and Hornberger (1996) ‘unpeel the onion’ of language policy and planning, placing teachers at the center of language-in-education policies as they question expectations and facilitate classroom and societal changes in attitudes about language. Neither educational administrators nor teachers are ‘helplessly caught in the ebb and flow of shifting ideologies in language policies,’ they show. Rather, educators ‘help develop, maintain, and change that flow’ (Hornberger and Johnson 2007, 527). In his Philadelphia-based ethnography of language policy, Johnson (2010) similarly reveals how policy constrains bilingual teachers, even as these same teachers find and force open spaces for educational approaches that embrace bilingualism. Far from being powerless within top-down structures, ‘educators are active agents in the interpretation and appropriation of language policy’ (Johnson 2010, 75).

There is a constant interplay, then – a tension – between agency and structure, with educators like those in Philadelphia responding to and working within top-down structures, just as they also recreate, reform and resist them (Bouchard and Glasgow 2018; Johnson 2010; Menken and García 2010). Within diverse policy structures, the agentic decision-making of school leaders and classroom teachers determines whether, the extent to which, and how language policies at national and locals level are implemented (Menken and García 2010). Following Lipsky (2010), De Soete and Slembrouck (2023) highlight the ways in which Belgian English-medium instructors too serve as ‘street-level bureaucrats’, enacting and making decisions about language policies in higher education. Similarly, in his study of language policies and practices in India, Ramanathan (2005) examines the ways educators evaluate and respond to the often-stratifying effects of language policies at school, ‘finding ethical responses to counter them by tweaking, side-stepping, or refashioning language policies’ (99). Indeed, across settings as diverse as Estonia (Brown 2010), Jamaica (Nero 2014), and the United States (De La Cruz Albizu 2020), educators negotiate the bounds of language at school, resisting, reinforcing, and recreating both language policies and ideologies.

In addition to the agentic ways in which educators mold language policies, however, systemic weaknesses within education systems can also make policy change more difficult, a dynamic that has been at play in Ugandan educational policy reform (Chapman, Burton, and Werner 2010). Particularly in contexts of rapid change, as when large populations of refugees join national schools, decision-making is pushed down to school leaders, whose views in such moments of flux are shaped not by training or official guidance, but by their own beliefs and constraints (Bush 2018). In schools across the Czech Republic that are diversifying due to increased migration, for example, school leaders experience pressures toward linguistic homogenization despite symbolic support of multilingualism (Janík and Goldberger 2024), pressures that result in monolingual policies and practices.

# Educators negotiating language ideologies and implementation spaces

In addition to the challenges posed to educators by systemic weaknesses and sudden flux within education systems, the experiences of educators and students alike are also shaped by language ideologies. Monoglossic language ideologies frame the use of a single language – of monolingualism – as a desired norm. They also situate dominant (often formerly colonial) languages as more valuable than minoritized languages spoken in communities (Bakhtin and Holquist 1981; Canagarajah 2017). For example, across South Asia, English is increasingly understood as more valuable for school than languages used at home, although learners and teachers alike struggle to use this language in classrooms (Sah 2022). Similarly, in Rwanda, public schools are expected to use English as the LOI from Grade 1, although often neither teachers nor children feel comfortable in the language – and despite there being a shared national language, Kinyarwanda, that could serve as a bridge into new content and language (Sibomana 2022). In both of these contexts, and in diverse settings globally, a language ideology that posits the monolingual use of English as the desired outcome of school forces other languages out of educational settings.

In contrast, heteroglossic language ideologies normalize and embrace multilingualism. They acknowledge that nearly all communities and classrooms the world over are in fact multilingual and ‘treat bilingualism [or multilingualism] as the norm’ (Flores and Schissel 2014, 455). Heteroglossic language ideologies position multilingualism as a resource rather than a problem, seen as enhancing community building, opportunity, and understanding (Hult and Hornberger 2016; Ruíz 1984). In so doing, heteroglossic language ideologies make space for education policy and pedagogy that embrace multilingualism, creating ‘heteroglossic implementation spaces that provide concrete tools’ for educators to draw on children’s multilingualism for learning, rather than rejecting it in favor of an imagined monolingual ideal (Flores and Schissel 2014, 455, italics in original; Hornberger 2005). Furthermore, the aspiration toward a ‘language as resource’ orientation in language planning has ‘potential usefulness in guiding policymakers and program developers in serving the needs of linguistic minorities and fostering sustainable societal multilingualism’ (Hult and Hornberger 2016, 42–43). The tension between monoglossic ideologies and pedagogies, multilingual classrooms, and efforts toward heteroglossic implementation spaces affect school-wide approaches to teaching and learning across contexts, including in Ugandan schools implementing refugee education inclusion. This study is the first to my knowledge to examine this interplay in a context where education inclusion is made available to refugee young people at scale through host country schools.

In the sections to come, I discuss the study’s research design, and then present its findings, a spectrum of approaches to language-in-education which schools adopt as they navigate tensions between ideology, policy, and implementation spaces in refugee education. I conclude with reflections on the implications of language policy and practice for efforts toward refugee education inclusion.

# Research design

# Research questions

We know very little about issues of language in refugee education in the Global South, where the majority of refugees live. Even less thoroughly examined are the experiences of educators who are the ones creating and implementing policies of education inclusion for refugees, and who must navigate linguistic diversity every day. In response to this gap, this study asks:

. How do school leaders navigate language-in-education in schools attended by refugee and national students?   
How do classroom teachers navigate language-in-education in classrooms where refugee and national students learn together?

# Setting

With the fourth-largest refugee population globally and in keeping with a history of progressive refugee policies, Uganda has developed policies that permit refugee young people to attend Ugandan national schools alongside Ugandan peers, and in classrooms led by Ugandan teachers (UNHCR 2019; 2023). Through these policies, Uganda has made both private and public elementary schools – all of which are overseen by the national Ministry of Education and Sports – available to refugees, supporting educational access in the capital city and elsewhere. However, despite the benefits of this approach for access to urban schools, it has also meant that refugees must navigate English as an LOI, and at times Luganda as a regional language taught as a subject in city schools (NCDC 2020), languages that are unfamiliar for most of them.

To understand how Ugandan educators navigate increasingly multilingual classrooms attended by both Ugandan and refugee young people, I undertook research across three schools in Kampala in 2018. To gauge educators’ strategies across school types, I purposively selected focal schools in Kampala where refugee and national students share classrooms, capturing variation in school type. Each of the three schools is different from the others along key criteria (cost, type, demographics), factors I anticipated might change educational approaches, although all serve families with relatively limited means.

# Data collection and analysis

I received consent from HTs to conduct data collection at their schools, which included ethnographic observations in classrooms and across school-wide events, as well as interviews with educators. I conducted classroom observations for Grades 1–5 in a variety of content areas, including social studies, English, and mathematics (see Tables 1 and 2), allowing me to understand the ways that students and teachers navigate language across subjects and grades. Each classroom observation lasted approximately $4 0 { - } 1 2 0 \mathrm { m i n } _ { \cdot }$ , and involved observing teachers conducting lessons with anywhere from 54 to 111 children at a time. I recorded my observations by hand using an observation tool I co-developed for a previous study about language and refugee education (Piper et al. 2020), focusing on languages used in class by teachers and students, for written assignments, and in the materials on the wall. Following observations, I wrote and then coded detailed memos to understand themes, patterns, and divergences across the observational data.

Table 1. Classroom observations and interviews with educators.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>School</td><td>Pseudonym</td><td>Role</td><td>Grade/subject taught3</td><td>Classroom observation</td><td>Interview</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">School leaders</td></tr><tr><td>CCPS</td><td>Isabel</td><td>Head teacher</td><td>P7 English</td><td></td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>CCPS</td><td>Celeste</td><td>Deputy head teacher.</td><td>P5 English</td><td></td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>MMPS</td><td>Thomas</td><td>Head teacher</td><td></td><td></td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>St. N</td><td>Melanie</td><td>Head teacher</td><td></td><td></td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>St. N</td><td>Caleb</td><td>Deputy head teacher.</td><td>P3 English</td><td>x</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">Classroom teachers</td></tr><tr><td>School</td><td>Pseudonym</td><td>Grade observed4</td><td>Subject observed</td><td>Classroom observation</td><td>Interview</td></tr><tr><td>CCPS</td><td>Ruth</td><td>P2</td><td>Math</td><td>xx</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Cultural gala dance practice</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>CCPS</td><td>Deborah</td><td>P1</td><td>English</td><td>x x</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>CCPS</td><td>Eva</td><td>P3</td><td>Math</td><td></td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>CCPS</td><td>Edward</td><td>P4</td><td>Math</td><td>x</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>CCPS CCPS</td><td>Claudine</td><td>P5</td><td>Social studies</td><td>x x</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Lilah</td><td>P3 P4</td><td>English CRE5</td><td></td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>CCPS</td><td></td><td>P2</td><td>Luganda</td><td>x</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>MMPS</td><td>Peggy</td><td>P4</td><td>English</td><td>x</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>MMPS</td><td>Tina</td><td></td><td>Math</td><td>x</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>MMPS</td><td>Matthew</td><td>P5</td><td> Literacy</td><td>x</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>MMPS</td><td>Jacques Lucy</td><td>P2/P3 P2</td><td>Social studies</td><td>xx</td><td>x x</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>English</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>MMPS</td><td>Dana</td><td>P2</td><td>Luganda</td><td>x</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>MMPS</td><td>Therese</td><td>P2/P3</td><td>English</td><td>Xx</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>MMPS</td><td>Robert</td><td>P4</td><td>Math</td><td>x</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>St. N6</td><td>Amani</td><td>P4</td><td>Social studies</td><td>x</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>St. N</td><td>Cameron</td><td>P5</td><td>Math</td><td>x</td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>St. N</td><td>Katie</td><td>P1</td><td>English, Literacy</td><td></td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>St. N</td><td>Junia</td><td>P3</td><td>English</td><td>x</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>St. N</td><td>Catherine</td><td>P2</td><td>English, literacy</td><td></td><td>x</td></tr><tr><td>St. N</td><td>Aremu</td><td>P4</td><td>English grammar</td><td>x</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>St. N</td><td>Hollie</td><td>P3</td><td>Science</td><td>x</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Classroom observations: 23</td><td>Interviews: 21</td></tr></table></body></html>

In addition to classroom observations, I also conducted observations throughout the school day, observing both routine daily events, like the time between and after classes, as well as singular moments, including ‘Visiting Day’, when families pick up children’s report cards, and end-of-term parties. Given my previous experience as a CT and teacher educator in East Africa, I was often asked to teach lessons when teachers were pulled out of their classes. These moments of teaching were instructive – and humbling given the large class sizes – and I wrote reflective, analytic memos about them as well. Taken together with my classroom and school-wide observations, these reflective memos inform my understanding of the complex work of teachers in multilingual classrooms in Kampala.

In addition to collecting extensive observational data, I also interviewed 21 HTs (school principals) and classrooms teachers across the three schools, all of whom I also observed teaching and conducting their daily work with students and parents. All educators chose to conduct the interviews in English, and my questions focused on their paths to teaching, any training they had received, pedagogical strategies, experiences teaching in multilingual schools attended by refugee and Ugandan students, and their aspirations for their own futures and those of their students.

Table 2. Three schools attended by refugee and national Ugandan students, and their spectrum of approaches to multilingualism.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">St. Nepomuscene Primary School</td><td colspan="2">Mary Magdalene Primary School City Center Primary School</td></tr><tr><td>Head teacher</td><td>Melanie (grew up speaking Runyoro and Luganda&#x27;)</td><td>Thomas (grew up speaking Luganda)</td><td>Isabel (grew up speaking Luganda) Claudine (grew up speaking</td></tr><tr><td>Classroom teachers</td><td>Amani (grew up speaking Lusoga)</td><td>Jacques (grew up speaking Runyooro, but has shifted to English and Luganda with his family in Kampala) Therese (grew up speaking</td><td>Samia, Swahili, Luganda and English because of family&#x27;s internal migration around Uganda)</td></tr><tr><td>School characteristics</td><td>Private (low cost) Most students were born in Uganda, including the many Somali students that attend this school. Refugee students are from Sudan.</td><td>Luganda) Government-run, with Catholic church affiliation. Most students were born in Uganda. Refugee students are primarily from South Sudan, with a handful from Rwanda, Burundi, and Ethiopia.</td><td>Public (government-run) Nearly half of all students are refugees/immigrants from Sudan, South Sudan, and many other surrounding countries.</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation Language ideology Creating and enforcing implementation spaces</td><td>Language as problem Monoglossic . English-only on school premises . No Luganda offered as a subject . Punitive approach to language enforcement</td><td>Language as resource Monoglossic/heteroglossic . English-only in class : Other languages permitted outside of class : Luganda taught as a subject . Discourage punitive approach to language enforcement</td><td>Language as resource and right Heteroglossic . Officially English-only in class, with subtle flexibility . Other languages encouraged outside of class . Luganda taught as a subject . Discourage punitive approach to language</td></tr></table></body></html>

Following

Deterding and Waters (2021), I conducted iterative, thematic coding of all interviews and observations. I first identified index codes through the initial development of synthetic, analytic memos identifying key themes in each interview and across them (Seidman 2019). Thereafter, I applied index codes to interview transcripts using Atlas.ti, building on the themes identified through initial memos (e.g. Pedagogy; Teacher Training). Then, I developed more refined, analytic codes, applying grounded, emic codes that emerge from the interviews and memos (e.g. Participation – Political) and etic codes that draw on my review of the literature to understand patterns and divergences across the data (e.g. Agency – Teachers) (Charmaz 2006; Rubin and Rubin 2012; Weiss 1994). I also undertook member checks with educators at the three schools during data collection and analysis, and shared my ongoing analysis with research mentors for analytical revision and refinement.

# Findings

The Ugandan educators in this study – Head Teachers and classroom teachers who work in multilingual urban schools attended by both refugee and national students – struggle with how best to balance English-only classroom expectations with students’ multilingualism. This balance is particularly challenging as none of the teachers or school leaders has received any training to prepare them to navigate the linguistically diverse classes they teach. Given this, they all draw on their extensive personal experiences navigating multilingualism at home and school, as well as ideological beliefs about migration and multilingualism.

In the absence of training, HTs determine how their schools will respond to English-only expectations for instruction, responses that fall along a spectrum (see Table 2). At the first school, St. Nepomuscene Primary School (SNPS), the HT orients toward monolingualism, focusing solely on English. At the second, MMPS, the HT acknowledges the value of multilingualism. Nonetheless, he and the teachers he oversees remain constrained by policies that orient toward a monolingual focus on English. Finally, at CCPS, the HT strives to embrace a heteroglossic ideology and to find spaces to reflect this appreciation of the value of multilingualism in pedagogy, but struggles to do so successfully. As a result, despite differences in orientations toward national monoglossic policies, the three schools demonstrate remarkably similar approaches to language in class, with CCPS identifying limited opportunities for languages other than English outside of class.

In the section below, I present each of these schools through mini-portraits, beginning with school leadership and then zooming in to educators in each school to reveal tensions between multilingual school realities and monolingual educational approaches in refugee education.

# School 1: St. Nepomuscene Primary School: monoglossic ideology, monoglossic implementation space

Those who enter the metal gates of SNPS in Kampala are greeted first by a white sign that reads SPEAK ENGLISH in red, capital letters. English is a central pillar of the school’s approach to education. Caleb, a CT and the assistant principal, is much like this bright red sign, strictly enforcing the school’s English-only policy. He is slim and stern, and often wields a heavy wooden plank at the front of the class, discouraging the children from misbehaving. He is the main disciplinarian at SNPS, ensuring that the English-only policy is strictly followed. In interviews, numerous refugee children and alum from this school casually described themselves or their classmates being caned by Caleb for speaking languages other than English, a practice some abhorred and others felt helped them improve their English language skills.

At SNPS, beliefs about refugees are intertwined with beliefs about language. HT Melanie sees her students as having deficits that she must redress through English. Highlighting their limitations, she explained, ‘for us, our children are too local, they know their parents’ languages only, so when they’re here, we just teach them English’. She sees little value in maintaining children’s diverse linguistic resources, which she instead sees as a problem to be resolved. She highlights that the gatekeepers of power and opportunity that the children will navigate, including exams, public services, and passport offices all require English. Hers is a straightforward approach for refugee and Ugandan students who have found their way to her school: ‘since English is the national language of our nation, they have to know it’. In response, Melanie requires that all classes are taught in English and that children use English whenever they are on campus, including during breaks and in the evenings in the dormitories. Luganda is not offered as a subject, although national policy allows schools to include it in the early grades if they choose. For Melanie, including Luganda would distract from her focus on English, which she feels is necessary for children’s success.

The monoglossic ideology that Melanie espouses in her leadership of SNPS shapes the implementation spaces that teachers have available to them. In this school, teachers strive to meet their students’ needs without using familiar languages in the classroom. Fourth-grade teacher Amani, for example, uses simple English to try to encourage newcomers: he wants to give them the courage to succeed at school, just as some of his teachers did for him when he felt isolated and unsupported as a child, growing up in a rural Ugandan community without many resources. Having had no training in other strategies and knowing that he dare not use languages other than English in class, Amani tries to support students by simplifying the way he communicates in English.

Amani resorts to this strategy, as he knows he must stay within the monoglossic implementation spaces available to him – and yet he doesn’t agree with the school’s strict embrace of the national English-only policy. For Amani, if he were leading the school, he would build in time for ‘local language lessons’, scheduling Luganda lessons among the classes. He would also permit children to use their diverse languages outside of class, and would structure opportunities for children to come together by shared language during free time, as he feels this would facilitate their understanding of their own histories and cultures – and would help them learn English. Amani stresses that children’s ability to learn an unfamiliar language like English is tied to their knowledge of their own language(s), explaining,

Denying them to use local language is like silencing the English also to be expressed because [if] they can’t think in their local language, don’t expect them to communicate in English, they move hand in hand … There is no way you can teach the English and someone understands without knowing local language, it can’t happen.

Not wanting to contradict the school’s monoglossic policy, however, and for the children to get in trouble, Amani encourages students to translate questions from English to their own languages silently, ‘in your heart or in your mind’, emphasizing for them that English ‘is just the medium of instruction but the answering and all the reasoning must originate from what you know … after reading the question, take it back home’. Amani attempts to communicate to children the value of their multilingualism, even if the implementation spaces open to him require a focus on English.

In rare cases, Amani uses languages other than English in class if he is teaching a topic that is unfamiliar and it’s clear that students need this extra support, forcing open the monoglossic implementation space toward a heteroglossic space that builds on students’ language skills. For example, some of Amani’s Somali students were having trouble understanding what a tortoise was – a topic required by the national curriculum – so Amani called one student from each language group to the front, showed them a picture on his phone, and allowed them to translate for their peers. Using this strategy, in which ‘you grant them to know in their local language’, Amani perceived that the students became active and energetic – an experience that also energized him as a teacher. He explained excitedly that once children could use languages in which they felt confident, suddenly they could engage with the lesson. But Amani reiterated that such a pedagogical practice is forbidden at the school, and that he does not want children to get in trouble and be caned or shamed for using languages other than English, so in general he sticks to English.

# School 2: Mary Magdalene Primary School: heteroglossic ideology, monoglossic implementation space

HT Thomas calls the refugee children who attend MMPS ‘diplomats’ rather than refugees. Having been born and raised in Uganda, but having moved between places, his stance toward the students is rooted in his own understanding of what it means to feel like an outsider. He knows the value of multilingualism in his own life, as it has allowed him to travel widely and find a way to communicate in many settings. He feels that a shared language is central to feeling welcome, allowing one to enter a new place and become ‘part and parcel of the community’, a central goal he has for the refugee students at MMPS.

Given these community-oriented goals, Thomas feels the school’s linguistic diversity requires that he choose one language as a language of broader communication, demonstrating a tension between a heteroglossic ideology that understands multilingualism as a resource (Ruíz 1984) and a monoglossic orientation at school. Thomas describes the school as ‘a cosmopolitan community. You find that we have a mixture of languages here’ and because of this mixture, ‘we insist that the children should speak English, which is universal, and which everybody should be able to speak’.

Despite this decision, however, HT Thomas does not orient toward English without second thoughts. Instead, he acknowledges that ideally, learning should begin in languages children know best and that forbidding these languages can be damaging. And since his goal is ensuring broad communication rather than simply that children speak English, Thomas explains that the unifying language could just as easily be Kiswahili, used widely in East Africa. But listing nine languages spoken by refugee and Ugandan students at MMPS, Thomas falls back on his own mother tongue to describe his feeling about trying to teach all of these languages: it would create a ‘katogo2 … we would have anarchy in the school’.

Finding a middle ground and integrating languages that facilitate both academic opportunities and relationship-building, Thomas requires English as a LOI for all content areas through all 7 years of primary school in line with national policy. He has also opted to offer Luganda as a subject to children in Grades 1–3 before phasing it out in Grade 4. Thomas does not ask his teachers to strictly enforce English-only policies at the school: ‘we are a little bit liberal’ in the enforcement of the English-only requirement, he explained. If teachers find children speaking languages other than English at school ‘you just rebuke them, you just remind them … you don’t go beyond that’, not forcing children to wear dirty sacks, for example, as was the policy at Thomas’ school when he was a student. When they are playing, in general children ‘are free to use the language that is convenient for them’. Often, Thomas says, at school children use Luganda, as newcomer refugee students from South Sudan in particular need to learn the language to build friendships and a sense of belonging in their new community. That said, physical punishment of children inside and outside of class does take place at MMPS, oriented largely around disruptive behaviors rather than an explicit focus on language – but very likely connected to the challenge of understanding and engaging when classes are taught in languages children don’t understand.

The teachers at MMPS in general express a warmth toward refugee students and an openness to their diverse linguistic repertoires. Nonetheless, like Thomas, given the requirements of the curriculum and high-stakes tests that the children will take in Grade 7, teachers feel they have little space to implement pedagogies that include or amplify students’ multilingual repertoires.

Jacques, for example, a second and third-grade teacher, knows that, according to the Ugandan Constitution, all children have a right to their own languages. This is a right he teaches in his Social Studies class – in English. In his teaching, Jacques instructs in English even as he also tries to mitigate the challenges children face with the language by integrating explicit English language instruction, an approach he has developed on his own without formal training. In a lesson about the Effects of HIV/AIDS, for example, he wove together required social studies content and explicit language teaching, reviewing key concepts while also trying to support the English language development of his students.

Jacques asked the class of 111 children:

The first word is?

‘Effects!’ they responded in unison. Jacques began to separate sounds and syllables of the word and as he did this, the children sounded out the letters. Then, to the whole class, he asked,

Is that word new to you?

Nooo!

What does it mean? Any other word or a group of words … ‘Results!’ called a child sitting near Jacques at the front, a response Jacques then repeated, loudly, for the rest of the students to hear.

As the lesson progressed, Jacques circulated, having asked about the word isolated, a feeling that someone with HIV can have, he explained, and then amplifying a definition offered by a child sitting at the center of the room: ‘they’re not friendly, they’re not your friends’, he said to the class, repeating the child’s response.

In these moments, Jacques accommodates a language policy that requires English, striving to acknowledge and support children’s emerging English language development as he teaches content. By breaking down words into their parts and defining them, and encouraging children to practice finding synonyms and listening to each other, Jacques provides a linguistic scaffold. Nonetheless, given the curricular and policy pressures he faces, he cannot permit them to use the many languages they share with each other and speak at home, and that might facilitate their learning. Instead, at the end of the lesson, it’s not clear who of the 111 children has understood the content – Jacques has only their notebooks as evidence, with a final activity written in English.

Therese, who teaches third-grade English in the same classroom as Jacques, epitomized the tensions faced by many of the educators: Therese wants refugee children’s English abilities to serve them if they are able to return to their countries of origin. But she also explained that Ugandan children whose families move to Kampala lose the ability to speak their family languages, and she doesn’t want that to befall the refugee children, too. If Therese were running a school with unlimited resources, she explained, she would teach children’s many languages. In the face of real-world constraints, though, Therese embraces the current school policy: teach in English, offer Luganda as a subject, and encourage children to use other languages at home.

# City Center Primary School: heteroglossic ideology, heteroglossic implementation space?

HT Isabel’s leadership of CCPS, a public day school where nearly $5 0 \%$ of the students are refugees, is guided by her empathic regard for her students. In her work, Isabel centers her pupils’ histories, rights, and needs, seeing these as assets and resources. She explained:

These children come from different backgrounds, but they have parents who instil them to their cultures. A child feels proud of his or her own language, and I think he has a right to it.

For Isabel, language and culture are intimately entwined with children’s futures; even as Isabel adheres officially to the monoglossic English-only policy, nonetheless, subtly and in interstitial spaces between classes and after school, she insists that the children must have access to their many languages.

To achieve this, Head Teacher Isabel requires English in classrooms and, like HT Thomas at MMPS, also offers Luganda classes in Grades 1–3. But she remains flexible with her teachers and students, explaining

we would not intensify it [the use of languages other than English in class] … But maybe if we are close [near to each other] and I am telling you [in a language other than English], I don’t see any problem.

For Isabel, she doesn’t feel she can openly embrace multilingualism at school but she encourages her teachers to do so subtly, in quiet moments when they are explaining content to their students. While some of the teachers Isabel oversees believe that the national English-only policy should be strictly enforced, others find ways to draw on students’ multilingualism in class.

Claudine is one of these teachers. Understanding the relationship between language, learning, and wellbeing, Claudine – a fifth-grade social studies teacher – contends with her students’ multilingualism by making space for languages other than English in class, a practice she feels is implicitly accepted at school, even if not openly sanctioned. Claudine reflected on the frustration the children experience in their new school and language, explaining of her refugee students,

they look wild, but they are not wild. At times it is even this part of language also, there is a way it also affects them, because if someone cannot express him or herself properly,

this can manifest in anger. Given this, Claudine looks out for refugee newcomers who struggle with English, as students who are linguistically isolated ‘tend to be lonely’, needing social support in those early days. She brings together newcomer students at the school across language and nationality – for example, she connected a group of teenage students from Sudan, South Sudan, and Pakistan, who have supported each other with the transition to Kampala. Claudine hopes that these friendships might allow them to feel that ‘we are now a family, we are building up’.

Although official national and school policies require that children and teachers use English in class, Claudine permits direct translation of key ideas during lessons that students struggle to grasp. For example, many of the children who had been raised in cities across the region were confused during a lesson about traditional Ugandan crafts; ignoring official policy but in line with the orientation HT Isabel models, Claudine explained that she welcomed one Somali student to translate the term ‘reed’ for the others, helping to move the lesson along.

Claudine also dismisses the idea that group work is impossible in large classes – for her, classes with as many as 60 children necessitate group work. When they are organized in groups, she explained, students can help one another rather than waiting for her to individually make it to their seat or grade their assignments. Despite having had no training in how to navigate instruction in such linguistically diverse classes, like her colleagues, Claudine finds herself confronting the issue of language daily. She is engaged in constant experimentation: ‘you find that if this one is not working well, then you ask yourself, ‘what else can I do?’ Then you just keep on trying’.

One way HT Isabel seeks to support teachers and students alike across multilingual classrooms is through the development of school-sanctioned, extracurricular opportunities for the use of diverse languages; in this way, she creates heteroglossic implementation spaces outside of class. The cornerstone in this effort is the annual Cultural Gala, which Isabel introduced when she first became principal. During this day, parents and families watch as children share songs, dances, and anthems from outside of Uganda. While just a ‘moment in time’, this event is a public statement about the value of the linguistic and culture diversity that refugee and Ugandan families alike bring to the school.

# Discussion

The majority of refugees today live in cities (Vos and Dempster 2021). In diversifying, multilingual, urban schools attended by refugee and host community students together, educators are creating and enacting approaches to educational inclusion with little training or preparation. Despite these challenges, research remains sparse about the experiences of educators as they navigate multilingualism at school in the context of refugee education.

This study reveals that educators confront significant tensions as they seek to include refugee young people in national education systems. For Head Teacher Melanie, children’s multilingualism is a problem (Ruíz 1984) – and in response, she requires that her teachers focus solely on English for the opportunities she hopes the language will enable. Head Teacher Thomas appreciates the many languages of his students, but like Melanie ultimately encourages teachers and students to focus on English because of the need for this language as a shared means of communication, and because of the requirements of curricula and tests. And Head Teacher Isabel, like Thomas, sees the value of her students’ multilingualism – and she even permits, subtly, teachers and students to draw on these linguistic resources in class. Ultimately, though, she reserves her full-throated embrace of the school’s multilingualism for moments when exams and curricula are not at stake. For educators navigating linguistic inclusion for refugees, there is a spectrum of approaches, but competing demands ultimately orient classrooms toward the dominant language, in this case English.

While Head Teachers demonstrated differing ideological orientations toward language, given national pressures to embrace English, there were few implementation spaces available to them and the classroom teachers they oversee where they might animate these differences through pedagogy (Flores and Schissel 2014; Hornberger 2005). Instead, within these constraints, educators find themselves turning to language enforcement and to spaces outside of class to venture heteroglossic approaches. While St. Nepomuscene Primary School (led by Head Teacher Melanie) chooses not to offer Luganda; to require English at all times at school, including in the dormitory; and to take a punitive approach to non-English languages, educators at the two other schools attempt different approaches. There, educators make efforts toward what Thomas calls a more ‘liberal’ approach, including Luganda as a subject; permitting and even encouraging students to draw on their linguistic repertoires outside of class; and working toward enforcement strategies that do not rely on physical and emotional abuse, even if this is not always achieved. Head Teacher Isabel’s Cultural Gala is an open gesture of support for her students’ multilingualism – even as it takes place outside the bounds of classroom instruction.

What we see in these examples are the very small spaces of agency that Head Teachers are able to locate in contexts with strict policy structures related to language but little support or training (Bouchard and Glasgow 2018). In Kampala’s schools where refugees and host community children attend school together, Head Teachers do act as street-level bureaucrats (Lipsky 2010), drawing on their beliefs about multilingualism and about refugees to make decisions about language-in-education. In this setting, however, the system-wide weaknesses that educators must navigate alongside policies of refugee educational inclusion do not only push decision-making down to Head Teachers; they make Head Teachers the central agents in school-wide approaches to multilingualism and limit the agency of classroom teachers who are expected to conform to their approaches. In refugee education, then, when uncertainty and flux define the educational space, school leadership is absolutely central to the kinds of opportunities and educational experiences that refugee children are able to access.

This article also echoes the challenge identified elsewhere of normalizing and affirming multilingualism when language ideologies orient toward a dominant language, in this case English. But it also reveals opportunities to merge an appreciation of the needs of newcomers with an understanding of the value of multilingualism. While this tension between monolingual expectations orienting toward English and multilingual classrooms is not easy to navigate, educators across the three schools did find opportunities for more open engagement with children’s multilingualism given their role in implementing policies of refugee educational inclusion. In contexts with considerable flux and little to no training, both Head Teachers and classroom teachers found themselves able to make some decisions about linguistic approaches at school. As policies of refugee educational inclusion evolve and become more yet more pressing, they must incorporate approaches to language that are additive in nature (Bartlett and García 2011; Hult and Hornberger 2016), embracing children’s full linguistic repertoires as they work to build futures across places and in contexts of uncertainty.

# Notes

1. All research participant and school names are pseudonyms.   
2. Katogo is a word for mixture, used in Luganda, which HT Thomas grew up speaking.   
3. All class administrators are licensed and able to teach a subject/grade at the schools they lead, although they did so infrequently over the period of my data collection.   
4. One challenge that all three schools faced was frequent teacher absenteeism, often because of attending a training during the school day, family illness, and weather constraints. Given this, many teachers filled in for each other across subjects and grades, a practice I record in my classroom observation notes when relevant.   
5. $\mathsf { C R E = }$ Christian Religious Education.   
6. St. Nepomuscene’s school schedule was much more fluid than the schedules at the other two schools. As a result, teachers were frequently absent because of training and other obligations, the school day was often interrupted for prayers at the local Catholic church, and test practice dominated the last weeks of the school year. Because of this, it was more difficult to complete both interviews and classroom observations with all teachers at this school than it was at the other two schools.   
7. Runyoro is spoken in western Uganda; Luganda is spoken in central Uganda; Lusoga is spoken in eastern Uganda; Samia is spoken at the border of Uganda and Kenya; Swahili is spoken throughout East Africa, but Claudine’s father worked in Kenya, which is how she learned this language.   
8. This school was run by the Catholic church during British colonial rule; it is now government-run but receives support from the Catholic church.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

# Funding

This work was supported by National Academy of Education/Spencer Foundation, The International Research Foundation (TIRF) for English Language Education, Sinclair Kennedy Traveling Fellowship at Harvard University, and Weath erhead Center for International Affairs, Harvard University.

# Notes on contributor

Celia Reddick is an Assistant Professor of Education and International Development at Florida State University. There, she leads a research program focusing on education in contexts of conflict and displacement. She holds an M.Sci. in TESOL from Lehman College, an M.Ed. in International Education Policy from the Harvard Graduate School of Education and a Ph.D. in Education from Harvard University.

# ORCID

Celia Reddick $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9303-0529

# References

Altinyelken, H. K., S. Moorcroft, and H. van Der Draai. 2014. “The Dilemmas and Complexities of Implementing Language-in-Education Policies: Perspectives from Urban and Rural Contexts in Uganda.” International Journal of Educational Development 36: 90–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2013.11.001.   
Bakhtin, M. M., and M. Holquist. 1981. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. Vol. 1. Austin: University of Texas Press.   
Bartlett, L., and O. García. 2011. Additive Schooling in Subtractive Times: Bilingual Education and Dominican Immigrant Youth in the Heights. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.   
Betts, A., I. Chaara, N. Omata, and O. Sterck. 2019. “Refugee Economies in Uganda: What Difference Does the SelfReliance Model Make?” Oxford, UK. https://www.rsc.ox.ac.uk/publications/refugee-economies-in-uganda-whatdifference-does-the-self-reliance-model-make.   
Bouchard, J., and G. P. Glasgow. 2018. Agency in Language Policy and Planning: Critical Inquiries. Edited by J. Bouchard and G. P. Glasgow. New York, London: Routledge.   
Brown, K. 2010. “Teachers as Language-Policy Actors: Contending with the Erasure of Lesser-Used Languages in Schools.” Anthropology & Education Quarterly 41 (3): 298–314. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1492.2010.01089.x.   
Bush, T. 2018. “Preparation and Induction for School Principals: Global Perspectives.” Management in Education 32 (2): 66–71. https://doi.org/10.1177/0892020618761805.   
Canagarajah, A. S. 2017. The Routledge Handbook of Migration and Language. New York, NY: Taylor and Francis.   
Carvalho, S., and A. K. Haybano. 2023. “‘Refugee Education Is Our Responsibility’: How Governance Shapes the Politics of Bridging the Humanitarian—Development Divide.” Journal of Refugee Studies 36 (4): 604–628. https://doi.org/10. 1093/jrs/fead001.   
Chapman, D. W., L. Burton, and J. Werner. 2010. “Universal Secondary Education in Uganda: The Head Teachers’ Dilemma.” International Journal of Educational Development 30 (1): 77–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2009. 08.002.   
Charmaz, K. 2006. Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide through Qualitative Analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.   
De La Cruz Albizu, P. J. 2020. “Exploring New York City Elementary School Principals’ Language Ideologies.” Language and Education 34 (6): 503–519. https://doi.org/10.1080/09500782.2020.1772817.   
De Soete, A., and S. Slembrouck. 2023. “The EMI Content Lecturer as a Street-Level Bureaucrat: Discretionary Actions and Coping Mechanisms in Micro-Level Language Policy-as-Produced.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 1–20. ahead-of-print. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2023.2229801.   
Deterding, N. M., and M. C. Waters. 2021. “Flexible Coding of In-depth Interviews: A Twenty-First-Century Approach.” Sociological Methods & Research 50 (2): 708–739. https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124118799377.   
Dryden-Peterson, S., E. Adelman, M. J. Bellino, and V. Chopra. 2019. “The Purposes of Refugee Education: Policy and Practice of Including Refugees in National Education Systems.” Sociology of Education 92 (4): 346–366. https://doi. org/10.1177/0038040719863054.   
Eberhard, D. M., G. F. Simons, and C. D. Fennig. 2021. “Ethnologue: Languages of the World.” 24th ed. http://www. ethnologue.com.   
Flores, N., and J. L. Schissel. 2014. “Dynamic Bilingualism as the Norm: Envisioning a Heteroglossic Approach to Standards-Based Reform.” TESOL Quarterly 48 (3): 454–479. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.182.   
Hornberger, N. H. 2005. “Opening and Filling Up Implementational and Ideological Spaces in Heritage Language Education.” The Modern Language Journal 89 (4): 605–609.   
Hornberger, N. H., and D. C. Johnson. 2007. “Slicing the Onion Ethnographically: Layers and Spaces in Multilingual Language Education Policy and Practice.” TESOL Quarterly 41 (3): 509–532. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1545-7249. 2007.tb00083.x.   
Hovil, L. 2016. Refugees, Conflict and the Search for Belonging. Cham, NY: Springer International Publisher.   
Hult, F. M., and N. H. Hornberger. 2016. “Revisiting Orientations in Language Planning: Problem, Right, and Resource as an Analytical Heuristic.” The Bilingual Review 33 (3): 30.   
International Refugee Rights Initiative. 2018a. ““My Children Should Stand Strong to Make Sure We Get Our Land Back”: Host Community Perspectives of Uganda’s Lamwo Refugee Settlement.” http://refugee-rights.org/wp-content/ uploads/2017/09/Causes-of-exile-Burundi-2017.pdf.   
International Refugee Rights Initiative. 2018b. “Uganda’s Refugee Policies: The History, the Politics, the Way Forward.” https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/IRRI-Uganda-policy-paper-October-2018-Paper.pdf.   
Janík, M., and M.-A. Goldberger. 2024. “Homogenization through Inclusion: Exploring Language Regimes at Four Multilingual Schools in the Czech Republic.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 27 (3): 285–300. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2023.2192336.   
Johnson, D. C. 2010. “Implementational and Ideological Spaces in Bilingual Education Language Policy.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 13 (1): 61–79. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050902780706.   
Lipsky, M. 2010. Street-Level Bureaucracy: Dilemmas of the Individual in Public Services. 30th anniversary expanded ed. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.   
Mendenhall, M., S. G. Russell, and E. Buckner. 2017. “Urban Refugee Education: Guidelines and Practical Strategies for Strengthening Support to Improve Educational Quality for All.” https://www.tc.columbia.edu/media/centers-amplabs/refugee-education-research-and-projects/2.-Programmatic-Guidance-Report.pdf.   
Menken, K., and O. García. 2010. Negotiating Language Practices in Schools: Educators as Policymakers. London: Taylor & Francis Group.   
Ministry of Education and Sports. 2018. “The Early Childhood Care and Education Policy.” Kampala, Uganda. http://www. education.go.ug/utsep/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/4.-Reviewed-Draft-Early-Child-Care-Education-PolicyApproved-by-ME-WG-Dec-2018.pdf.   
NCDC. 2020. “Thematic/Lower Primary Curriculum.” https://www.ncdc.go.ug/content/thematic-lower-primarycurriculum.   
Nero, S. J. 2014. “De Facto Language Education Policy through Teachers’ Attitudes and Practices: A Critical Ethnographic Study in Three Jamaican Schools.” Language Policy 13 (3): 221–242. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10993-013-9311-x.   
O’Regan, J. P. 2021. Global English and Political Economy. London: Routledge.   
Piper, B., S. Dryden-Peterson, V. Chopra, C. Reddick, and A. Oyanga. 2020. “Are Refugee Children Learning? Early Grade Literacy in a Refugee Camp in Kenya.” Journal on Education in Emergencies 5 (2): 71–107. https://doi.org/10.33682/ f1wr-yk6y.   
Ramanathan, V. 2005. “Rethinking Language Planning and Policy from the Ground Up: Refashioning Institutional Realities and Human Lives.” Current Issues in Language Planning 6 (2): 89–101. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 14664200508668275.   
Reddick, C. 2022. “Language for an Unknowable Future: How Language Ideologies and Pedagogies Shape the Lives of Refugee Children.” Unpublished diss., Harvard University.   
Reddick, C., and V. Chopra. 2021. “Language Considerations in Refugee Education: Languages for Opportunity, Connection, and Roots.” Language and Education 37 (2): 244–261. https://doi.org/10.1080/09500782.2021.1983588.   
Ricento, T. K., and N. H. Hornberger. 1996. “Unpeeling the Onion: Language Planning and Policy and the ELT Professional.” TESOL Quarterly 30 (3): 401–427. https://doi.org/10.2307/3587691.   
Rubin, H. J., and I. Rubin. 2012. Qualitative Interviewing: The Art of Hearing Data. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.   
Ruíz, R. 1984. “Orientations in Language Planning.” NABE: The Journal for the National Association for Bilingual Education 8 (2): 15–34.   
Sah, P. K. 2022. “English Medium Instruction in South Asia’s Multilingual Schools: Unpacking the Dynamics of Ideological Orientations, Policy/Practices, and Democratic Questions.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 25 (2): 742–755. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2020.1718591.   
Seidman, I. 2019. Interviewing as Qualitative Research: A Guide for Researchers in Education and the Social Sciences. 5th ed. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.   
Sibomana, E. 2022. “Transitioning from a Local Language to English as a Medium of Instruction: Rwandan Teachers’ and Classroom-Based Perspectives.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 25 (4): 1259–1274. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2020.1749554.   
UNHCR. 2019. “Refugee Education 2030: A Strategy for Refugee Inclusion.” https://www.unhcr.org/en-us/publications/ education/5d651da88d7/education-2030-strategy-refugee-education.html.   
UNHCR. 2021. “Uganda Refugee Statistics – November 2021.” https://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/details/90179.   
UNHCR. 2022. “Uganda Comprehensive Refugee Response Portal.” https://data.unhcr.org/en/country/uga.   
UNHCR. 2023. “Figures at a Glance.” https://www.unhcr.org/us/about-unhcr/who-we-are/figures-glance.   
Vos, A., and H. Dempster. 2021. “Most Refugees Live in Cities, Not Camps. Our Response Needs to Shift.” https://www. cgdev.org/blog/most-refugees-live-cities-not-camps-our-response-needs-shift.   
Weiss, R. S. 1994. Learning from Strangers: The Art and Method of Qualitative Interview Studies. New York: Maxwell Macmillan International.