# NS/NNS Models in Teaching Speaking

ENISA MEDE, GULCIN COSGUN, AND DERIN ATAY

# Framing the Issue

The ability to speak a language has been regarded as the most important skill, since speech is the backbone of human communication. The widespread use of the English language to maintain international communication as well as to achieve career‐ and academic‐related goals has made the teaching of oral skills the focal point in many EFL classrooms. Nevertheless, speaking poses a real challenge to most language learners since it requires the learners to deal with diverse simultaneous demands such as monitoring, forming accurate sentences, and being fluent and intelligible. Due to these reasons, many learners in EFL settings are not willing to communicate in the target language. This makes the role of teachers crucial in encouraging learners to speak English. The pedagogical decisions that teachers make and the strategies that they use while providing feedback and reacting to learners’ oral performance impact leaner communication. Lack of constructive feedback, strategy training, sufficient wait time, even allocation of turns, comprehensible input, and teacher encouragement may result in learner hesitance to communicate (Lee $\& N g , 2 0 1 0$ ). These pedagogical decisions that NESTs and NNESTs give while teaching oral skills might differ. However, despite the still ongoing sensitive debate regarding whether the NEST or the NNEST is better when it comes to teaching a foreign language, as Levis, Sonsaat, Link, and Barriuso (2016) suggest, both NESTs and NNESTs can be equally good teachers in their own terms since teachers of both groups have their own different characteristics and teaching strategies which may cultivate L2 learners’ communication skills.

This entry explores the question of whether NESTs and NNESTs differ in terms of strategies used while developing learners’ oral competence and how sharing these differences can be turned into opportunities to improve learners’ oral competence.

# Making the Case

Medgyes (1994) asserts that there are differences between the use of speaking techniques by NESTs and NNESTs in their classroom practices. This study highlights that while NESTs focus more on fluency, meaning, language in use, oral skills, and colloquial registers, NNESTs emphasize more accuracy, form, grammar rules, and formal registers. NESTs are also reported to prefer free activities, favor group work, use no or less L1, teach items in context, and tolerate errors. On the contrary, NNESTs prefer controlled activities, favor frontal work, use more L1, teach items in isolation, and correct errors. Yi and Jian (2009) suggest that there are a number of significant differences between the two groups related to classroom interaction as well. They observed that more language input, higher frequency of convergent teacher questions, and feedback are provided by the NNESTs for students while more uptake, genuine and natural communication through procedural questions are reported in NESTs’ classrooms. Although there seems to be no difference in the degree to which both groups provide corrective feedback and summary feedback, the two groups differ in terms of the feedback types. Specifically, while NESTs tended to provide learners with evaluative feedback, followed by summary and then acknowledgement feedback, NNESTs preferred repetitive feedback, followed by acknowledgement and then clarification feedback.

In a study conducted in Turkey, İnan (2012) compared classroom interaction patterns such as turn‐taking, teacher feedback, teacher echo, and different kinds of scaffolding strategies adopted by NESTs and NNESTs. The result of the study revealed that a common interactional pattern in the classrooms is IRE (Initiate, Response, and Evaluation), and asking alternative questions is the most common scaffolding technique used by both groups of teachers. The only difference that was discovered was that NESTs are more tolerant than NNESTs in terms of error correction. In their study with first year Thai university students Zhang and Chatupote (2014) compared NESTs’ and NNESTs’ corrective feedback on students’ errors, feedback types that they use, and students’ uptake. The results revealed that NESTs and NNESTs seemed to share some similar understandings of students’ mistakes, correction strategies, and expectations of students’ reactions, but they also discovered that non‐native English‐speaking teachers provided overwhelmingly more feedback and tended to use more recasts than native teachers.

Mede, Cosgun, and Atay (2017) conducted a study in order to explore and compare the speaking techniques that NESTs and NNESTs in English preparatory programs at universities around Turkey employ. Data gathered from an open‐ ended questionnaire revealed that although both groups highlighted the importance of discussions and debates to develop students’ speaking skills, the NESTs preferred collaborative tasks more while the NNESTs focused more on teacher– student interaction in English speaking classes. The two groups also differed in the way they provided feedback for students’ performance. NESTs reported that they judge how well the learners met the requirements of a communicative task that they might be required to carry out in a real‐world encounter, while the NNESTs base their judgment more on students’ underlying language ability to perform the task. In other words, NESTs focus on meaning while NNESTs focus on accuracy while giving feedback.

NESTs and NNESTs also show differences related to the challenges they experience while developing learners’ communication skills. Despite the advantage they have in providing a linguistic model for foreign language, NESTs may not have the necessary insights into lesson planning and implementation since they lack the experience of learning English as a foreign language. It might be difficult for them to anticipate learner difficulties and set achievable goals for their learners. Since NNESTs themselves have gone through a similar language learning process, they might serve as good learner models. They can teach language learning strategies more effectively than NESTs. However, NNESTs may feel insecure about teaching speaking skills simply because they are not native speakers. These issues were also stated by learners in a study with 30 secondary students in 3 different schools in Hong Kong conducted by Ma (2012). Data gathered through semi‐structured group interviews revealed that the perceived advantages of having NNESTs include their proficiency in students’ L1, their knowledge of students’ learning difficulties, the ease students experience in understanding their teaching, and in communication whereas the perceived advantages of NESTs are their good English proficiency and ability to facilitate student learning.

Despite the differences, it is important to note that NESTs and NNESTs have their own characteristics which may improve L2 learners’ oral competence, as Levis et  al. (2016) suggested. In their study the researchers evaluated students’ speech for accentedness and comprehensibility in order to determine whether there was a difference between classes taught by the NESTs and NNESTs. Results demonstrated that native listeners’ ratings of the students’ comprehensibility were similar in their classes, suggesting that, being a NNEST or NEST is not a critical factor in teachers being effective pronunciation teachers.

# Pedagogical Implications

Research shows that NESTs and NNESTs might have differences, but it is worth noting that both NESTs and NNESTs are indispensable in an ideal EFL environment since they complement each other in their strengths and weaknesses (Medgyes, 1994). Many educational institutions around the world specify their preference for NESTs in their language job advertisements justifying their decision by stating that many students prefer NESTs for certain classroom tasks, primarily speaking tasks despite recent research demonstrating that many students can appreciate the value of NNESTs (Moussu & Llurda, 2008; Öztürk & Atay, 2010). Having reviewed the recent literature, it can be concluded that professional competence such as subject knowledge, preparation, being able to make lessons interesting, fun, and motivating for students were found to be more essential than native language backgrounds by EFL learners. Therefore, given the crucial role of both groups in cultivating the speaking skills of English learners, it is essential for institutions to recognize the assets that each group brings to teaching. The institutions can help NESTs and NNESTs excel at their career and this will inevitably contribute to the success of the students and institution.

First, educational institutions need to provide all the necessary tools for both NESTs and NNESTs so that they can overcome the frustrations or challenges that they experience while developing EFL learners’ communication skills (Moussu & Llurda, 2008). This can be achieved through providing necessary guidance to mediate their mental processes through continuous reflection so that they can transform themselves and their performance. One pedagogical implication is conducting swapshops or idea‐sharing sessions in which opportunities are given to NESTs and NNESTs to exchange their thoughts and effective teaching practices. They may help each other improve their teaching practices using their unique strengths and competence as well as improving their own skills by learning from the differences. By doing so, institutions might also make teachers feel valued and respected for their expertise and contributions and consequently more confident in their own teaching practice.

Another important implication is that institutions may promote peer observations followed up with reflective dialogues. Observing each other’s lessons may help NESTs and NNESTs learn about each other’s strengths, reflect on their own teaching, and incorporate strategies of the other group into their teaching practices. Promoting reflection on awareness of teachers’ strengths and weaknesses inevitably provides opportunities for both NESTs and NNESTs to use their teaching techniques and competencies.

Team‐teaching is another suggestion to better contribute to learners’ speaking skills. NESTs and NNESTs could work together to plan speaking lessons, implement them in the classroom, and reflect on them after classes. NESTs and NNESTs may follow different approaches in this process. One method is planning the lesson together, implementing it in different classes, and coming together after the lesson to reflect on the effectiveness of it. Another method is that they may plan and execute the lesson together and as a follow up, they can again have a reflective discussion. By doing so, teachers will plan and execute more effective lessons since they complement each other. To exemplify, by collaborating with NNESTs, NESTs may be able to understand the process of learning EFL. Therefore, during the planning stage, NNESTs can anticipate more easily the difficulties learners would encounter and design speaking lessons in which more information about language and learning strategies are provided and learners are assisted better. Besides, thanks to team teaching, students will have the opportunity to improve their speaking skills through different tasks used by both groups. They will have more opportunities to listen to and speak in English and experience cultural exposure to different nationalities. In addition to richer exposure, students might be provided with more support, especially during group work, since there will be two teachers in the classroom. They will also benefit from the different types of feedback given by their NESTs and NNESTs.

Conducting collaborative action research is another possibility for helping NESTs and NNESTs improve their teaching competence as well as fostering learners’ speaking skills. Teachers can come together to identify which problems their students have in speaking. Then, they may generate ideas to address the problems and plan what they can do to overcome them. After implementing their actions, they can analyse the data, interpret and reflect on the results. They might also be asked to reflect on a speaking lesson which they think was not successful in achieving expected outcomes. This may create a supportive and collaborative network among NESTs and NNESTs. Participating in collaborative action research and exchanging ideas while systematically observing, evaluating, and reflecting on their teaching practices promote collegial support between NESTs and NNESTs who have different strengths and weaknesses.

In brief, preferences of NESTs and NNESTs vary in terms of the strategies they adopt while teaching spoken skills. A review of the literature indicates that the in‐class practices of NESTs and NNESTs differ considerably in terms of their way of dealing with errors, preferred task types, focus while providing feedback, and choice of interaction patterns. However, it is crucial to note that both groups are equally effective in their own ways and complement each other. Therefore, institutions should find ways to foster collaboration between NESTs and NNESTs to help them overcome the frustrations or challenges that they experience while developing EFL learners’ communication skills as well as improve their teaching practices, which will eventually contribute to students’ oral competence.

SEE ALSO: Attitudes of Students Toward NESTs and NNESTs; Challenges Faced by NNESTs; Collaboration and Collaborative Practices; Communication Strategies and Teaching Speaking; Interaction in L2 Classrooms; PD for NEST/NNEST ELT Teachers in the EFL Setting

# References

İnan, B. (2012). A comparison of classroom interaction patterns of native and nonnative EFL teachers. Social and Behavioral Sciences, 46(2012), 2419–23.   
Lee, W., & Ng, S. (2010). Reducing student reticence through teacher interaction strategy. ELT Journal, 64(3), 302–13.   
Levis, J. M., Sonsaat, S., Link, S., & Barriuso, T. A. (2016). Native and nonnative teachers of L2 pronunciation: Effects on learner performance. TESOL Quarterly, 50(4), 894–931.   
Ma, L. (2012). Advantages and disadvantages of native‐ and nonnative‐English speaking teachers: Student perceptions in Hong Kong. TESOL Quarterly, 46(2), 280–305.   
Mede, E., Cosgun, G., & Atay, D. (2017). The use of speaking techniques by native and non‐Native English instructors: A case in Turkey. International Journal of Learning and Teaching, 9(4), 411–17.   
Medgyes, P. (1994). The non‐native teacher. London, England: Macmillan.   
Moussu, L., & Llurda, E. (2008). Non‐native English‐speaking English language teachers: History and research. Language Teaching, 41(3), 315–48.   
Öztürk, Ü., & Atay, D. (2010). Challenges of being a non‐native English teacher. Educational Research, 1(5), 135–9.   
Yi, Z., & Jian, W. (2009). A comparative study of NEST and NNEST classroom interaction in Chinese context. CELEA Journal, 32(2), 92–102.   
Zhang, S., & Chatupote, M. (2014). Feedback used in classrooms with native English and non‐Native English teachers. International Journal of English Language Education, 2(1), 241–58.