# BALEAP News

June and July are busy months for EAP teaching with the delivery of summer pre-sessional courses, this year a mix of distance learning and blended learning with a few students being taught on campus though the majority remain overseas and online. Despite uncertainties about the future, there appeared to be a late surge in student numbers (often a characteristic of summer courses) with corresponding calls to recruit more teachers appearing on the BALEAP JISCM $@$ il discussion list. The list was also active with messages on BALEAP SIG activity with updates and postings about webinars, coffee and reading clubs, and other events from the ‘Academic Listening’, ‘Academic Literacies’, ‘Creative Disciplines’, ‘Doctoral Education’, ‘Social Justice’, ‘Testing, Assessment and Feedback’, and ‘Teacher Education in EAP (TEd in EAP)’ SIGs. Depending on their particular focus, the BALEAP SIGs attract a mix of EAP practitioners, many of them based in the UK but others from all round the world. A recent summer event held by the newly created TEd in EAP SIG on ‘Puzzling about our practice’ proved of interest to a widely dispersed network of practitioners with participation from China, Turkey, Finland, Norway, Taiwan, Argentina, Greece, Kazakhstan, and the UK.

BALEAP's next organisation-wide event will be the Professional Issues Meeting (PIM) on 19 November hosted online by the Uni versity of York, International Pathway College. The theme of the PIM is ‘Ownership in EAP: Integrity, argumentation and authorial voice’. The organisers write that: ‘The idea of constructing arguments and of student writers finding their own voice has long been a central tenet of EAP. However, with increasing dominance of essays mills and sophisticated machine translation tools there is a pressing need to define attribution more generally, and to question how best to facilitate independent student writing in the current digital age. Controversies surrounding the use of proofreading services are ongoing, and freely available translation and checking software raise further questions over the reliability of independent coursework as a means of measuring language proficiency.’ More information about the event, including details of the two plenaries given by Prof. Sheena Gardner and by Mike Groves and Klaus Mundt can be found on the BALEAP website (https://www.baleap.org/event/baleap-pim-ownership-in-eap).

Planning is also underway for a new series of Research Training Events following a survey carried out by BALEAP's Research Officers to identify what aspects of research training would be most valued by the membership. The most popular theme was where and how to publish our work $( 7 8 . 3 \% )$ with exploration of the different theoretical frameworks to employ in research coming second in the survey $( 7 1 . 7 \% )$ . While the series of training events is being developed, the Research Officers are introducing a regular more informal series of ‘EAP Conversations’. The conversation sessions are envisaged as centring on the conversation host's research (in progress or completed), with a particular focus on the theoretical framework used in the project. These will be informal events, taking place online to ensure that they are open to the whole membership and, as the title suggests, discussion based, rather than an op portunity to present work.

BALEAP is also seeking the membership's views on effective ways for the organisation as a charity to use any financial surplus to support membership activity and interests. Initiatives that have been funded in recent years include:

o A new TEAP scholarship   
o The introduction of SIGs   
o A Practitioner Research fund   
o The Collaborative Practice (2019) and Innovative Practice (2020) funds   
o A research project on the impact of Covid-19 on the EAP sector

Consultation with the membership will allow the Executive Committee to plan for further initiatives over the next year.

The summer is also the busiest period of the year for the BALEAP Accreditation Scheme (BAS) and this is particularly the case this year because of an enforced pause in accreditation visits due to the pandemic. BAS has been accrediting courses since 1991, based on standards set out in a code of practice first established in 1989 and the scheme has been regularly reviewed. In the last two years, it has undergone the latest review and a revised set of criteria has been developed and is currently being trialled. It is expected that the new set of criteria will be fully adopted from January 2022.

The BALEAP Creative Disciplines SIG was established in March 2020 following conversations among EAP practitioners wishing to share experiences, expertise, research and resources relating to the learning and teaching of creative disciplines at higher education institutions. We have since been busy setting up a website - https://baleapcreativesig.wordpress.com/ - where we have been very pleased to host regular blog contributions from members and share events information. For our first ‘Creative Juice’ event in November 2020, we heard from six stimulating speakers on themes as diverse as using memes, the materiality of writing, an online fashion glossary, story-telling, images as object analysis and books as a source of creative inspiration. Our second event was a workshop held as part of the BALEAP conference where we shared reflections on research around communicative needs within the transformational process of enquiry in creative disciplines education. We have also enjoyed monthly ‘Speakeasy’ Friday afternoon conversations on all aspects of teaching within creative disciplines. If you would like to keep up with events, read the interesting blogs and our twitter feed or join us, please click on the link above.