Lexical Bundles in Native and Non-native Scientific Writing: Applying a Corpus-based Study to Language Teaching   

<html><body><table><tr><td>D. Salazar</td></tr><tr><td>John Benjamins 2014, 212 pp., 90.00</td></tr><tr><td>ISBN 978 9O 272 O373 1</td></tr></table></body></html>

One of the important findings in language learning studies is that native speakers greatly depend on a pool of prefabricated word chunks while nonnative speakers fall short of such phraseological capabilities (Sinclair 1991). This phenomenon has led to researchers’ interest in the use of lexical bundles in the writing of both native speakers (for example Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan 1999; Hyland 2008) and non-native speakers (for example Granger 1998; Nesselhauf 2005). The book under review is distinct from previous studies in that it focuses on the pedagogical perspective of lexical bundles in scientific writing and aims to develop a pedagogy-oriented list of lexical bundles and provide hands-on suggestions on how to teach the bundles. Thus, it is particularly targeted at language instructors and researchers in the area of English for Academic Purposes. It is also an invaluable reference for postgraduates in the area of applied linguistics and corpus linguistics.

The rationale for the book, as explained in the introductory chapter, relates to the fact that previous studies in the area of bundles offer only brief discussions of the pedagogical implications and they may fail to provide in detail practical advice on how to teach lexical bundles.

The remaining seven chapters of the book are grouped into two parts: Part 1, which explores how lexical bundles are used in native and non-native scientific writing, and Part 2, which focuses mainly on the pedagogical applications. In the first part, the author reviews the literature pertinent to phraseology and lexical bundles studies in terms of their definitions, structures, and functions, and argues that it is of importance to change teachers’ and learners’ attitudes to phraseological studies and introduce phraseological information to classroom and teaching materials, which could only be fulfilled by providing them access to such phraseological data (Chapter 1). The argument serves as a good point of departure for the study, i.e. to develop a pedagogically useful list of lexical bundles and to provide advice on how to use the list in language teaching and material compilation. In order to do precisely that, the author provides currently available resources of phraseology and reviews issues of classroom practice on lexical bundles that may be of value to the readers, such as identifying bundles

and their functions, comparing the use of bundles in different genres, paraphrasing sentences with a given set of bundles, and concordancing practice for bundle learning (p. 38).

Chapter 2 presents the methodology used for the development of the lexical bundles list. The author describes the corpus used in the study, the methods for lexical bundles extraction, and frameworks for categorizations of the lexical bundles. The method used by the author is the ‘keyword and prototype analysis’, to group the lexical bundles into ‘prototypical bundles’ based on the keywords and semantic and structural relationships of the bundles. The prototypical bundles are further separated based on their meanings, functions, and lexico-grammatical preferences, which are taken as the baseline or target bundles to investigate non-native speakers’ writing. The keyword and prototype approach is a novel methodology and it seems a breakthrough in lexical bundles categorization.

Chapters 3 and 4 report the frequency, structures, and functions of the target bundles in the native speakers’ corpus of biomedical research writing, which are then compared with the use of the target bundles in nonnative speakers’ writing. The results show that nonnative speakers’ use of the target bundles is largely similar to that of their native counterparts in terms of frequency, structural, and functional distributions. However, they tend to depend heavily on a limited set of high-frequency bundles, which was explained as ‘collocational teddy bears’ (Nesselhauf op.cit.). Meanwhile, they use much less participant-oriented bundles than the native speakers, since expressions with epistemic, evaluative, and directive meanings have been proving a challenge to non-native speakers (for example Hyland and Milton 1997).

Part 2 is composed of three chapters, two of which focus on the pedagogical applications of the lexical bundles list developed in the study. In Chapter 5, the author summarizes the advantages of the lexical bundles list, such as providing bundles frequencies, explaining the meanings they take on, the functions they perform, the exemplar sentences with the bundles in, etc. Meanwhile, the list solves the problems of structural incompleteness and overlap that other similar lists may have (for example Simpson-Vlach and Ellis 2010; Ackermann and Chen 2013). It is fully accessible to the readers and researchers as a downloadable spreadsheet document (available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1075/scl.65.additional).

Chapter 6 discusses how to use the lexical bundles for teaching purposes. It presents 14 activities based on Nation’s (2001) model of vocabulary acquisition to

facilitate the learning process, i.e. noticing, retrieval, and generation. Besides the activities described in the chapter, the author also refers the readers to exercises proposed in other studies (for example Flowerdew 2013). Chapter 7, the concluding chapter, summarizes the findings and contributions of the study by addressing the research questions. It also discusses the limitations of the study and proposes suggestions for future research.

The book under review explores lexical bundles in native and non-native scientific writing in a clearly structured manner. It makes its contribution to the study of lexical bundles in scientific writing in terms of the development of a teaching-oriented lexical bundles list and in-depth discussions of its pedagogical applications. First, the methods of developing the lexical bundles list are of methodological significance for future research in lexical bundles list compilation. Apart from the use of measures such as frequency and collocation association for lexical bundles extraction as other studies utilize (for example Biber et al. op.cit.; Simpson-Vlach and Ellis op.cit.; Ackermann and Chen 2013), Salazar takes a step forward and employs the keyword and prototype analysis to group the bundles into prototypical bundles. The qualitative analysis of keywords and prototypes is novel in methodology and as a result makes the list distinctive from existing pedagogy-oriented lists such as those compiled in Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (op.cit.) and Ackermann and Chen (op.cit.).

Second, the list of prototypical bundles is particularly pedagogically significant in that it shows its distinguishing features in the information it offers as a result of the keyword and prototype analysis. The most salient point may be that the list provides not only information concerning frequency and structure of the bundles but also resources regarding semantic and functional relationships, contextual examples, and usage notes of the bundles. One successful outcome such abundant resources bring about is that it solves, in the author’s words, the problem of face validity. That is, the format of prototypical bundles uncovers ‘certain semantic and structural relationships among the lexical bundles that were not as obvious when they were presented in a frequency-ordered inventory’ (p. 54). Accordingly, the information the list supplies may make it more teacher- and learner-friendly than other lists of similar kinds in the process of teaching and learning practices.

Third, the book stands out from other phraseological studies for its particular attention to the pedagogical applications of lexical bundles. Salazar reviews and discusses how to use lexical bundles in teaching

throughout the book, while other researchers usually briefly discuss pedagogical implications at the end of their studies. The author even devotes one chapter (Chapter 6) to discussing various activities concerning the use of lexical bundles in different contexts. The activities described in the chapter may be the most comprehensive and in-depth discussions on how to use the phraseological resources in teaching practices and material development. Although the activities are targeted at EAP classrooms and teaching materials, they may also serve well as references in other contexts, such as lower-level language classes or materials development.

None the less, the book is not without limitations. First, the corpus size of the non-native speakers’ articles is rather small. The corpus consists of only 43 articles with 120,718 words written by the non-native writers. The small size of the non-native speakers’ corpus may somewhat limit the validity of the results. For example, the results show that the non-native writers excessively rely on a small number of highfrequency bundles (for example ‘in agreement with’, ‘carried out with’, and ‘on the other hand’) while they rarely use bundles that the native writers more frequently use (for example ‘is consistent with’, ‘was performed using’, and ‘in contrast to’) (pp. 113–15). Different results may occur if a larger corpus of nonnative speakers’ writing was used.

Another possible limitation related to the non-native speakers’ corpus is that the data used are restricted to writing by native Spanish speakers only. Taken together with the small size of the corpus, the findings of the use of the bundles by the non-native writers may demonstrate only the features of a small group of Spanish writers, which may not be extended to non-native writers with other language backgrounds. In addition, since the corpus data of native speakers are all articles in biomedicine, based on which the list of bundles is developed, the list should be used with caution, especially for EAP learners in the areas of arts and humanities. I would add one suggestion for future research in the development of lexical bundles lists before I end the review. Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (op.cit.) used a composite metric, named ‘teaching worth’, to index the teachability of the formulas in choosing the academic formulas. The teaching worth is a combination of both the measures of mutual information and frequency of the formulas, which is a valuable index for choosing pedagogy-oriented formula or lexical bundles. Future research may take teaching worth into consideration before the keyword and prototype analysis proposed in the study is performed.

Finally, the book places excessive emphasis on the dichotomy between native and non-native speakers’ writing. While the general idea of aiming to enlarge the use of lexical bundles in non-expert writers is laudable, it is not easy to differentiate native speakers’ writing from that of non-native speakers when English has become an international language. It is particularly true when the norm of academic writing for both native and non-native speaker writers should be published articles in international English journals (Bolton, Nelson, and Hung 2002) while a large part of the published articles are actually written by non-native speakers. Against this backdrop, it seems more pedagogically significant, in future research, to compare the use of lexical bundles by non-expert writers with that of expert writers, i.e. usage in those published articles, regardless of an author’s first language.

Despite all the critical comments, I would recommend this book to researchers in English for Academic Purposes who would further explore lexical bundles in academic English, as well as instructors of scientific writing and non-native/non-expert authors who would promote the use of lexical bundles in their students’ or their own writing.

# Note

1 The work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (grant number 2013RW021).

# References

Ackermann, K. and Y-H. Chen. 2013. ‘Developing   
the academic collocation list (ACL): a corpus-driven and expert-judged approach’. Journal of English for Academic Purposes 12/4: 235–47.   
Biber, D., S. Johansson, G. Leech, S. Conrad, and   
E. Finegan. 1999. Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English. Harlow: Pearson Education.   
Bolton, K., G. Nelson, and J. Hung. 2002. ‘A corpusbased study of connectors in student writing: research from the International Corpus of English in Hong Kong (ICE-HK)’. International Journal of Corpus   
Linguistics 7/2: 165–82.   
Flowerdew, L. 2013. ‘Corpus-based research and   
pedagogy in EAP: from lexis to genre’. Language   
Teaching 26/1: 1–18.   
Granger, S. 1998. ‘Prefabricated patterns in advanced EFL writing: collocations and formulae’ in A. P. Cowie (ed.). Phraseology: Theory, Analysis, and Applications. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Hyland, K. 2008. ‘As can be seen: lexical bundles and disciplinary variation’. English for Specific Purposes 27/1: 4–21. Hyland, K. and J. Milton. 1997. ‘Qualification and certainty in L1 and L2 students’ writing’. Journal of Second Language Writing 6/2: 183–205.   
Nation, I. S. P. 2001. Learning Vocabulary in Another Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Nesselhauf, N. 2005. Collocations in a Learner   
Corpus. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.   
Simpson-Vlach, R. and N. C. Ellis. 2010. ‘An academic formulas list: new methods in phraseology research’. Applied Linguistics 31/4: 487–512.   
Sinclair, J. 1991. Corpus, Concordance, Collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

# The reviewer1

Yaoyu Wei is a Lecturer of English in the School of Foreign Languages at Huazhong Agricultural University, China, where she teaches on the BA Business English Programme. Her research interests are second language acquisition and corpus linguistics. She has published articles and book reviews in The RELC Journal and other journals in China.

Email: wuhan4ever@126.com doi:10.1093/elt/ccv045