# ‘I/we focus ony’: A cross-cultural analysis of self-mentions in business management research articles \$

Pilar Mur Duen˜ as

Departamento Filologı´a Inglesa y Alemana, Facultad Filosofı´a y Letras, Universidad de Zaragoza, C/Pedro Cerbuna 12, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain

# Abstract

Although research articles (RAs) have been frequently characterised by impersonal language, which entails the use of nominalisations and passive sentences, self-mentions, that is, explicit references to the RA author(s), are found to intermingle with those impersonal constructions. These self-references can be considered a rhetorical strategy that scholars may use to present themselves as authorial selves, promoting themselves and outlining their specific, novel contribution to their discipline. This paper aims at quantitatively and qualitatively analysing the use and distribution of self-mentions—realised by self-references (i.e., first person singular and plural pronouns and possessive adjectives) and self-citations—in a comparable corpus of business management RAs written in English for an international readership by scholars based at North American universities and RAs written in Spanish for a national readership by scholars based at Spanish universities. The former were found to make greater use of self-mentions than the latter. Significant differences were also found in the distribution of self-mentions and the rhetorical functions both groups of scholars most commonly perform through the use of exclusive we. The different results in both subcorpora suggest that the use of self-mentions in RAs is not only conditioned by the discipline to which the authors belong but also by the specific cultural context in which RAs are produced and distributed.

$©$ 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Self-mentions; Metadiscourse; Research article; Intercultural rhetoric; Business management; English for academic purposes

# 1. Introduction

When scholars step into the discourse by means of self-mentions (i.e., first person singular and plural pronouns and possessive adjectives and self-citations), they manifest an authorial voice through which they can portray themselves as expert, reliable members of a given disciplinary community. Establishing a positive self-representation can be seen as a key aspect of persuasion in written academic discourse. Scholars need to construct a credible ethos in order to convince their readers of the validity, novelty and appropriateness of the research being reported. One way of attaining that credibility can be the use of self-mentions since, as stated by Hyland (2004a, p. 106), they ‘‘are related to the desire to present oneself as an informed and reliable colleague, strongly identifying oneself with a particular view to gain credit for one’s individual perspective or research decisions.’’

Self-representation in writing has been exhaustively analysed by Ivanicˇ (1998). She posits that the writer’s identity is constructed depending on the ‘‘possibilities of self-hood’’ available to the writer in particular contexts. In her view, three different selves interact in the construction of the writer’s identity in written discourse: (1) ‘‘the autobiographical self,’’ which refers to ‘‘the identity which people bring with them to any act of writing’’ (p. 24), as related to their life-history and own personal experiences and personalities; (2) ‘‘the discoursal self,’’ which refers to ‘‘the impression [y] which they consciously or unconsciously convey of themselves in a particular written text’’ (p. 25), as they may or may not accommodate to the readers’ expectations; and (3) ‘‘the self as author,’’ which refers to the extent to which writers present or view themselves as authors (p. 26), that is, their explicit portrayal of an original authorial persona, which may be affected by their autobiographical selves and which may modulate their discoursal self. The focus of this paper will be on this third aspect of identity, which has attracted the most attention in the study of self-representation in written academic discourse and which will be here explored cross-culturally.

In order to come up with a successful piece of research, it is not only necessary to demonstrate solidarity with the particular disciplinary community members (i.e., present oneself as a humble servant and show respect for the readers’ expectations, values and beliefs) but also to show relevance and innovation (Myers, 1989) and, by means of selfmentions, one’s novel ideas and originality can be made clear (Hyland, 2001). Therefore, by stepping forward as authorial selves, scholars can promote themselves and their research. Hence, making explicit reference to their role as authors ‘‘would seem to have significant consequences for how one’s message is received’’ (Hyland, 2001, p. 211), and, thereby, for the kind of relationship built up between writer(s) and readers and for how the former comes to be viewed by the latter. It should be outlined that explicit references to the scholars’ role as authors can be made not only through the use of first person pronouns and possessive adjectives but also through the inclusion of self-citations. Self-mentions (which encompass all of these features) have been found to be acceptable to different degrees in RAs from various fields (Hyland, 2001, 2002). Especially dependent on the discipline seem to be the different realisations of self-mentions.

Whereas ‘‘self-mention constitutes a central pragmatic feature of academic discourse since it contributes not only to the writer’s construction of a text, but also of a rhetorical self’’ (Hyland, 2002, p. 1110), the extent to which academics can appropriately intrude into their discourse is a controversial issue; opinions on the use of (im)personal style vary among scholars, even among those belonging to related disciplines (see Chang & Swales, 1999; Hyland, 2001). Owing to this variety of opinions, the use of self-mentions can be problematic for native speakers of English and much more so for non-native speakers, who may be used to negotiating meaning and interactive relationships differently in another big culture (Atkinson, 2004), that is, in another socio-cultural context.

More specifically, the writer’s representation in the text by means of self-mentions has been found to differ in written academic texts according to: (1) genre, for instance, between undergraduate projects and journal articles (Hyland, 2002) and between abstracts and research articles (RAs) (Hyland, 2003); (2) discipline or small culture, for instance, between hard and soft disciplines (Hyland, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2004a, 2005); and (3) certain national or big cultures. It is this intercultural perspective, which will be the focus of the analysis presented here. The use of self-mentions in RAs, especially personal pronouns, has been analysed cross-culturally between English and several European languages. A thorough analysis of self-mentions and authorial voice has been carried out among RAs written in English, Norwegian and French in the fields of economics, linguistics and medicine (Breivega, Dahl, & Fløttum, 2002; Fløttum, 2003; Fløttum, Dahl, & Kinn, 2006) and among linguistics RAs written in English, German, French, Russian and Bulgarian (Vassileva, 1998, 2000). A contrastive analysis on how native Spanish speakers and native English speakers make use of first person pronouns in English RAs has been carried out by Martı´ nez (2005). However, no cross-cultural analyses of personal pronouns have been conducted so far between RAs published in English and RAs published in Spanish.

The aim of this paper is to contrastively analyse the degree of self-representation, as expressed by self-mentions, of Business Management (BM) scholars publishing their RAs internationally in English in the US context and BM scholars publishing their RAs in Spanish in a national context. I intend to explore the frequency of use of self-mentions in the two sub-corpora as well as their distribution of self-mentions across the different sections of the RAs.

In Section 2, a discussion of self-mentions as a category of interpersonal/interactional metadiscourse is included. The comparable corpus analysed and the methodological procedures followed are described in Section 3. Section 4, which is divided into two subsections: self-references and self-citations, presents the results drawn from the analysis of the corpus. Finally in Section 5 some concluding remarks are offered in the light of the results obtained.

# 2. Self-mentions as features of interactional metadiscourse

Metadiscourse has recently been defined as ‘‘the cover term for the self-reflective expressions used to negotiate interactional meanings in a text, assisting the writer (or speaker) to express a viewpoint and engage with readers as members of a particular community’’ (Hyland, 2005, p. 37). As pointed out in Section 1 of this paper, referring to oneself by means of a self-mention may contribute to shaping the writer–reader relationship and it can also help writers indicate what their own contribution and ideas are. In that sense, self-mentions can be considered to play an important role in the construction of the writer’s stance. According to the definition presented above, then, they can be seen as metadiscursive features. They constitute a category of interactional metadiscourse in Hyland’s (2004b, 2005) and Hyland and Tse’s (2004) taxonomies. They also constitute a category of interpersonal metadiscourse in previous taxonomies put forward by Hyland (1999, 2000), then referred to as ‘‘person markers.’’ However, selfmentions or person markers, although briefly discussed in relation to other metadiscourse categories, have not been considered a category of their own in other taxonomies (e.g., Crismore, Markkanen, & Steffensen, 1993; Dafouz Milne, 2003; Vande Kopple, 1985, 2002). Following the most recent and influential metadiscourse taxonomies, self-mentions or person markers are considered an independent category of interactional metadiscourse, as they greatly contribute to the relationship established between writer(s) and readers.

# 3. Corpus and methodology

The corpus consists of 24 RAs written in English and in Spanish (140,000 words approximately) in the field of BM. A social science discipline was chosen for the crosscultural analysis to be undertaken as a result of the general assumption that academic knowledge in social sciences (and to a larger extent in the humanities) is possibly more prone to be culturally bound than in pure sciences. As stated by Duszak (1997, p. 11), ‘‘in these research fields, communication styles respond most strongly to language- and culture-bound discoursal preferences and constraints,’’ whereas in academic writing within pure sciences a greater deal of homogenisation seems to prevail as a result of a largely shared multinational set of conventions (Duszak, 1997). Further, some research had already been conducted on interactional features in RAs in social sciences, and more specifically in BM as well as in other related disciplines, such as Marketing and Economics, which would allow for the comparison of results.

The RAs selected for the corpus were taken from 4 different journals published during the years 2003 and 2004 in each of the two different big cultures1 : Academy of Management Journal (AMJ), Strategic Management Journal (SMJ), Journal of Management (JM), and Journal of International Management (JIM) in the US and Alta Direccio´n (AD), Direccio´n y Organizacio´n de Empresas (DyO), Revista Europea de Direccio´n y Economı´a de la Empresa (REDyEE) and Investigaciones Europeas de Direccio´n y Economı´a de la Empresa (IE) in Spain.2 Three RAs were selected from each of the journals. Only empirical RAs were chosen. The authors of the RAs selected for the corpus were based at a North American university in the case of the sub-corpus in English and at a Spanish university in the case of the sub-corpus in Spanish. Therefore, although not necessarily native speakers of one or the other language, the authors of the RAs in English are scholars acquainted with the

American academic world and the authors of the RAs in Spanish are acquainted with the norms and conventions prevailing in the Spanish academic context. The similarity constraints put forward by Connor and Moreno (2005, p. 159) to achieve tertia comparationis were controlled when compiling the comparable corpus to ensure that it ‘‘provide[s] baseline data for meaningful cultural comparisons’’ (p. 156). That is, texts belonging to the same genre, the same academic discipline, with a similar communicative purpose, and similar participants involved were chosen so that they could lend themselves to intercultural analysis.

The RAs were downloaded from the Internet or scanned and subsequently converted into text format and carefully checked. The software Wordsmith Tools (4.0) was used to carry out the quantitative analysis of self-mentioning features in the corpus, which was supplemented with qualitative analysis. The count included only those tokens which expressed the scholars’ authorial voice, leaving aside engaging tokens (i.e., making joint reference to authors and scholars or generally to all disciplinary members) and selfreferences used in citations or in the reproduction of questionnaires. Further, as will be pointed out, a careful analysis of the cotext and context of the instances was carried out to classify tokens of exclusive we according to their sub-rhetorical functions as well as for the interpretation of the differences in the frequency and distribution of self-mentions in the two sub-corpora.

# 4. Self-mentions in the corpus

Self-mentions are realised by means of self-references (i.e., singular and plural first person pronouns and possessive adjectives referring to the authors) and self-citations. The total number of self-mentions included in each RA composing the corpus is presented in Table 1.

In the corpus, all RAs in English and most RAs in Spanish present a significant use of self-mentions, frequently stepping into the discourse. The raw and normalised frequency of use per 1000 words3 show that American-based BM scholars addressing the international community are more prone to present themselves as authorial selves than their Spanish colleagues addressing a national community in Spanish. In previous studies of self-mentions in business RAs in English, it has also been found that the inclusion of first person pronouns is a rather common practice. For instance, Harwood (2005b), who included only single-authored RAs in his physics, computing science, economics and BM corpus, and thus did not find any tokens of exclusive we in his BM sub-corpus, found the greatest number of $I$ tokens in the BM sub-corpus. His finding together with the results presented here highlight the importance of presenting oneself as author in international RAs in English in this discipline. Hyland (2001) also reports a high incidence of use of self-mentions in most of the disciplines he analyses, especially in Marketing—a related discipline to BM, which comes second in terms of highest frequency of inclusion of self-mentions.

Table 1 Number of self-mentions in the corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td>American sub-corpus</td><td></td><td>Spanish sub-corpus</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>AMJ1</td><td>70</td><td>AD1</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>AMJ2</td><td>17</td><td>AD2</td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td>AMJ3</td><td>53</td><td>AD3</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td> Jm1</td><td>94</td><td>DyO1</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td> JM2</td><td>33</td><td>DyO2</td><td>63</td></tr><tr><td>JM3</td><td>74</td><td>DyO3</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td>SMJ1</td><td>123</td><td>REDyEE1</td><td>147</td></tr><tr><td>SMJ2</td><td>67</td><td>REDyEE2</td><td>37</td></tr><tr><td>SMJ3</td><td>76</td><td>REDyEE3</td><td>24</td></tr><tr><td>JIM1</td><td>10</td><td>IE1</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td> JIM2</td><td>33</td><td>IE2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>JIM3</td><td>94</td><td>IE3</td><td>21</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>744</td><td>Total</td><td>382</td></tr><tr><td>Per 1000 words</td><td>9.35</td><td>Per 1000 words</td><td>6.60</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Number of single- and multiple-authored RAs in the corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>American sub-corpus</td><td>Spanish sub-corpus</td></tr><tr><td>Single-authored</td><td>1</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Multiple-authored</td><td>11</td><td>8</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.1. Self-references

# 4.1.1. Frequency of use and distribution of first person plural self-references

First person plural self-references encompass instances of first person plural subject pronoun $( w e )$ , object pronoun (us), possessive adjective (our) and possessive pronoun (ours) which refer to the author(s) of the RAs. As subject pronouns are usually left out in Spanish sentences, a computational search for the verb ending \*mos was carried out to obtain all tokens of verbs in the first person plural in the Spanish sub-corpus. So, although in this particular realisation of self-mentions pronouns are compared with verb-endings, the comparison is still valid as they can be considered functionally equivalent. Those instances in which the pronouns or possessive adjectives made reference to both writer(s) and readers or to the discourse community as a whole were excluded, as they are considered to be inclusive engagement markers, thus performing a different function. The context was carefully analysed to include only those instances that refer to the author(s).

Before analysing the use of plural self-references in the corpus, the authorship of the RAs was looked at to see how many of them were individual (single-authored) and how many were collective (multiple-authored), since this was going to be an important feature to bear in mind in the discussion of results (Table 2).

In both the English and Spanish sub-corpora there are more multiple-authored than single-authored RAs. In the following table, which shows the raw counts of exclusive we, our and us as found in the two sub-corpora, single-authored RAs have been marked with an asterisk. No examples of exclusive first person plural possessive pronouns (ours) or its Spanish counterpart were found in the corpus (Table 3).

Table 3 Number of first person plural self-references in the corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">American sub-corpus</td><td></td><td colspan="3">Spanish sub-corpus</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>we</td><td>Us</td><td>our</td><td></td><td>we</td><td>us</td><td>our</td></tr><tr><td>AMJ1</td><td>47</td><td>0</td><td>16</td><td>AD1</td><td>11</td><td>3</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>AMJ2*</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>AD2</td><td>17</td><td>3</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>AMJ3</td><td>35</td><td>0</td><td>18</td><td>AD3</td><td>22</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>JM1</td><td>71</td><td>1</td><td>21</td><td>DyO1*</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>JM2</td><td>26</td><td>0</td><td>7</td><td>DyO2</td><td>48</td><td>9</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>JM3</td><td>47</td><td>1</td><td>26</td><td>DyO3</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>SMJ1</td><td>81</td><td>2</td><td>39</td><td>REDyEE1*</td><td>92</td><td>25</td><td>29</td></tr><tr><td>SMJ2</td><td>33</td><td>2</td><td>32</td><td>REDyEE2*</td><td>23</td><td>3</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>SMJ3</td><td>54</td><td>4</td><td>18</td><td>REDyEE3</td><td>16</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td> JIM1</td><td>9</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>IE1</td><td>4</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td> JIm2</td><td>18</td><td>0</td><td>15</td><td>IE2*</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>JIM3</td><td>41</td><td>5</td><td>30</td><td>IE3</td><td>13</td><td>7</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>462 (66%)</td><td>15 (2.14%)</td><td>223 (31.86%)</td><td>Total</td><td>253 (68.01%)</td><td>58 (15.59%)</td><td>61 (16.40%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

The results in the table indicate that there are differences between the two sub-corpora regarding the realisation of self-mentions in terms of first person plural subject pronoun, object pronoun and possessive adjective. While the percentage of subject pronouns is roughly the same, the percentages of object pronouns and possessive adjectives differ considerably. Many more first person plural object pronouns were found in the Spanish sub-corpus (58 tokens, $1 5 . 5 9 \%$ ) than in the American one (15 tokens, $2 . 1 4 \%$ ). On the other hand, first person plural possessive adjectives were found to be more frequently used by international BM scholars (223 tokens, $3 1 . 8 6 \%$ ) than by Spanish ones (61 tokens, $1 6 . 4 0 \%$ ).4 It is generally believed that Anglo-Saxon speakers use possessive adjectives more frequently than Spanish ones (see Lo´ pez Guix & Wilkinson, 1997; Va´ zquez Ayora, 1977). Hence, this difference in the realisation of plural self-references in BM RAs in both sub-cultures could be at least partially explained in terms of the different language systems. Hyland (2001) also found possessive adjectives to be more common than first person plural object pronouns not only in marketing RAs but also in RAs from other disciplines.

An interesting finding is that tokens of exclusive we, us and our were also found in singleauthored Spanish RAs (REDyEE1, REDyEE2, and to a lesser extent, IE2). Surprisingly, the RA with the highest number of first person plural self-references (REDyEE1) was written by one author. It can be argued that although scholars can indicate what their own contribution is through exclusive we, us or our tokens in single-authored RAs (such as Ex 1 below), these are less obvious markers of authority claiming than I, me or my.

Ex 1: Para contrastar nuestro modelo realizamos una investigacio´ n empı´ rica, apoya´ ndonos en una muestra de compradores de lavadora [y] a los que someteremos a un cuestionario fundamentalmente de actitudes, que [y]. (REDyEE1-I)

[To contrast our model we carried out an empirical investigation for which we used a sample of washing machine purchasers [y] to whom we distributed a questionnaire mainly on attitudes, which [y]

As Hyland (2001, p. 217) states, those cases in which the first person plural pronoun is used in single-authored RAs are examples of ‘‘how writers can simultaneously reduce their personal intrusion and yet emphasise the importance that should be given to their unique procedural choices or views.’’ Thus, Spanish BM single author scholars who use plural self-references seem to avoid personal intrusions in their RAs, but they still emphasise their role as authors.

The total number of plural self-references in the American and Spanish sub-corpora are presented in Table 4 together with their distribution along the four moves of the RA.

Table 4 shows again that, except in the Introduction, Spanish BM scholars use fewer plural self-mention tokens than their international peers in the North American context. Further, there are significant differences between both sub-corpora in the distribution of self-mentions within the RAs. The greatest difference lies in the extent of use of plural selfreferences in the Methods section. It may be inferred from this result that Spanish BM scholars feel more inclined to state their procedures in more impersonal terms, hiding their research or acting role to a greater extent than the authors of the RAs in English. Further, in the American sub-corpus the Discussion section comes second (184 tokens) in regard to the intrusion of the writer in the text by means of plural self-references. In the Spanish subcorpus, however, the Discussion section comes fourth (45 tokens). In this section American-based BM scholars quite commonly use first person plural pronouns and possessive adjectives in order to assess their research in terms of its strengths and limitations. Spanish BM scholars, however, do not tend to judge their research as often and as critically as international BM scholars do in their RAs in English, as will be further discussed below.

# 4.1.2. Functional analysis of exclusive we

To ascertain the specific rhetorical purposes for which international BM scholars in the US and Spanish contexts make explicit their persona, a contrastive analysis of the rhetorical functions of exclusive first person plural subject pronouns in both sub-corpora was carried out. Only this particular realisation of first person plural self-reference was analysed in depth, as it is believed that through the subject pronoun a stronger authorial voice is conveyed than when using the first person plural object pronoun or possessive adjective. Due to the low number of first person singular self-references, no discussion of their rhetorical functions is included here.

Table 4 Frequency and distribution of first person plural self-references in the corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">American sub-corpus</td><td colspan="2">Spanish sub-corpus</td></tr><tr><td>Sub-total</td><td>Per 1000 words</td><td>Sub-total</td><td>Per 1000 words</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>152</td><td>4.35</td><td>142</td><td>6.35</td></tr><tr><td>Methods</td><td>287</td><td>17.34</td><td>131</td><td>10.70</td></tr><tr><td>Results</td><td>77</td><td>9.41</td><td>54</td><td>3.40</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>184</td><td>9.41</td><td>45</td><td>6.41</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>700</td><td>8.80</td><td>372</td><td>6.43</td></tr></table></body></html>

Kuo (1999) proposes six rhetorical functions in his analysis of personal pronouns in scientific journal articles: proposing a theory or approach, stating a goal or purpose, showing results or findings, showing commitment or contribution to research, comparing approaches or viewpoints and expressing a wish or expectation. Tang and John (1999) establish a similar but broader typology that also encompasses inclusive and generic uses of personal pronouns.5 Hyland (2002, 2003) carried out an analysis of the particular rhetorical functions of pronouns—adjusting those previous two typologies of authorial roles—as a part of his cross-disciplinary examination of authority in RAs and in student reports (2002) and in RAs and abstracts (2003). The roles he proposes are: stating a goal/purpose, explaining a procedure, stating results/claims, expressing self-benefits and elaborating an argument.

In the light of these taxonomies, tokens of exclusive first person plural subject pronouns drawn from the computational analysis were closely examined to determine their rhetorical function. In order to classify them in terms of the different purposes for which they were used, the cotext was very much taken into account, following Harwood (2005a), as it is this rather than the pronoun itself which indicates the purposes for which a personal statement was used. Exclusive we tokens in the corpus were found to effect eight different rhetorical functions:

# (1) Explaining a procedure:

(Ex 2) [y] therefore, we used a negative binomial regression model rather than Poisson regression. (AMJ3-D)   
(Ex 3) Para lograr un valor que explique de forma global el estre´ s diario del sujeto procedimos de la siguiente manera: 1. Sumamos las puntuaciones [y]. (AD2- M) [In order to get a value that fully explains the individual’s daily stress we proceeded as follows: 1. We added the punctuation [y].]

(2) Making a claim or statement, elaborating an argument:

(Ex 4) We suggest that highly conscientious employees are more likely to be affected by emotional exhaustion than employees low in conscientiousness. (JM2-I) (Ex 5) Por todo ello, afirmamos que la escala de tres indicadores alcanza una evaluacio´ n positiva. (REDyEE1-I)   
[For all this we state that the scale of three indicators reaches a positive evaluation.]

There are a number of claims or statements in the corpus that are expressed by means of an exclusive pronoun; the force of that statement clearly depends on the type of (modal) verb that is used.

(3) Stating a hypothesis, an expectation or a wish:

(Ex 6) On the basis of this logic, we predict: Hypothesis 1. [y]. (AMJ3-I)

(Ex 7) En este sentido, optamos por plantear la hipo´ tesis segunda con el siguiente enunciado: (DyO2-I) [In this sense, we opt/opted to establish the second hypothesis as follows: ]

(4) Stating a goal or purpose:

(Ex 8) In this paper, we therefore attempt to address this important topic that has been largely neglected by past studies. We focus exclusively on a large sample of firms that can be clearly regarded as late entrants. (SMJ2-I) (Ex 9) Con esta investigacio´ n hemos pretendido poner de manifiesto la importancia de asignar una marca comercial a los productos, [y]. (REDyEE3-D) [With this research we have tried to highlight the importance of assigning a commercial brand to products, [y].]

The goal(s) or purpose(s) of the research is commonly found in the Introduction of the BM RAs in both English and Spanish, and is in some cases restated in the Discussion, possibly to show that it has been accomplished. Quite frequently authors do this in personal terms with a self-promotional purpose, as found by Harwood (2005a) also.

# (5) Showing results or findings:

$\left( \operatorname { E x } 1 0 \right)$ We also find no significant differences for the degree of integration based on financial or product quality reputation––firms were no more likely to integrate weak targets than strong. (JM1-D)

$\left( \mathrm { E x } \ 1 1 \right)$ Si bien no hemos podido confirmar la hipo´ tesis $H 4 \ [ \ldots ]$ , sı´ podemos al menos confirmar el efecto indirecto que ejerce el grado de intensidad sobre las asociaciones de la marca.

[Although we have been unable to confirm hypothesis $\mathrm { H } 4 \ [ \ldots ]$ , we can at least confirm the indirect effect of the degree of intensity on brand associations.]

(6) Assessing the limitations of their research:

(Ex 12) for the most part, we were unable to include any financial information on non-public targets, which limited our ability to construct these measures. (JM2-D) (Ex 13) De igual forma, otra limitacio´ n del trabajo la encontramos en la obtencio´ n de conclusiones provenientes del estudio como parte de un estudio de mayor rango que ha contemplado la presencia de otros esfuerzos de marketing que sin lugar a dudas afectan al resultado del valor de marca, y que en este trabajo no han sido considerados [y]. (REDyEE1-D)   
[Likewise, we find another limitation in the conclusions to be drawn from this study, as it is part of a wider project which has taken into account the presence of other marketing efforts which undoubtedly affect the result of brand value but which have not been considered for this research.]

(7) Assessing the strengths of their research:

$\left( \mathrm { E x \ 1 4 } \right)$ Thus the theoretical model we report displays much greater fit than the alternative efficiency models. (SMJ1-R)

Some BM scholars include an assessment—either positive or negative or both—of their own research, especially in the Discussion section of their RAs. By pointing to the possible limitations or even flaws of their research, BM scholars anticipate the possible readers’ critiques and, accordingly, they can contribute to saving their face (Brown & Levinson, 1987; Myers, 1989). Further, by indicating the strengths of their research, they highlight their main contribution(s), portraying their research as valid and themselves as valuable members of the disciplinary community.

# (8) Outlining the steps followed in the RA:

(Ex 15) In the next section, we develop arguments and hypotheses to propose that institutionally legitimate and observable governance characteristics serve as secondary sources of information (i.e., signals) and screening filters. (SMJ1-I) (Ex 16) Para ello, este artı´ culo se estructura de la siguiente forma. En primer lugar, [y] Posteriormente, y a partir del estudio de los distintos trabajos empı´ ricos realizados sobre este tema, identificaremos los factores o determinantes fundamentales que tienen un impacto significativo en la decisio´ n de externalizar el SI. Finalmente, concluiremos con una descripcio´ n de las principales carencias y limitaciones metodolo´ gicas que presentan estos estudios y ofreceremos una serie de sugerencias y posibles lı´ neas futuras de investigacio´ n. (AD3-I) [In order to do so, this article is structured as follows. Firstly [y] Next, from the empirical research published on this topic, we will identify the main factors or primary determiners which have a significant impact on the decision to externalise the IS. Finally, we will conclude with a description of the main methodological limitations that these previous studies present and we will offer suggestions and possible future lines of research.]

In some cases BM scholars make use of exclusive first person plural pronouns when outlining the development of their RA in the Introduction (usually towards the end of this section), as in Ex 15. Sometimes writers also recapitulate the steps followed in the presentation of their RA in the Discussion section and again exclusive we tokens are often included for that purpose. In addition, at certain points BM scholars use this exclusive pronoun to state what comes next or establish links with previous parts in the RA, as in $\operatorname { E x } 1 6$ .

The results of the contrastive analysis of the rhetorical functions of exclusive first person plural subject pronouns in the corpus are summarised in Table 5.

Exclusive subject we items are used in the corpus mainly to explain a procedure or to elaborate an argument. These two rhetorical sub-functions amount to $7 0 . 6 3 \%$ of the total count in the RAs in English and to $7 1 . 5 4 \%$ of the total count in the Spanish multipleauthored RAs. However, whereas BM scholars writing for an international readership in English in the North American context most frequently use first person plural subject pronouns to explain their methodology, Spanish BM scholars mostly use it to make arguments or statements.

The results for the BM RAs in English are in line with those of Hyland (2002) for Marketing RAs. Using exclusive we to explain a procedure is in fact the most common function in the RAs of most disciplines analysed by Hyland and very certainly of his marketing sub-corpus. Further, if those tokens of exclusive we making a claim and those showing results are fused together, as Hyland does, they would also come second in importance in the present analysis, just as in Hyland’s results for marketing RAs. Further, the first person plural subject pronoun has also been used significantly to state the researchers’ goals and purposes both in the present BM RAs and in Hyland’s Marketing RAs.6

Table 5 Summary of rhetorical sub-functions of exclusive we in multiple-authored RAs   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">American sub-corpus</td><td colspan="2">Spanish sub-corpus</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>(%)</td><td>Total</td><td>(%)</td></tr><tr><td>Explaining a procedure</td><td>250</td><td>54.00</td><td>41</td><td>29.93</td></tr><tr><td>Making a claim/elaborating an argument</td><td>77</td><td>16.63</td><td>57</td><td>41.61</td></tr><tr><td>Stating hypotheses.</td><td>41</td><td>8.86</td><td>4</td><td>2.92</td></tr><tr><td>Stating a goal/purpose</td><td>33</td><td>7.13</td><td>15</td><td>10.95</td></tr><tr><td>Showing results/findings</td><td>29</td><td>6.26</td><td>7</td><td>5.11</td></tr><tr><td>Presenting limitations</td><td>13</td><td>2.81</td><td>2</td><td>1.46</td></tr><tr><td>Presenting strengths</td><td>10</td><td>2.16</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Outlining the RAa</td><td>9</td><td>1.94</td><td>13</td><td>9.49</td></tr></table></body></html>

a There is one more token of exclusive we in the English sub-corpus, which does not fit in any of these rhetorical functions; it is used for acknowledging purposes. Thus, the total number of exclusive we tokens is 462.

Another frequent rhetorical function of exclusive we in the English sub-corpus (not reported in previous taxonomies) is ‘‘stating hypotheses,’’ which may be considered a particular feature in the communication of disciplinary knowledge in BM RAs, at least in those written in English and published in an international US context. These BM RAs seem to revolve around hypotheses, which are formulated in the Introduction, commonly by means of self-references; they are sometimes re-stated in the Results and Discussion sections also in personal terms to assess their findings in terms of (non-) support for those hypotheses. Finally, some examples have been found in the sub-corpus in English in which exclusive we is used to emphasise the strengths of the research, usually in terms of the benefits of the authors’ research for the discipline.

(Ex 17) We offer three strengths. First, [y]. Second, we replicated previous findings of an emotional exhaustion-CSR performance relationship (Singh et al., 1994 and Von Emster & Harrison, 1998), extending the literature [y]. (JM2-D) (Ex 18) Our study extends Robinson and 0’Leary-Kelly’s (1998) work on antisocial behaviour by examining [y].We also account for the role of individual differences in explaining aggressive behaviour. (AMJ1-D)

Hyland (2002, p. 1100) reports the use of self-mentions to express self-benefits in students’ reports, that is, to express personal statements which ‘‘add a reflective dimension to the learning experience’’; such use of the subject personal pronoun is not found in the professional RA genre. However, it could be argued that the use of exclusive we to explicitly present strengths (as well as limitations) from a personal point of view may add a reflective dimension into the research experience and the value obtained from it for the disciplinary community; it could thus be considered to fulfil a similar function to the statements of self-benefit in students’ reports stated above. The different number of tokens of exclusive we used to assess strengths and limitations of the research in the BM RAs in English and in Spanish suggests that such a reflection on the benefits is a less common convention among members of a local disciplinary BM community than among members of the international BM community.

# 4.1.3. Frequency of use of first person singular self-references

No examples of first person object pronoun (me), first person possessive adjective (my) or possessive pronoun (mine) or their Spanish counterparts have been found in the corpus. Although there are 4 single-authored Spanish RAs in the corpus (DyO1, DyO3, REDyEE1, REDyEE2), no examples of the first person singular subject pronoun have been found in the Spanish sub-corpus. In the sub-corpus in English, however, the only single-authored RA (AMJ2) featured 17 tokens of $\bar { I . ^ { 7 } }$ Harwood (2005b) finds a high number of $I$ tokens in all BM RAs in English in his corpus. From his findings and the results reported here it can be suggested that international BM scholars writing singleauthored RAs in English seem to be more likely to use singular personal references than Spanish BM ones writing single-authored RAs in Spanish.

The scarce use of first person singular self-references can be partly explained by the fact that most RAs within this discipline are written by two or more scholars. Also, its use may imply a stronger face-threatening act (FTA) (Brown & Levinson, 1987; Myers, 1989) than first person plural pronouns. Thus, it can be more difficult for single authoring scholars to display an image of themselves that appropriately combines solidarity with the members of their disciplinary community and a necessary ‘‘authoritative professional persona’’ (Hyland, 2001, p. 209), which may have led Spanish BM scholars to use plural (instead of singular) self-references, even when they were the single authors of their RAs. Different cultural traditions and conventions may also be behind the rhetorical choice (not) to use first person singular self-references.

Vassileva (1998, 2000) found we and $I$ forms to be frequently used in combination in the same RA in the five languages she investigated (i.e., English, German, French, Russian and Bulgarian); in fact, in the English RAs she found the mixing of the two forms to be more common than the use of one form or the other independently. However, that combination of singular and plural self-references in the same RA has not been found in either of the two sub-corpora. The different results can be explained in terms of the different academic disciplines being analysed (i.e., Linguistics vs. BM).

# 4.2. Self-citation

When scholars cite themselves, they provide evidence for their credentials (Hyland, 2001, p. 214). By citing their own work, scholars indicate that their previous research has already been published and, thus, show proof of their valid membership to that small culture. As such, self-citation ‘‘is perhaps the strongest demonstration a writer can make to establish his or her claim to be seen as an important player in a field and to have work taken seriously’’ (Hyland, 2004a, p. 104). The following are some examples taken from the corpus.

(Ex 19) Compared to large, traditional US firms, stock-based incentives are somewhat greater in Internet firms (cf. Bethel and Liebeskind, 1993; Sanders and Carpenter, 1998; Zajac and Westphal, 1994). (SMJ1-R) (Ex 20) El me´ todo operativo para el ana´ lisis y diagno´ stico del entorno utilizado es el modelo GEPS (Oreja, 1999) que permite identificar [y]. (DyO3-I) [The operational model used for the analysis and diagnosis of the environment is the GEPS model (Oreja, 1999) which allows for the identification of [y].]

Self-citations have been found in four RAs in the American sub-corpus (AMJ1, JM1, SMJ1 and JIM3) and in five RAs in the Spanish sub-corpus (AD1, AD3, DyO3, REDyEE1 and REDyEE2). The number of self-citations per article ranges from 1 (JM1 and SMJ1) to 18 (JIM3) in the sub-corpus in English and from 1 (AD3 and REDyEE1) to 3 (AD1 and DyO3) in the Spanish sub-corpus.

As shown in Table 6, self-citations in the American sub-corpus are more frequently used in the Introduction and Discussion sections. Through authors’ citing of their own work, especially in the Introduction, readers are induced to perceive the writing scholar(s) as competent disciplinary members and to take their research seriously. In the Discussion section self-citations are mainly used to compare the results of the present research with previous analogous studies carried out by one or more scholars authoring the RA. The low number of self-citations in each of the four sections in the RAs in Spanish does not allow for valid comparisons of their distributional use.

All the self-citations found in the corpus are non-integral citations (Swales, 1990), appearing between brackets or in footnotes $\operatorname { E x } 1 9$ and $\operatorname { E x } 2 0$ above). Integral citations (in which the name of the researchers appear as subject, passive agent, possessive noun phrase or adjunct in the discourse) tend to foreground the reported author(s)’s ideas rather than their own persona, drawing the readers’ attention to the reported message rather than to the reported author. Thus, non-integral citations can be considered less selfpromotional than integral self-citations in that more attention is drawn to the reported author. Non-integral self-citations, nevertheless, still indicate that scholars have research published in the field, which contributes to their displaying a credible image of themselves.

On the whole Spanish BM scholars intrude into the discourse through self-citations less frequently than their colleagues at North American institutions, although the number of Spanish scholars that have chosen to cite their own work is higher (5 in the sub-corpus in

Table 6 Frequency and distribution of self-citations in the corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">American sub-corpus</td><td colspan="2">Spanish sub-corpus</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Per 1000 words</td><td>Total</td><td>Per 1000 words</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>18</td><td>0.52</td><td>4</td><td>0.18</td></tr><tr><td>Methods</td><td>3</td><td>0.18</td><td>2</td><td>0.16</td></tr><tr><td>Results</td><td>1</td><td>0.12</td><td>3</td><td>0.19</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>5</td><td>0.26</td><td>1</td><td>0.14</td></tr><tr><td>Total self-citations</td><td>27</td><td>0.34</td><td>10</td><td>0.17</td></tr></table></body></html>

English vs. 4 in the Spanish sub-corpus). As Hyland (2001, 2003) acknowledges, the causes that lead some scholars to cite themselves may be varied and may be related to personality factors, such as self-confidence or seniority. Thus, not only the different cultural contexts in which RAs were published but also individual differences and preferences would be relevant to better understand the use made of self-citations.

# 5. Concluding remarks

The results from the cross-cultural analysis of self-mentions in a comparable corpus of international BM RAs written in English in the North American context and of national BM RAs written in Spanish in Spain have indicated that the American-based scholars present themselves as authorial selves in their RAs more frequently than their Spanish counterparts. The number of plural self-references and self-citations has been found to be higher in the sub-corpus in English than in the Spanish one. First person singular pronouns were found in the only single-authored English RA, and in none of the four single-authored Spanish RAs. Spanish BM scholars seem to avoid the use of first person singular pronouns or possessive adjectives. The higher number of self-references in the American sub-corpus than in the Spanish one could be partly explained bearing in mind the high level of competitiveness among scholars wishing to publish their RAs in an international journal. In order to get positive reviews, writing scholars need to establish their credentials and present themselves as original contributors to the discipline community they belong to, which they can achieve by means of the use of self-mentioning features. This originality and credibility may have to be emphasised more strongly when BM scholars address a wider, international readership than when they write for a smaller, national peer group. In other words, the different audiences the RAs are intended for (international vs. national) may be a conditioning factor in the extent to which authors present themselves as authors by means of self-mentions. The lower number of selfreferences in the Spanish sub-corpus than in the American one could perhaps also be explained in terms of the possible different conventional, traditional views on selfrepresentation pertaining to the different national, big cultures (Atkinson, 2004) in which the RAs are written. Spanish culture seems to favour positive politeness strategies, emphasising in-group and involvement relations (Hickey, 1991, 2005), which may run counter to the use of features which emphasise one’s authorial persona, whereas AngloSaxon cultures seem to generally favour negative politeness strategies, which could prompt the use of self-mentions to a greater extent. Thus, it may be argued that what contributes to establishing a credible ethos and, consequently, what constitutes an appropriate selfrepresentation of the writer in the text may differ across different big or national cultures; these differences, in turn, may influence the frequency of use of self-mentions in written texts in general and in RAs in particular. Previous contrastive research has shown that selfrepresentation in academic papers may differ according to the authors’ cultural background (e.g., Breivega et al., 2002; Fløttum, 2003; Fløttum et al., 2006; Mauranen, 1993; Vassileva, 1998, 2000). The study presented here can be taken to provide further evidence for the influence the big, national culture seems to have on the degree of authorial presence in a power-balanced academic text.

One factor which has not been taken into account in the analysis, but which could nevertheless have an influence on the extent to which BM scholars present themselves as authorial selves in their RAs, is authors’ individual characteristics, especially their status and recognition within the field. Exploring whether the RAs presenting a higher incidence of use of self-mentions are authored by more experienced, recognised members of the disciplinary community than those which present a lower incidence of these markers or more generally whether the ‘‘autobiographical self’’ may exert an influence on the ‘‘self as author’’ in RAs could be of great interest.

Further, gatekeepers may have played a role in the authors’ decisions as to the (non) inclusion of self-mentions in their RAs. One way to go deeper into these issues would be to interview the authors of the RAs, adding a valuable ethnographic approach to the textbased analysis presented here, an approach which has recently been called upon in intercultural rhetorical analyses (Connor, 2004a, b). However, this perspective lay outside the purposes of the present research.

Besides the greater frequency of use of self-mentions in the sub-corpus in English, the contrastive analysis has yielded significant differences in the distribution of self-references throughout the RAs in English and in Spanish and in the particular rhetorical functions they perform. Plural self-references were most prominent in the Methods section in both sub-corpora but their incidence of use was much higher in the sub-corpus in English. In line with this result, the subsequent analysis of the specific rhetorical purposes for which exclusive first person plural subject pronouns were used showed that BM scholars publishing their RAs internationally in English in the US tend to make a much higher use of these markers to explain the procedures followed for their investigation than Spanish scholars publishing their RAs nationally in Spanish. In addition, the latter did not tend to state their hypotheses, limitations or strengths in personal terms to the same extent as their peers publishing internationally did.

The specificity and small size of the corpus analysed here calls for more analyses that confirm the results obtained. Nevertheless, it can be tentatively concluded that the differences in frequency and distribution of use of self-mentions through which an author is portrayed as an authorial self in an RA seem to depend not only on the discipline (i.e., small culture), as has been demonstrated (Harwood, 2005b; Hyland, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2003, 2004a), but also on the specific national culture (i.e., big culture) in which the text is produced and distributed and the interaction between the two, as well as on the particular move of the RA. The appropriate degree of authorial presence in a written academic text seems to be determined by the communicative purpose of the text produced, the different participants in the communicative event and the disciplinary community within which it is written as well as by the cultural context in which it is produced and distributed. Having all these factors in mind might help scholars make suitable decisions in relation to their portrayal as authorial selves in their academic texts in different cultural contexts.

# Acknowledgements

I am indebted to the Spanish Ministry of Education, as this research was undertaken while holding a research scholarship from this institution. I am also indebted to the Indiana Center for Intercultural Communication (ICIC) at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI), as part of the research here presented was carried out while being a visiting scholar at this centre. I would also like to thank Dr. Ulla Connor, Dr. Rosa Lore´ s, Dr. Ruiz-Garrido and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on previous drafts of this article.

# Appendix A. List of research articles in the corpus

# A.1. American sub-corpus

(AMJ1) Glomb, T. M., & Liao, H. (2003). Interpersonal aggression in work groups: social influence, reciprocal, and individual effects. Academy of Management Journal, 46, 486–496.   
(AMJ2) Fynn, F. (2003). How much should I give and how often? The effects of generosity and frequency of favor exchange on social status and productivity. Academy of   
Management Journal, 46, 539–553.   
(AMJ3) Williamson, I. O., & Cable, D. M. (2003). Organisational hiring patterns, interfirm network ties, and interorganizational imitation. Academy of Management Journal, 46, 349–358.   
(JM1) Saxon, T., & Dollinger, M. (2004). Target reputation and appropriability: Picking and deploying resources in acquisitions. Journal of Management, 30, 123–147.   
(JM2) Witt, L. A., Andrews, M. C., & Carlson, D. S. (2003). When conscientiousness isn’t enough: Emotional exhaustion and performance among call center customer service representatives. Journal of Management, 30, 149–160.   
(JM3) Walters, B. A., & Bhuian, S. A. (2003). Complexity absorption and performance: A structural analysis of acute-care hospitals. Journal of Management, 30, 97–121. (SMJ1) Sanders, G. W. M., & Boivie, S. (2004). Sorting things out: Valuation of new firms in uncertain markets. Strategic Management Journal, 25, 167–186.   
(SMJ2) Shamsie, J., Corey P., & Kuperman, J. (2004). Better late than never: A study of late entrants in household electrical equipment. Strategic Management Journal, 25, 69–84.   
(SMJ3) Barr, P. S., & Glynn, M. A. (2004). Cultural variations in strategic issue interpretation: Relating cultural uncertainty avoidance to controllability in discriminating threat and opportunity. Strategic Management Journal, 25, 59–67.   
(JIM1) Elango, B., & Sambharya R. B. (2004). The influence of industry structure on the entry mode choice of overseas entrants in manufacturing industries. Journal of   
International Management, 10, 107–124.   
(JIM2) Richards, M., & De Carolis, D. M. (2003). Joint venture research and development activity: An analysis of the international biotechnology industry. Journal of International Management, 9, 33–49.   
(JIM3) Watson, S., & Weaver, G. R. (2003). How internationalisation affects corporate ethics: formal structures and informal management behavior. Journal of International Management, 9, 75–93.

# A.2. Spanish sub-corpus

(AD1) Cabrera Sua´ rez, M. K., De Saa´ Pe´ rez, P., & Garcı´ a Falco´ n, J. M. (2003). La empresa familiar en Espan˜ a: una aproximacio´ n. Alta Direccio´n, 230, 251–259. (AD2) Manzano Garcı´ a, G., & Ramos Campos, F. (2003). Burnout en instituciones hospitalarias: factores de influencia. Alta Direccio´n, 228, 546–556. (AD3) Dı´ az Martı´ n, M. C., & A´ lvarez Suescun, E. (2003). Factores determinantes de la externalizacio´ n de sistemas de informacio´ n. Alta Direccio´n, 230, 77–88.

(DyO1) Sa´ nchez Garcı´ a, J. (2003). Conocimiento e importancia de los servicios como determinantes de la imagen de una organizacio´ n. Una especial referencia al sector de los azulejos. Direccio´n y Organizacio´n de Empresas, 29, 86–95.   
(DyO2) Marco Lajara, B, Garcı´ a Lillo, F., & Quer Ramo´ n, D. (2003). Factores de e´ xito y fracaso de la cooperacio´ n entre empresas: un enfoque organizativo y estrate´ gico. Direccio´n y Organizacio´n de Empresas, 29, 161–168.   
(DyO3) Oreja Rodrı´ guez J. R., & Yanes Este´ vez, V. (2002). Determinacio´ n de puntos de referencia externos a partir de la incertidumbre percibida en el entorno. Direccio´n y Organizacio´n de Empresas, 28, 32–42.   
(REDyEE1) Villarejo Ramos, A. F. (2003). La importancia del grado de intensidad de la distribucio´ n en la determinacio´ n del valour de marca de un bien duradero. Revista Europea de Direccio´n y Economı´a de la Empresa, 12, 41–58.   
(REDyEE2) Ribeiro Soriano, D. (2003). Rendimiento de las PYMES innovadoras. Revista Europea de Direccio´n y Economı´a de la Empresa, 12(3), 119–132.   
(REDyEE3) Del Rı´ o Lanza, A. B., Va´ zquez Casielles, R., & Iglesias Argu¨ elles, V. (2003). La influencia de la marca en la evaluacio´ n del producto: consideraciones sobre el efecto halo. Revista Europea de Direccio´n y Economı´a de la Empresa, 12, 25–40.   
(IE1) Lo´ pez Pe´ rez, S, Montes Peo´ n, J. M., & Va´ zquez Orda´ s, D. J. (2004). El aprendizaje organizativo como factor de competitividad en la empresa espan˜ ola. Investigaciones Europeas de Direccio´n y Economı´a de la Empresa, 10, 15–29.   
(IE2) Gonza´ lez Torre, P. L. (2004). Influencia del taman˜ o de la empresa en las   
caracterı´ sticas de los envases en Espan˜ a. Investigaciones Europeas de Direccio´n y Economı´a de la Empresa, 10, 133–147.   
(IE3) Barrios del Pino, I., Acosta Molina, M., & Correa Rodrı´ guez, A. (2004). Ana´ lisis de las ventajas competitivas econo´ mico-financieras: una aplicacio´ n empı´ rica a la industria manufacturera espan˜ ola. Investigaciones Europeas de Direccio´n y Economı´a de la Empresa, 10, 93–111.

# References

Atkinson, D. (2004). Contrasting rhetorics/contrasting cultures: Why contrastive rhetoric needs a better conceptualization of culture. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3(4), 277–289.   
Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Reppen, R. (1998). Corpus linguistics: Investigating language structure and use. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Breivega, K. R., Dahl, T., & Fløttum, K. (2002). Traces of self and others in research articles. A comparative pilot study of English, French and Norwegian research articles in medicine, economics and linguistics. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 12(2), 218–239.   
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language use. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Chang, Y., & Swales, J. (1999). Informal elements in English academic writing: Threats or opportunities for advanced non-native speakers. In C. N. Candlin, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: Texts, processes and practices (pp. 145–147). London: Longman.   
Connor, U. (2004a). Introduction. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3(4), 271–276.   
Connor, U. (2004b). Intercultural rhetoric research: Beyond texts. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3(4), 291–304.   
Connor, U., & Moreno, A. (2005). Tertium comparationis: A vital component in contrastive research methodology. In P. Bruthiaux, D. Atkinson, W. E. Egginton, W. Grabe, & V. Ramanathan (Eds.), Directions in applied linguistics: Essays in honor of Robert B. Kaplan (pp. 153–167). Clevendon, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Crismore, A., Markkanen, R., & Steffensen, M. S. (1993). Metadiscourse in persuasive writing: A study of texts written by American and Finnish University students. Written Communication, 10(1), 39–71.   
Dafouz Milne, E. (2003). Metadiscourse revisited: A contrastive study of persuasive writing in professional discourse. Estudios Ingleses de la Universidad Complutense, 11, 29–52.   
Duszak, A. (1997). Cross-cultural academic communication: A discourse community view. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse (pp. 11–39). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Fløttum, K. (2003). Personal English, indefinite French and plural Norwegian scientific authors? Pronominal author manifestation in research articles. Norsk Lingvistisk Tidsskrift, 21, 21–55.   
Fløttum, K., Dahl, T., & Kinn, T. (2006). Academic voices—across languages and disciplines. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Harwood, N. (2005a). ‘Nowhere has anybody attemptedy In this article I aim to do just that’: A corpus-based study of self-promotional $I$ and we in academic writing across four disciplines. Journal of Pragmatics, 37, 1207–1231.   
Harwood, N. (2005b). We do not seem to have a theoryy the theory I present here attempts to fill this gap: Inclusive and exclusive pronouns in academic writing. Applied Linguistics, 26(3), 343–375.   
Hickey, L. (1991). Comparatively polite people in Spain and Britain. ACIS Journal, 4(2), 2–6.   
Hickey, L. (2005). Politeness in Spain: Thanks but no ‘thanks’. In L. Hickey, & M. Stewart (Eds.), Politeness in Europe (pp. 317–330). Clevendon: Multilingual Matters.   
Hyland, K. (1999). Disciplinary discourses: Writer stance in research articles. In C. N. Candlin, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: Texts, processes and practices (pp. 99–121). London: Longman.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. London: Longman.   
Hyland, K. (2001). Humble servants of the discipline? Self-mention in research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 20, 207–226.   
Hyland, K. (2002). Authority and invisibility: Authorial identity in academic writing. Journal of Pragmatics, 34, 1091–1112.   
Hyland, K. (2003). Self-citation and self-reference: Credibility and promotion in academic publication. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 54(3), 251–259.   
Hyland, K. (2004a). A convincing argument: Corpus analysis and academic persuasion. In U. Connor, & T. A. Upton (Eds.), Discourse in the professions: Perspectives from corpus linguistics (pp. 87–112). Amsterdan: John Benjamins.   
Hyland, K. (2004b). Disciplinary interactions: Metadiscourse in L2 postgraduate writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 13, 133–151.   
Hyland, K. (2005). Metadiscourse: Exploring interaction in writing. London: Continuum.   
Hyland, K., & Tse, P. (2004). Metadiscourse in academic writing: A reappraisal. Applied Linguistics, 25(2), 156–177.   
Ivanicˇ , R. (1998). Writing and identity: The discoursal construction of identity in academic writing. Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Kuo, C. H. (1999). The use of personal pronouns: Role relationships in scientific journal articles. English for Specific Purposes, 18, 121–138.   
Lo´ pez Guix, G., & Wilkinson, J. M. (1997). Manual de traduccio´n: Ingle´s-castellano; castellano-ingle´s. Barcelona: Gedisa Editorial.   
Martı´ nez, I. A. (2005). Native and non-native writer’s use of first person pronouns in the different sections of biology research articles in biology. Journal of Second Language Writing, 14(3), 174–190.   
Mauranen, A. (1993). Contrastive ESP rhetoric: Metatext in Finnish-English economic texts. English for Specific Purposes, 12, 3–22.   
Myers, G. (1989). The pragmatics of politeness in scientific articles. Applied Linguistics, 10(1), 1–35.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Tang, R., & John, S. (1999). The ‘I’ in identity: Exploring writer identity in student academic writing through the first person pronoun. English for Specific Purposes, 18(Suppl.), S23–S39.   
Vande Kopple, W. J. (1985). Some exploratory discourse on metadiscourse. College Composition and Communication, 36, 82–93.   
Vande Kopple, W. J. (2002). Metadiscourse, discourse and issues in composition and rhetoric. In E. Barton, & G. Stygall (Eds.), Discourse studies in composition (pp. 91–113). New Jersey: Hampton Press.   
Vassileva, I. (1998). Who am I/Who are we in academic writing? International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 8(2), 163–190.

Vassileva, I. (2000). Who is the author? A contrastive analysis of authorial presence in English, German, French, Russian and Bulgarian academic discourse. Sankt Augustin: Asgard Verlag. Va´ zquez Ayora, G. (1977). Introduccio´n a la traductologı´a. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.

Pilar Mur Duen˜ as is a lecturer at the Department of English and German Philology at the University of Zaragoza in Spain, where she is completing her Ph.D. dissertation on the cross-cultural analysis of metadiscourse in English and Spanish business management research articles.