# Demystifying academic promotional genre:A rhetorical move-step analysis of Teaching Philosophy Statements (TPSs)

Yuanheng (Arthur) Wang

Department of Applied Linguistics, The Pennsylvania State University, 312 Sparks Building, University Park, PA, 16803, USA

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Handling Editor: Dr Hilary Nesi

Keywords:   
Promotional genre   
Teaching philosophy statements   
Genre research   
Rhetorical move-step analysis   
EAP   
Academic writing

As a high-stakes academic promotional genre, teaching philosophy statements (TPSs) are important in academic professionals' career success and professional development in U.S. higher education. However, this genre remains relatively overlooked in current EAP genre research. The study addresses this gap by investigating the rhetorical moves and steps, including their frequency and sequence, in 100 TPSs written by U.S. university faculty members who wrote their TPSs to apply for and eventually won prestigious university teaching awards. It also explores gatekeeper and novice writer's perceptions of the genre analysis results. Findings show that the TPSs are structured by two very common moves: Construct teacher profile and Demonstrate teacher competence in the classroom, as well as three less common moves and multiple very common, common, and less common steps. The TPSs are also cyclically sequenced by the two very common moves. The gatekeeper and novice writer positively recognized the usefulness of the genre analysis results in terms of representing the TPS genre, further highlighted the genre's intertextual operation, and eventually interpreted the results' potential in informing EAP writing pedagogy. Future research and pedagogical directions are discussed.

# 1. Introduction

In U.S. higher education, academics seeking faculty postions, teaching awards, teaching grants/fellowships, teure and promotion, or graduate school programs are typically required to write and submit their teaching philosophy statements (TPss) as part of their application materials (Kaplan, ONeal, Meizish, Carillo, & Kardia, 2008). As "asystematic and critica rationale that focuses on the important components defining effective teaching and learning" (Schonwetter, Sokal, Friesen, & Taylor, 2002, p. 84), TPS primarily serves promotional purposes as a promotional genre (Bhatia, 1993). It allows writers to articulate and explain the \*why, what, and how" of their teaching (Boye, 2012, p. 1) and demonstrate to potential gatekeepers, such as members of various hiring, award review, or admissions committes, why they are competent teachers deserving of employment, awards/recognition, or admission.

However, research that examines the textual features of TPS as a promotional genre (Bhatia, 1993) within English for Academic Purposes (EAP) genre scholarship is very scarce. Researchers and practitioners (e.g., instructional specialists working at university teaching/learning centers) from non-EAP fields such as teacher education and higher education administration have compiled a plethora of practical guidelines to display different components typically een in a TPS, such as conceptualizations or philosophies of teaching/leaning or teacher/lrner, teaching/leaning goals, teacher/learner actvties, and asssments, among others e., Boye, 2012; Chism, 1998; Eierman, 2008; G00dyear & Alchin, 1998; Kaplan, Meizlish, O'Neal, & Wright, 208; Schonwetter et al, 2002, etc.) by drawing from thir understanding of the nature of TPS, experiences in conducting university faculty workshops and evaluating TPSs, and/or surveys and interviews with stakeholders. However, these findings do not explicitly reveal what academic writers do to unpack thee components i act writing and to subsequenly meet nreexpectations. Alo, in contrast with other ccluded geres e.

8, grant proposal reviews or tenure/promotion reports, see wales, 1996), TPS i not strictly occluded because its sample texts can be easily identified and accessed nowadays online. However, TPS could be a semi-occluded genre (Samraj & Monk, 2008) because its significance in the decision-making proces (e.g., job or award applications) may be opaque; it value may not be as high as it should be," with candidates and gatekeepers holding "a wide variety of expectations and understandings of what that statement should include" (Eierman, 2008, p. 336).

Due to allthe above issues, the TPS genre remains overlooked in current EAP writing research. Consequently, for EAP writing instructors, TPS may be dificult to teach because of a lack of concrete, evidence-based pedagogical materials (Boye, 2012; Kearns & Sullivan, 2011). Novice writers may truggle to identify the rhetorical features f such genre and meet audience expectations, lacking exposure to the genre and informed pedagogical support (Boye, 2012; Ellis& Griffin, 2000; Kearns & Sullivan, 2011; Schonwetter et al., 2002). Nonetheless, TPS remains a critical, high-stakes genre that academics must master for their career development and succes in the face of increasing institutional demands and fierce job market competition (Hegarty, 2015).

Therefore, the current study aims to unveil the rhetorical features of 100 TPs written by U.S. universty faculty members who were nominated for and eventually won prestigious university teaching awards. It contributes to the body of EAP promotional genre research by (1) presenting a detailed rhetorical move-step framework of TPS and (2) revealing the extent to which the framework can adequately describe the TPS genre and inform the teaching of the genre as interpreted by stakeholders.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Research on teaching philosophy statement

Previous research on TPS has been conducted across disciplines or disciplinary fields such as teacher education, management/ business education, and higher education administration, among others (e.g., Bakker, Dubensky, Harvey, & McDonough, 2019; Beatty, Leigh, & Lund Dean, 2009; Chism, 1998; Eierman, 2008; Goodyear & Alchin, 1998; Kaplan et al., 2008; Schonwettr et al., 2002; Supasiraprapa & De Costa, 2017). Based on insights from a critical review by Laundon, Cathart, and Gree (2020), it appears that three empirical or practice-based lines of inquiry shape the body of literature on TPS: promotional, pedagogical, and conceptual, with the first line being the most relevant to the purpose of the current study.

The most popular line of inquiry, pursued primarily by teacher educators and universty instructional specialists or administrators, focuses on the promotional function of TPs. It aims to support teachers or teacher candidates professional development (e.g., job application) by offering a variety of guidelines and strategies related to the content, organization, and evaluation of TPS in forms of practitioner reports, reports of workshops, and writing guidelines (Chism, 1998; Eierman, 2008; Goodyear & Allchin, 1998; Kaplan et al., 2008; Schonwetter e l., 2002. Table 1 synthesizes the range of key components commonly een ineffective TPs as proposed by relevant research.

As Table 1 shows, the line of research on the promotional function of TPS has revealed various potentially overlapping components in a typical TPS as the researchers drew from insights from theoretical literature in education (Chism, 1998) and thir experience serving on search commitees and evaluating multiple TPSs (Eierman, 2008), conducting teacher training or faculty development workshops (Chism, 1998; Go0dyear & Allchin, 1998; Kaplan et al., 2008; Schonweter et al., 2002), and gathering and analyzing input from faculty, students, and administrators through surveys, interviews, and conversations (Kaplan et l., 2008; Schonwetter et al., 2002). Specificly, it is believed that TPS writers should focus on presenting (1) their understanding or conceptualization of what teaching/learning and teacher/learner mean (Chism, 1998; Kaplan et al., 2008; Schonwetter et al., 2002), (2) their goals for the students (Chism, 1998; Kaplan et al., 2008; Schonwetter et al., 2002), (3) their execution of teaching philosophies in the classroom (Chism, 1998; Eierman, 2008; Kaplan et al, 2008 Schonwetter et al, 2002), and (4) teaching/leaning outcomes (Goodyear & Allchin, 1998; Kaplan et al., 2008; Schonwetter et a., 202). However, some notable variations also exist: While Goodyear and Alchin (1998) highlighted that TPS writers athe universt leel should (1) describe how they balance teaching, reearch, and service and (2) explain their professional expertise and contrbution to the discipline/institution, Kaplan et al. (2008) emphasized the importance of discussing how teachers create and maintain inclusivity in their teaching. Moreover, Eierman (2008) offered specific guidelines on the discourse structure of TPS by noting the necessity of providing summaries and reference lists at the end of TPSs.

Table 1 Key components in effective TPSs.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Chism (1998)</td><td>Eierman (2008)</td><td>Goodyear and Allchin (1998)</td><td>Kaplan et al. (2008)</td><td>Schonwetter et al. (2002)</td></tr><tr><td>Conceptualization of learning</td><td>Experience in &amp; commitment to teaching</td><td>Integration of university professor responsibilities (teaching, research, &amp; service)</td><td>Goals for student learning</td><td>Definition of teaching</td></tr><tr><td>Conceptualization of teaching</td><td>Philosophy of teaching &amp; learning: : Learning models : Teaching models</td><td>Expertise in intended discipline or institution</td><td>Enactment of goals (teaching methods)</td><td>Definition of learning</td></tr><tr><td>Goals for students</td><td>. Assessment Teaching interests</td><td>Student-teacher relationships</td><td>Assessment of goals (measuring student learning)</td><td>View of the learner</td></tr><tr><td>Implementation of the teaching philosophy</td><td> Summary</td><td>Creation of learning environment</td><td>Creating an inclusive learning environment</td><td>Goals &amp; expectations of student-teacher</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"> Personal growth plan</td><td rowspan="2">References</td><td>Values imparted through teaching</td><td></td><td>relationship Teaching method &amp;</td></tr><tr><td>Teaching methods, strategies, &amp; innovation</td><td></td><td>evaluation</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Descriptive statistics for the Corpus of Teaching Philosophy Statements.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Disciplines</td><td>Texts</td><td>Total Words</td><td>Mean Words</td><td>Word SD</td><td>Word Range</td></tr><tr><td>Business</td><td>12</td><td>8,726</td><td>727</td><td>190</td><td>406-1,012</td></tr><tr><td>Engineering</td><td>15</td><td>10,535</td><td>702</td><td>185</td><td>470-1,220</td></tr><tr><td>Liberal Arts</td><td>33</td><td>20,819</td><td>631</td><td>146</td><td>318-947</td></tr><tr><td> Social Sciences</td><td>19</td><td>13,495</td><td>710</td><td>169</td><td>422-1,208</td></tr><tr><td>Science</td><td>21</td><td>15,716</td><td>748</td><td>176</td><td> 465-1,244</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>100</td><td>69,291</td><td>704</td><td>174</td><td>318-1,244</td></tr></table></body></html>

Despite the usefulness of the indings from the above research in terms of revealing general components and audience expectations of TPS, we may sill have a crippled understanding of the actual witing practie concerning the TPS genre, including how frequently these components appear, how they may be sequenced, and what writers actually do to make them visible in writing. Although components such as Implementatio of teaching philosophy (Chism, 1998) or Enactment of goals (teaching methods) (Kaplan et al., 2008) may make intuitive sense to seasoned academic writers who are familiar with the notions of TPS and promotional culture (Wernick. 1991) in U.S. higher education, novice writers, including native and non-native speakers of English, graduate students, and junior faculty, can stil encounter tremendous stumbling blocks in terms of implementing and structring these components in writing (Ells & Griffin, 200; Keans & Sullivan, 2011. As such, an empirical investigation that systematiclly explores the textual fatres of the TPS genre is much needed to address the above gap.

The second and third lines of inquiry focus on how TPS may support the professonal development of academics or teachers from different practical and conceptual orientations. Pedagogically, Supasiraprapa and De Costa (2017) detected how two graduate teacher candidates i TEsol used their TPs to construct and glamorize different aspects of their profesional identities by integrating various metadiscourse devices. Payant and Hirano (2018) found that in-service English language teachers' beliefs and identities became increasingly sophisticated when they were engaged in the ongoing proces of drafing and revising their TPSs. In terms of concep tualizing TPS, Beatty et al. (2009) problematized the genre's traditional notion, critiquing that i overloos the role of learners/learning, by tracing and reviewing elements from pure philosophy and educational philoophy that have shaped the concept of TPS. Beatty et al. (2009) therfore asked teachers to remain critcal when writing their TPs and reflet on relevant philosophical concepts that inform their teaching philosophies. As cited in Laundon et al. (2020), Bakker et al. (2019) corroborated Beaty et al. (2009), noting that TPS is often used to certify a teacher's suitabilit \*to fit within status quo'" rather than develop critical philosophical skills to respond toistemic, moral, and political relities in their ucational profesions (p. 3). Bakker e al. (2019)further urgd teacher educators to encourage autonomy and creativity when they guide teachers to develop their TPSs.

# 2.2. EAP genre research on academic promotional genres

Profoundly influenced by the seminal work of Swales (1990, 2004) on genre research and analysis, EAP genre researchers have investigated the rhetorical structures of a plethora of academic and profesional geres. This body of reearch has illuminated the wide range of strategies that writers use to compose different genres, thus contributing to the development of AP genre pedagogy (Tardy, 2016). However, it has paid relatively les attention to promotional genres (Bhatia, 1993). While professional promotional genres include sales leters and job application ltters, academic promotional genres typicall include Grant Proposals (e.g., Connor, 2000; Halleck & Connor, 2006), Statements of Purpose (SoP)/Personal Statements (PS) (e.g., Brown, 2004; Chiu, 2015, 2016; Ding, 2007; Lopez-Ferrero & Bach, 2016; Samraj & Monk, 2008), and Conference Proposals (e.g., Yo0n & Casal, 2020b). Writers of promotional geres primarly am t persuade ther targe ders to belie in something good that the writrs ffer, be it an idea, roduct a piece of work, or afavorable, positive, and relevant [originally emphasized] description of the abilities" of themselves (Bhatia, 1993, p. 119). In exchange, these writers may expect some future benefits, such as a job, a grant or award, or acceptance into a program or conference.

An academic promotional genre that shares potentill similar features with TPS is SoP/PS. Both genres allow writers to combine their personal, academic, and professional experiences to claim their competence (Chiu, 2015, 2016; Ding, 207; Kesser, 2020; Samra) & Monk, 2008), whereas other genres, such as Conference or Grant Proposals, involve writers in disciplinary knowledge construction and dissemination (e.g., Hallck & Connor, 2006). Much EAP genre research has adopted a Swalesian move analysis approach to capture the rhetorical moves and steps in diffrent SoP/Ps. These statements were written by applicants from various backgrounds with different purposes, including (1) graduate chool applications covering disciplines such as psychology (Brown, 2004), education (Chiu, 2015, 2016) and language education (Lopez-Ferrero & Bach, 2016), medical/dental fields (Ding, 2007), and linguistics, engineering, and business (Samraj & Monk, 2008), or (2) grant application involving the composition of SoP and PS as two separate genres (Kesser, 2020). Although the total number of moves and steps reported in these studies varied, ranging from five moves with 14 steps (Samraj & Monk, 2008) to ten moves (Lopez-Ferrero & Bach, 2016) or three moves with 15 steps (Kessler, 2020), two major themes have emerged. The first theme is that SoP/PS writers tend to construct a positive and competent identity, as manifested in thir strategic use and distribution of moves and steps, by drawing from and focusing on different aspects of their experiences, such as research/academic, professional, and extracurricular. Ding (2007) found that successful applicants to medical/dental chools' grad. uate programs devoted many steps to describing thir credentials comprised of a multitude of academic, research, and professional experience. Similarl, Brown (2004) discovered that successfl applicants to graduate programs in clinical psychology not only described their research experiences but also discussed them in light of potential contributions to the discipline and the public. These similarities indicate writers intentional use and distribution of particular rhetorical strategies o accomplish the overarching aim of self-promotion; they also explicitly demonstrate the benefit of using a move analysis approach to demystify shared rhetoric in academic promotional genres.

The second theme isthat writers and gatekeepers may have competing understandings of what constitutes efective academic promotional genres, due to variation in personal preferences, disciplinary conventions, and/or institutional guidelines. In Samraj and Monk (2008), the specialist informants from the three target graduate school programs had varying expectations of what should be included in SoPs, with the informant from Engineering valuing applicants personal and extracurricular experiences while the one from Linguistics prioritized professional experiences. Similarl, Kesser (2020) found that rater of the Fulbright Teaching Assistant grant proposals perceived SoP and PS as two rhetorically distinctive genres even though the applicants included multiple repetitive moves and steps.

Meanwhile, Chiu (2015) identified diffrences in the expectations and interpretations of the role of PS in graduate school appli cations between academics from U.S. and U.K. universities. While both groups recognized the value of PS, the U.S. academics viewed PS as a potential academic writing sample from the applicants. However, the U.K. academics viewed PS as less important in comparison to other application materials, such as the applicant's research proposals. Chiu (2016) further interviewed writers of the PSs collected by Chiu (2015) to explore the interplay between the genre structures of their PSs and their writer identity construction, noting that the applicants from the U.. weave the textual features of reearch proposals into their PSs in order to portray a researcher identity. Overall, the above studie collectively demonstrate the inherent complexities and tensions associated with academic promotional genres, the challenges they pose to writers and potentially teachers and gatekeeper, and the need to explore reader/writer perceptions to enrich findings from pure textual analysis.

# 2.3. The current study

In light of the above gaps and themes, the current study extends the body of EAP genre research by implementing a Swalesian rhetorical move analysis(Swales, 1990, 2004) to explicitly capture moves and steps in TPs written by award-winning university faculty members. Drawing on insights from previous studies (Brown, 2004; Chiu, 2015, 2016; Kesser, 2020; Samraj & Monk, 2008), the study also considers writer's and gatekeeper's perceptions f its findings. The study is guided by the following three research questions (RQs):

RQ1. What are the rhetorical moves and steps in the 100 TPss? How frequent do they appear?   
RQ2. What are the patterns in the way the moves are sequenced?   
RQ3. How do the writer and the gatekeeper perceive results from RQs 2 and 3 in terms of their usefulness in representing and   
potentially teaching the TPS genre?

# 3. Methodology

The study was designed and conducted according to its three RQs. The current section describes and explains the methodological procedures and considerations. table that detals step-by-step breakdowns of the study's implementational processand procedures can also be found in Appendix A.

# 3.1. Description of the TPS corpus

The $1 0 0 \mathrm { T P S s }$ were retrieved from the official website of a Center for Excellence in Teaching/Learning at a public university in the U.S. Each year, the universty awards a highly prestigious teaching award toa retricted number of full-time undergraduate faculty members. To be eligible, the candidates must (1) have taught undergraduate courses at the university in a full-time capacity for a least three years; (2) obtain official support from their units (3) submit a comprehensive award nomination package that includes a onepage TPS (around 600 to 750 words as required by the Center), a sample syllabus, several original leson plans, and recommendatin letters from their colleagues or supervisors as well as from their students.

As the unit responsible for the award application/nomination procedures, the Center describes the TPS as a document that de scribes why the teacher does what they do in their courses; it is more than a statement of beliefs about teaching and learning, but it does not have explicit requirements on what content should be included or how a TPS should be organized. Additionall, there were no published rubrics or criteria for the evaluation of the TPSs or the overall award nomination packet.

Following a competitive, multilayered proces that entails departmental/program nomination, college-level recommendation, and universty-level review, an Award Review Committe comprised of administrators and previous awardees reviews the candidates materials and determines the awardees The Center makes the awardees' TPSs frel available on their website each year. These TPSs were considered an appropriate representation of academic promotional genre because their writers may have composed TPs solely or partially for promotional purposes.

At the time of data collection, 116 TPSs were published on the Center's website in PDF format, but only 100 of them were fully accessible and therefore collected for the purpose of the study. The other $1 6 ~ \mathrm { T P S s }$ were excluded because they either could not be opened successfuly or contained highly blurry texts due to possible tchnical isues during the canning and uploading processes. The 100 accessible TPs were converted into Microsoft Excel sheets, with each sheet containing one TPS and each Exce file containing ten sheets/texts. I cleaned the texts on each sheet by (1) anonymizing information relevant to the identities of the writers by manually replacing it with the ltter  (e.g., X is a student in my  course: Iroduction to Microbiology) and (2) checking and correcting typos, special character ssues, and grammaticalerrors caused during the conversion process. As Table 1 shows, the 100 cleaned TPs total 69,291 words. Their writers came from five disciplines: Business $[ \boldsymbol { \mathsf { n } } = 1 2 \mathrm { \check { \Omega } }$ , Engineering $( \mathbf { n } = 1 5$ , Liberal Arts $\mathbf { ( n = 3 3 }$ , Social Sciences $( \mathtt { n } = 1 9 )$ , and Science $\left( \mathtt { n } = 2 1 \right)$

# 3.2. Rhetorical move-step annotation of the 100 TPSs

In response to RQ1, I annotated the 100 TPSs with rhetorical move-stes based on several considerations and practice illuminated in previous EAP genre research on the development and modification of rhetorical move frameworks for general academic genes e., part-genres within research articles) and for promotional genres in particular (e.g., Conference Proposals & SoPs/PSs) (Chiu, 2015; Cotos, Huffman, & Link, 2017; Kesser, 2020; Lu, Yoon, & Kisselev, 2021; Moreno & Swales, 2018; Yoon & Casal, 2020b).

# 3.2.1. Determination of analytic units & procedure

To begin, the study followed Swales' (2004) definition of moves as "discoursal or rhetorical units performing coherent commu. nicative functions in texts" (p. 228-229) and the definition of steps as the variety of text fragments that \*together, or in some combination, relize the move' in such a way that \*the steps of a move primaril function to achieve the purpose of the move to which it belongs" (Biber, Connor, & Upton, 2007, p. 24). Given that no existing rhetorical move-step framework exists for TPSs, the study followed Moreno and Swales' (2018) procedure f targeting analysis \*primarily at the step level before going up to the move level" (p. 48). A step-driven rhetorical move analysis captures the fine-grained communicative functions performed by particular stretches of texts more full, especially for promotional genres with space constraints (Yoon & Casal, 2020b) and thus merits more analytic comprehensiveness (Moreno & Swales, 2018). Moreover, various EAP promotional genre studies adopting the Swalesian rhetorical move-step analysis have demonstrated that steps are the more suitable analytic units to account for writers' varied strategies and choices to accomplish the promotional goal of the target genre. For example, both Chiu (2015) and Kesslr (2020) identified comparable moves, i., Move 2: Relevant Background in Chiu (2015) and Move 1: Competence Claims in Kesser (2020), to showcase the applicants' competence. However, most applicants in Chiu (2015) implemented the move through a combination of academic experiences (Step 2a), work experiences (Step 2b), and research experiences (Step 2c) while most applicants in Kesser (2020) accomplished it by presenting their teaching experience (Step 1a) and their knowledge of the target country (Step 1b) in their SoPs. Such variation reeals how witers intntionally fos on different asts of their comtce through the sf tes to achieve the goal of self-promotion, thus demonstrating the suitability of treating and interpreting steps as the basic analytic units inall, even though previous research on TPSs has revealed a variety of generalTPS components (.g., Enactment of goals through teching and metods from Kaplan et al., 2008), which may be interpreted as potential characterizations of moves, they do not show how writers use them in writing practices, which, again, warrants the step-driven analysis.

# 3.2.2. Move-step annotation, reliability testing, & data validation

To ensure validity and reliability, I annotated the 100 TPSs using a three-phase approach. Throughout the process, I drew on insights from Cotos et al. (2017) and Moreno and Swales (2018) and consulted an external expert, who had experience in rhetorical move/step analysis and extensive professional experience reading, writing, and evaluating TPSs. In accordance with the annotation practices in Cotos et al. (2017) and Lu et al. (2021), I also viewed and anotated chunks of texts/steps as the basic analytc units but assigned the move-step codes at sentence boundaries because of the following considerations: First, the current study deries from a large corpus-based EAP genre research project that aims to investigate the linguistic realization of different rhetorical features of multiple under-explored academic promotional genres, to which the TPS genre belongs. Therefore, placing move-step codes at sentence boundarie can help to facilitate the subsequent corpus-assted, semi-automated analysis of the linguistic features of the TPS gee, such as matching phrase-frames to moves and stes (.g., Lu et al, 2021). Second, as explained in Cotos e al. (2017) and Lu et al. (2021), assigning move-step codes at sentence boundaries would result i some sentences either performing dual rhetorical functions as a whole, a illustrated in (1), or performing dual functions in different parts of the sentences (e.g. clauses), as exemplifid in (2). followed the practices of Lu et al. (2021) by keeping the dual function codes at the sentence boundaries to not only capture the multifunctional discourse but also support the future linguistic analysis.

(1) As a 400-level course,  (course name) requires substantial amounts of time for self-exploring and self-learning . [M3_S1A: Describe teaching context] [M3_S4: Justify teacher reasoning or interpret teacher work]   
(2) As inspired by my graduate chool mentor, Itreat my students in my X class with passion and respect .. [M1 2: Interpret or reflect on teacher developmental journeys or background, which points to the \*As" clause] [M3 S3A: Describe teacher actions, which points to the "I' clause]

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="7">ble 3 rhetorical move-step framework for the corpus of Teaching Philosophy Statements.</td></tr><tr><td>Move/ Step</td><td>Name of move/step</td><td>Explanation</td><td>Code</td><td></td><td># of texts sharing the M-</td><td>Status of commonality</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Move 1 Construct a professional profile</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>S code 42</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Describe teacher developmental journeys or backgrounds</td><td>Teachers describe their professional development journeys (e.g., previous learning or learning-to-teach experiences) and their personal or professional backgrounds.</td><td></td><td>[M1_S1]</td><td></td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 2</td><td>Interpret or reflect on the journeys and backgrounds</td><td>Teachers discuss what their journeys and backgrounds mean, why they matter, and/or how they have informed their growth.</td><td></td><td>[M1_S2]</td><td>49</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 3</td><td>Generalize professional beliefs, goals, principles, or concepts</td><td>Teachers present a series of broad beliefs, goals, principles, and/or concepts that inform their understanding of teaching/ learning or teacher/learner.</td><td></td><td>[M1_S3]</td><td>98</td><td>Very common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 4</td><td>Express a commitment</td><td>to the teaching profession, including their students, the institution, and the field.</td><td>Teachers explicitly convey their passion for and commitment</td><td>[M1_S4]</td><td>13</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Move 2 Signal the structure of the text and/or propositional themes</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Teachers introduce the structure of or propositional themes in their statements.</td><td>[M2]</td><td>27</td><td></td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 1A</td><td>Move 3 Demonstrate teacher competence in the classroom Describe teaching context</td><td>Teachers describe specific instructional contexts, including the institutional/classroom environment, student demographics, course background, etc.</td><td></td><td>[M3_S1A]</td><td>30</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 1B</td><td>Problematize teaching context</td><td>Teachers explicitly highlight particular ssues, challenges, and/or problems associated with their teaching, including challenging teaching tasks, difficult course content or</td><td></td><td>[M3_S1B]</td><td>25</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>materials, demanding workload or institutional environment, etc.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step 2A</td><td>Specify teaching and/or learning objectives</td><td>Teachers present specific teaching/learning objectives in their classroom.</td><td></td><td>[M3_S2A]</td><td>48</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>Step</td><td>Situate teacher beliefs, feelings,</td><td>Teachers present and explain what they believe or feel in</td><td></td><td>[M3_S2B]</td><td>80</td><td>Very common</td></tr><tr><td>2B</td><td>and/or attitudes</td><td>terms of specific students, courses/course content, tools, methods, or materials, and/or roles of teachers/students in</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step</td><td>Describe teacher actions</td><td>specific courses, etc. Teachers describe what they do in (e.g., actual classroom</td><td>[M3_S3A]</td><td></td><td>99</td><td>Very common</td></tr><tr><td>3A</td><td>Describe learner actions</td><td>teaching actions) or for their class (e.g., lesson planning). Teachers describe what their students do in (e.g., learner</td><td>[M3_S3B]</td><td></td><td>64</td><td>Common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 3B</td><td></td><td>activities) or for their class (e.g., homework). Teachers describe what they and their students do</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step 3C</td><td>Describe teacher-learner actions</td><td>collaboratively or what their students do in relation to what they do.</td><td></td><td>[M3_S3C]</td><td> 31</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 3D</td><td>Describe content</td><td>Teachers describe the *what&#x27; in their teaching, including course content, materials, assignments, and/or activities, without specifying who does what.</td><td></td><td>[M3_S3D]</td><td>59</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 4</td><td>Justify teacher reasoning or interpret teacher work</td><td>Teachers explain and/or reflect on the when, how, and why in what they do in the classroom, such as reasons for or interpretations about adopting particular approaches, methods, or materials.</td><td></td><td>[M3_S4]</td><td>86</td><td>Very common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 5A</td><td>Showcase teacher&#x27;s individual accomplishments</td><td>Teachers highlight their own accomplishments directly related to teaching, including materialized accomplishments (e.g., teaching grants, awards, research products related to teaching), professional achievements (e.g., promotion and</td><td></td><td>[M3_S5A]</td><td>29</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 5B</td><td>Showcase teacher-learner accomplishments</td><td>tenure), and positive feedback from others. Teachers highlight their students&#x27; accomplishments, including senses of emotional/intellectual achievements (e. g., a passion for the subject matter; commitment to academic research, etc.), academic achievements (e.g., improved learning outcomes), materialized accomplishments (e.g.,</td><td></td><td>[M3_S5B]</td><td> 30</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">graduate school acceptance, jobs), or extracurricular achievements (e.g., clubs or organizations), among others.</td></tr><tr><td>Step</td><td>Move 4 Demonstrate teacher competence outside the classroom Contextualize teaching-related</td><td>Teachers provide background information related to their</td><td>[M4_S1]</td><td>6</td><td></td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>1 Step</td><td>work outside the classroom Describe the work outside the</td><td>work outside the classroom. Teachers describe their work outside the classroom</td><td></td><td>[M4_S2]</td><td>32</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>2 Step</td><td>classroom Showcase relevant</td><td>potentially in relation to teaching. Teachers highlight their accomplishments outside the</td><td></td><td>[M4_S3]</td><td>12</td><td>Less common</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 (continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move/ Step</td><td> Name of move/step</td><td>Explanation</td><td>Code</td><td># of texts sharing the M- S code</td><td>Status of commonality</td></tr><tr><td>Step 4</td><td>Justify teacher reasoning or interpret the work outside the</td><td>Teachers explain or reflect on their work outside the classroom in terms of classroom teaching/learning.</td><td>[M4_S4]</td><td>15</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>Move 5</td><td>classroom Express gratitude</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Appreciate the overall teaching profession</td><td>Teachers explicitly recognize and thank the professional field, including their students or the institution.</td><td>[M5_S1A]</td><td>9</td><td>Less common</td></tr><tr><td>Step 2</td><td>Appreciate the gatekeepers</td><td>Teachers explicitly thank the potential gatekeepers.</td><td>[M5_S1B]</td><td>3</td><td>Less common</td></tr></table></body></html>

In the first phase, based on a close, iterative reading and manual anotation of the rhetorical, structural, lingustic, and propositional feature f chunks of text, I independently annotated 50 TPSs randomly retrieved from the TPs corpus, starting atthe step leve! and then moving towards the move level. This resulted in an intia framework with definitions and explanations of each move/step, along with sample text extracts. The framework was presented to the consultant for feedback and subsequently updated.

In the second phase, a senior doctoral student in Applied Linguistics with specialization in genre research and analysis participated in the inter-rater reliability testing. I held a training sessin to introduce the notion of promotional genre, the TPs corpus, and the framework from phase one. The rater and I then collaboratively annotated five TPs as pilot coding, compared results, and resolved discrepancies through discussion. The rater was then given two wees to independentl annotate the 50 TPSs that were previously annotated by me in phase one. Following insights from Rau and Shih (2021), percent agreement was conducte to asess inter-rater reliability. High reliability was obtained, with percentage agreements of $9 8 . 6 \%$ for moves and $8 8 . 7 \%$ for steps, respectively. Discrepancies were again collaboratively resolved, leading to a slightly modified framework.

For the third phase, I independently coded the remaining 50 TPs with ongoing modifications to the framework from the end of phase two. Additionll, two rounds of consultation were held with the external expert as mentioned at the beginning of the current section. The irs round primaril focused on interpreting ambiguous steps, which eventually led to the completion of the annotation and preparation of the finalized framework. The second round focused on validating the presentation of the framework - i.e., the extent to which the label/naming and description of each move/step were accurate and accessible to other readers. Discussions and minor modifications eventually led to the finalized framework in Table 3.

At the end of the third phase, the calculation of the frequency of the move/step codes was conducted through a combination of Python scripts and manual checks. I determined that moves/steps are Very common if they appeared in $8 0 \% { - } 1 0 0 \%$ of the texts, Common for $6 0 \% { - } 7 9 \%$ , and Less common for those below $6 0 \%$ in the TPS corpus. This decision was made by synthesizing insights characterizing moves/steps as obligatory (appearing $1 0 0 \%$ of the texts), quasi-obligatory $( 5 1 - 9 9 \% )$ , or optional (below $5 0 \%$ ) (Ye, 2019) and categorizing moves/steps as conventional (more than $6 0 \%$ of the texts) and optional (below $6 0 \%$ ) (Kanoksilapatham, 2005) as well as findings from the TPS literature concerning its important components (see Section 2.1 above). In particular, I used Very common, Common, and Les common to capture the extent to which iferent steps may frequently appear i actual TPS writing practice to avoid the negative annotations on such terms as obligatory or mandatory, which potentially perpetuates strict conventions and have therefore been problematized i recent EAP genre research (se Halleck & Connor, 2006). The status of commonality for each move-step code was noted in Table 3.

# 3.3. Identification of patterns in move sequence

In response to RQ2, the second stage involved identification of patterns in move sequence. Specifically, sequence not only char. acterizes how a text may be structured by different moves, but also manifests how these moves are ordered (Bhatia, 1993; Tessuto, 2015). For example, in revealing the genre structure of empirical law research artices written in English, Tessuto (2015) found that even though thearticles broadly fllow a linear sequence according to the Introduction-Methods-Results-Discussion (IMRD) structure, they employ various rcursive seuences within and acros different sections. Therefore, move sequence alows for ivestigtion of the way TPS writer ary and shft ifferent components in ther texts. To identify such sequences, a eries of Python scrits on the order of the move-step codes in the 100 TPSs were implemented and verified by subsequent manual checks. Table 4 presents the top four most frequent move sequences.

Table 4 Top four frequent move sequences.   

<html><body><table><tr><td># of moves in a sequence throughout the entire text</td><td>Five-move sequence</td><td>Three-move sequence</td><td>Six-move sequence</td><td>Four-move sequence</td></tr><tr><td># of texts sharing the sequence</td><td>15</td><td>13</td><td>13</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>Representation of the most prominent flow of. the sequence</td><td>M1-M3-M1-M3-M1</td><td>M1-M3-M1</td><td> M1-M3-M1-M3-M1-M3</td><td>M1-M3-M1-M3</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.4. Semi-structured interviews & data analysis

In response to RQ3 and following practices in previous research (e.g, Brown, 2004; Chiu, 2015, 2016; Cotos et al., 2017; Kessler. 2020; Samraj & Monk, 2008), I conducted semi-structured interviews with two stakeholders. The first stakeholder, Dr. Whitney (pseudonym), is aretired U.S. universt faculty member with an interdisciplinary background in Rhetoric/Composition and Applied Linguistics previous experience erving on the Award Review Committe for the teaching award targeted by the TPSs analyzed in the current study, and professional experience teaching TPSs to junior faculty and evaluating them in other capacities (e.g., search committes). The second stakeholder, Wilson (pseudonym), is a graduate student in Science and Education with recent experience learning and writing the TPS genre for job and Ph.D. application purposes in his practicum course, taught by an experienced teacher educator named Nancy (pseudonym). Although Wilson did not write the TPSs analyzed in the study, his identity as a novice writer and learner with experience navigating TPS as an unfamiliar genre enabled him to share important insights.

Before the interviews, I held two separate meetings to briely introduce the purpose of the study, the notion of TPS as an academic promotional genre, and the basics of rhetorical move/step analysis.

Each interview was conducted via Zoom and lasted for approximately $4 5 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ . They aimed to explore the extent to which the framework resonated with the interviewees experience learning, writing, reading/evaluating, and/or conceptualizing the TPS genre. Additionall, the interviewees were also encouraged to contribute their perceptions for the potential pedagogical usefulness of the framework. Via Zoom's shared screen functions during the interviews, both the interviewees and I had access to the framework and informatin in Tables 3and 4, as wll as sample text extracts illstrating each move-step. Sample interview questions are included in Appendix B.

The Zoom interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim. As I viewed the interview data as subsidiary to complement the results of the genre analysis (Chiu, 2016), the data was coded both inductively and deductively in an iterative manner. The inductive coding focused on recognizing and categorizing themes and their connections emerging from the interview conversations, while the deductive coding aimed to identify, categorize, and interpret how these themes resonated with concepts from previous research (e., moves and steps as manifestation of promotional strategies; tensions among reader/writer perceptions, etc.). All themes and connections were then cross-referenced with the textual data in the genre analysis.

# 4. Results

# 4.1. (RQ1) rhetorical moves/steps in the 100 TPSs & their frequency

As ilustrated in Table 2, a TPS may be structured using five moves, each comprising multiple steps. This section addresses RQ1 by describing and exemplifying these moves and steps while commenting on their commonality.

# 4.1.1. Move 1: construct a professional profile

As a very common move, Move 1: Construct a professional profileaffords writers an opportunity to provide a broad description of themselves as teachers, primarily addressing the questions of \*Who I am" and \*What I believe." This move consists of four steps, as exemplified below:

(3) (M1_S1: Describe teacher developmental journeys and backgrounds) Although I spent over 23 years pursuing formal education, the most formative educational experience of my life took place during the two and a half years I spent as a young scholar studying, living, working, and traveling in X.   
(4) (M1 s2: Interpret or reflect on the journeys and backgrounds) I have come to recognize that two specific facets of my lif.. were particularly useful toward allowing me to not only learn from my experiences, but to ultimately transfer those lessons into positive future endeavors.   
(5) (M1 s3: Generalize professional beliefs, goals, principles, or concepts) My mission as a teacher is to inspire students to realize their potential by expanding their views on the course subject, challenging them to think critically, and creating an inclusive learning environment.   
(6) (M1 S4: Express a commitment) I love to teach and take pride in being an enthusiastic and effective teacher.

In M1 S1, teachers introduce how they have developed as teachers by describing or referencing important memories or stories from their prior educational or professional experiences. This enables their readers to understand where they \*come from. In M1 s2, they interpret the memoris or stories in terms of their profesional development. In M1 3, teachers present a set of general beliefs, goals, principles, and/or concepts broadly related to teaching/learning, teacher/learner, education, or the field. Finally, in M1 4, they present their dedication totheir profession by compellingly expressing such positive emotions as love, pride, and passion. As Table 3 shows, M1 3 is the only very common move while other moves are les common. This i not surprising since a central element of TPS is to reveal teachers' articulations of and responses to the \*big questions" of teaching (Boye, 2012, p. 1), which this step precisely accomplishes.

4.1.2. Move 2: signal the structure of the text and/or propositional themes The only independent move that does not involve any steps, Move 2: ignal the structure of the text and/or propostional themes enables   
teachers to explicitly introduce the structure of their texts or relevant themes:

(7) (M2: Signal the structure of and/or propositional themes of the text) I reflect below on my views of effective learning and teaching ...

In particular, while most steps in other moves were primarily observed at the level of clauses or sentences, various instances of Move 2 were identified at the phraseological level. That is, many writers use phrases, such as My views on teaching and learning (italicized and bolded in the original text), to suggest topics of textual proportions, similar to headings or subheadings in research articles (e.g., Introduction). Move 2 is less common, likely due to the narrtive nature of the TPS genre (Chism, 1998), which is potentiall comparable to a personal statement (Boye, 2012; Ding, 207), in which tructural or thematic cues may be interwoven into the texts instead of being explicitly announced.

# 4.1.3. Move 3: demonstrate teacher competence in the classroom

As the primary move implementing and advancing the rhetorical goal of doing promotion, Move 3: Demonstrate tacher competence in the classrom enables teachers to leverage a range of stes to prove how and why they are effective and accomplished teachers

As shown below, M3_S1A and 1B focus on teachers' descriptions of particular instructional context, and M3_2A and 2B present what they aim to accomplish in a particular context, course, or lesson and what they think or fel about the \*particularities" in a situated context. Moreover, whileM3_3A, 3B, 3C, and 3D are dedicated todifferent aspects of the \*who" and \*what" in the classroom, M3_S4 highlights the "why" - i.e., teachers explaining, justifying, or reflecting on why they design and implement lessons, create materials, engage with students r asses learning in particular ways. Finally, M35A and 5B allow teachers to explicitly display their accomplishments.

(8) (M3_s1A: Describe teaching context) Students in Mechanical Engineering enter the program in their third year.   
(9) (M3 s1B: Problematize teaching context) Everyday, I am faced with the challenge of educating hundreds of students.   
(10) (M3 2A: Specify teaching and/or learning objectives)The main objective of this course is for students to be able to evaluate energy technologies .   
(11) (M3 2B: Situate teacher beliefs, feelings, and/or attitudes) The best way to master calculus is to participate in a small study-buddy group.   
(12) (M3 s3A: Describe teacher actions) I provide introductions for every topic and \*guided study" questions for each asssment.   
(13) (M3_s3B: Describe learner actions) They [My students] work in small groups and write four to si strategic marketing plns...   
(14) (M3_s3c: Describe teacher-learner actions) With some urging from me, a few study-buddy groups willstart to form.   
(15) (M3_s3D: Describe content) These plans are based mostly on business cases of real companies.   
(16) (M3 s4: Justify teacher reasoning or interpret teacher work) In this way, my timely and extensive feedback on students work enables me to not just evaluate their learning ..but it also provides me with numerous opportunities to dialogue with students ...   
(17) (M3 S5A: Showcase teacher's individual accomplishments) A former student in my 2012 X class sent me an ema.. thanking me for being "a bright spot in what was kind of a difficult period in my life."   
(18) (M3 S5B: Showcase teacher-learner accomplishments) Many of my former students have ben accepted to prestigious graduate school programs in Harvard, MIT, and Stanford.

As one of the very common moves, Move 3 characterizes how teachers leverage a diverse range of strategies to claim a competent teacher identity in the classroom, the very core of TPS as an academic promotional genre. Teachers can provide either a neutral illustration of their intructional context (M3 s1A) or acritical decription to underscore relevant isues or dificulties in the context (M3_S1B) as two les common steps. Regarding advancing the overall rhetorical aim of doing promotion, M3_1B may be more compelling because it explicitly highlights teachers abilities to teach in achllenging environment. Similarl, they can either display their individual accomplishments (M3 \$5A) or highlight the achievements of their students (M3 S5B). These two lesscommon steps can rhtoricll unction as a demonstration of their teching effctivenes - .., uccessul teachers are accomplished b themseles or can cultivate accomplished learners or productive learning.

Meanwhile, to illustrate the intricacie f classroom teaching, teachers may articulate instructional objectives, describe course content, or descie the collaborative or sequential actions between themselves and their students in the classroom using les common steps such as M3 2A, 3C, or S3D, respectively. Mre importantly, teachers may express concrete beliefs or felings regarding specific instructional contexts or students, describe their teaching actions, and/or provide a rationale or principles that underlie said actions by using very common steps such as M3 S2B, M3_S3A, and M3 S4, respectively. They may also use M3 S3B as a common step to present their students' actions. Note that M3 S3C differs from M3 S3A and M3 s3B because of the potential rhetorical effects created by the linguistic focus in their corresponding examples: what the teacher does on their own (M3s3A), what students do on their own (M3_S3B), or what the teacher and their tudents do relationally, as exemplified in (14), or collaboratively (e.g., We deconstructed classic philoophical texts). In other words, M3 3A to S3C collectively reflect the TPS writers rhetorical strategies for displaying different nuanced aspect of their instructional (teching and learning) activity in the classroom by addressing the who (actor), the what (action), and the whom (audience).

As compared to the other very common move, Move 1 Construct aprofessonal profil, which reveals who the teacher is and what s/ he believes, Move 3 addresses what the teacher does in the classroom, how s/he teaches, and why $s / \mathrm { h e }$ teaches in particular ways. Overall, the variety and richnes of the stes within Move 3 demonstrate how teachers may intentionally draw on and combine diverse aspects of their classroom teaching to foreground their competence claims.

.1.4. Move 4: demonstrate teacher competence outside the classroom

Most teachers concentrate on showcasing their competence in the claroom through Move 3, but some also discus what they do outside the classroom via Move 4: Demonstrate tacher competence outside the classroom. This move comprises four steps:

(19) (M4 S1: Contextualize teaching-related work outside the classroom) Our campus focuses primarily on undergraduate teaching.   
(20) (M4 s2: Describe the work outside the classroom) I continue to be afaculty peer reviewer and a mentor to new faculty.   
(21) (M4_s3: Showcase relevant achievements) .. One of my recent faculty mentees was recently awarded with the highly competitive X Teaching Award.   
(22) (M4 S4: Justify teacher reasoning or interpret the work outside the classroom) In doing so, I can identify those [faculty] who are doing great, as well as those who need guidance to do better.

The four steps in Move 4 potentially resemble various aspects f steps in Move 3, through which teachers describe the institutional context (M4 S1) illutrate their work, such as faculty leadership or mentoring (M4 2), highliht achievements (M4 S3), and explain their reasoning (M4 S4). While other examples of M4 S2 and S3 include student advising, research, or administration, the teachers all frame them as inked to teaching/learning, such as enhancing faculty teaching performance or deriving innovative pedagogical ma terials from reearch. In short, while Move 4 and is associate stes are les common, they offer an exra rhetorical spacefor teachers to claim and enrich multiple layers of their teacher competence.

# 4.1.5. Move 5: express gratitude

Functionally comparable to a Closing move," Move 5: Express gatitude provides teachers with an opportunity to appreciate eithe. the overall teaching profession or the gatekeepers, such as the award review committe members:

(23) (M5_S1A: Appreciate the overall teaching profession) As a teacher, I feel eternally grateful. (24) (M5_S1B: Appreciate the gatekeepers) Thank you for reviewing my nomination package!

# 4.2. Patterns in move-sequence

The semi-automated identification of the patterns in move sequence led to interesting results. Most notably, no dominating move sequence was found among the 100 TPSs, which included various sequences ranging from as many as 18 moves to as few as one move in a single text. In particular, the one TPS with 18 moves is structured in a Q & A format, in which the writer uses Move 2 to divide the text into multiple sections and sub-sections (e.g., What are the goals I set for my students?) and incorporates various other moves within each section or sub-section. The TPS with only one move is realized entirely by Move 1, through which the writer narrates how they grew up, who influenced their decision to pursue a university teaching career, and what thir developmental ourney meant, without describing or explaining what the writer teaches or how they teach. However, despite the above variations, ive, thre, six, and four-move sequences appeared to be slightly more frequent than others, each of which was shared by 15, 13, 12, and 12 texts respectively, as shown in Table 4. In spite of the variation in the specific number of moves in a given sequence within a text, most TPSs followed acyclical and recursive (Kanoksilapatham, 2005, p. 275) sequence pattern, through which the TPS writer iterated between Move 1: Construct a professional profil and Move 3: Demonstrate teacher competence in the classoom. The sample text extract below exemplifies such recursive sequence. Note that ... represents omitted steps within the same move:

(25) (Sample extract of move sequence) The teacher's first job . is to convey the pleasure of curiosity [M1 3] .. Students who assumed that they knew an image at first sight suddenly change their posture [M3 S3B]. They squint at the image [M3 3B].. Curiosity needs to be learned by doing [M1_S3].

In the above extract, the writer first provides a generic statement on a teacher's "first job" (M1 S3: Generalize professional bliefs goals, principles or concepts). The writer goes on to expand and explain this statement using various steps within the same move and then moves to Move 3, in which the writer describes what students did and how they reacted when they were presented with an image by the teacher (M3 s3B Describe leamer actions). The writer finall returns to Move 1, explaining how their teacher belief can be implemented.

Finally, another interesting finding is that Move 1 is the most frequent opening move, shared by 77out of 100 texts followed by Move 3 $( \mathtt { n } = 1 9 )$ , Move 2 $( \mathtt { n } = 2 )$ , and Move 5 ${ \bf \hat { n } } = { \bf 2 } { \bf \dot { \theta } } .$ . Examples that illustrate texts that do not begin with Move 1 are presented below:

(26) (Opening move: Move 3 Demonstrate teacher competence in the classroom) The students that I interact with most often are non-science majors ... [M3_S1A]   
(27) (Opening move: Move 2 Signal the structure and/or propositional themes of the text) What are the goals I set for my students? [M2]   
(28) (Opening move: Move 5 Express gratitude) I am deeply honored to be nominated for this award. [M5]

# 4.3. Reader/evaluator and writer perceptions

The analysis of the transcribed interviews with Dr. Whitney and Wilson resulted in three themes that reflect the extent to which the findings from Sections 4.1 and 4.2 could describe the TPS genre and potentilly aid its teaching. Note that the notes in brackets () in the interview extracts below were added by me to close information gaps.

# 4.3.1."Unpacking the foggy stuff

Drawing on her professonal experience serving on the award review commitee, multiplesearch committes, and coaching junior aculty, Dr. Whitney provided a positive evaluation of the findings of the genre analysis:

It's very thorough, pretty much covering all sorts of things I've seen people do or I've told others to do to make their statements compelling especiall if you're up for an award or a promotion. It's not a new genre, but itsa tough one because you gotta show your philosophy and how you make that visible in practice and make sure your readers know why you do particular things in particular ways, so it' always intimidating to virgin writers," you know, like faculty members who haven't been trained before or grad students. So you're really unpacking the foggy stuff here. I mean you obviously don't have to include all of them [moves and steps], but here [it] shows a variety of options or choices that people can take. And these [the status of commonality of each move-step] show the tendencies ...

Vilson corroborated but focused more on the status of commonality of certain moves and steps and the cyclical move sequences

I have never been trained in this [the TPS genre], and no one in my cohort knew what ateaching philoophy was. Of course Nancy [Wilson's practicum instructor, pseudonym] gave us great support and walked us through the process - asking us to do different drafts and providing [her] feedback. What you have here is very comprehensive because that's what I was taught, but yours is apparently more nuanced with the frequencies and status. Whats missing, I guess is I was taught that I had to propose my future professional goals towards the end of my statement, but other moves and steps, like Step 3 in Move 1, and the 2B, 3A 3B, and even C and D, and 4 in Move 3 are definitely important. Nancy kept telling us that we need to tll a good story, so I guess these [very common and common] steps are like the key characters in the story. And I see how the sequences, like $\mathbf { M } \mathbf { 1 } {  } \mathbf { M } \mathbf { 3 } {  } \mathbf { M } \mathbf { 1 }$ , make sense because the plot should not be a list of bullet points that you check and move on. What I learned was, you know, do things back and forth tocreate your story. You talk alittlebit about yourself like here [Move 1], you move on to what you teach and how you teach [Move 3], you go back to here [Move 1] and explain how you teach s connected to who you are. To me, this, I mean at least what I learned, this is how you tell a good story [through one's TPS].

Both interviewee validated the genre analysis findings from different perspectives. While the reader/gatekeeper interpreted them as athorough framework that unpacks the fggy stuff in theTP genre, the writer/learner insightull charactrizedthe TPS genre as storytelling, in which the range of very common and common steps are metaphorically viewed as the 'key characters" and the cyclical sequences as the \*plot that enables writers to \*move back and forth" between their professonal profile (Move 1) and their competence in the classroom (Move 3).

# 4.3.2."Showing one core part of the chain"

Additionally, the two interviewees noted the significance of TPS in relation to other genres in decision-making and promotional processes. Dr. Whitney highlighted:

We looked at the packages holisticlly, like the candidat's statement, lesson plans, rec letters, and syllabus, but the teaching philosophy statement was important because I, or we, viewed it as a critical space to see the candidate's teacher persona .. I'd pay particular ttention to the connections between their statement and other materials, like if you claim in your statement that you believe or do something, do you or can you demonstrate that in your lesson plans and do the rec leters provide concrete examples? To me, I made my recommendation [on the award finaliss] based on if I could find those connections or evidence of connections.

Also acknowledging the critical role of TPS in job or graduate school applications based on his prior course experience, Wison shared:

Nancy called them [job or graduate school application materials] a chain, like everything we put on that chain needs to communicate. What you have here is showing one core part of the chain, like I said [before], the structure of a good story with good characters, because the teaching philosophy statement is a place where I get to be creative and being personal, like showing my professional personality.

Overall, although the two interviewees pointed out how the genre analysis findings helped to unveil the role of TPS as "one core part of the chain, both unanimously indicated the intertextual operation and function of TPs. For Dr. Whitney, the coordinating relationship between a nominee's TPS and other materials in the nomination package clearly drove her to make award recommen. dation decisions rather than the TPS alone. For Wilson, while TPS was recognized as a textual space for being \*creative" and \*per sonal," the communication between TPS and other materials (e.g., cover ltter, teaching portfolio,etc.) in the "chain" was more integral and thus strongly emphasized in his practicum course experience.

# 4.3.3."A good starting point for teaching"

Finally, both interviewees positively recognized the pedagogical potentia of the genre analysis findings. Reiterating her comments presented in Section 4.3.1, Dr. Whitney stressed:

This is going to be very handy because the entire framework is accessible and self-explanatory. And you know, you are making explicit the range of choices available to people who need this genre. They get to know the conventions, like the mandatory [very common] steps, and they also get to build some rom for creativity, like the ess common steps. Especially when you make it into some sort of concrete pedagogical materials, like workshops, guided writing exercises ...So yeah, it gives a solid foundation to whatever pedagogical interventions you will do.

Similarly, Wilson expressed:

It's a good starting point for teaching, and I'm saying this based on my learning experience and with some teaching experience, you know, because I know a lot of people like novice writers would need it. You might need to do more [in actual future teaching], but I wish I'd seen this before when I started writing mine.

In short, whil Dr. Whitney commented on the pedagogical potential of the genre analysis findings in terms of exhibiting \*the range f choices" with "conventions" and \*room for creativity" and suggested directions for future pedagogical applications, Wilson erceived the framework's usefulnessas satisfying the needs of "novice writers' as "a good starting point for teaching."

# 5. Discussion

The study revealed that the 100 faculty members who won prestigious teaching awards structured their TPS with two very common moves: Move 1: ostruct  roesional proilead Moe 3: Dmonstate teacher omtenc in the clssrom, as e as thr les common moves: Move 2: Signal th structure of the text and/or propositional themes, Move 4: Demonstrate tacher competence outside the classroom, and Move 5: Express gratitude.

In addition, these faculty members utilized a variety of very common steps to generalize professional beliefs, goal, principles, or concepts (M13), sitate teacher beliefs feelings, and/or attitdes (M3S2B), describe techer actions (M3S3A), and justify teacher reasoning or interpret teacher work (M3_\$4). They also employed a common step, describe learner actions (M3 S3B), and various less common steps.

While the 100 TPSs were organized into different move sequences, they primarily adopted a recursive sequence pattern across Moves 1 and 3. As can be recalled from Sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.3, while Move 1 unveil teacher's backgrounds, identities, and overal beliefs, Move 3 displays teacher's activities and reasoning in the clasroom. The cyclical move sequence therefore demonstrates how the TPS writers drew from different aspects of and moved back and forth between their teacher profile (Move 1) and their competence in the classroom (Move 3).

Furthermore, interviews with the gatekeeper/reader (Dr. Whitney) and the novice writer/learner (Wilson) of the TPS genre provided valuable insights that enriched the results of the genre analysis by suggesting how they could adequately describe and represent the TPS genre, how TPS operates inherently intertextually in either the gatekeeper's decision-making experience or the writer's learning-to-write experience, and how they could be applied in teaching.

The above findings resonate with but enrich findings from previous TPS literature, especiall regarding those on the promotional functions of the TPS genre, as reviewed in Section 2.1. The status of commonality of particular moves or sts can empirically verif the central components in typical TPSs, including onceualization of leaming/taching or lemer/teacher eg., Chism, 1998; Schonwetter et al., 2002), which may be materialized primarily by Move 1, and Teaching methods or model (e.g, Eierman, 2008; Goodyear & Allchin, 198), which may be captured primaril by Move 3. More importantly, the findings illuminate how various TPS components proposed by previous litrature can be executed and concretized through diverse writing practice to accomplish the promotional goal. For example, when dssing teching conxts in their TPs (e, Kaplan e al., 2008; Showetter e al., 2002), writers can choose to present neutral information about the contexts (M3_S1A) or problematize them by indicating issues or challenges (M3_S1B). In addition, to undercore and conform to the concetual nature of TPS as astmatic and critical rationale (Schonwettr et al., 2002, p. 84), writers may present their overarching beliefs and principles across diffrent educational contexts (M1 S3),articulate their specifi feelings r attitudes about the particularities of their lassrooms (M3 s2B), or interpret their classroom work (M3 S4) all of which involve writers in contemplating and reasoning what they believe, what they strive to achieve, and why they teach in certain ways. Finall, to demonstrate ther competence as ell-rounded university profesors (Goodyear & Allchin, 1998), teachers can choose between incorporating Move 4 to present their work outside the classoom or highlighting different aspects of their teacher accomplishments through steps such as M3_S5A and M3_S5B.

Generall consistent wit findings from prior EAP promotional genre research (e.g., Brown, 2004; Ding, 2007; Kesser, 2020), this study shows that when writers seekto promote themselves, they not only integate different aspects of ther comptence e., teacher work inside and outside the classroom), but also intentionll prioritize and elaborate on those aspect that align with thir primary promotional goals. Such intentionality is demonstrated in the TPS writers' use of the very common steps (e.g., M3_S3B, M3_S3A, & M3_S4), all of which are explicitly related to their individual competence in the classroom.

Moreover, findings on the cyclical move sequences of the TPS genre echo previous research on move/step-sequence pattens in a variety f academic genres (e.g., Kanoksilapatham, 2005; Tessuto, 2015; Ye, 2019; Yo0n & Casal, 2020b). In reearch articles, cyclical move patterns allow researchers to engage in a sophisticated rhetorical exposition' and reveal \*the presentation of the complex researchable topics . within the utility value of aconventionalized articl structure" (Tessuto, 2015, p. 24). As Wilson shared by referring to his teacher-training experience, a TPS should not be organized as a list of bullet points." This insightful comment corroborates the recursive (rather than linear) move-sequence pattrn identified in the TPSs, in which the TPS writers implement a recursive "congruent progression throughout belief, practice, and goal' (Schonwetter et al., 2002, p. 93) by iterating between and ultimately bridging who they are (Move 1) and what they do and how they teach in the classroom (Move 3) (Boye, 2012)

While the current study did not discover explicit conflict between how the reader/gatekeeper and the writer perceived the target genre (e.g, Chiu, 2015, 2016; Kesser, 2020; Samraj & Monk, 2008), it shed light on the importance of understanding the TPS genre based on the needs and expectations of different types f stakeholders. Dr. Whitney and Wilson interpreted the results of the genre analysis as thorough or \*omprehensive," but Wilson indicated that Proposing future professonal goals" is amove not manfested in the current framework although it is captured in previous TPS literature (e.g., Chism, 1998. This is understandable because the TPS authors in the current study have been full-time faculty members at their intitution for several years, which may explain why they were not expected to discuss their future goals in their award application materials as compared to other writers with different promotional goals. For example, in their TPSs, graduate students applying for faculty positions or graduate programs may need to explicitly state their goals and plans for contributing to their target institutions as atractive and valuable candidates.

Similarly, the two interviewees emphasized the need to treat the promotional genre intertextually (e.g., Chiu, 2015). In her original conceptualization of profesional promotional gnres, Bhati (1993) characterized a cover ltter as a core genre, the primary document in a promotional genre system for job application purposes, and a resume as a dependent genre, which i rlated to and reinforces the effectiveness of the core genre. Given that the two interviewee interpreted TPs as "a critical space' in the award review process (Dr. Whitney) and "one core part of the chain" (Wilson), TPS could be a core genre. However, how it was weighted in the award review process in relation to other dependent genres (e.g., the candidate's sample lesson plans & recommendation leters could not be identified due to limited access.

As elucidated in previous research (e.g., Cotos, Huffman, & Link, 2015; Lu, Casal, & Liu, 2021, etc.), frameworks that display and explain moves and stes can provide aademic writers-inneed with reertoire of resources, alo referred to as \*choices' by one of the interviewees (Dr. Whitney, to help them grasp the conventions of the target written discourse community or potentially negotiate space for creativity. Similarly, such frameworks can aid EAP writing teachers in adapting their approaches to meet different instructional objectives. Given that the TPS can be a challenging and complex genre to novice writers and writing teachers (Boye, 2012; Ells & Griffin, 2000; Kearns & Sullivan, 2011), the study posseses strong pedagogical implications. Notably, the different aspects of the framework presented across Tables 3and 4 could serve as an empirical foundation for writers and EAP writing teachers to either unpack the TPS genre or develop and implement pedagogical activities or materials for teaching promotional genres.

# 6. Conclusion

To the best of my knowledge, this is the first large-scale EAP genre study to identify the rhetorical features of TPS by employing a step-driven rhetorical move analysis (RQs 1 & 2) and investigating how stakeholders perceived the findings of the genre analysis (RQ 3). Insofar as TPS is relatively understudied academic promotional genre in EAP genre research but remains key to the career success of academics in a promotion culture (Wernick, 191), the findings of the study contribute to the field by "demystifying" how TPS may be structured and recognized conceptually and potentially pedagogically.

Meanwhil, the study suggests several future directions to addressis caveats. First, due t its primary focus on the TPS genre's rhetorical structures, the study did not investigate the genre's linguistic features and how they relate to the moves and steps. Following the call from and empirical evidence of recent corpus-based EAP genre research (e.g., Moreno & Swale, 2018), future research could explore how the moves and steps ientified in the current study are executed across iffeent linguistic dimensions of the TPS genre, including lexica (g, Lopez-Ferrero & Bach, 2016), phraseological (e.g., Casal & Kesser, 2020; Cortes, 2013; Omidian, Shahriari, & Siyanova-Chanturia, 2018; Yoon & Casal, 2020a), and syntactic (e.g., Lu, Casal, & Liu, 2020) in order to more effectively bridge the "function-form gap" (Moreno & Swales, 2018, p. 41) in existing EAP genre scholarship.

Second, due to limited access and resources, the study could not examine the writing experiences of the actual authors of the 100 TPSs and how their experiences with and perceptions f the genre may have resonated with those of the gatekeeper (Dr. Whitney). Similarl, the study could not examine the entire award nomination packages of the TPS writers and relevant intertextual connections and thus does not clam that its findings are the determining factor that led to the 100 writers successul promotion outcome. Future research could trace and analyze the experiences of the actual TPS writers in relation to those of the gatekeepers (e.g., Chiu, 2015; Kessler, 2020) or adopt a genre system perspective (Tardy, 2003) to investigate how different genres within the award nomination packages collaborated and jointly facilitated gatekeepers' decisions.

Finally, previous research has shown how variations in disciplines, promotion outcomes, and text types (e.g., PS vs. SoP) may be captured in the moves and steps of iferent promotional enres (Connor, 200; Ding, 207; Kessler, 2020; Samraj & Monk, 2008). This study did not identify such variations, which could be pursued in future research with a larger TPS corpus and greater accessto other resources (e.g., TPSs written by the unsuccessful nominees).

# CRediT author statement

Yuanheng Wang: Conceptualization; Methodology; Software; Validation; Formal Analysis; Investigation; Data Curation; Writing - Original Draft; Writing - Review & Editing; Visualization; Project administration.

# Statement of competing interests

No.

# Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Dr. Xiaofei Lu for hs compelling mentoring, as well as Minjin Kim, Xixin Qiu, and Genggeng Zhang, all from The Pennsylvania State University, for their insightul input at different stages of the study. I also would like to thank Dr. Hansun Waring (Teachers College, Columbia Universty), who introduced me to the world of "promotional genre'. My thanks also go to the editor and two reviewers, whose constructive feedback has improved and sharpened my article in various ways while I alone am responsible for any remaining flaws. Finally, I wanted to thank Dr. Mary Connerty (Penn State Behrend) and Mr. Zhenyuan (Tom) Wang for their unwavering support.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2023.101284.

# References

Bakker, C, ek, e,  gh,  019).  nf g  ho f ion" st in tc in courses. Philosophical Inquiry in Education, 26(1), 1-19.   
Bet, J  09. Ph oep t tio ch phophphe, and philosophy. Journal of Management Education, 33(1), 99-114. https://doi.org/10.1177/1052562907310557   
Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analysing genre: Language use in professional settings. Routledge.   
Biber, D., Conor, U., & Upton, T. A. (2007). Discourse on the move: Uin corpus analysis todecrie discorse structure. John Benjamins Publishing.   
oye,       ,  /d Resources/Teaching_resources/TLPDC teaching_ resources/Documents/WritingYourTeachingPhilosophywhitepaper.pdf.   
B 0   2./1826438   
Casal . r,  (200  d l tiof - i win  s- n. t 9 Artice 102370. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102370   
Chism, N. V. N. (1998). Developing a philosophy of teaching statement. Essays on Teaching Excellence, 9(3), 1-2.   
Chi, . 015.    ieti.   r   733. /. org/10.1016/j.jeap.2015.02.002   
Chi, ..   t    o i  of s  e, 21, 48-59. https:/doi.org/10.1016/jjeap.2015.11.001   
Coor, .00  g  o . s a . t 1 18. //1515/0.1   
Core . 3   t h ti  f h i  12 33-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2012.11.002   
Cots  fm  015. g ad  oe/ts in min    t o  . Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 19, 52-72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2015.05.004   
Cotos   . in 017 e/  or  tirti i t. s for  es, 1)0-0. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.01.001   
Dng H.00 f : f   cl .is fr   2, 368-392. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2006.09.004   
Eieman, 008  ph    ati   o h io 3, 36-3 /.g 10.1021/ed085p336   
Ellis D, rifeg  hp t  hlr  .   e hsis Development, 7(1), 85-92.   
Gooyear, .  Ah . (199. ts f h phophy.  M Kn, . an .)  oe t cy  f facly, instructional, and organizational development (pp. 103-121). New Forums Press.   
Haleck,   2.al     .  f sh i , ,70. /.10.1016 j.jeap.2005.08.001   
Hegarty, 015).e    hp s   th  or t   g ph  llfet you. Journal of Adult Education, 44(2), 28-30.   
anoksila (205. r sr f br rh i. ish o i e, 23, 29-2. /./0.1016/. esp.2004.08.003   
apla,s ht, . 208r or  t, 6 (1), 242-262. Physiology Education, 35(2), 136-145. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00123.2010   
Keer, i ati  th  . ri Purposes, 60, 182-192. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2020.07.003   
Laudn,  rt,  e,  (2020  pho ts. Jd f  tio, 4, 57757. /./0.1177 105256292094228   
Lope-Frrer,  Bac . 016e aso sts f  ting   ps . e, 8, 286310. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461445616634553 Academic Purposes, 44, 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2019.100832 63-83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2020.10.001   
reno,    we, J. (018. tthn moe nis m ods bring th ftioo . gis for iic e, 50, 4063. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.11.006   
m  -i t -    s Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 36, 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.06.002   
Payant, C. , 018.Rring to i glish aa her we ch phooy stateme. Ld o/ ESL DU CANADA, 35(1), 29-51.   
Ra, .  h  2) r    r Academic Purposes, 53, 101026.   
aj,        27 193-211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2007.07.001   
Scheer, l   o, 00    or te   i teaching philosophy statements. Inernational Jounal for Academic Development, 7(1), 83-97. htps://doi.org/10.1080/1360140210156501   
ura    . Tesol Quarterly, 51(4), 868-896. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesp.360   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge University Press.   
Swale . (19. i a  t issues (pp. 45-58). John Benjamins Publishing.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Tad,  03.  f  f a r  1736/.141830325369   
Tardy, C. M. (2016). Beyond convention: Genre innovation in academic writing. University of Michigan Press.   
Teuto ri -m   ii  nover. English for Specific Purposes, 37, 13-26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.06.002   
Wernick, A. (1991). Promotional culture: Advertising, ideology, and symbolic expression. Sage. 38, 48-61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2019.01.007   
Yoon, J, l  )-a  npsi . ,  .) corpus- based research on academic writing: ffects of discipline, register, and writr expertise (p. 282-305). John Benjamins Publishing.   
Yon, .  0 t , i  a i i Journal of Applied Linguistics, 30(3), 462-478. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijal.12300