# Editorial

# Part 1: Farewell and thanks to Ken Hyland

The first seven years of the journal have flown by, and it is very pleasing to see that JEAP continues to go from strength to strength. There is in fact only one dark spot on JEAP’s horizon, and that is the impending departure of Ken Hyland for new challengesdspecifically, for the Co-Editorship of Applied Linguistics. Ken has written a farewell of his own which you will find below. I know all readers will join me in offering Ken our congratulations and best wishes as well as our regrets at losing him. It meant a great deal to me to have Ken join me at the beginning, and his name and reputation as well his excellent editorial skills have been of great value, while our collegial working relationship has been a pleasure. Ken will remain with us as a member of the Editorial Board, and I expect to announce a new CoEditor in the next issue of the journal.

Liz Hamp-Lyons

# From Ken Hyland

The next issue of $J E A P$ , a special issue on Critical EAP edited by Sarah Benesch, will be the last where I act as coeditor. As JEAP begins its eighth year of publication, I am stepping down to take up the co-editorship of Applied Linguistics, a very different journal with very different challenges.

I make the change with some considerable regrets. I have enjoyed working on the journal tremendously and have met some great people and read some wonderful papers while doing so. I also leave with feelings of satisfaction in having helped launch and nurture a journal which has become a serious contributor to academic debate and an important part of the EAP landscape.

When Liz and I first discussed cooperating on an EAP journal in a taxi crossing the Singapore causeway in back in 2000 I don’t think we imagined how quickly it would grow. In each of the past seven years we have been delighted to see increases in subscriptions, internet downloads and submitted articles. While these increases partly reflect the growth of EAP as a field of professional practice in recent times, I would like to think that JEAP has played a part in assisting this growth, offering a venue for the field’s responses, whether theoretical, empirical, or practical, to the puzzles of understanding and teaching academic discourses and communicative activities. Research has increasingly revealed the varieties of disciplinary discourses and the complexities of academic contexts so that understanding the demands these make on us and our students has become a major preoccupation of our professional lives.

In this context $J E A P$ plays an important role and has, through its Special Issues and published papers, addressed some of the key issues and challenges, adopting a view which encourages teachers to highlight communication rather than language, to adopt a research orientation to their work, to employ collaborative pedagogies, to be aware of discourse variation, and to consider the wider political implications of their role. Academic literacy education is very much a research-based activity and teachers recognise the importance of a good understanding of the ways language works in academic settings to inform their practice. This, I think, has been the force driving the growth of the journal until now and I feel proud and privileged to have been part of it.

Finally, I would briefly like to pay tribute to the people who have helped me as co-editor and made the experience so valuable. In particular, I’d like to mention our editorial board and occasional reviewers; the Elsevier team of Ann

Corney, Chris Tancock and Linsey Burbery; and, most of all, Liz Hamp-Lyons, my friend and co-editor, who has been a pleasure to work with.

Here’s to the continued success of JEAP!

Ken Hyland

# Part 2: In this issue

We have a very varied issue for you to begin JEAP’s 8th year. John Swales opens it for us by reminding us that there is not always a ‘‘Perfect Text’’: Swales exemplifies his point by referring to various texts that he and his co-authors over the years have used, adapted or indeed invented. Drawing on the example of ‘The story of Joyce’ which will be well-known to many readers of this journal, Swales opens his virtual laundry basket to our eyes and encourages us to similarly consider creative approaches to finding the text when faced with ‘‘The EAP Practitioner’s Dilemma’’.

In the next article, Mostafa Hasrati and Brian Street describe a study of what they term ‘topic arrangement’ e the variation between self-selected PhD topics and supervisor-assigned topics. Hasrati and Street raise interesting issues of expertise, authority and power in decisions about ‘‘big ‘D’ discourse’’ in advanced academic literacy contexts. Janna Fox’s paper is located in a context where major change decisions are being made at university level, without consultation with EAP staff members. Fox discusses how a thoughtful assessment innovation was able to moderate the potential negative impact of this policy change, and to support EAP curricular renewal. Next, Karen Bennett reports a survey of academic style manuals, suggesting as a result of her findings that there is a ‘‘common framework underlying all English Academic Discourse’’. Readers will nevertheless be interested, and sometimes entertained, to find that there are indeed some significant areas of variation in style advice. The next paper by Alla Zareva looks at the analysis of circumstance adverbials based on L1 and L2 corpora of student presentations.

In this issue we return to the topic of the use of Goffman’s term ‘stigma’ in discussing non-native scholarly writers in English: John Flowerdew makes a response to Christine Casanave’s commentary (in JEAP 7,4) on his original article in JEAP 7,2. Flowerdew comments here that ‘‘Given the tone of her writing, I do not have much hope that she will come round to my position’’ and it’s clear to me that this is true equally in reverse. When thoughtful scholars disagree, there is clearly a problem, whether of reality or perception. As an Editor of two journals and a former Editor of the ESP Journal, I have been disturbed to attend a number of conference presentations in recent years where individuals have ‘reported data’ showing how non-native authors have been mistreated by journals/editors. These have always been less-experienced individuals and their claims have been based on tiny ‘datasets’ and no comparative analysis. At this journal, as at all those I am familiar with, we work both deliberately and in line with our personal values to treat all authors respectfully and helpfully. We don’t always succeeddwhat human beings ever do? We are not always treated with equal courtesy in return, but we put that down to inexperience or a very bad day. I worry that if non-native would-be authors take to heart Flowerdew’s claims, the rejection of a paper may be seen as some kind of deliberate personal or political ‘stigmatizing’ act. If that were to happen, authors’ reading of the correspondence and of the situation itself would be tainted by suspicion and distrust, and as a result they would in effect close off opportunities to benefit from the advice they have been given by conscientious reviewers and editors. This would benefit nobody, and certainly it would not benefit the journal.

The recent situation at $J E A P$ may serve as a case in point: In 2008 our Assistant Editor, Kathy Leung, who had served the journal so well for six years, had problems which led to a difficult period of ‘lost’ manuscripts and authors uncontacted. Ken and I have done our best to keep things looking as though they were going smoothly from the reader’s point of view, and if we have succeeded we have to thank, first, a large number of authors who were incredibly understanding and tolerant when faced with our apologies for long delays. Of all those unfortunate authors who suffered from this situation only two have responded to our profuse apology with less than good grace. Rather than suggest any potentially stigmatizing pattern here I will note that in both cases the author was unpublished or inexperienced, and in their (otherwise justified) criticism betrayed no sense of the amount of volunteer specialist expertise that lies behind every single article consideration process.

We also have to especially thank all our reviewers, who in this difficult period agreed to review more manuscripts more quickly than we would ever have planned to ask of them. JEAP has now moved into EES (Elsevier Editorial System) which should ensure reliability of manuscript tracking and information flow with authors. However, the system does not review the articles for us, and so we continue to depend on our excellent Editorial Board members and the many other academic colleagues who agree to help by reviewing for us from time to time. Many authors offer us their special thanks for the reviews and reviewers when they get their feedback: in fact, even most of those whose papers are rejected tell us that they find a good deal of really valuable support in the careful reviews they have received. Of course, reviewers are authors themselves, and they know first hand the importance of reviewers in the whole publishing process.

What I take from these observations is a reminder that becoming a member of an academic community is a long and difficult journey, and one that is rarely taken alone. We all need friends on that journey and so I hope to foster academic encounters and collegial discourses that enable us to build friendships while we identify areas of intellectual difference and even disagreement.