# Legal Problem Question Answer Genre across jurisdictions and cultures Girolamo Tessuto

Law Faculty, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Via Mazzocchi 5, 81055 Santa Maria Capua Vetere, Caserta, Italy

# a r t i c l e i n f o

# a b s t r a c t

Article history: Available online 8 June 2011

Keywords:   
Legal discourse   
Legal genre   
Academic community   
Professional community

This paper seeks to analyse discourse patterns of legal opinions in two languages and cultures – namely, Legal Problem Question Answers (LPQs) in the UK academic writing context and Pareri $( \mathsf { P } \mathsf { s } )$ in the Italian professional writing context. The qualitative and quantitative analysis of discourse in this paper, based on the tenets of genre analysis, was carried out on a small collection of Model Answer texts to Problem Questions used in the two legal cultures. Findings indicate that while LPQs and Ps mostly bear similarities in the relevant rhetorical organisational patterns, they also show differences in the use of lexico-grammatical resources. It is argued that the generic and discoursal patterns resulting from the written data are determined by the writers’ disciplinary (legal) culture and language, which are appropriate to legal discourse practices of Western local jurisdictions.

$^ { © }$ 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

The interest in genre analysis has generated a growing number of studies among contemporary scholars (Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995; Bhatia, 1993, 2004, 2008a,b, 2010; Bhatia & Gotti, 2006; Candlin, 2002; Gillaerts & Gotti, 2005; Miller, 1994; Swales, 1990, 2004). These studies have provided an informed platform by describing specialized discourse features in academic, professional and other contexts across a range of disciplines, and have similarly provided theoretical positions by improving our understanding of textual realizations within various legal genres. In this framework, instances of conventionalised textual genres representing academic and professional practices in specific disciplinary domains have provided an analytical source by which to understand how writers communicate in their ‘discourse communities’ (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990) through genres to pursue their disciplinary and professional goals.

The purpose of this paper is to present a generic description of discursive practices in law as they emerge from two different international academic and professional contexts of written communication. The English Legal Problem Question Answers and their equivalent, Italian Pareri, are therefore examined as highly specialised discursive practices in academic legal contexts. In comparing English academic discourse patterns with those displayed in similarly produced texts by Italian professionals, this study focuses on the conventionalized move-structure and choice of lexico-grammatical items that make the genre appropriate to the legal rhetorical action within a ‘‘socially recognized communicative purpose’’ (Bhatia, 2004, p. 21). The examination of the linguistic features displayed in two sets of English and Italian data leads to the identification of similarities and differences in the genre, as implicated in a recognizable legal culture and language. As such, this paper seeks to expand upon previous studies of the single Legal Problem Question genre based on the IRAC (Issue-Rule-Application-Conclusion) rhetorical organisation (e.g., Bhatia, Langton, & Lung, 2004) by providing further insights into discourse practices in cross-cultural contexts. It also provides some implications for the ESP profession in legal contexts.

# 2. Materials and method

# 2.1. Data collection: context, audience and purpose

In building up a body of data as a resource for intercultural generic discourse analysis, a collection of written language was randomly selected in a total number of ten ‘expert’ Model Answer texts in two languages and cultures – namely, five Legal Problem Question Answers (LPQAs) in the English academic context and five Pareri $( P s )$ in the Italian professional context, both covering civil and criminal law areas. As shown in Table 1, model texts were extracted from specific textbooks on the teaching of legal writing skills for native students in academic law examinations, and written by senior law lecturers in the UK; and from a similarly produced manual, written for Italian law graduates in professional lawyer examinations (Esame di Avvocato) by Italian lawyers. In this context, account was given to the absence of teachable Model Answers for use in Italian academic law examinations. Unlike the Anglo-American tradition, Italian law undergraduates are not made aware of such teachable writing skills until they, as graduates, embark on professional lawyer examinations.

Despite the two differently organised systems of law curricula in both countries, the ‘academic-professional’ dichotomy remains formal rather than substantial in nature, since both LPQs and Ps require writers in academic and professional contexts of examinations to simulate a legal opinion given to a prospective client by a lawyer. Guidance for such advice is found in a series of Questions asked of writers and written by their instructors, as legal experts, in a variety of Model Answers to legal problems posed. The nature of LPQs and Ps is therefore determinant on the ‘advisory’ (and not ‘deciding’, as in judgments) communicative purpose as ‘‘identified and mutually understood by members of the professional or academic community’’ (Bhatia, 2004, p. 23).

Table 1 shows the size of the English texts, which is between 642 to 1875 words (2–4 pages) in a total 7258 word count, as compared to the Italian texts that are kept between 1045 to 1620 words (3–4 pages) in a total 6892 word count. The resulting length is a 14,150 total word count in the data collected. Although the corpora are small, they would seem to offer a reliable assessment of the legal problem genre in the two languages since the rhetorical/linguistic patterns of discourse recurring in such texts appear in both languages. Also, the current study opens the way for further research and debate if the findings are disputed by future researchers working along the same lines. Simple sentences (containing one predicate in a range of 10–25 words) are proportionally higher than compound and complex sentence types (40–65 word count), depending on the need to maintain the reader’s attention on the complexity of the arguable statement. By comparison, the length of Italian sentences ranges from a minimum of 35 words to an astonishing maximum of 90 words.

# 2.2. Method

As a starting point, the method for investigating the expert source of writing in both languages was inspired by the generally defined notion of genre analysis as ‘‘the study of situated linguistic behaviour in institutionalized academic or professional settings’’ (Bhatia, 2004, p. 22), where the expectations and norms of expert writers are portrayed in their ‘discourse community’ (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990) which has common social goals or purposes. Although the present investigation focused on the comparable genre mainly in terms of its textual analysis (discourse as text), forming part of Bhatia’s (2004, pp. 18–22) four-space model of discourse analysis, it related the level of textual discourse to the scholar’s multi-perspectives of discourse as genre, discourse as professional practice, and discourse as social practice for a more comprehensive understanding of the comparable genre.

The qualitative and quantitative investigation was carried out manually by analyzing English and Italian model texts and describing the textual organization and the language use in a conventionalized communicative context. Language-use investigation was associated with some of the rhetorical patterns of argumentative discourse (modality, hedging patterns), as derived from metadiscourse theory (Hyland, 2005), alongside other interactional metadiscoursal resources (voice, impersonalisation). The investigation drew on these descriptions for a standard application to Italian texts, so as to identify similarities and differences in both languages.

Table 1 Source texts, page numbers, word length per text and totals.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Textbooks</td><td>Model answers</td><td>Tokens</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">Exams Skills for Law Students, OUP, 2006</td><td>pp. 9-10</td><td>642</td></tr><tr><td> pp. 13-15</td><td>1638</td></tr><tr><td> pp. 37-39</td><td>1583</td></tr><tr><td>pp. 44-47</td><td>1875</td></tr><tr><td>pp. 57-60</td><td>1520</td></tr><tr><td>Total: 5</td><td>Total: 7258</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">Costruire un Parere Motivato Civile e Penale - Tecniche e Strategie Vincenti, Simone, 2009</td><td>pp. 15-18</td><td>1620</td></tr><tr><td> pp. 24-27</td><td>1415</td></tr><tr><td> pp. 46-49</td><td>1550</td></tr><tr><td>pp. 66-68</td><td>1045</td></tr><tr><td> pp. 89-92</td><td>1262</td></tr><tr><td>Total: 5</td><td>Total: 6892</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total: 10</td><td>Total: 14,150</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3. Results

In this section, we analyse the findings for the genre in the two languages.

3.1. Study 1 – LPQAs: the allowable textual structure

A reading of individual question answers in the LPQAs shows that they are based on a six-move organisational structure necessary to achieve their communicative purpose for the intended audience, as shown in Table 2:

Here, the rhetorical sequence in the IRAC structure accounts for a typical cognitive method on which to base an Answer. IRAC allows writers to chart out an opinion on the facts given in the problem scenario (Question) in a highly legalistic structure – that is, by identifying the legal rules and principles in relation to specific facts, developing arguments and counterarguments and applying the rules to the facts, so as to present a possible conclusion.

Scrutinising the above six-move rhetorical structure, English texts elucidate first the collection style format of the facts in individual Questions where a narrative-oriented approach is used in both indirect and direct speech. Next in the structure is the division of the hypothetical problem Answer into four sections based on the IRAC building blocks and associated communicative purpose(s), as in a criminal law Problem Question in Table 3.

Here, writers separate the Question into a series of issues and deal with each of them separately around the various building blocks, so as to provide an answer to the Question as a whole. By way of examples, Answers start with Issue(s) identification in the Question by the use of the formal conjunction (The first issue is whether Safeco can successfully sue Alice in negligence . . .), which raises an indirect legal Issue in the resulting block (indirect question). However, variation exists in regard to the identification of key isues that are textualised in the form of sufficiently concise direct questions, appearing in bold type, and used as headings for the contents of the issue under discussion:

# (1) Issue II: Does Zoe enter into a contract with Julia?

According to Treitel an acceptance is . .

As a result of the six-move organizational structure, it is reasonable to perceive the overall writing format of LPQAs to revolve around a combination of rhetorical/generic values, described as narration, description, explanation, evaluation, instruction (Bhatia, 2002), when advising on the facts of the scenario.

# 3.1.1. Argumentative patterns of discourse

In keeping with the question of the rhetorical balance in the IRAC structure, let us now examine the main argumentative devices identified in the English texts, which allow writers to reason towards a conclusion (advice) in the language of rights, liabilities and duties of the imaginary parties.

An analysis of Table 4 reveals that these devices are evidenced in the quantitative and qualitative data concerning modality and hedging patterns. The data show that model answers account for the higher total incidence (135 occurrences) of modal auxiliary verbs enacting epistemic meanings in MAY, MIGHT, CAN, COULD, WILL and WOULD modals, as compared with its far lower than half total incidence (51) of deontic meanings underlying MUST (25) and SHOULD (6) modals. The latter incidence combines with deontic meanings that are potentially conveyed by MAY (5), CAN (6) and COULD (9) modals in different circumstances. This modal load is found in the majority of main clauses where subjective epistemic meanings are also paraphrased as ‘it is likely/possible that-to . . .’ constructions. Epistemic modal verbs add to a proportionally high incidence of other (unquantified) modal markers (adjectives, adverbs, nouns, verbs), spreading in a range of one to two such items in almost every sentence. However, as Table 5 illustrates, these epistemic modal markers interact with the total incidence (74) of conditional meanings expressed in $i f .$ -clauses (Quirk et al., 1985), conditional items, and non-lexical hedges (Hyland, 1998).

Thus, the wide coverage attached to epistemic modality (Table 4), together with other linguistic realisations (Table 5), signal the important notion of hedging in our data. In this study, we draw on traditional approaches to hedging which are typically linked to epistemic modality (Crompton, 1997; Hyland, 1998) as a ‘‘polypragmatic’’ (Hyland, 1996, p. 437) interpersonal strategy. Consequently, the analysis of hedging here highlights the need for writers to temper their full commitment to claims (Hyland, 1998, p. 1), and is a useful rhetorical device aimed at persuasion. Indeed, the specificity of hedging in the current discourse may be treated, by theoretical extension of Hyland’s (1998) ‘‘interpersonal’’ metadiscourse, as a pragmatic label for the ‘‘interactional’’ metadiscourse model (Hyland, 2005, pp. 49–50). Under this label, hedges ‘‘emphasize the subjectivity of a position [. . .] and therefore open that position to negotiation [. . .]’’ and ‘‘therefore imply that a statement is based on the writer’s plausible reasoning rather than certain knowledge, indicating the degree of confidence it is prudent to attribute to it’’ (Hyland, 2005, p. 52).

Table 2 Corpus texts: six-move textual organisation.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Question (problem scenario) Instruction (DIscuss, ADvIsE type) Issue I Rule R Application A</td><td>Move 1 Move 2 Move 3 Move 4 Move 5</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 IRAC building blocks as adapted from McVea and Cumper (2006: 9, 32) with the addition of rhetorical move structure and associated communicative purpose(s).   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Move</td><td>Communicative purpose</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Suggested answer</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Issue (s)</td><td>3</td><td>Identifying the contentious legal issue(s) - i.e. all the relevant ingredients of the offences and any defences available to the parties committing the offence</td></tr><tr><td>R</td><td>Rule (s) of law</td><td></td><td>Identifying the relevant law supported by authority - e.g. case law, statute</td></tr><tr><td>A</td><td>Application of the law to</td><td></td><td>Stating any significant fact that may render the law inapplicable (arguing for both prosecution and the</td></tr><tr><td>c</td><td>the facts Conclusion</td><td>6</td><td>defence) Saying whether liability may arise (qualifying the advice)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Modality as expressed through a variety of grammatical categories, including occurrences of central modal verbs in either meaning.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Central modal verbs</td><td>MUST (25) - SHOULD (6) - MAY (23) - MIGHT (8) - cAN (15) - COULD (20) - wOULD (61) - wILL (28) - Total: 186</td></tr><tr><td>Adjectives</td><td>epistemic occurrences: 135 - deontic occurrences: 51 e.g. foreeable, implied, fair, likel, nsary, ordnary, ossible, (unsonable, pausible, (unfit unpredicable, uusual, voluntry</td></tr><tr><td>Adverbs</td><td>e.g. abnormally, broadly, highly, honestly, narrowly, negligently, probably, presumably, properly, surely</td></tr><tr><td>Nouns</td><td>e.g. argument, care, chance, claim, conclusion, deision, evidence, likelihood, obligation, possibility, predictabilit, requirement</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical verbs</td><td>standard, suggestion e.g. alle, appear, argue, assume, claim, believe, forese, ind, intend, mistake, know, plead, presume, require, satisfy, seem</td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>e.g. (be) answerable to, (be) liable to</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 Other linguistic realisations: occurrences.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>If-clauses : &#x27;real&#x27; conditionals [with a present tense verb and a will form] (12)</td></tr><tr><td>: unreal&#x27; (hypothetical) conditionals: (6) : &#x27;unreal&#x27; (counterfactual) conditionals in if + past perfect structure: (2)</td></tr><tr><td>Tot.: 20</td></tr><tr><td>Conditional items</td></tr><tr><td>Assuming X is ... Y will ... (5)</td></tr><tr><td>Provided X is/was ... then Y would ... (4) Where X does ... Y will .. .(6)</td></tr><tr><td>It is unclear whether X is ... or .../Whether X is ... (24) Tot.: 39</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>Non-lexical hedges (Hyland, 1998)</td></tr><tr><td>It is unclear ... whether ... (5) Whether ... is, however, problematic ... (2)</td></tr><tr><td>This would be difficult to show on the facts. (1)</td></tr><tr><td>... there is no suggestion ... (3)</td></tr><tr><td>If, however, this argument is correct ... (2)</td></tr><tr><td>Although there is some degree of doubt as the exact nature of the test ... (1)</td></tr><tr><td>Whether the warning Keep Out ...&#x27; constitutes sufficient notice ... is debatable given that ... (1) Tot.: 15</td></tr><tr><td>Total 74</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.1.2. Deontic modal auxiliaries (MAY–CAN–COULD) and hedging items

In a context where we are dealing with the evaluative function of legal discourse, in which hedging items concur, a closer scrutiny deserves the function performed by certain modal auxiliaries beyond their ordinary epistemic role of expressing tentativeness.

The data show that deontic modality functions (Palmer, 1990, 2001) may be elicited from the use of MAY (5), CAN (6) and COULD (9) modals in a total of 20 instances, since writers construct arguments around different rhetorical purposes, as in:

(2) According to White v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire (1998, HL), a person who negligently exposes another to a risk of injury can be held liable for any psychological damage [Rule section].   
(3) In The Wagon Mound (1966, PC) it was held that damages could only be recovered for the type of harm that was reasonably foreseeable [Rule section].   
(4) If, however, this argument is correct and the clause properly construed does not cover the breach, there is still the possibility that an exclusion clause may be rendered ineffective by virtue of either the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contract Regulations 1999 or by virtue of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 [Application section].

The textual surface of the examples in (2) and (3) suggests that deontic modality of ‘possibility’ (can be held liable: ‘it is possible for x to y’) and ‘permission’ (could only be recovered: ‘x is permitted to y’) bear no connection with the writer’s epistemic subjectivity of the propositions made, since the compelling (deontic) situations of the modality are attributed to the source of authority (decided case), appearing in marked position, with no direct involvement of the writer. In these examples, deontic sources allow writers to report the general legal rules for application to Question facts in the Rule section. Rule propositions which, we understand, encode a possibility to recognise (liability arising from negligently exposing someone to risk) or a permission (to obtain financial compensation for damage) by authority of judges, will therefore support the truthvalue arguments advanced later. In (4), where the writer is directly involved in the argument, the writer’s (epistemic) assumption (as to whether the particular issue of exclusion clause exists) is embedded in the relevant deontic sources being explicitly cited (Unfair Terms). Thus, faced with the constraints allowed by the deontic sources embedded in the context of discourse in (4), it is reasonable to treat the modal phrase (may be rendered: ‘x is permitted to y’) as eliciting a deontic ‘permission’ function of ‘‘event modality’’ (Palmer, 2001, p. 8), where permission is given on the basis of authority of law.

In the examples given, tentativeness in expressing arguments is visible by conditional meanings evoked by the use of present $i f .$ -clauses and (underlined) epistemic markers, which allow writers to evaluate the ensuing rights, duties and liabilities of the parties. Similarly, but in connection with the general hypothetical marker of WOULD modal (predictability) in epistemic use, the hedging effect intrudes by the use of other (underlined) epistemic lexical markers, allowing writers to recognise the readers’ potentially opposing views while also engaging them in the writers’ line of argumentation:

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3" colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>(5) Common sense would indicate this; the harm is therefore foreseeable, .. That said, the quantity of foil, and the purpose and manner of its storage, would need to be ascertained before a more reliable conclusion could be drawn</td></tr><tr><td>[Application + Conclusion sections].</td></tr></table></body></html>

3.1.3. Other hedging rhetorical devices and conditional meanings

As shown in Table 5, other linguistic resources interact with the variety of epistemic grammatical categories discussed so far. These resources are displayed by clausal elements which comment, by hedging, on the state of existing knowledge of writers in various ways, as in:

(6) It is unclear whether recklessness in this context is subjective or objective . . .   
(7) Whether there has been an escape of something that is dangerous and has a non-natural use is, however, problematic.   
(8) Here, however, there is no suggestion that Alan’s factory is on an industrial estate . .   
(9) If, however, this argument is correct and the clause properly construed does not cover the breach . . .

Following, by adaptation, Hyland’s (1998, pp. 141–148) system of ‘‘non-lexical hedges’’ in RAs, the clausal elements in the above examples, as found in a total of 15 instances in the data, are capable of being identified as instances of ‘‘lack of knowledge’’ and ‘‘doubts in experimental conditions’’ in the scholar’s terminology. In either instance, the general notion of deficiency or otherwise difficulty in qualifying the propositions is sufficient to hedge the accuracy or certainty of the information presented.

In the examples above, we can perceive the meaning of doubt in the subordinating conjunction (whether . . . or . . .) instead of $i f$ when both sides of an alternative (two possibilities) are given, or in the initial sentence with whether noted before (to introduce indirect questions) instead of if and, finally, by the use of $i f .$ -clauses. Being also relatively used in embedded structures, the total incidence of such clauses (20 occurrences) adds to the total incidence (39) of other varying conditional items, as shown in Table 5 (e.g., Assuming X is . . . Y will . . ./Provided X is/was . . . then Y would . . ./It is unclear whether X is . . . or . . .).

Taken together, $i f .$ conditionals and other such items provide for more than insignificant data by their total occurrences (59). Table 5 illustrates that $i f .$ -clauses occur in the ordinary English paradigm of ‘real’ conditionals, and ‘unreal’ (hypothetical) conditionals. By contrast, ‘unreal’ (counterfactual) conditionals are only marginally observed in the data.

As a result of arguing in contingency of the law using discourse markers (adverbial clauses and conjunctional adverbs), tentativeness is increased when framing an answer.

# 3.1.4. Conclusion sections: how definitive?

Although, as seen, writers rehearse legal arguments around epistemic resources in the rule-oriented structure, it should be added that facts which writers assess as certain are presented declaratively in the present simple tense only in the minority of cases, as in:

<html><body><table><tr><td>(10) Prima facie, both s 20 charges are sustainable.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">The rule-structure approach is conducive to the quality of conclusions reached. Let us consider the following example:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(11) In conclusion, Simon&#x27;s best hope is that the initial agreement between him and Nicky is not a contract, but that the later agreement concerning the 250 is. With respect to Jo, Simon appears to be on firmer ground since it seems likely that the court will hold that payment for the work was implicit.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Here, the certainty of the proposition is encoded in the first compound sentence in its declarative form, from which others in the data are derived using different epistemic modality items. The illocutionary force of this sentence is to inform the parties of a fact as certain and may therefore be treated as constative with performative value (Austin, 1962), since by stating a fact writers perform an illocutionary act. However, by describing or constating a fact in the declarative form, genre writers do not decide the case on a win-or-lose basis, as English judges do at trial in the judgment genre, but assess the client’s chances in order to fight his/her case as far as the law and facts allow. By contrast, the uncertainty of the proposition creeps in to the remaining sentence which cautiously revolves around epistemic items of the predicted circumstances, as the most likely outcome of the case.

It is therefore easy to perceive that this and other conclusion statements in the English data read like surmises and conjectures, which lead them not to be definitive in the answer to the problem posed, on account of one epistemic item normally intruding. In the absence of a single answer, therefore, the tendency among writers is to strike the right balance between the certainty and uncertainty of the conclusion reached, in a context where concluding statements are kept to a maximum length of 55 words.

# 3.1.5. Voice

In keeping with Hyland’s (2005) interactional metadiscourse which highlights, among other features, ‘‘the writer’s expression of a textual ‘voice’, or community-recognized personality’’ (2005, p. 49), it is possible to capture the writer voice, as identified by the reference to the ‘‘self-mention’’, we (Hyland, 2005, p. 53). With no other explicit device (pronouns, possessive adjectives) of writer voice occurring in the data, writers manifest themselves exclusively in a we pronoun, co-occurring only with the tell verb form in three instances:

(12) In the problem before us, however, we are told that L has erected a ‘large sign’ excluding liability.

The use of the inclusive we-pronoun allows writers not only to organise and evaluate their argumentative discourse for advice, as it results from previous knowledge in client-lawyer exchange, but provides, most importantly, the pragmatic response to recognition of a two-dimensional interaction of discourse. Such interaction, on the one hand, concerns the assumptions of a role (the lawyer advising the client) and the representation of the profession under examination conditions. The latter conditions, on the other, require academic writers (student-lawyers) to have expert writers (law lecturers) as their most immediate readers for whom they write and learn writing. As a result, the inclusive we establishes writer/reader relationships with the appropriate disciplinary community (academic and professional).

# 3.1.6. Impersonalisation

The overt writer presence, however, only marginally expressed in the data, brings into focus other noticeable pragma-linguistic resources employed by writers to express their ‘‘stance’’ (Biber et al., 1999), as defined by the recurrent use of it impersonal subjects. Besides it subjects (such as, In Hardy it was held/stated that . . .) reporting the statement of law in the cited source, which is relevant to the factual and legal issues specifically raised in problem question answer, other frequently used it-structures are observed by the use of:

- empty subjects it in that-clauses, co-occurring with APPEAR, ARGUE, ESTABLISH, SHOW SEEM verb forms and depending on can, could, would and must modals (5–10 instances per text out of a total of 38 occurrences); and - other introductory it-epistemic structures – for example, it seems likely that, it seems reasonable to assume that (3–6 instances per text out of a total of 13 occurrences).

Let us consider the following example:

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>(13) It could be argued that Bill should have foreseen the type of harm that could be sustained (broken bones)from his conduct. In any case, (i) it is reasonably foreseeable that an old lady would have a fragile bone condition ...</td></tr></table></body></html>

Although the it-subjects contribute to obscure the writer’s propositional responsibility (stance) by means of de-emphasising the subject within the sentence, they allow writers to incorporate into their texts their own ‘‘personal feelings, attitudes, value judgments, or assessments’’ (Biber et al., 1999, p. 966), as defining ways in which writers reveal their subjectivity (stance) in advisory discourse. In particular, however, writer stance in the data is revealed metadiscursively (Hyland, 2005, p. 37), by considering that legal arguments are convincingly rehearsed for or against the client’s case in writer–reader interaction, as shown in (13), which elucidates the degree of tentativeness (hedging effect) expressed by the propositions. Here the compound hedge (could modal verb $^ +$ argue lexical verb) and epistemic modifying noun clause (it is reasonably foreseeable) mark the writer’s preference for qualifying the tentative prediction of the event. By presenting statements as cautiously as possible, the writer in the example therefore helps the imaginary client to recognise the various issues raised and, at the same time, goes some way to mitigating the client’s negative reactions as arguments unfold in legal reasoning.

# 3.2. Study 2 – Pareri – Ps: textual structure

In Table 6, we introduce the allowable textual organisation in the Italian texts based on a seven-move structure. Scrutinising the various sequences at work in this Table, we note both similarities and differences between the English and Italian data:

As with LPQAs, Ps allow for the collection style format of the facts requiring an Answer to be found in the Question (Move 2), using a narrative-oriented approach, and provide Instruction for such a Question. By contrast, LPQAs avoid mentioning the Subject (Move 1) as well as using lengthy (3–4 page) law research material (Move 4), as found in Italian texts. While no use is made of an Opinion Plan (Move 5) proper in LPQAs, Question facts are used in the Opinion (Move 5) to construct evaluative legal arguments via researched materials, so as to support a thesis as a premise. This Opinion, as it results from the arguable statements for advice in specific sections (Moves), turns out to be analogous to LPQAs that are structured around the IRAC reasoning.

Faced with such analogy in reasoning, the punchline in $P s$ seems to be less than the Quid Juris question (What is the law applicable to these facts?), which is indeed the rationale behind the IRAC legalistic rhetorical structure. Against this rationale, in fact, Italian writers tend to adopt a more academic-like approach to the Question posed than their English counterparts, by engaging in critical analysis of a controversial statement (comunione legale $>$ joint estate) in legal theory, as in:

Table 6 Pareri: seven-move rhetorical-textual structure.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move 1 Move 2</td><td>Subject</td><td>Not found in LPQAs</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Question (QUESTIONE)</td><td>Analysing the problem question in order to identify the legal issues that need to be resolved: status causae (Cicero)</td></tr><tr><td>Move 3</td><td>Instruction (to the Question)</td><td>Selecting and providing the content of legal statements in different sources</td></tr><tr><td>Move 4</td><td>Researching the law</td><td>(legislation, case law, doctrine) that best apply for arguments in the Opinion</td></tr><tr><td>Move 5</td><td>Plan of Opinion in coincise form.</td><td>Suggesting a concise answering plan by snappy contents of law applied to facts, and conclusion</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Move 6</td><td rowspan="2">OpiniOn (PARERE) = IRAC</td><td>6.1. INTRODUCTION : Outlining general statements/thesis statement as a premise to be supported with</td></tr><tr><td>arguments 6.2. BODY</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>: Developing evaluative arguments (for or against the party) based on facts and law: topic sentences and supporting evidence by cited sources. 6.3. CONCLUSION : Summarising main findings and points to the question posed.</td></tr><tr><td>Move 7</td><td>Restatement of arguments in corollary-like style.</td><td>Repeating the conclusion reached also by introducing new material</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2" colspan="2">(14)</td></tr><tr><td>Itranslation: There are two different approaches to the notion of the joint estate of spouses. One initial approach is...</td></tr></table></body></html>

This results in the INTRODUCTION and BODY sections of Opinions to be less than concise and focused statement of the relevant law, and therefore leads Italian writers to give their Opinions a feel of a legal Essay. This is accounted for by their explanation of the law which, though accurately constructed in the context of the facts, as in (14), reduces the requirement to strengthen the application of the law to the facts, as the Quid Juris question referred to before.

This academic-type approach can be seen further in the INTRODUCTION section shown in Table 6 (6.1), in which Italian writers tend to outline an interpretation of the Question posed, rather than narration of facts leading to the identification of issues, as noted among English writers. According to the conventions of English writers, in fact, the identification of the Issue(s) leads to the discussion of relevant areas of law applicable to the problem Question (The issue is whether . . .), and leads to precision in the section (ranging from 15 to 20 words in the English data). This contrasts with the Italian conventions of wording the interpretation of the law in 6.1, which does not usually identify the Issue and thus results in lengthy interpretations there, ranging from 74 to 90 words.

As a result of this tendency, Italian writers often introduce definitions about features of law in the introduction, along the lines: La comunione legale può essere definita come il regolamento tipico dei rapporti patrimoniali della famiglia in base ai quali . . . [translation: Joint estate may be defined as a regulation inherent in the estate relationships within the family whereby . . .], where the excessive length of definitions achieves an astonishing 320 word count. While such an elaborate section is crucial for the prospective lawyer in instructional contexts of $P s$ , it provides yet another opportunity for reducing the application of the law to the facts, as the Quid Juris requirement in the opening lines of the Opinion.

# 3.2.1. Argumentative patterns of discourse

The identification of the textual/rhetorical similarities and differences in the two sets of data provides the context in which to describe standard patterns of argumentation in Italian advisory discourse. These patterns are analysed in specific rhetorical devices for persuasive objectives.

# 3.2.2. Modal meanings v present indicative tense

The qualitative investigation into modal meanings expressed in the Italian data highlights how writers qualify their statements when constructing arguments for a conclusion. Considering that Italian grammar does not use the term modal verb as a grammatical phenomenon, it is still possible for writers to encode deontic meanings of obligation and epistemic meanings of possibility/probability. The rationale behind these meanings lies in a variety of lexical phrases (positive/negative) reported in Table 7, which fall into the category of verbi di pertinenza (verbs specifying duty or possibility falling upon the person being referred to) in Latin and Italian (e.g., ha il compito/ha la facoltà), specifying the subject to whom the action refers. As a result, these meanings may be associated with traditional English central modal verbs with deontic and epistemic value.

Of these phrases, in which the verb potere $( { \mathsf { c a n } } / { \mathsf { m a y } } )$ is used, writers are capable of entertaining only a lower incidence of epistemic meanings conveyed in Presente (Present Tense), including those in the Congiuntivo Presente (Present Subjunctive) for future-referring hypothesis, in a total of 12 instances in the data. Thus, for example:

<html><body><table><tr><td>(15) concepito malformato richiedere ... (possibility: Present Subjunctive). Itranslation: If the mother was capable of making her own decision regarding abortion, the question then arises as to</td><td>Si parla in tal caso di cd. danni da lesioni prenatali o da interferenze nella vita fetale e I&#x27;azione risarcitoria puo riguardare sia i danni ... (possibility: Present). Itranslation: In this case one may speak of so-called damage caused by pre-natal injuries or by foetal interference and action for damages may concern both damage ...] Il problema che si pone e se allorche la madre non sia stata posta in grado di autodeterminarsi per I&#x27;aborto, possail</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 Modality meanings in a variety of lexical phrases.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>ha oblig-  ore die tet  t dg n igatio  ty to at (mng that somthi ms, hs t or should be eformed deve parars dis de ritenere chde escuders che impersonal costruction - expresing weakstrong assumption based on lglneessty (meaning that it must or should be (verb) that and other combinations) ine ci  i  nn  liu efde  d l  - ariously</td></tr><tr><td>expressing possibility, probability, discretion, or power that something may/might/can/could be performed Epistemic meanings (potere) in Presente/Congiuntivo Presente: 12 occ. Obligation/necessity (dovere): 25 occ.</td></tr></table></body></html>

By contrast, writers tend to speculate more on the possible overlapping meanings of obligation (deriving from the expectation of law), and deduction based on certainty or logical necessity (deriving from the speaker) in a total of 25 instances, as in:

(16) . . . la rappresentanza del tutore è sottoposta a un duplice ordine di vincoli: egli deve innanzitutto agire nell’esclusivo interesse dell’incapace, . . . La funzionalizzazione del potere di rappresentanza, dovendo essere orientato alla tutela del diritto alla vita . . . (obligation: Present $^ +$ Gerund). [translation: . . . representation of the guardian is subject to two legal constraints: he or she must first and foremost act in the exclusive interest of the disabled child, . . .. Secondly, there is the representational power since it has to be oriented towards protection of the right to life . . .] Deve escludersi che il diritto alla autodeterminazione terapeutica del paziente incontri . . . (deduction/certainty: (si) impersonal structure). [translation: It should be ruled out that the right of the patient to decide on whether to undergo therapy may come up against . . .]

Taken together in incidence, however, these modal meanings are superseded by the higher incidence of the present indicative tense (Presente) used in 52 instances throughout Ps. Being identical to the English simple present noted before, Presente is used to state a fact or rule, also by embedding the writer’s statement within a legally cited source, as in (18):

(17) I proventi dell’attività separata di ciascuno dei coniugi, dunque, entrano di pieno diritto a far parte della comunione immediata . . . [translation: Proceeds of separate activities carried out by a single spouse therefore are deemed to rightfully go towards joint estate . . .]   
(18) L’art. 177 lett. a) stabilisce, come regola generale, che costituiscono oggetto della comunione gli acquisti . . . [translation: By article 177, comma a), it is established as a general principle that purchases. . .. constitute a joint estate]

Considering the illocutionary force of the statements above which functions to inform the client about his/her present position, the indicative form may be regarded as a specification of the meaning encoded by declaratives that describe or constate a fact or rule (Austin, 1962), and is part of argumentative legal reasoning.

It is worth noting that the tendency among Italian writers is only for certain (tentative) lexical categories (e.g., adeguatamente/adequately, apprezzare/appreciate, dimostrare/demonstrate, efficienza/efficiency, facoltà/choice-option, giusto/fair, intendere/to be understood, ipotesi/hypothesis, ragionevole/reasonable, possibilità/possibility, possible/possible, qualche/ some, supporre/assume) to be used sparingly, as the context requires, in order to prove the validity of their arguments. Surprisingly, hedging devices in the deficiency or difficulty types, as used by English writers, are not recorded in the Italian data.

# 3.2.3. Conditional patterns

In a context where writers tend to be more assertive about their arguments of law applied to facts by the use of indicative forms, or otherwise being neutrally assertive about those arguments by the use of impersonalized indicative forms, as shown below, the result is that they tend to provide a lower incidence of conditional patterns than their English counterparts.

Spread in every five to eight sentences in a total of 20 instances in the data, conditional patterns are generally expressed by the hypothetical items se (if) and quando (when), as well as by Condizionale Presente (Present Conditional) (expressing condition: formerebbero oggetto di comunione $>$ they should/would make up joint estate) and Congiuntivo Presente (Present Subjunctive) (expressing possibility and doubt: $p o s s a > m a y + \nu e r b .$ ). These patterns occur in syntactic environments of subordination, and are used to argue the alternative of facts or law:

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="5">would be obliged ...</td><td>(19)  ... se gli stessi fossero stati adeguatamente informati delle prospettive di tali malformazioni.</td></tr><tr><td>[translation: if they had been adequately informed of the prospects of such disabilities] La fattispecie oggetto di parere si inquadra in quest&#x27;ultima ipotesi, atteso che le malformazioni con cui e venuta</td></tr><tr><td>alla luce Tizietta non sono ascrivibili ad una colpa medica ...</td></tr><tr><td>Itranslation: the type of conduct awaiting opinion may be framed within the latter hypothesis, by considering that the</td></tr><tr><td>disabilities Tizietta was born with are not attributable to medical negligence] Infatti, anche se non vi fosse pericolo .., ogni qual volta vi osse la previsione ... Ia gestante avrebbe I&#x27;obbligo... translation: Indeed, even though there may be no danger ., every time foreseeability arose that .., the mother-to-be</td></tr></table></body></html>

While, in the examples above, the meaning of doubt (tentativeness) is reasonably increased, on account of the hypotheses rehearsing arguments broadly or narrowly, the syntactic effect of subordination, as well as embedded clauses, allows Ps to read like texts in which the primary and secondary information often results in complex, hypotactic phenomena. As a visibly recurrent device among Italian writers, subordination is found to occur mainly in participial structure, as in the atteso che clause above, introduced by che as a subordinating syntactic link.

In this context, raising hypotheses (Ci si chiede . . . $>$ One may ask) for later arguments of facts applied to law, allows writers to pose indirect rhetorical questions using se (if/whether) hypothetical conjunction:

(20) Ci si chiede infatti se il tutore possa spingersi al punto di sostituirsi all’interessato, . . . Secondo la giurisprudenza più recente (Cass. 21748/2007), il riferimento all’istituto della rappresentanza legale non trasferisce al tutore un potere incondizionato . . [translation: One may ask, indeed, whether the guardian may attempt to take the place of the minor, . . .. According to latest court decisions (Supreme Court Decision 21748/2007), the reference to the institution of legal representation does not shift unconditional power to the guardian . . .]

3.2.4. Conclusion sections: more definitive

Table 8 shows that Italian writers encode the certainty patterns in conclusion statements by the higher incidence of the present indicative form, as in the following examples:

(21) Ne discende che il sanitario Caio risponde dei danni cagionati . . translation: It follows that the physician Caio is answerable for the damage caused . . . Le malformazioni . . . non sono eziologicamente riconducibili . . . translation: Disabilities . . . are not etiologically referrable to . . .

However, the use of the present indicative is one which also categorically entertains deontic meanings of obligation:

(22) Il tutore ha quindi il compito di completare questa identità complessa sulla vita del paziente . . translation: The guardian thus has the duty to fill in the missing pieces of the complex identity of the patient’s life . . Allorchè l’una o l’altra condizione manchi, il giudice deve negare l’autorizzazione, dovendo allora essere data incondizionata prevalenza al diritto alla vita . . . translation: In the absence of one of these requirements, the court must deny permission, since unconditional priority must be given to the right to life . . .

Although variation in the obligative idea of dovere (must) is observed only marginally (2 instances) by the use of the gerund form dovendo and the impersonal form of indicative si deve ritenere (translation: one should consider), the latter suggests that the writer’s logical certainty is derived from reasoned arguments.

Yet, other cases using potere are recorded in the present indicative, as well as gerund and future forms. In the two indicative instances of such verb use in negative contexts (il coniuge non può contestarne in alcuna maniera il modo d’impiego $>$ neither spouse may in any way challenge the manner of use), certainty surfaces in the negated proposition and the surrounding adverbial phrase, as compared to the sole instance of the verb appearing in indicative positive contexts (e, pertanto, può essere dato corso . . . alla richiesta $>$ and, therefore, application to . . . may proceed) which may open the way to tentativeness. In the remaining instances shown in (23) and (24), incorporating the explicit marker of future time reference (Futuro Semplice) of the verb (positive/negative), as is elsewhere with saranno (will be), the semantics expresses prediction-based assertions about future situations. Although the writer’s certainty towards the actualization of the future action is implied more in (24) by negating the proposition - which is likely to flow into a deontic reading (discretion) on account of the allowable criteria set by law – prediction-based certainty in (23) seems indeed to flow into an epistemic (possibility) reading alone:

Table 8 Verb phrases occurring in Italian conclusion sections.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Caio risponde/va invece esclusa la possibilita/non sono eziologicamente riconducibili/non e imputabile/e qui vi e diritto al risarcimento/il tutore ha il compito di completare/il tutore</td><td>Higher density of present indicative: writers stating facts (as certain) or general rules</td></tr><tr><td>non deve ignorare/il giudice deve negare/puo essere dato corso alla richiesta/ si deve ritenere che/non potendosi ritenere che</td><td>Impersonalising or passivising (si) stereotype in</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> indicative/gerund: logical certainty</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td>(23) Tizio fondamentalmente potra opporsi alla richiesta ad esso inoltrata dall&#x27;amministratore ca. il pagamento..</td></tr><tr><td>translation: Tizio essentially may challenge the request for payment received from the supervisor ...</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">(24)</td><td>Dall&#x27;altro canto I&#x27;amministratore Mevio non potra sostenere che nell&#x27;ipotesi di alienazione di una porzione dell&#x27;edificio .. .</td></tr><tr><td>translation: On the other hand, the supervisor Mevio may not hold that in the case of a portion of building being alienated ...</td></tr></table></body></html>

By adopting a more categorical (certain) position, Italian writers therefore reveal a more definitive tone in conclusion statements than their English counterparts, while, at the same time, being as effective in the written genre as their English colleagues in persuading readers. Unlike the latter, though, Italian writers construct lengthy conclusion statements which range astonishingly from a 230 to 260 word count, as compared to the maximum word count (55) needed by their English equivalents to justify their conclusions.

# 3.2.5. Impersonalisation

Example (20), examined before, is also indicative of the impersonalization pattern (Ci si chiede $>$ One may ask), characterizing the current argumentative discourse. Considering that no use is made of the first person speech role (singular or plural) in the Italian data, the conventional impersonalization use of si pattern (it is . . .) in (20) adds to other similar cases, such as: si intende che Caio (it is understood that Caio) or deve escludersi che il diritto (it must be ruled out that the right).

# 4. Discussion

The rhetoric of the legal discipline via comparable model texts shows that disciplinary writers in two different languages and cultures functional share the same generic goal or purpose of advising within a specific community (academic/professional). Obviously, the extent to which writers shape the recurring and novel rhetorical contexts of generic action depends on their ability to construct their own textual identities in the genre, as derived from the ways in which each language reflects its communicative practices and goals. Here, the data suggest that the cognitive demands placed on genre writers allow for typical features of textual organization to mostly share similarity in the narrative and rule-oriented approach to advising in interculturally community-specific contexts. This approach is the result of controlling the dynamics of the law in problem solving, and ‘‘relies heavily on tried and tested modes of communication’’ (Bhatia, 2004, p. 37). However, differences do emerge among English and Italian writers who distance themselves from each other when certain organizational moves in the genre macrostructure are taken into account, involving the rigid IRAC approach to English Problem Question merging into an academic-style approach to Italian problem solving. These differences highlight the differently organized disciplinary cultures and practices in which the law is meant to represent the two communities at work, and lie in the English inductiveItalian deductive dichotomy of legal reasoning. Despite this dichotomy, LPQAs and Ps still provide a common rhetorical place in which the same purpose (advising) is functionally achieved from opposite sides of the rule of law.

In order to account for the pragmatically relevant aspects of lexico-grammar in the two languages and cultures, the data examined allow for discourse patterning among English writers to readily admit to a much higher degree of hedging content in writing problem solving than their Italian counterparts writing in a similar genre. The variety of hedging grammatical categories found in LPQAs confirm Hyland’s (1998) case for the significance of these devices in academic discourse, since in the data examined they are important communicative resources for English writers to construct logically coherent arguments based on their prototypical images of the external world, as defined by their certainty or uncertainty about knowledge claims (true-value propositions). These resources allow writers to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the arguments, counter-arguments and conclusions made, and therefore help to shape legal discourse conventions in the genre based on persuasive objectives. By contrast, epistemic modal devices (hedging), as defined by adjectives, adverbs, nouns and verbs in $P s$ , reveal that Italian writers are left only with a heavily lower proportion of such choices than their English counterparts. In the absence of comparable analyses in the Italian literature in the field, the fewer epistemic choices and conditional items available to Italian writers in the data may be attributed to their specific culture, which is more content-oriented in the expectations and values of their advisory discourse than it is for their English colleagues. The latter are indeed more reader-oriented in the same discourse when assessing the chances of the client in the case being advised. Hence, the specific function of hedging in the English data becomes reader-oriented (interactional).

Such socio-cultural differences support the idea that Italian writers generally bring their readership around to the accuracy and legitimacy of their reasoning by using more categorical statements than the English, and therefore leave little room for likely contentions from their readers. By contrast, it is customary for English writers, in any disciplinary discourse, to achieve the same effect in their reasoning by cautious statements constructed through a variety of hedging devices. And such differences also creep into conclusion statements. LPQAs writers, in fact, conventionally construct indefinite conclusions around epistemic items, which seek to inform the client of the best possible understanding of their position before the case proceeds to trial. By contrast, the tendency among $P$ writers is to lead the client into the most definitive understanding of their case before trial. Despite such consciously established differences in constructing statements for advice in legal reasoning and conclusions, credential-building criteria are equally shared by English and Italian writers via impersonalization techniques, used responsibly to construct stance in legal (advisory) argumentation.

# 5. Conclusion and pedagogical implications

As a result of these allowable linguistic differences and similarities in the written data, it may be concluded overall that English and Italian writers are in a position to provide their opinions with a social expendibility, as defined by the socio-rhetorical action of the genre for specific communities. Consequently, they preserve the integrity of the genre (Bhatia, 2004) in the community-based orientation to discourse practices and objectives. Given the specificity of the texts produced in these contexts, therefore, disciplinary practices in the advisory genre come to reflect the ‘‘communities of practice’’ (Swales, 1990) that are typical of recognisable legal cultures (English Common Law versus Italian Continental Civil Law) engaged in the use of their discourse practices for the real world of the legal profession (Bhatia, 2004).

The knowledge gained by this study can provide a supporting tool for ESP practitioners engaged in assessing the effectiveness of English legal discourse analytical approaches to the learning and teaching of the specialized variety of English, thus supporting the line that the academic/professional genre may be translated into pedagogical applications (Bhatia, 1993, 2002, 2004, 2008a; Hyland, 2005; Swales, 1990; Swales, 2004). By exposing non-native (Italian) writers of legal English to rhetorical-grammatical and discoursal differences embedded within differing socio-cultural and legal systems, the findings may allow them to become less vulnerable to the rhetorical influences of their own native language in English legal writing courses. In this context, and as a result of English being the international language for legal communication, specific use of language in the English conventionalized genre may provide L2 learners with the necessary linguistic standards to write effective legal advice specific to the UK loci of law, by developing control over the concerns, practices, values and culture of the academic/professional genre. Where any such development implies the ‘‘awareness of the need to integrate language training with the communication of disciplinary knowledge’’ (Bhatia, 2004, p. 204) in ESP curriculum and evaluation, the latter orientation becomes one in which ESP practitioners engaged in the law discipline ‘‘must participate more actively and collaboratively in the concerns of the specialist disciplines’’ (Bhatia, 2004, p. 212).

# References

Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (1995). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication: Cognition, culture, power. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analysing genre: Language use in professional settings. London: Longman.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2002). Applied genre analysis: Analytical advances and pedagogical procedures. In A. M. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom: Multiple perspectives (pp. 279–284). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2004). Worlds of written discourse. London: Continuum.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2008a). Genre analysis, ESP and professional practice. English for Specific Purposes, 27, 161–174.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2008b). Towards critical genre analysis. In V. K. Bhatia & R. J. Flowerdew (Eds.), Advances in discourse studies (pp. 166–177). London: Routledge.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2010). Interdiscursivity in professional communication. Discourse and Communication, 4(1), 32–50.   
Bhatia, V. K., Langton, N., & Lung, J. (2004). Legal discourse: Opportunities and threats for corpus linguistics. In U. Connor & T. Upton (Eds.), Discourse in the professions. Perspectives from corpus linguistics (pp. 203–234). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Bhatia, V. K., & Gotti, M. (Eds.). (2006). Explorations in specialized genres. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.   
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrard, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Grammar of spoken and written English, London, Longman.   
Candlin, C. N. (Ed.). (2002). Research and practice in professional discourse. Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong Press.   
Crompton, P. (1997). Hedging in academic writing: Some theoretical problems. English for Specific Purposes, 16(4), 271–287.   
Hyland, K. (1996). Writing without conviction? Hedging in science research articles. Applied Linguistics, 17(4), 433–454.   
Hyland, K. (1998). Hedging in scientific research articles. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Hyland, K. (2005). Metadiscourse. Exploring interaction in writing. London: Continuum.   
McVea, H., & Cumper, P. (2006). Exams skills for law students. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Miller, C. R. (1994). Genre as social action. In A. Freedman & P. Medway (Eds.), Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 23–42). London: Taylor and Francis.   
Gillaerts, P., & Gotti, M. (Eds.). (2005). Genre variation in business letters. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.   
Palmer, F. (1990). Modality and the English modals. London: Longman.   
Palmer, F. (2001). Mood and modality. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of contemporary English. London: Longman.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres. Explorations and applications. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Girolamo Tessuto is Associate Professor of English Language and Linguistics at the Law Faculty of Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli (where he is also in charge of the Language Centre) as well as teaching at the Law Faculty of the University of Naples Federico II. His main research interests are in the fields of English legal language, discourse and genre, translation and plain legal language issues.