# The stance of stance: a critical look at ways stance is expressed and modeled in academic discourse

Marc Silver\*

Universita\` di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Centro Linguistico di Ateneo, Corso Vittorio 59, I-41100 Modena, Italy

# Abstract

As work on how evaluation is expressed in academic discourse proliferates, it is easy to fall into the methodological trap of assuming that all descriptions lead in the same direction, that one need simply combine and implement existing categories and models. This paper raises a number of methodological questions about the universality of commonly applied linguistic categories by offering a critical reading of the adverbial evidently as it appears in a corpus of contemporary research articles. The adverbial is analysed from three general vantage points: its position or function as hedge or booster; the way it intervenes and/or gets caught up in the overall ‘meta-textual’ strategy; the way it intervenes and/or gets caught up in the overall ‘meta-pragmatic’ strategy. A number of conclusions are drawn about the relevance of such findings in/for academic discourse.

$©$ 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Academic writing; Stance adverbial; Argumentation; Evaluation; Hedge; Metadiscourse

# 1. The problem

Research in English linguistics has recently focused considerable attention on the multiplicity of ways evaluation1 in the language is expressed. One of the effects of the greater interest in this question is the increased complexity with which once broad-based distinctions are now being seen. General categories or markers are rethought and broken down as they are made to pass through the analytic sieve of experimental work from a host of linguistic perspectives.2 These smaller, more specific typologies then become the building blocks of new theoretical constructions.

In conjunction with this process, the advent of corpus-based approaches to language use has greatly facilitated research, allowing experts to take into consideration vaster areas of written and spoken discourse in less and less time. The extension of analyses to types of discourse and textual genres previously thought to be characterized only marginally by questions of stance, has given rise to a plurality of models which identify and define evaluative elements of discourse. But although all of these models, at least in theory, circumscribe the same object, not all work from similar premises or at the same descriptive level. Some, for instance, may take the behavior of lexico-grammatical items as the building blocks of a global system (Biber & Finegan, 1988, 1989; Conrad & Biber 2000; Martin, 2000) while others (Caffi, 1999; Hoey, 2000) use the same items as integral parts of an instantial argumentative strategy.

The positive effect of this increased interest is undoubtedly that we now have much more information about how evaluation is communicated in the English language. The negative side is that this information, which often takes the form of categorizations and codifications of descriptive models which are not transparently comparable or compatible, quickly creates the illusion that we have finally arrived at a level of knowledge and understanding from which we can state how these lexicogrammatical elements combine to convey stance.

The aim of this paper is to contribute to the on-going debate about the expression of evaluation by reflecting critically on how the leveling of different orders of description and the indiscriminate adoption of dishomogeneous descriptive models, may alter the way we see and hence understand this important but delicate question. To carry out this largely methodological exploration, we analyze the behavior of the adverbial evidently3 , as it appears in a corpus of contemporary American academic journal articles from the fields of history and economics. But since our interest is to trace the behavior of the adverbial, paying particular attention to its role in/as metadiscourse, close textual and discourse analyses are made for each occurrence. For the purposes of this line of investigation it is our feeling that the analysis of the behavior of but one adverbial within a specific genre of academic discourse offers what Swales refers to as a ‘‘narrower and deeper’’ analysis (Swales, 1990: 3), which has the strategic advantage of making it easier for us to compare our findings with the definitions and categorizations of other researchers.

# 2. Persuasion in the academic text and the importance of metadiscourse

In this light, our choice to analyze the behavior of the adverbial evidently in research articles derives from two factors: the role and position others have attributed this adverbial—or adverbial type—and the nature or function we attribute to this genre of academic discourse.

For the first of the two factors, we take as our comparative model the new Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English (LGSWE), as it dedicates over 100 pages to adverbials—and considerably more to the problem of stance—from within a corpus where academic prose comprises one of its four major registers. (Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999: 8) The organizing principle behind the $L G S W E$ is to offer the range of ‘‘grammatical features’’ in English with particular attention to the ways these features ‘‘occur and recur in actual use.’’ (Biber et al., 1999: 5) The authors willfully adopt an extremely broad definition of ‘‘grammatical features’’ terming grammar ‘‘a general cover for anything that recurs in texts that can be given a linguistic description.’’ (Biber et al., 1999: 5) As LGSWE is interested in providing ‘‘full descriptions of both the structure and use’’ (1999:5) of these features, it is based on an empirical analysis regarding the range of variants for each structure and the frequency of recurrence of the features. The data gathered, both qualitative and quantitative, is derived from a large electronic database or corpus. (Biber et al., 1999: 4–46).

More specifically, the LGSWE develops a tri-partite definition of semantic categories of stance adverbials: epistemic, attitude and style. According to the definition offered in Biber et al. (1999).

‘‘Epistemic stance adverbials and attitude stance adverbials both comment on the content of a proposition. Epistemic markers express the speaker’s judgment about the certainty, reliability, and limitations of the proposition; they can also comment on the source of the information. Attitude stance adverbials convey the speaker’s attitude or value judgment about the proposition’s content. Style adverbials, in contrast, describe the manner of speaking.’’ (Biber et al., 1999: 854)

Following these categories, evidently is taken by the authors as being an epistemic adverbial of stance, either showing the source of knowledge, that is, the information reported in the associated proposition, or alluding to the evidence supporting the proposition (Biber et al., 1999: 855). The LGSWE does not foresee the syntactic difference in the realization of these adverbials as determining a change in their stance class.

Although the LGSWE does speak considerably about hedges and intensifiers with regard to adverbials of stance, almost all of the discussion is tied either to the attitude adverbials or to those epistemic adverbials marking certainty, doubt and imprecision. That is to say, no direct mention is made of the specific category of epistemic stance adverbials that evidently is seen as occupying. And yet, in two introductory studies to the LGSWE conducted by Douglas Biber and Edward Finegan evidently gets classified as an adverb of certainty (Biber & Finegan, 1988: 33, 1989: 119).4 These studies, by making a correlation between adverbial group (divided out semantically) and textual genre (both spoken and written) subdivide the adverbial marking of stance into different ‘‘styles’’, labelling the written academic style ‘‘faceless’’ (Biber & Finegan, 1988: 3–5; 1989: 93–95). By ‘‘faceless’’ the authors intend texts that do not overtly mark attitudes or commitment towards the message. In the case of academic exposition, this style is taken as appropriate because the evidence necessary for the reader’s evaluation is assumed to be explicit in the text. Biber and Finegan argue that there is an expectation of academics ‘‘to present findings and conclusions that are supported with sufficient evidence to be judged independently.’’ This implies that adverbials such as evidently have to keep to a minimal marking of stance, a ‘‘cautious stance’’; if not they may inadvertently raise suspicion about the inadequacy of the evidence provided in the text (Biber & Finegan, 1988: 22–23).

As for the second factor—the choice of academic discourse—what appears essential, in our opinion, is its nature as essentially persuasive. Whether an academic writes an article expressly for other academics working in the same discipline or for a different specialized public, the affirmations s/he makes are never simply ‘matter of fact’. Knowledge claims come in the form of arguments, and arguments have to be convincing if they are to elicit attention and support. Implicitly and/or explicitly the writer always works within a dialogical framework (Bahktin, 1973: 6), negotiating her/his claims (Hyland, 1998a: 349) to accommodate what s/he postulates as the potential or hypothetical readership. Furthermore, writing within a given discipline necessarily requires familiarity with the conventional discursive practices of the disciplinary community (Swales, 1990; Hyland 1998a; b).

The ways this familiarity and negotiation are indicated in the text is not a simple question; it plays itself out on different levels. It involves the internalization on the part of the writer of epistemological assumptions of the discipline, a rhetorical understanding of the genre one is writing in and an idea of how the audience being addressed may react to what is being put forth. The textual mechanisms which regulate the position between reader, writer and message are essential and offer a way of unveiling how stance5 is being conveyed. These mechanisms often fall into what is generally called metadiscourse. As Hyland aptly puts it:

$( \mathrm { I } ) \mathrm { n }$ academic prose [. . .] a writer wants a message to be understood (an illocutionary effect or uptake) and to be accepted (a hoped for perlocutionary effect). But relating these two factors is complicated by the fact that there is no independent, objective means of distinguishing observation from presumption. There is always more than one plausible interpretation for a given piece of data and readers always retain the option of rejecting the writer’s message. This need for ratification thus reveals the negatability of statements, and also the active role readers have in their construction. Metadiscourse is one indication of a writer’s response to the potential negatability of his/her claims; an intervention to engage the reader and anticipate possible objections or difficulties of interpretation. Its role in academic discourse is therefore rhetorical, concerned with galvanizing support, expressing collegiality, resolving difficulties and avoiding disputation. (Hyland, 1998b: 440)

This explanation, which indicates why metadiscourse is essential to academic writing, also offers a number of indications as to the extent of its use. Since as a mechanism it helps the writer affirm/assert control over the text and how it is to be read, it cannot help but attest to the writer’s desire for control of the text and readership. It may just as easily appear through cohesive and metatextual (organizational) devices as mediatory devices of the writer’s own position and voice. It therefore manifests itself through the transmission of information as well as attitude. Although metadiscourse is generally viewed as being non-referential, it can assume such a referential or informational function when it indicates ‘‘how to understand the primary message in terms of its content and structure and of the author’s purpose and goals.’’ (Crismore, 1989: 193)

Looked at from our point of view as professional readers of texts—although not necessarily the designated readers—the metadiscoursal features found in a research article provide clues as to how the writer consciously or unconsciously attempts to direct the way the reader is supposed to make sense of the text and in this manner reveal something about the writer’s own suppositions and moves. In Hyland’s words:

[. . .] metadiscourse seeks to establish an appropriate, discipline-defined balance between the researcher’s authority as expert-knower and his/her humility as disciplinary servant. This is principally accomplished through a judicious balance of tentativeness and assertion, and the expression of a suitable relationship to one’s data, arguments and audience. Mastery of the situationally appropriate rhetorical conventions of one’s discipline thus enables the writer to address an audience with skill and exhibit a professional interpersonal competence which influences the effectiveness of the argument. (Hyland, 1998b: 440)

The analysis we propose of evidently as adverbial of stance seen from within specific disciplinary and genre confines calls for a metadiscoursal analysis which can both pick up on the implications of how the adverbial participates in the writer’s overall strategy for control and recognition on the discourse-semantic level as well as how it evokes stance at the lexical-semantic level by affirming, for example, the relative credibility or truth of a knowledge source.

# 3. Corpus and procedure

The research findings we obtained were gathered from a corpus of contemporary American academic articles in the fields of history and economics.6 More specifically, the journals used were American Quarterly, Journal of Social History, Journal of the History of Ideas for history and American Economics, Journal of Corporate Finance, Journal of Development Economics, Journal of Economics and Business, The North American Journal of Economics and Finance for economics. The concordancing, which was carried out with the 3.0 version of Wordsmith Tools (Scott, 1998), sought all occurrences of evidently both in initial and non-initial position. The history section of the corpus, containing approximately 1.85 million words and the economics section, with 2.25 million words, yielded 13 occurrences of the adverbial each. A provisional 1000 character horizon was used in concordancing to give what was thought would be a sufficient segment of text to understand the role the adverbial was playing in the text.7

Given the essentially methodological orientation of our study, we feel it is more important to found our observations on a thorough reading of each occurrence than to make an argument based primarily on empirical data. Although an in-depth analysis was carried out on all occurrences found in our corpus, only a few examples can be analyzed here in detail.

The parameters we have chosen for our comparison or contrast with the model expressed in the LGSWE, are outlined in the following terms:

1. position or function of the adverbial as hedge or booster   
2. way adverbial intervenes in the overall ‘meta-textual’ strategy   
3. way adverbial intervenes in the overall ‘meta-pragmatic’ strategy

These distinctions, which are general intuitive groupings we have come up with, have as their exclusive purpose that of dialoguing with or responding to divisions often used to discuss adverbials of stance. They neither reflect homogeneous categories nor can they be taken as linguistically acceptable divisions. Their function is heuristic, allowing us to problematize well-known categories, as is the case for the first parameter, and to highlight different aspects of the text’s construction, for the second and third parameter. We are well aware that what we are calling ‘metapragmatic’ strategy plays itself out in and through the text, and is therefore simultaneously a ‘meta-textual’ strategy. The distinction we make between parameter 2 and 3 is one of relative emphasis. In the case of the writer’s ‘meta-textual’ strategy, we are above all interested in ways the text has been organized, how it plays off of textual elements or sequences in relation to the adverbial to construct/argument her/ his claim. In the case of the ‘meta-pragmatic’ strategy, it is rather the way the writer attempts to anticipate and redirect the reader’s potential rejection of her/his claim, to negotiate or dialogue with her/his idea of the reader’s position.

# 4. Problematizing the hedge—booster distinction

Although the literature on hedges is vast in comparison to that on boosters,8 and the pragmatic dissymmetry of the two concepts has convincingly been shown (Caffi, 1999), their rhetorical complementarity as largely oppositional units is hard to avoid. Just as hedges are often referred to as ‘‘downtoners’’, ‘‘understaters’’, ‘‘mitigators’’ or ‘‘downgraders’’, so are boosters indicated as ‘‘overstaters’’, ‘‘intensifiers’’ and ‘‘emphasisers’’. If the one is invoked in the expression of doubt or conveys tentativeness, the other instead is seen as asserting certainty and conviction. And yet, once we widen our interpretative horizons to include what we have indicated as the writer’s metatextual and metapragmatic strategy, the two terms, which cover the range of relative force, belief and assertiveness with which a proposition is offered, are not necessarily as easy to distinguish as we may at first think.

The purpose of initiating our textual analysis with an eye to the way evidently functions as hedge-booster, regards less an attempt on our part to show that such a dichotomous vision doesn’t hold up, than it does to insist that the very idea that hedges or boosters can be singled out lexically as isolated items is problematic. Although we make reference to but one example in introducing this question, all the other cases discussed in this article reiterate this basic point.

(1)many of these women found seamstresses too expensive or bothersome; the call of the needle competed with the lure of the book. No wonder one woman, Mary Belden, lamented to her friend in 1838, ‘‘I had been much interrupted in pursuing them [her studies]. George returned from the South . . . and as his wardrobe wanted replenishing, I used my needle a few weeks and thus learnt, as his Emerson would say, ‘a lesson in domestic philosophy’.’’ Evidently her mind still turned to literature even as she performed essential duties. Like Belden, other women who labored within the home tried, often successfully, to integrate literature within the extended world of goods involved in sewing, which included fabrics, needlework, and work baskets. Elizabeth Cary Agassiz pointed to the natural, complementary, and intimate connection of books and needlework within the household when she fondly [H5].

In example (1) from our history corpus, the writer uses Mary Belden’s autobiographic account in the sentence prior to the one with the adverbial retroactively as the source of her/his affirmation about the woman’s sentiments. Rhetorically, the adverbial negotiates the transition between the one descriptive level and the other, so that the reader is made to take the relationship between Mary Belden’s quote of Emerson and the writer’s claim that ‘‘her mind still turned to literature’’ as largely transparent. Evidently therefore has a strong anaphoric role, linking the writer’s assertion to the preceding sentence by referencing Emerson. It seeks to make the reader equate the use of the quote of Emerson with ‘‘her mind still turned to literature’’. Evidently, in this way, also infers the source of knowledge9 by silently provoking a ‘hearing-is-believing’ type affirmation—based on the supposed certainty of such sense data. The term’s signification here fits well with the first definition of evidently given in the Oxford English Dictionary: ‘‘so as to be distinctly visible or perceptible; with perfect clearness, conspicuously.’’ (909)

What is most interesting here, from our point of view, is the complexity of the adverbial’s position as hedge-booster. On one level, as we have just mentioned, the writer commits her-/himself categorically to the truth value of the thesis s/he puts forth, and as such the adverbial can be treated as a booster. On another level, however, by pointing to the ‘self-evidence’ of the meaning of the Emersonian quote, the writer indirectly unveils the weakness of his/her personal claim. The reader is given the sensation that the relationship is causal, that it is the direct consequence of the woman’s statement and not something the writer necessarily affirms her/himself. On another level again, Evidently acts somewhat as hedge. This can be seen in two ways: (a) it works as shield, evidencing the writer’s non-firsthand knowledge, and (b) it cannot help but open up the semantic but also somewhat philosophical problem of the relationship between evidently and evidence. As soon as evidently poses the question of evidence to the reader, the acceptance or rejection of such evidence becomes a question. Evidence needs to convince in order to act as evidence. It therefore falls within the reader’s interpretative power. The writer has to persuade the reader that the connection or argument s/he is putting forth is convincing. From this point of view, we can almost think of Evidently here as expressing an apology for having to demonstrate what should ’go without saying’.10

# 5. Discussing meta-textual strategy

When analyzing the adverbial from a meta-discourse point of view, there are a number of different ways it can be seen as partaking of or revealing a ‘meta-textual’ strategy. We shall use examples from our corpus to discuss two of these ways.

The first regards how the writer employs the adverbial to help construct a more global textual posture. This is to say, that although the adverbial appears locally in the text to play a certain role, when seen as part of a larger communicative strategy, it participates to offer a very different picture.

(2)While these seem to be relevant effects, their empirical importance is not easily detectable. Indeed, the extent of government ownership seems to be positively related to the level of corruption (Keefer & Knack, 1995 and La). Also, many democratic countries have large public sectors and, at times, have voted in leftist parties with clear inclinations to expand state ownership and control, as in France under the socialists and Britain under the labor party in the 1960s. Evidently, in some situations, pressure from taxpayers may reinforce the politicians’ incentive for controlling firms by inducing them to substitute the quasi-rents of production units for taxes from other sources. Another implication of the Shleifer-Vishny model is that when politicians face a higher cost of public funds, their ability to maintain influence and patronage in firms declines and greater privatization and restructuring becomes possible. Yarrow (1999) also develops this theme and [E12].

In example (2), the sentence framed by the adverbial is strongly hedged (i.e. ‘‘some situations’’, ‘‘may reinforce’’), and the adverbial itself, in as much as it introduces what appears to be a concession, can be taken as a hedge. And yet, it would be a mistake to see Evidently here either as distancing the writer’s commitment or reducing the truth value of the thesis set forth in the paragraph. If anything, the hedge helps the writer overcome doubts the reader may have by deviating these doubts away from the edifice of the thesis and onto the specific conditions which may have determined the recourse to greater state intervention. The complexity for the writer in developing her/his argument is that s/he introduces it her/himself as a problem which ‘‘is not easily detectable’’. The repetition of the same verb $^ +$ complement clause construction [‘‘seem/s to be’’] at the top of the passage, which situates both the theoretical prospect and the practical difficulty of its demonstration, sets the stage for a textual strategy that makes recourse both to a fairly complex embedding of the writer’s thesis through theses put forth by others, and to the interlacing of hedge and booster11 to help make the argument more convincing. The case here, whereby the writer sustains a thesis s/he prefaces as being difficult to demonstrate, itself attests to the often tortuous nature of knowledge construction for academics and how, as Hyland affirms, ‘‘their discoursal decisions are influenced by, and embedded in, the epistemological and interactional conventions of their discipline. [. . .] [A]cademics gain acceptance for their research claims by balancing conviction with caution, either investing statements with the confidence of reliable knowledge, or with tentativeness to reflect uncertainty or appropriate social interactions.’’ (1998a:349)

A different way of indicating the importance of analyzing what we are calling the meta-textual dimension can be found in the following example.

(3)orderly off stage in a grim and archetypal ritual. In ‘‘The Fire,’’ for example, it is the movement of the tower-like (344) policeman’s fingers that calls the fire department to battle with the flames of nature. In ‘‘When A Man Falls, A Crowd Gathers,’’ a patrolman deters a crowd with a ‘‘sweep’’ of ‘‘two huge buckskin gloves’’ (348). Like his counterpart the fireman, the patrolman is also cast by Crane (as by Roosevelt) as intrinsically a veteran figure, ‘‘evidently in an eternal state of injured surprise at [the civilian crowd’s] persistent desire to get a view of things’’ (344). As Crane puts it in his late novel Active Service, the police are part of ‘‘the machinery of a finished society that prevents its parts from clashing.’’ 69 Here again one discovers the limits of fixing Crane’s position with a simple partisan label. Even though he resisted the explicit brutality of police and Becker’s [H3].

Here what appears noteworthy is a little discussed aspect of academic discourse: the way ambiguity is used and plays itself out in the text. There are two main ways this manifests itself in the passage above: the adverbial’s role as invoking a sensorial source of knowledge which is in tension with the preceding description of cause, and the effect created by the complex use of direct and indirect reported discourse, which has its fulcrum in the adverbial.

As far as the first is concerned, the adverbial is caught up in the narration of visual scenes.12 And yet, not only is evidently extraneous of/to a discrete sensorial image, unless such an image is taken as metaphorically archetypical, but its use erects a tension between the term’s value as hedge and the description offered by the writer in the previous sentence that ‘‘the patrolman is cast as intrinsically13 a veteran figure’’. As we mentioned earlier in our discussion of the function of evidently, it highlights an interesting overlapping between the adverbial’s grammatical potential to reveal source of knowledge through its phonological and semantic encoding of ‘evidence’ with all the epistemological implications this latter position evokes. In this example, it alludes to the source of knowledge—evidence—coming in the form of visual sense perception. But, if, as the anteceding sentence states, the policeman is cast as intrinsically a veteran, then we are lead to presume that he is—or should be— such without the need for visual confirmation, for from its early etymological sense as ‘‘inward’’ [Latin to Late Latin intrinsecus], intrinsically regards what is inherent, what belongs or is basic to something by its very nature. A tension manifests itself to the reader between the adverbial, which symbolically carries and authorizes a demonstration (the visual perception of the policeman), and the policeman’s inherent nature as veteran, which calls for no such demonstration.

The position and role of the adverbial is made even more complicated—and ambiguous—by the way it is invested in/by the quotation marks. The writer of the article, who moves us back and forth from indirect to direct reported speech, strategically chooses evidently to initiate a moment of direct reporting. But given that we as readers lack anything like the necessary context for understanding how Crane, the author of the referenced text, might have meant to use the adverbial, its invocation by the writer of the article is destabilizing. When read carefully, the adverbial is deployed in such a way as to make it virtually impossible to disentangle from the writer’s more general persuasive design. The essential ambiguity which arises from such a use is made apparent as soon as we ask ourselves whether the adverbial functions as hedge or booster. It both anaphorically weakens the strong indirectly reported affirmation that the patrolman is ‘‘intrinsically a veteran figure’’ and cataphorically highlights the ‘‘eternal state of injured surprise’’, thus emphasizing the gap between what he ‘is’ and how he is perceived.14

# 6. Discussing meta-pragmatic strategy

(4)Dilemma: Two-Part Tariffs for a Mickey Mouse Monopoly’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 85 (February 1971) 77–96. (n13.) Stan Warner, Herb Mohring, and Steve Sobotka were members of the Transportation Center staff. I also had contact with Meyer Burstein, Bob Strotz, Bob Clower, and for a short time, Franco Modiglianni in the Department of Economics.(n14.) William Gorham who is now the President of the Urban Institute told me that his first choice for Director was Gregg Lewis. Gregg evidently had an earlier commitment and suggested me for the job. Chance surely smiled upon me and gave me the opportunity to participate in one of the most important policy issues. (n15.) The papers presented at this Conference as well as a roster of those attending can be found in Sol Tax, editor, The Draft (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967). See especially pp. 200–251.(n16.) His speech, ‘‘Abolish the Draft’’ appears in W. Allen Wallis [E2].

Example (4), which appears as a footnote, is quite interesting in that the evidently seems at first glance to be a logical conclusion drawn on the information given in the preceding sentence. But since the information provided in that sentence regards exclusively William Gorham’s initial ‘‘choice for Director’’, the idea that he must have had an ‘‘earlier commitment’’ requires a logical leap of faith, a retrogressive hypothesis or abduction, which is a consequence of, but not directly related to, either the information or the source of knowledge. From this standpoint, the adverbial acts as shield, or form of hedge, indicating an indirect relationship to the people and events.15 But, an essential meta-pragmatic ambiguity remains since there are other signals the author is sending the reader. On the one hand he is using a politeness code when he invokes as explanation for his having been offered the job that ‘‘chance surely smiled upon me’’, while on the other, he makes it clear he is on a first name basis with Gregg Lewis. If the initial comment is one of exaggerated or excessive modesty and self-effacement, the second reveals the need the writer has to show his intimacy with such an important individual and therefore to be part of an in-group. The former seeks to convince us of the writer’s humble past while the latter, by breaking rules of formality here, indirectly indicates the writer’s somewhat more prestigious professional position in the present, not to mention her/his renewed self-esteem. The discrepancy—although probably offered to help construct a more credible and intimate relationship with the reader—largely falsifies the exogenous position the adverbial attests to.16

(5)fewer years of college teaching experience (NYRTEACH). Although the last difference was not statistically significant, we retain NYRTEACH in the Version 3 regressions to control for any independent influence it may have on student ratings. There is no appreciable difference in the average number of hours that students of ESLs and EFLs spent studying principles (HOURS). We expected that students of ESLs might study more outside of class to compensate for learning less in class, but evidently they do not. We retain this variable to see whether there is any relation across classes between HOURS and student ratings, holding other factors constant. Because this relationship might differ for ESLs and EFLs, we partition it by multiplying HOURS by ENGFIRST (for EFLs) and 1- ENGFIRST (for ESLs). It would be reasonable for students to give higher ratings to those instructors they perceive to be better prepared for class and more enthusiastic. How students might respond [E8].

There is a complexity to how evidently functions in this example (5), which can hardly be explained away through its definition as epistemic adverbial of stance. Although a good part of its referential strength comes from ‘‘alluding to the evidence supporting the proposition’’ (Biber et al., 1999: 855), just how it effectuates such an allusion and how the evidence gets transferred back onto the adverbial, are far more difficult questions to answer.

The adverbial functions at once as hedge and booster. As hedge, it combines with other sentential elements to signal the writer’s initial hypothesis as erroneous. It does this by acknowledging and accepting the experimental data collected (illustrated elsewhere in article) while preserving a space of self-doubt. We cannot read this hedged use either as a simple marker of politeness or as an acknowledgement that the source of knowledge is indirect—second-hand—since the writer is contradicting her/his own earlier hypothesis and the empirical status of the evidence for such a contradiction is never brought into question.17 We are rather witnessing a pragmatically-oriented rhetorical strategy whereby the writer reveals an initial error in intuition in order to reinforce the belief in the reader that s/he follows scientific methodology, even when it goes against her/his own ideas. This reader-oriented strategy not only exploits the self-criticism to construct the writer’s scientific persona, but the admission of one’s fallibility allows the reader to attain an in-group status or ‘‘common ground’’ (Hyland, 1998a) s/he otherwise would not have had. Rhetorically speaking, the price paid for the confession is far less than what is gained in persuasive terms in support of the writer’s general scientific approach and findings.

# 7. Conclusion

The focus of this investigation has been to illustrate something of the complexity inherent in categorizing adverbials of stance18 in academic discourse through the case of evidently. Our selection of three heuristic parameters, for the purposes of exemplification and argumentation, allows us now to reflect briefly on how the adverbial is best situated when approached from a metadiscourse point of view.

If we look first at the adverbial’s role as hedge or booster—one which it always assumes in one way or another—what appears most clearly from the cases analyzed is that this role is subordinate to a number of pragmatic factors without which generalizations regarding the lexical item itself would be of little meaning.

Our findings—including the occurrences not analyzed here—tend to confirm Ken Hyland’s assertion that ‘‘[h]edges are employed to achieve a single primary objective: to overcome the inherent negatability of statements and gain the reader’s acceptance of a knowledge claim.’’ (1998b: ix). Along with boosters, they are essentially argumentational devices which help the writer regulate her/his attention more to the proposition or to the reader, emphasizing or diminishing the truth value or writer accountability.

From our results, it seems, therefore, somewhat counterproductive and misleading to detach the hedge-booster from its specific context in order to define and classify it. Even when we accept a standard description of hedging, that it announces a lack of complete commitment to the truth value of an accompanying proposition, we still have to ask ourselves in what such a less-than-complete commitment consists. It could mean the writer is pointing to a tentativeness of the truth value, thus limiting his commitment temporally, or it could equally mean that his commitment is on the order of possibility and not necessity. And yet, what if in both cases the dominant style, ideology or epistemological paradigm used in academia—or in the writer’s specific academic discipline—corresponds to just such a tentativeness? The writer’s hedge would then be less of a personal withdrawal from the truth value of the hypothesis being put forth than a more persuasive way of putting across one’s ideas. It is above all with academic texts, that ‘‘despite or, perhaps, because of their mitigating effect, hedges can increase the credibility of a statement’’ (Clemen, 1983:243).

Although the focus of this research was not to articulate disciplinary differences in the writers’ strategies, it is interesting to note that the adverbial in the economics corpus often initially appears as a booster (11 cases out of 13), only to find itself either buttressed by more cautionary markers (3 cases out of 11) or involved in preemptive ‘‘negotiation’’ with the reader (4 cases out of 11), whereas in the history corpus evidently initially makes its appearance as a hedge (8 cases out of 13) before revealing a more ambiguous or complicated posture metatextually (5 cases out of 8) and metapragmatically (4 cases out of 8) speaking. Phenomena such as embedding the adverbial within reported speech and using it to bolster negative conviction were present almost exclusively in the history corpus. These preliminary findings seem to suggest that there is a significantly different use of the adverbial along disciplinary lines, but a much larger sample of occurrences would have to be analysed before trying to offer an explanation of the ways in which this reflects the values of the disciplinary communities, highlighting for example the desire for empirical evidence in economics and the need to establish critical dialogue with intertextual voices in history.

As for the more global mechanisms analysed, what appears first and foremost is the complexity of the knowledge construction process in written academic discourse. This manifests itself in terms of

(a) a strategy of clustering, where hedging and boosting functions/uses ‘balance’ each other out [example (2)],   
(b) a strategy of seeking common ground, where the writer offers to ‘confess’ her/ his fallibility in order to gain reader acceptance and convey a more collegial attitude [examples (4) and (5)],   
(c) a strategy of articulating structurally ambiguous forms [examples (3) and (4)], which double-binds the reader’s interpretative tendencies.

In all cases, the stance adverbial is actively deployed in both the construction of knowledge claims and the writer’s professional persona.

When an expression like evidently is looked at from a discourse semantics perspective, its ambiguity becomes apparent. The degree of adhesion to the single proposition may take up more than one value in discursive contexts where it becomes part of metatextual and metapragmatic strategies. The single lexical unit does not just mitigate or intensify a proposition, but points to the way in which propositions become part of a wider argument (in co-text) and get involved in constructing writer and reader identity.

It is particularly when looked at form this point of view that an adverbial like evidently goes beyond the specific expression of an epistemic stance towards propositions to express an evaluation of what constitutes evidence within the value system of the discipline.

# References

Bakhtin, M. l. (1973). Problems of Dostoevsky’s poetics. USA: Ardis Press.   
Biber, D., & Finegan, E. (1988). Adverbial stance types in english. Discourse Processes, 11, 1–34.   
Biber, D., & Finegan, E. (1989). Styles of stance in English: Lexical and grammatical marking of evidentiality and affect. Text, 9(1), 99–124.   
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and written english. London: Pearson Education Limited.   
Bondi, M. (2000). English across genres: language variation in the discourse of economics. Modena: Il Fiorino.   
Bondi, M. (2002). Attitude and episteme in academic discourse: adverbials of stance across genres and moves. Textus XV, II. Genova. Tilgher-Genova.   
Caffi, C. (1999). On mitigation. Journal of Pragmatics, 31, 881–909.   
Chafe, W L. (1985). Linguistic difference produced by differences between speaking and writing. In D. R. Olson, N. Torrance, & A. Hildyard (Eds.), Literacy, language and learning: the nature and consequences of reading and writing. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Chafe, W L. (1986). Evidentiality in English conversation and academic writing. In W. L. Chafe, & J. Nichols (Eds.), Evidentiality: the Linguistic coding of epistemology. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
Clemen, G. (1983). The concept of hedging: origins, approaches and definitions. In Alex Hubler (Ed.), Understatements and hedges in English. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Conrad, S., Biber, D. (2000). In S. Hunston & Thompson G. (Eds.), Evaluation in text. Authorial stance and the construction of discourse. Oxford. Oxford University Press.   
Crismore, A. (1989). Talking with readers. Metadiscourse as rhetorical act. New York: Peter Ling.   
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and power. London: Longman.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold.   
Hoey, M. (1983). On the surface of discourse. London: Allen and Unwin.   
Hoey, M. (2000). Persuasive rhetoric in linguistics: a stylistic study of some features of the language of Noam Chomsky. In S. Hunston, & G. Thompson (Eds.), Evaluation in text. Authorial stance and the construction of discourse (pp. 28–37). Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Hunston, S., Thompson, G. (Eds.). (2000). Evaluation in text. Authorial stance and the construction of discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Hyland, K. (1994). Hedging in academic writing and EAP textbooks. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 239–256.   
Hyland, K. (1998a). Boosting, hedging and the negotiation of academic knowledge. Text, 18(3), 349–382.   
Hyland, K. (1998b). Persuasion and context: the pragmatics of academic metadiscourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 30, 437–455.   
Hyland, K. (1998c). Hedging in scientific research articles. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Hedges, boosters and lexical invisibility: noticing modifiers in academic texts. Language Awareness, 9, 4.   
Lakoff, G. (1973). Hedges: a study in meaning criteria and the logic of fuzzy concepts. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 2, 458–508.   
Markkanen, R., Schro˜ der, H. (Eds.). (1997). Hedging and discourse: approaches to the analysis of a pragmatic phenomenon in academic texts. New York: Walter de Gruyer.   
Martin, J. R. (2000). Beyond exchange: APPRAISAL systems in English. In S. Hunston, & G. Thompson (Eds.), Evaluation in text. Authorial stance and the construction of discourse (pp. 142–175). Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Meyer, P.G. (1997) In R. Markkanen & H. Schro˜ der (Eds.) Hedging and discourse: approaches to the analysis of a pragmatic phenomenon in academic texts. New York: Walter de Gruyer.   
Myers, G. (1989). The pragmatics of politeness in scientific articles. Applied Linguistics, 10, 1 2-35.   
Myers, G. (1990). Writing biology: texts in the social construction of scientific knowledge. Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press.   
Scott, M. (1998). Wordsmith tools. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Stubbs, M. (1996). Text and corpus analysis: computer-assisted studies of language and culture. Oxford: Blackwell.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis. English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Thompson, G., & Hunston, S. (2000). Evaluation: an introduction. In S. Hunston, & G. Thompson (Eds.), Evaluation in text. Authorial stance and the construction of discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Thompson, G., & Zhou, J. (2000). Evaluation and organization in text: the structuring role of evaluative disjuncts. In S. Hunston, & G. Thompson (Eds.), Evaluation in text. Authorial stance and the construction of discourse (pp. 121–141). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Marc Silver is Associate Professor of English Language at the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia. He has published in the field of argumentation and the relationship between language and culture. His most recent work on academic discourse focuses on cross-disciplinary variation both in a corpus and in a discourse perspective.