# Understanding news & views articles: Rhetorical structures across different disciplines

Haiyang Sun\*, Xinyuan Mei, Honghui Zhang

Department of Foreign Languages, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.19 Yuquan Road, 100049, Beijing, China

# a r t i c l e i n f o

# a b s t r a c t

Article history: Available online 27 October 2023

Keywords:   
News and views articles   
Article reviews   
Review genre   
Rhetorical structure   
Disciplinary variation   
Textual organization

Article reviews play a pivotal role in fostering students’ critical evaluation and critical thinking skills. News & Views (N&V) articles published in Nature journals are one prominent example of article reviews and serve as excellent models for students to learn and refine their skills in writing article reviews. However, there is limited research on the rhetorical features of N&V articles, especially in terms of textual organization across different disciplines. To address this gap, three corpora were compiled for the present study, representing the disciplinary groups of natural sciences (NS), social sciences (SS), and technology and engineering (TE). Each corpus was comprised of 30 N&V texts from its respective disciplinary group. Using a self-developed coding framework building on previous research, we coded the move and step of each text in the corpora. The coding data were compared and analyzed to uncover the distinguishing textual features of the three disciplinary groups. The analysis revealed that the variations were predominantly at the step level. N&V articles of NS and SS shared most of the moves and steps, but N&Vs in TE exhibited unique stylistic characteristics. These findings hold significant implications for training and teaching article review writing, particularly in relation to disciplinary contexts.

$\circledcirc$ 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Evaluation performs important functions in academic discourse such as “reflecting the value-system of the discourse community”, “constructing a dialogue between the writer and the readers”, and “structuring a text in expected ways” (Hyland and Diani, 2009, p. 5). Among all types of academic discourse, explicit evaluation is particularly noticeable in review genres. For researchers, review genres offer a platform to communicate and play a very important part in constructing knowledge and maintaining the cohesiveness of the research community (Hyland and Diani, 2009). For graduate students, review genres are invaluable for learning how to express evaluative comments, which are essential in their article critique assignments (Hyland, 2014).

Hyland and Diani (2009) identified three main subgenres of reviews: book reviews, literature reviews, and review articles. A book review involves reviewing a single book or occasionally several related books. A literature review, commonly found within a research article (RA) or a thesis, entails examining and evaluating previous research in a specific area of study. A review article refers to a published journal article that surveys the existing literature on a particular issue or area of research.

In addition, there is another type of reviews called article review or journal article review, which involves reviewing a single RA or a cluster of related RAs. Article reviews are widely published in prestigious scientific journals under various names such as News and Views (shortened as N&V hereafter) in Nature, Perspectives in Science, and Commentary in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS). Article reviews share similar social purposes and communicative functions with the other three review genres and can be recognized as a review genre as they enable the writers to express their opinions towards the source article as well as summarizing and highlighting the advancements and significance of the work being discussed.

While book reviews and literature reviews have been extensively examined in existing literature (e.g., Bruce, 2014; Zou and Hyland, 2020), article reviews have received scant attention in the field of English for Academic Purposes (EAP). However, in teaching practice article reviews serve as a prevalent type of writing assignment or assessment task across a diverse range of graduate courses. Paper analysis and critique, for instance, are commonly employed by educators to evaluate students’ competence in summarizing and critically evaluating scientific papers (e.g., Hyland, 2014; Li and Yang, 2022; Miser, 2006). Another type of article review that is frequently used as an assessment task by discipline teachers (e.g. School of Oceanography at the University of Washington; Evolutionary & Ecological Genomics Lab at the University of Notre Dame; Center for Detectors at Rochester Institute of Technology; Joint Colleges of Science at Australian National University1 ) is N&V writing, which follows the style of N&V articles published by Nature. The widespread use of N&V writing as an assessment task is probably due to the following two advantages: Firstly, unlike the extensive reading involved in writing book reviews, literature reviews, and review articles, N&V articles typically rely on only one or a few RAs (often just one) and usually contain fewer than ten references, as explained in the guide to authors on the journal’s website. As a result, the reading workload associated with N&V articles is relatively light, which places minimal psychological and physical burdens on students. Secondly, the use of a single source for the reading-to-write task allows for the establishment of systematic and unified rating criteria and rubrics (Gabril and Plakans, 2014), which facilitates more consistent assessment of students’ writing of N&Vs.

From a rhetorical perspective, N&V articles, which contain a synopsis of a high-impact RA plus the author’s evaluative commentary, bear resemblances to other review genres and RAs. Written by established researchers in specific fields, N&Vs serve as excellent examples for students to learn and enhance their skills in writing article reviews and critiques. As research with RAs indicated, students generally seek and need straightforward descriptions of academic discourse structures to help them understand and use the genre (Devitt, 2015). However, the instructions for writing an article review or an N&V, typically found in guides provided by university libraries and journal guidelines2 , tend to offer a general framework of introductionbody-conclusion or a summary plus critique structure, which may not fully capture the nuanced rhetorical strategies employed in such texts. Consequently, identifying and extracting the rhetorical moves of N&Vs would be beneficial in tertiary education for teaching students the essential skills of crafting article reviews and conducting effective academic evaluations. In EAP research, to date, only one study has investigated the genre features of N&Vs and lexical grammatical resources in expressing stance in N&Vs (Yin and Parkinson, 2021), and to our knowledge, there has been no research on the disciplinary differences regarding the rhetorical functions of N&V articles. Given that RAs in different disciplines demonstrate both rhetorical similarities, such as the overall IMRD structure and the creating a research space (CARS) structure of Introductions (Swales, 1990), and discipline-specific variations (e.g., Bruce, 2009; Cotos et al., 2017; Holmes, 1997; Lin and Evans, 2012; Samraj, 2005; Stoller and Robinson, 2013), N&Vs in distinct disciplines would also exhibit different rhetorical patterns as well as commonalities. Therefore, in this study, we aim to examine the rhetorical structures of N&V articles across various disciplines so as to provide guidance and references for teaching N&V writing by considering disciplinary traditions, conventions, and the broader context of academic writing.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Genre analysis in academic English

Genre analysis of RA structure was started by Swales (1990), who defined genre as texts or writings sharing similar communicative functions and established the CARS model of moves and steps for RA introductions. Moves are sequences of units in a text which perform rhetorical functions to fulfill the overall communicative purpose of the genre. The lengths of moves in a genre may vary, but usually a proposition can be found in a move (Connor and Mauranen, 1999). A move can be further divided into steps or strategies which realize the communicative purposes of the move. Move analysis involves identifying the typical recurring instances, features and typical organization of an academic genre. Rhetorical analysis of RA move structure was done at both the micro and the macro levels: Microstructure analysis focuses on examining how each section of the RA is constructed (e.g., Bruce, 2008; Lim, 2006; Peacock, 2002; Williams, 1999; Yang and Allison, 2003). Conversely, macrostructure analysis provides a holistic picture of the overall structure of an RA (e.g., Lin and Evans, 2012; Ye, 2019) and delves deeper into exploring disciplinary variations in the organization and structure of RAs.

While previous studies on reviews have predominantly focused on how evaluation was expressed (e.g., Xie, 2016; Zou and Hyland, 2020), comparatively less attention has been paid to the rrhetorical structures of review genres. To the best of our knowledge, only two studies were concerned with stylistic organization of review genres: Motta-Roth (1995) identified four moves in book reviews, including introducing the book, outlining the book, highlighting parts of the book, and providing closing evaluation of the book. Yin and Parkinson (2021) observed six moves in N&V articles: introducing associated RA in strapline, announcing the importance of the field, niche occupied by the associated RA, describing the present study, evaluating the present study, and suggesting future research. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that Yin & Parkinson’s study did not take into account the potential influence of disciplinary traditions and conventions on the structure and organization of N&Vs. Therefore, further analysis is warranted to explore how N&V articles vary across different academic fields and disciplines.

# 2.2. Disciplines and disciplinary variations in academic English

Disciplines are commonly understood as different fields of knowledge, each of which has its own organizing concepts, terminology, methods, procedures, and research practices (Lattuca, 2002). Disciplines are also conceptualized as “academic tribes” (Becher, 1989, 1994) falling into four broad categories: the hard pure, hard applied, soft pure and soft applied. Hard pure disciplines mainly refer to the natural sciences, and they adopt cumulative, quantitative, deductive approaches to new discoveries (Becher, 1994; Ylonen et al., 2018). Soft pure disciplines, on the other hand, include the humanities and social sciences, and they employ reiterative, qualitative, and inductive approaches to new understanding or interpretation (Becher, 1994). In hard applied fields, researchers often adopt heuristic approaches to developing new products or techniques (Becher, 1994; Yeo and Boman, 2019). Soft applied disciplines are also functional, but they usually adopt iterative approaches to new protocols or procedures. Although this framework may have certain caveats, such as the blurred boundaries between the categories (Becher, 1989), it can still be used as a heuristic tool for describing disciplinary similarities and differences (Trowler, 2014).

In EAP research and teaching practice, variation in rhetorical structures and language use across disciplines is one of the focal concerns. Using Swalesian “moves” analytical approach, a considerable number of microstructure studies were conducted to investigate differences on specific sections of RAs across disciplines (e.g., Bruce, 2009; Cotos et al., 2017; Holmes, 1997; Lim, 2010; Liu and Xiao, 2022; Samraj, 2005). Macrostructure comparisons are relatively fewer, but are instrumental in advancing our holistic understanding of RA structures across disciplines. Some of such comparisons involved almost all disciplines in university settings (e.g., 39 disciplines in Lin and Evans, 2012), some were made between two disciplines (e.g., chemistry and applied linguistics in Stoller and Robinson, 2013), and others focused on different sub-disciplines of only one field (e.g., engineering in Kanoksilapatham, 2015). Disciplinary differences in review genres were focused on linguistic features and were mainly about book reviews (e.g., Diani, 2009; Groom, 2009; Hyland, 2014). However, unlike extensive research on the rhetorical aspects of RAs, there seems to be no dedicated research on the textual organizations of review genres across different disciplines.

The discipline-specific approach to academic discourse studies has provided more insights into a better understanding of how RAs or individual sections of RAs are constructed. However, in academic writing, it would be impractical to offer courses for every individual major because producing EAP courses is labor-intensive and it is exceedingly difficult to manage such a wide range of courses considering administrative and economic costs (Lau and Gardner, 2019). On the other hand, many universities in China do provide EAP writing classes for students from various departments. However, it is widely recognized that a “one size fits all” EAP course may not adequately meet the specific academic needs of students across different disciplines. Such a tension between unity (general features and skills of writing held in common across all disciplines) and particularity (particular formats and particular styles for each discipline) in academic teaching (Bazerman et al., 2005) calls for the integration of cognate disciplinary areas within EAP instruction. Becher’s (1994) taxonomy of broad disciplines can thus be utilized to inform the development of course materials and class activities if similar features can be identified within the disciplinary groups. Such similarities were found in some lexical bundle studies (e.g., Durrant, 2017; Omidian et al., 2018) and rhetorical structure analysis (e.g., Basturkmen, 2012; Cotos et al., 2017; Peacock, 2002). Furthermore, teachers within the same disciplinary cluster, such as those in the field of hard sciences, often share a common understanding about teaching and assessment (Yeo and Boman, 2019), and students in the broad academic domains also demonstrated similar learning styles and preferences (Lau and Gardner, 2019). Moreover, while certain studies have identified discipline-specific features or strategies, many of them discussed and explained their research findings using epistemologic traits of broad domains, such as soft or hard sciences (e.g., Bruce, 2009; Hyland, 2014; Samraj, 2005). Besides, in corpus-based research, specific disciplines were usually grouped into disciplinary clusters which roughly align with Becher’s (1994) framework (e.g., Biber, 2006; Coxhead, 2000; Gardner and Nesi, 2013; Liu et al., 2023; Simpson-Vlach and Ellis, 2010). Therefore, grouping disciplines into broader disciplinary groups or clusters seems to be feasible both theoretically and practically.

To address the gap in disciplinary analysis of review genres in literature, the present study aimed to explore the textual organizations of N&V articles across disciplinary groups. Our classification of disciplines primarily adhered to Becher’s (1994) framework, except that soft-applied fields were omitted because N&Vs related to these disciplines, such as education and counseling, were seldom found in Nature journals. Similarly, we excluded arts and humanities from the soft-pure category due to the limited availability of N&V articles in these areas within Nature journals. For the hard applied domain, we only included engineering as it is one frequently and individually established disciplinary group in corpus studies, and other hardapplied disciplines such as medical science were rarely put together with engineering (Biber, 2006; Simpson-Vlach and Ellis, 2010). Consequently, we created three corpora of N&V articles from disciplinary groups, namely natural sciences (NS), social sciences (SS), and technology and engineering (TE). Specifically, the current study aims to answer the following two questions:

(1) What rhetorical moves and steps are employed in N&V articles in NS, SS, and TE as observed in our self-built corpora? (2) What are the disciplinary variations in the moves and steps of N&V articles in NS, SS, and TE?

# 3. Material and methods

# 3.1. The corpora compilation

The corpora compilation started in May 2022, and we focused on N&V articles published between Jan 2017 and April 2022 (about 1500 texts). To conduct a preliminary screening of the texts, the following criteria were used:

1) Those without a short abstract which stands before the main body were screened out to ensure the similarity of the structure;   
2) Those which evaluated more than one RA were filtered out to ensure the homogeneity of the texts;   
3) Those which reviewed and revisited an RA published more than one decade ago were excluded because such texts often involve external evaluations that have their own unique structure and may not align with the typical structure of N&Vs;   
4) Articles within the disciplines having higher ratios of texts were selected to ensure the representativeness of the disciplines. The NS group saw higher ratios of N&Vs in biology, physics, astronomy, ecology, climate science, and life sciences. In the TE group, electrical engineering, materials, and applied physics were found to be the predominant disciplines. As N&Vs in the domain of SS account for only about $7 \%$ of the total, all texts in SS were retained in this phase.

This process yielded approximately 800 texts, with around 500 in NS, 240 in TE, and 60 in SS. Then we selected 30 texts from the NS and TE groups using computer-generated random numbers. As for the SS group, since Nature published fewer RAs and NVs in social sciences, we only selected seven texts from the journal. The selected texts encompassed subject areas ranging from anthropology, economics, psychology, and politics to sociology and human behaviors. To maintain balance across the three corpora, we also utilized a random number generator and selected 23 texts from N&Vs published in Nature Human Behaviour between 2017 and 2021. The number of texts in each selected discipline is shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Components of the corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Domains/Disciplinary groups</td><td>Disciplines</td><td>Number of texts</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Natural Sciences</td><td>Climate &amp; Ecology</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>Physics &amp; Astronomy</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Biology &amp; life sciences</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Total texts Social Sciences</td><td></td><td>30</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td> Psychology</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Sociology Politics &amp; Economics</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Total texts</td><td>Anthropology &amp; human behavior</td><td>6. 30</td></tr><tr><td> Technology and Engineering</td><td>Electrical engineering</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Total texts</td><td> Materials &amp; technology</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td> Other technology</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>30</td></tr></table></body></html>

Each N&V article was saved as a separate plain text file and cleaned of titles, figures, section heads, foot notes, reference lists and textual oddities resulting from the text conversion process. As shown in Table 2, the total number of words in the three corpora was 92,588, and the mean length of each article was about 1,029 words.

Table 2 Descriptive statistics of the three corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Corpora</td><td>Token</td><td>Mean token</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Natural Sciences (n = 30)</td><td>31,383</td><td>1,046</td><td>122</td></tr><tr><td>Social Sciences (n = 30)</td><td>30,937</td><td>1,031</td><td>136</td></tr><tr><td>Technology and Engineering (n = 30)</td><td>30,268</td><td>1,009</td><td>121</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>92,588</td><td>1,029</td><td>126</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.2. Coding and inter-coder reliability analysis

To address the two research questions, we need to identify the sequence of moves and steps used in N&V articles. We first selected three texts from each corpus and analyzed the rhetorical function of each sentence within these texts referring to the established research on the rhetorical structures of RAs and other review genres. Specifically, the N&V’s move model proposed by Yin and Parkinson (2021) was used as a guiding framework in our analysis of the rhetorical purposes of each sentence. During the analysis, if we encountered a step which had not been documented in the existing literature, we added it as a new step into the framework. The order of moves and steps followed the sequence of functions observed in the texts. We extracted the recurring moves and steps present in each corpus and established the initial draft coding framework. This coding framework was utilized by the first two authors to independently annotate 18 N&V articles using NVivo 12, with six articles selected from each disciplinary group. Subsequently, the annotations were compared, discussed, and any discrepancies were resolved, resulting in a revised framework. The 18 N&V articles were then independently re-annotated using the revised framework, and an inter-rater reliability analysis was performed. The Cohen’s Kappa values for NS, SS, and TE N&V annotation were found to be 0.91, 0.87, and 0.89, respectively, indicating a high level of inter-rater reliability. Following this, the first author proceeded to annotate the remaining 72 N&V articles using NVivo 12.

# 3.3. The criteria for determining the status of moves and steps

Swales (1990) initially classified moves and steps into two categories: obligatory and optional. However, he did not provide a specific criterion to distinguish between the two. Following him, subsequent researchers introduced an additional condition in between the two categories and established specific criteria to differentiate between the three. While all researchers shared the notion that a move or step must occur at a $100 \%$ rate to be considered obligatory, they differed in their nomenclature and the cut-off frequency for defining the other two categories. Lim (2014) introduced the concept of “quasiobligatory” moves and used a $5 0 \%$ frequency as a dividing line between quasi-obligatory and optional moves. In contrast, Kanoksilapatham (2015) separated conventional and optional moves using a $60 \%$ frequency standard. Given our focus on providing practical guidance for N&V writing and teaching, we determined that a lower cut-off frequency would be more appropriate. Therefore, we adopted Lim’s (2014) criteria, classifying moves or steps as obligatory, quasi-obligatory, or optional based on their occurrence rates: $1 0 0 \%$ , $5 0 \%$ , or below $5 0 \%$ respectively.

# 3.4. Data analysis

To address the first research question, we counted the frequency of each move and standardized the values as percentages. This allowed us to analyze the relative occurrence of each move and step across the dataset. To answer the second research question, we conducted multiple chi-square tests using SPSS 22.0 to identify significant variations in the distribution of moves and steps among the three disciplinary groups. It should be noted that a step’s status is determined by its occurrence rates in the corpora, and the chi-square tests on steps used their occurrence rates within the occurring move.

# 4. Results and discussion

Unlike research papers, which typically have clearly-defined sections with headings, N&V articles do not have section headings and thus lack an easily identifiable organization pattern. This highlights the importance of specifying the rhetorical structure of N&Vs for graduate students and researchers who seek references or guidance in writing such pieces. All together five moves were identified from the N&Vs in the three corpora, including one move in the abstract and four in the main body. The frequency of occurrence of the five moves and the steps constituting each move is displayed in Table 3. As can be seen from the table, except for Move 3, all other four moves are obligatory, being found in every N&V in the three corpora, suggesting that, generally all disciplines organize their N&V texts similarly. However, the steps within each move demonstrate variations across the three disciplinary categories. The following subsections will report the obligatory/quasiobligatory and optional status of steps in each move with examples as well as disciplinary variations across the three corpora.

# 4.1. Move 1 and the steps within it

Preceding the main text, M1: Introducing RA in the standfirst highlights and promotes the new findings or newly designed technologies of the reviewed RA. Its primary purpose is to captivate readers’ interest and entice them to continue reading. In this sense, it bears some resemblance to the abstract of RAs and the catchphrase of book blurbs. M1 is obligatory in all three corpora and can be realized in four steps: M1S1: Context, M1S2: Methods/Questions/Technology, M1S3: Results/Features or functions, and M1S4: Implications or applications. Among the four steps, M1S3 is obligatory for NS and SS, M1S2 is quasiobligatory for NS $( 6 0 \% )$ , SS $( 6 3 . 3 3 \mathrm { ~ \% } )$ , TE $( 9 6 . 6 7 ~ \% )$ , and M1S4 is quasi-obligatory for TE, occurring in $5 3 . 3 3 \ \%$ of the TE texts. All other steps are optional for the three disciplinary clusters. Despite the four steps identified, many N&V articles integrate several steps in one single sentence, as exemplified in (1), (2), and (3) from each corpus.

Table 3 Move structure of N&V articles in the three disciplinary groups.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Move/Step</td><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">NS (n = 30)</td><td rowspan="2"> Status</td><td colspan="2"> SS (n = 30)</td><td rowspan="2">Status</td><td colspan="2">TE (n = 30)</td><td rowspan="2">Status</td><td rowspan="2"> p-value</td></tr><tr><td>Count</td><td>Percent</td><td>Count</td><td>Percent</td><td>Count</td><td>Percent</td></tr><tr><td>m1</td><td>Introducing RA in the standfirst</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td> 30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>m1S1</td><td>Context</td><td>13/30</td><td>43.33</td><td>optional</td><td>13/30</td><td>43.33</td><td>optional</td><td>14/30</td><td>46.67</td><td>optional</td><td>.956</td></tr><tr><td>M1S2</td><td>Methods/Questions/Technology designed</td><td>18/30</td><td>60.</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>19/30</td><td>63.33</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>29/30</td><td>96.67</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>.002*</td></tr><tr><td>M1s3</td><td>Results/Features or functions</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>11/30</td><td>36.67</td><td> optional</td><td>.000*</td></tr><tr><td>M1s4</td><td>Implications or applications</td><td>12/30</td><td>40</td><td> optional</td><td>5/30</td><td>16.67</td><td>optional</td><td>16/30</td><td>53.33</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>.012*</td></tr><tr><td>M2</td><td>Setting the stage for RA</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td>obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>M2S1</td><td>Introducing RA topic by describing non- research-related phenomena or practices</td><td>26/30</td><td>86.67</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>26/30</td><td>86.67</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>21/30</td><td>70</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>.163</td></tr><tr><td>M2S2</td><td>Claiming centrality</td><td>11/30</td><td>36.67</td><td>optional</td><td>9/30</td><td>30</td><td>optional</td><td>13/30</td><td>43.33</td><td>optional</td><td>.563</td></tr><tr><td>M2S3</td><td>Defining key terms</td><td>5/30</td><td>16.67</td><td>optional</td><td>7|30.</td><td>23.33</td><td>optional</td><td>3/30</td><td>10</td><td>optional</td><td>.383.</td></tr><tr><td>M2S4</td><td>Reviewing previous research</td><td>9/30</td><td>30</td><td> optional</td><td>10/30</td><td>33.33</td><td> optional</td><td>0/30.</td><td>None</td><td>N|V</td><td>.002*</td></tr><tr><td>M2S5</td><td>Indicating a gap or a need for RA/RA technology</td><td>22/30</td><td>73.33</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>20/30</td><td>66.67</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>20/30</td><td>66.67</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>.813</td></tr><tr><td>M2S6</td><td>Presenting RA/technology, its authors and</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td>obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td>obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td>obligatory</td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>m3</td><td>major content/performance or applications Surveying the academic background of</td><td>28/30</td><td>93.33</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>20/30</td><td>66.67</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>24/30</td><td>80</td><td>quasi-obligatory</td><td>.036*</td></tr><tr><td>M3S1</td><td>RA topic Making topic generalizations</td><td>17/28</td><td>60.71</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M3S2</td><td>Surveying research activities about RA</td><td>26/28</td><td>92.86</td><td>quasi-obligatory quasi-obligatory</td><td>11/20 11/20</td><td>55 55</td><td>optional optional</td><td>11/24 20/24</td><td>45.83 83.33</td><td>optional quasi-obligatory</td><td>.560 .005*</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>theme</td><td></td><td>71.43</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M3S3 M3S4</td><td>Providing justifications for RA topic Presenting hypotheses of RA</td><td>20/28 8/28</td><td>28.57</td><td>quasi-obligatory optional</td><td>12/20 10/20</td><td>60 50</td><td>optional optional</td><td>21/24 0/24</td><td>87.5 None</td><td>quasi-obligatory N/V</td><td>.113 .001*</td></tr><tr><td>m4</td><td>Describing the study of RA</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>M4S1</td><td> Illustrating the difficulty of the study/the</td><td>7|30</td><td>23.33</td><td>optional</td><td>5/30</td><td>16.67</td><td>optional</td><td>7|30</td><td>23.33</td><td>optional</td><td>.766</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>technology</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M4S2</td><td>Stating the purpose (s) of RA</td><td>7|30</td><td>23.33</td><td>optional</td><td>8/30</td><td>26.67</td><td> optional</td><td>0/30</td><td> None</td><td>N/V</td><td>.010*</td></tr><tr><td>M4S3 M4S4</td><td>Describing the theoretical framework Introducing the design and working</td><td>4/30 0/30</td><td>13.33 None</td><td>optional N/V</td><td>5/30 0/30</td><td>16.67 None</td><td>optional N/V</td><td>6/30 30/30</td><td>20. 100</td><td>optional obligatory</td><td>.787 .000*</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>mechanism</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M4S5</td><td>Summarizing methods and procedures of RA</td><td>30/30</td><td>100 %</td><td>obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td>obligatory</td><td>14/30</td><td>46.67</td><td> optional</td><td>.000*</td></tr><tr><td>M4S6</td><td>Reporting findings of RA/performance or</td><td>30/30</td><td>100 %</td><td> obligatory</td><td>29/30</td><td>96.67</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>25/30</td><td>83.33</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>.024*</td></tr><tr><td>M4S7</td><td>functions of the technology Stating advantages of RA technology</td><td>0/30</td><td>None</td><td>N/V</td><td>0/30</td><td>None</td><td>N/V</td><td>21/30</td><td>70</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>.000*</td></tr><tr><td>M5</td><td>Evaluating RA</td><td>30 </td><td>100 %</td><td> obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td> obligatory</td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>M5S1 M5S2</td><td>Interpreting findings of RA</td><td>25/30 10/30</td><td>83.33 % 33.33 %</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>25/30</td><td>83.33</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>0/30.</td><td>None 33.33</td><td>N|V</td><td>.000*</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Comparing the present study with previous research</td><td></td><td></td><td>optional</td><td>9/30</td><td>30</td><td>optional</td><td>10/30</td><td></td><td>optional</td><td>.950</td></tr><tr><td>M5S3</td><td> Accounting for the results/the technology</td><td>19/30</td><td>63.33</td><td>quasi-obligatory</td><td>15/30</td><td>50</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>7/|30</td><td>23.33</td><td> optional</td><td>.007*</td></tr><tr><td>M5S4</td><td>performance Positively evaluating RA</td><td>29/30</td><td>96.67</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>30/30</td><td>100</td><td>obligatory</td><td>29/30</td><td>96.67</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>M5S5</td><td>Negatively evaluating RA</td><td>25/30</td><td>83.33 90</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>22/30</td><td>73.33</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>25/30</td><td>83.33 70</td><td> quasi-obligatory</td><td>.600 .535</td></tr><tr><td>M5S6</td><td>Suggesting future research</td><td>27|30</td></table></body></html>

Note: ${ } ^ { * } \mathbf { p } < 0 . 0 5$ .

(1) [M1S1] Multiple guesses from one individual, like guesses from a crowd, yield a better estimate when averaged. [M1S2] How far can such solipsistic polling take us in real, high-stakes settings? [M1S2] Now 1.2 million incentivized, real-world guesses [M1S3] show just how much people can improve their judgments by reconsidering their own estimates. (SS18)   
(2) [M1S2] A powerful radio telescope has peered back through time [M1S3] to observe a galaxy that contained a cold, rotating disk of gas not long after the Big Bang d [M1S4] fueling the debate about when and how disks first formed in galaxies. (NS2)   
(3) [M1S1] Current biological sensors require bulky external power sources. [M1S2] Ultrathin solar cells have now been fabricated [M1S3] that can power flexible, wearable sensors for the precise and continuous monitoring of biological signals. (TE26)

Three steps (M1S2, M1S3 and M1S4) display substantial variations across the three domains $( p _ { M 1 S 2 } = . 0 0 2$ , $p _ { M 1 S 3 } = . 0 0 0$ , $p _ { M 1 S 4 } = . 0 1 2 $ ), and the big differences are mainly between TE and the other two. Writers of N&Vs in TE, the hard applied science, tend to promote the new products or new technology the source RA designed (M1S2) “through the lens of its apparatus” (Omidian et al.’s, 2018, p. 12), whereas NS and SS writers seem to promote the RA by emphasizing its findings (M1S3). Such a difference is probably determined by the rhetorical function of this move and the potential readers of N&Vs: readers of N&V may not be experts in the field, and what attracts them to read on should be something which can catch their eyes such as the advanced technology or the impressive results. Less rhetorical effort was given to implications in SS (M1S4) probably because of the word limit in the standfirst (one or two sentences, 50 words maximum), as indicated in the guide to authors on Nature’s website.

Although NS and SS share most of the steps of M1, a close scrutiny of the texts in the two corpora reveals that questions were used more frequently in SS $( 1 0 / 3 0 , 3 3 . 3 3 \% )$ (See the above Example (1)) and no question was used in NS and TE. The occurrence of questions in SS is in line with the previous research finding that questions in RAs were largely confined to soft fields (Hyland, 2002, 2005). Questions are important engagement markers and are used to catch readers’ attention, encourage their curiosity and draw them into the discourse as participants (Hyland, 2005, 2008). Social science N&V authors used questions to arouse readers’ interest, invite their engagement and promote their dialogic involvement.

# 4.2. Move 2 and the steps within it

The main text of N&V articles commences with M2: Setting the stage for RA. M2 serves as a concise introduction to the research topic at hand, highlighting the existing gaps or needs that the source RA study addressed. Notably, the RA under review is explicitly presented towards the end of the introductory paragraph to capture the interest of both experts in the field and those who lack expertise, thus ensuring a broader readership. M2 is obligatory in all three corpora and can be realized by a maximum of six steps: M2S1 and M2S2 resemble establishing the importance of the field, M2S3-M2S5 are similar to indicating a niche, and M2S6 shares a similar function to describing the present study in Swales’ (1990) CARS model for RA introduction. Three out of six steps are either obligatory or quasi-obligatory: M2S1: Introducing RA topic by describing non-research-related phenomena or practices (occurring in $8 6 . 6 7 \%$ , $8 6 . 6 7 \%$ and $7 0 \%$ of the NS, SS and TE texts), M2S5: Indicating a gap or a need for RA (with the occurrence rates being $7 3 . 3 3 \ \%$ , $6 6 . 6 7 \%$ and $6 6 . 6 7 \%$ in NS, SS and TE), and M2S6: Presenting RA, its authors and major content ( $100 \%$ occurrence in all three corpora).

M2S1: Introducing RA topic by describing non-research-related phenomena or practices contextualizes the RA topic in the real-world phenomena, events or stories to accommodate the needs of potential readers of N&V and to fulfill the purpose of recommending the source RA to a wide public.

M2S2: Claiming centrality, M2S3: Defining key terms, and M2S4: Reviewing previous research are optional in all three discipline groups. They are more compressed compared to the corresponding steps in the RA. M2S2 emphasizes the importance and value of the research area, which can be signalled by adjectives like “essential”, “crucial”, “striking” or nouns like “value”, “forefront”, among others. M2S3 provides definitions of key terms to make the text more comprehensible and readable. M2S4 provides readers with a snapshot of previous studies. It did not occur in TE and is the only step in M2 where the three disciplinary clusters differ significantly $( p = . 0 0 2 )$ . The absence of M2S4 in TE can probably be explained by two factors: Firstly, the field of TE is rapidly evolving, and there may not be extensive literature available on the specific technology discussed in the source RA (Kanoksilapatham, 2015). Secondly, TE N&V articles had a more detailed literature survey in the subsequent move following the presentation of the reviewed RA. In other words, TE N&V authors tend not to do a brief literature review in the introduction M2 section, which is evidenced by the shorter text coverage devoted to M2 in TE $( 9 . 4 3 \% )$ compared to NS $( 1 1 . 5 5 \% )$ and SS $( 1 4 . 9 9 \% )$ , with statistical analysis indicating a significant difference $\mathrm { \Delta F = 6 . 3 7 9 }$ , $\begin{array} { r } { \mathbf { p } = . 0 0 3 \cdot } \end{array}$ ).

M2S5: Indicating a gap or a need for RA serves to highlight an existing gap in prior research or emphasizes the necessity of the research conducted by the RA. The linguistic cues employed for this function include adversative conjunctions such as “but” and “yet”, adversative adverbials such as “however”, “nonetheless”, adverbs such as “unfortunately”, and adjectives such as “controversial”, “limited”, “elusive”.

M2S6: Presenting RA, its authors and major content directly mentions the reviewed RA, its authors and briefly describes the major content or the newly designed technology by using reporting verbs such as “report”, “demonstrate”, “reveal”, and “address”. What needs to be noted is that N&V articles published in Nature all explicitly provide the page number on which the source RA appears, whereas N&Vs in Nature Human Behaviour do not give the page number.

Examples of these six steps are shown in (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8). Notably, M2S6 of (7) and (8) exemplify how N&Vs published in Nature and Nature Human Behaviour introduce the reviewed RA.

(4) [M2S1] Going back to the time of Leonardo da Vinci, animal flight has inspired human enquiry, and we have sought to emulate nature by building machines that attempt to fly using flapping wings. (TE7)   
(5) [M2S2] For decades, the development of a cheap and efficient way to convert sunlight into electricity has been at the forefront of research, from the physical sciences to engineering. (TE27)   
(6) [M2S3] BBN is the process that produced the nuclei of the lightest elements, and started about 1 s after the Big Bang d the earliest time at which the known laws of physics left ‘fossils’ that can be probed experimentally. (NS28)   
(7) [M2S4] Although this type of negative thinking has been demonstrated consistently among individuals with depression, [M2S5] research has not yet examined the language of depressed persons in ‘real-world’ settings, such as through social media. [M2S6] A fascinating study in Nature Human Behaviour by Bathina et al. that analyzed over 1.5 million tweets addresses this gap. (SS14)   
(8) [M2S6] On page 39, Willis et al. provide a glimpse of what happened during the dark ages by doing some galactic archaeology. (NS4)

# 4.3. Move 3 and the steps within it

M3: Describing the academic background of RA topic narrows down the relatively broad research field sketched in M2 and provides a more specific and detailed account of the academic background of the RA topic. It serves the purpose of reviewing the important literature on the RA topic, pointing out the existing problems, and emphasizing the need for the RA study. In this regard, it shares certain functions with M2 and bears similarities to the literature review section in applied linguistics RAs (Kwan, 2006). M3 is the only quasi-obligatory move among the five moves and is also the only one which was found to be statistically different across the three disciplinary corpora $\left( { p = } . 0 3 6 \right)$ . It was more frequently used in NS $( 9 3 . 3 3 \% )$ and TE $( 8 0 \% )$ than in SS $( 6 6 . 6 7 \% )$ ). Accordingly, both NS and TE N&V authors also assigned more text space to this move $2 3 . 7 5 \%$ and $2 4 \%$ than SS authors did $( 1 4 . 7 \% )$ . M3 consists of four steps and demonstrates two substantial variations at the step level across the three corpora: M3S2: Surveying research activities about RA theme, and M3S4: Presenting hypotheses of RA $\cdot p _ { M 3 S 2 } = . 0 0 5$ , $p _ { M 3 S 4 } = . 0 0 1$ ).

M3S1: Making topic generalizations provides an overview of the current state of the disciplinary knowledge or practices related to the RA topic. It is quasi-obligatory in NS (17/30, 56.67 %) but is optional in SS and TE N&V articles $( 1 1 / 3 0 , 3 6 . 6 7 \% )$ .

M3S2: Surveying research activities about RA theme delineates the historical development of the research on the RA theme. M3S2 is quasi-obligatory in NS $( 2 6 / 3 0 , 8 6 . 6 7 \% )$ ) and TE N&V articles $( 1 1 / 3 0 , 3 6 . 6 7 \% )$ but is optional in SS N&V articles $( 2 0 / 3 0 ,$ , $6 6 . 6 7 \mathrm { ~ \% }$ ).

Compared with M2S5, M3S3: Providing justifications for RA topic offers a more specific account of the problems of previous research and elaborates on the reasons why the research carried out by the reviewed RA is necessary and reasonable. It is quasi-obligatory in NS (20/30, 66.67 %) and TE N&V articles $( 2 1 / 3 0 , 7 0 \% )$ yet is optional in SS N&V articles $( 1 2 / 3 0 , 4 0 \% )$ .

M3S4: Presenting hypotheses of RA states the hypotheses of the reviewed RA, which can be signalled by verbs such as “hypothesize” and “postulate”, and nouns such as “hypothesis”. M3S4 is an optional step in NS and SS, with the occurrence rates being $2 6 . 6 7 \%$ and $3 3 . 3 3 \%$ respectively, but does not occur in the TE corpus. These four steps are shown in (9) and (10).

(9) [M3S1] Much of the previously available information on ocean temperatures during the past thousands of years has come from records produced by organisms that lived in those times d [M3S2] for example, from differences in observed assemblages . , from ratios of metal ions . , or from the arrangement of chemical bonds . , all of which have a known temperature dependency. [M3S4] The temperatures obtained from these records are valuable, but are subject to uncertainties due to the complex responses of the organisms . As a result, these temperature proxies are typically accurate to approximately $1 ~ ^ { \circ } \mathbb { C }$ . This is a problem, because the mean temperature change of the ocean is thought to have been only about $3 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C .$ (NS10)   
(10) [M3S3] The authors stipulated two hypotheses that could explain . ordinary people: it is possible that . relatives. Alternatively, it is equally plausible that . distant others’ well-being. (SS24)

The more frequent occurrence of M3 (28/30, 93.33 %) and M3S2 (26/28, 92.86 %) in NS texts might be attributed to the epistemological nature of the disciplines: Hard pure knowledge features relatively steady cumulative growth, wherein new findings are generated by a linear development from the existing state of knowledge (Becher, 1989, 1994; Kolb, 1981; Kuhn, 1970). It appears that in the domain of hard pure science, N&V writers often engage in a comprehensive survey of linear development of literature within M3. Conversely, in soft pure fields, fewer N&V writers (20/30) adopted this move, and even fewer of them (11/20) chose to write a literature survey within it. This may be associated with the more space covered by M2 in SS texts, indicating that writers in this domain tend to conduct more extensive literature reviews on the topic prior to introducing the source RA. This finding aligns with the observation made by Holmes (1997, p. 332) that “social science tended towards complexity and elaboration at the beginning of RA,” thus demonstrating that N&V writers in SS adhere to the disciplinary conventions while writing article reviews.

The absence of M3S4: Presenting hypotheses of RA in TE might also have something to do with the epistemological orientations commonly found in hard applied disciplines such as engineering, which often adopt a pragmatist, problem-solving paradigm (Carter, 2007; Kwan, 2017; March and Smith, 1995) that places less emphasis on hypothesis testing. In contrast, the more frequent occurrence of this step in SS may seem contradictory to Becher’s (1989) definition of soft pure science, which often employs a qualitative, inductive approach. However, Becher (1989) himself acknowledged that his framework may not fully capture the dynamic change and advancements taking place within various disciplines. It is worth noting that the traditional positivistic, hypothetical-deductive approach, which is predominantly associated with NS, now has gained prominence and plays an equally important role in certain disciplines within SS as well (Bruce, 2009), including psychology, economics, and sociology. This shift highlights the evolving research methodologies and practices within these fields. The presence of hypothesis testing in SS reflects the adaptation of these disciplines towards a more diverse set of approaches, encompassing both quantitative and qualitative methods.

# 4.4. Move 4 and the steps within it

M4: Describing the present study mainly focuses on the key aspects of the RA study, including its theoretical framework, purposes, methods, procedure, and findings, etc. This move is obligatory in all three corpora and can be realized by seven steps. They are like methods and results sections of RAs in the brief version, and can be compared to the move of outlining the book in book reviews (Motta-Roth, 1995). Just as the outline of a book provides a summary of its content, M4 and the steps within it offer a snapshot of the study’s essential components, enabling readers to grasp the main points without delving into the full details of the RA.

M4S1-M4S3 are optional in all three disciplinary clusters (occurrence rates ranging from 0 to $2 6 . 6 7 \%$ , see Table 2). M4S1: Illustrating the difficulty of the study/technology explains the key difficulties and challenges faced and overcome by the study, which can be signalled by nouns such as “challenge”, “problem”, “hurdle” and adjectives such as “challenging”, “difficult”, “hard”, as shown in (11). M4S2: Stating purpose(s) of RA shows the purpose(s) of the reviewed RA, which is usually given in the infinitives, as shown in (12). M4S3: Describing the theoretical framework expounds on the theoretical basis underlying the research, as shown in (13).

(11) [M4S1] Identifying vulnerability factors for PTSD usually requires studying large numbers of people before they’re exposed to trauma and then again afterwards. This is, of course, challenging, because the occurrence of traumatic events is often unpredictable. (SS23)   
(12) [M4S2] To test whether the variation in recruitment timing observed in the ten forests is sufficient to increase the probability of species coexistence at low latitudes, [M4S5] Usinowicz and colleagues incorporated species-recruitment data into a mathematical model of forest dynamics . [M4S6] They found that the relative strength . decreased by $0 . 2 5 \ \%$ .. (NS18)   
(13) [M4S3] The research is underpinned by a theoretical framework developed by the authors through previous work. They propose the idea of a ‘devoted actor’ as a means of understanding why someone would seemingly want to engage in costly sacrifice . A second, key element, in the devoted actor framework is a feeling of collective invulnerability . (SS16)

Among the remaining four steps in M4 (M4S4-M4S7), two steps (M4S5: Summarizing methods and procedures of RA and M4S6: Reporting findings of RA/performance or functions of the technology) are obligatory or quasi-obligatory in NS and SS. For TE, three steps are obligatory or quasi-obligatory: M4S4: Introducing design and working mechanism $( 1 0 0 \% )$ , M4S6: Reporting performance or functions of the technology $( 8 3 . 3 3 \%$ ), and M4S7: Stating advantages of RA technology (about $7 0 \%$ ). M4S4 serves to outline the design and working mechanisms of the newly designed technology, usually displayed in a figure to illustrate the design framework or development process (Gardner and Nesi, 2013). This step is distinctively featured in TE N&V articles, as exemplified in (14). M4S5 describes the methods used by the RA or the research process undertaken by the RA, as shown in (12). M4S6 highlights the key findings of the RA or the performance of the technology developed, which can be signalled by verbs such as “find”, “identify”, “show”, “reveal”, and nouns such as “finding”. An example of this step can be found in (12). M4S7 discusses the major advantages or benefits offered by the technology, as evidenced in (14).

(14) [M4S4] Jafferis and colleagues’ work builds on .. The authors combine a multitude of diverse technologies . to achieve the sustained flight of . the RoboBee X-Wing (Figur 1). At the core of the RoboBee is a flapping-wing system made of a composite material and constructed using a process . The group has developed a design and manufacturing tool . The current design of the flapping-wing system uses an innovative four-wing configuration . This motion is driven by . and generates sufficient lift with acceptable power demands. [M4S7] Key advances in the current work are the optimization of a mechanical transmission . and the development of a lightweight electronic circuit. (TE7)

Five out of seven steps in M4 exhibited statistically significant disciplinary variations: M4S2, M4S4, M4S5, M4S6, and M4S7. Among these five steps, M4S2: Stating purpose(s) of RA had similar rates of occurrence in NS and SS N&V articles $2 3 . 3 3 \%$ and $2 6 . 6 7 \%$ , respectively) but was absent in TE N&V articles; M4S4: Introducing design and working mechanism and M4S7: Stating advantages of RA technology were absent in NS and SS but had very high occurrence rates in TE texts ( $1 0 0 \%$ and $70 \%$ ). Therefore, M4S4 and M4S7 can be regarded as distinguishing textual features of TE disciplines. In contrast, what distinguishes NS and SS texts from TE texts are M4S5: Summarizing methods and procedures of RA and M4S6: Reporting findings of RA/performance or functions of the technology: the former had a $100 \%$ occurrence in NS and SS texts but occurred less frequently in TE (about $47 \%$ ); the latter were observed in all 30 NS texts and 29 out of 30 SS texts but occurred in 25 out of 30 TE texts. These differences need to be explained with the overall communicative function of N&V and the specific function of M4: N&Vs are written mainly to promote and recommend the source RA. To do so, writers of N&Vs summarize and highlight the most important content of the RA in M4 before they make evaluative comments in the next move. It appears that N&V writers in NS and SS promote the RA through the lens of methodology and findings whereas TE writers of RAs tended to promote the study of RAs by emphasizing their working mechanism, which integrate the purpose(s) and the procedure of the design, and advantages, which can also be regarded as positive evaluation.

# 4.5. Move 5 and the steps within it

In contrast to the previous moves that primarily serve the purpose of summarizing the RA (i.e., the “news”), M5: Evaluating the present study realizes the communicative function of evaluating and recommending the RA (i.e., the “views”). This move bears similarity to the discussion section of RAs across diverse disciplines, such as social sciences (Holmes, 1997) and engineering (Kanoksilapatham, 2015). It also shares similarities with providing focused evaluation in book reviews (Motta-Roth, 1995). M5 is obligatory in each of the disciplinary groups and can be realized by seven steps, among which M1S1-M1S3 are similar to commenting on results and M1S6 and M1S7 share a common function of [drawing] deductions from research in RA discussion sections (Liu and Buckingham, 2018). For both NS and SS texts, six out of seven steps are either obligatory or quasi-obligatory. The only exception is M5S2: Comparing the present study with previous research, which appeared in $3 3 . 3 3 \%$ and $3 0 \%$ of NS and SS texts, respectively. In contrast, TE texts have only four obligatory steps: M5S4: Positively evaluating RA, M5S5: Negatively evaluating RA, M5S6: Suggesting future research, and M5S7: Stating applications and implications of RA. Unique to N&V articles are M1S4 and M1S5.

In M5S1: Interpreting findings of RA, N&V writers interpret and elaborate on the major findings of RAs, which can be signalled by verbs like “suggest”, “imply”, “mean”, and “indicate” as well as phrases such as “in other words”, “support the idea that”, and “provide evidence that”, as demonstrated in (15). This step is quite prevalent in N&Vs from both NS and SS, appearing in $8 3 . 3 3 \ \%$ of NS and SS texts. However, it was not observed in N&Vs from TE field.

M5S2: Comparing the present study with previous research compares the findings of the RA with the extant research and can be signalled by expressions such as “differ”, “resemble”, “by contrast”, “be consistent with”, “in line with”, as illustrated in (15). Comparatively, this step appeared less frequently in all three corpora, with occurrence rates of $3 3 . 3 3 \%$ , $3 0 \%$ , and $3 3 . 3 3 \%$ in NS, SS, and TE texts, respectively.

M5S3: Accounting for the results provides explanations for the major findings of the RA and is signalled by the use of causality words or phrases such as “because”, “therefore”, “thus”, “be caused by”, and “result in/from”, as shown in (15). This step is quasi-obligatory in NS $( 6 3 . 3 3 \ \% )$ and SS $( 5 0 \% )$ N&V articles. In TE N&V corpus, however, this step is optional and appeared in only $2 3 . 3 3 \%$ of the texts.

(15) [M5S1] This field experiment provided convincing evidence that a simple intervention can reduce crime . [M5S2] This level of reduction is similar to that of more-aggressive policing policies4. [M4S6] The drop in crime lessened after three months, [M5S3] which the authors suggest is due to the light touch and limited duration of the intervention. Interventions designed to keep officers’ information at the top of residents’ minds . might therefore result in longer-term effects. (SS20)

In M5S4: Positively evaluating RA, N&V writers compliment on the strengths, value and significance of the reviewed RA, which is signalled by evaluation markers such as “groundbreaking”, “innovative”, “exquisitely”, “remarkably”, “triumph”, “breakthrough” as well as phrases like “pave the way for”, “lay the groundwork for”, among others. M5S4 is obligatory in the SS texts and quasi-obligatory in NS and TE texts (occurring in 29 out of 30 texts in both corpora).

M5S5: Negatively evaluating RA states the problems or limitations of the reviewed RA, which is indicated by negative evaluative markers such as “uncertainty”, “caveat”, “challenge”, “unknown”, “lack”, “fail”, “provide only a few snapshots of”, and “yield no insights into”. Despite being quasi-obligatory in all three corpora (occurring in $8 3 . 3 3 \%$ , $7 3 . 3 3 \%$ and $8 3 . 3 3 \%$ of the texts in NS, SS, and TE), M5S5 appeared less frequently compared to positive evaluation, which was observed in all review genres. This difference in frequency could be attributed to the potential face-threatening nature of negative evaluation, as noted by Hyland (2014). To mitigate the potential face-threatening effect, negative evaluation was often sandwiched between positive evaluations in the majority of texts within our corpora, as demonstrated in (16).

(16) [M5S4] Weisman and colleagues offer innovative methods and pioneering cross-cultural and cross-age data on the human conception of mind. [M5S5] We can be confident that this conception is structured along a small number of dimensions, but the exact meaning and number of these dimensions are not yet settled. [M5S4] This is the nature of groundbreaking research: it paves the way for even deeper questions and for refinements of our current knowledge. (SS13)

M5S6: Suggesting future research and M5S7: Stating applications and implications of RA closely resemble the functions of their corresponding steps in the full-length RAs, but are condensed in the mini version. Despite their brevity, M5S6 and M5S7 still fulfill their purpose by providing valuable insights into possible areas for future research and highlighting the practical applications and broader implications of the RA. These two steps are frequently observed across all three corpora, with occurrence rates ranging from $5 6 . 6 7 \%$ to $9 0 \%$ . Typically, they were positioned after M5S4 or M5S5, as shown in (17), (18), and (19).

(17) [M5S4] Claeys Bouuaert and colleagues’ work marks the start of an exciting ‘phase’ of research into the fundamental mechanisms of meiotic recombination. [M5S6] Taken together with steady progress in our understanding of meiotic chromosome architecture and dynamics, the stage is set for further advances, including the in vitro reconstitution of meiotic DNA-break formation and inter-homologue recombination. (NS25)   
(18) [M5S4] Chen et al. propose a plausible route from ECR-generated ethyl-coenzyme M to CO2 . [M5S5] However, the conversion of ethyl-coenzyme M to acetyl-coenzyme A still requires experimental validation. A similar gap in knowledge also exists for other non-methane oxidation pathways . [M5S6] The next logical steps are to resolve the controversy . and to build the metabolic bridge between ethyl-coenzyme M and acetyl-coenzyme A. (NS6)

(19) [M5S4] Mickle and colleagues have taken a major step forward for this field by developing a therapeutic system that enables specific and stable stimulation of the nervous system. [M5S7] If optogenetics approaches are approved for specific clinical applications, this type of closed-loop system might be poised to have a key role in driving a transformative shift towards the use of such strategies to treat human disease. (TE20)

Just like cyclic occurrence of results and discussion sections of an RA (Kanoksilapatham, 2005, 2015; Ye, 2019), the last four steps in M5 always exhibit a cyclic pattern, as shown in (20) and (21).

(20) Cycle 1 [M5S4] Drawing on the innovative data compilation and modelling methods of Osman and colleagues as a foundation, [M5S6] future work should focus on adding more terrestrial records . There is also a need for more model simulations . Cycle 2 [M5S4] Nonetheless, the work by Osman et al. is a triumph, and sets a new standard for the development of large-scale temperature reconstructions of the geological past. [M5S7] It should inspire climate scientists to undertake similar analyses . (NS13)   
(21) Cycle 1 [M5S4] . Despite these impressive findings, [M5S5] a key limitation of the work is that only the PCM devices were actually fabricated; the other components of the synaptic cells and the neurons were simulated computationally . Cycle 2 [M5S4] However, Ambrogio and colleagues’ work is more than a crucial stepping stone to the integration of PCM devices . [M5S7] It will also inspire device research . Cycle 3 [M5S4] A wall in emerging memory technologies has been breached . [M5S7] This finding suggests that advances in artificial intelligence will not only continue, but also be accelerated by emerging hardware. (TE8)

Two out of seven steps in M5 displayed statistically significant disciplinary variations across the three corpora: M5S1: Interpreting findings of RA was found in NS and SS texts $8 3 . 3 3 \%$ in both corpora) but not in TE N&V articles; M5S3: Accounting for the results was less frequent in TE $( 2 3 . 3 3 \% )$ than in NS $( 6 3 . 3 3 \% )$ and SS $( 5 0 \% )$ . The higher occurrence frequency of M5S1 and M5S3 in NS and SS may be related to their essential roles in scientifically justifying the results of the RA (Williams, 1999). However, it is interesting to observe the low occurrence rates of M5S3 and the absence of M5S1 in N&V articles from the TE field, which differs from Kanoksilapatham’s (2015) finding that engineering RAs often include interpretation $(6 1 \% - 9 4 \% )$ and explanation $( 3 3 \% - 8 0 \% )$ of results in their discussion section. Under scrutiny, we found that interpreting findings may not be necessary in N&V texts related to TE. This is because M4S6: Reporting performance or functions of the technology often incorporates the parameter performances of the new design. Furthermore, some explanations for the performance may have already been provided in M4S4: describing the design and working mechanism. Consequently, in M5 N&V writers primarily focus on evaluations rather than interpretations of the findings. Another potential explanation for the lower occurrence rates of M5S1 may be that TE is developing rapidly and the fast-paced growth in the field, coupled with the recommending purpose of N&V, has likely led to an increased focus on showcasing and evaluating the technology’s performance instead of interpreting the findings.

To sum up, the differences in the three disciplinary clusters may be determined by the object of enquiry, the research aim of the disciplinary area, research paradigms, and other epistemological traditions in each domain (Becher, 1989, 1994; Bruce, 2009; Trowler et al., 2012). Some other factors, such as socio-cultural contexts, the nature of the focus of the research, the pace of discipline evolution, or interdisciplinary communication, might also influence scientific investigation and knowledge creation, which in turn can shape textual structure of the disciplines (Bazerman et al., 2005).

# 5. Implications and conclusion

Using self-established corpora, this paper presented a detailed genre analysis of N&V articles across NS, SS, and TE, and identified textural organizations of each disciplinary cluster. We observed the crucial textual variations of the three groups, most of which were at the step level. Globally, four out of the five moves of N&Vs across the three disciplinary clusters are obligatory and share the common goals of highlighting the unique finding(s) of the RA, introducing the RA, describing the RA methods and results, and evaluating the RA. Such an organization pattern makes N&Vs appear to be mini-RAs plus critical evaluations. Although N&Vs are constructed similarly across the three disciplinary clusters at the text level, statistical analysis demonstrates that some steps represented distinguishing textual features of the domains. Such salient rhetorical features were mainly found within the TE field. N&V authors of TE tend to do some literature review after they introduced the source RA, and they thoroughly described the working mechanism and advantages of the new technology, which combined aim, methods and procedures together. N&Vs in SS differ from NS mainly in one move and two steps: The standfirst in SS exhibited a relatively lower frequency of mentioning implications, whereas in the evaluation move, implications were addressed similarly across all three disciplinary clusters. Interestingly, authors of N&V articles in the SS showed a tendency to conduct more extensive literature reviews before introducing the RA, differing from the approaches adopted by the other two disciplinary groups. Another interesting finding is that hypotheses were more frequently found in SS than in NS and TE. This, on the one hand, might be related to the fast changing pace of the disciplines. On the other hand, scientific enquiry in NS has become highly procedural and hypothesis may not always be explicitly stated but implicitly acknowledged and incorporated into the study design, methodology, and data analysis in NS. Taken together, these findings seem to show that N&Vs in the three clusters basically adhered to the conventions observed in RAs. This supports N&V be used as a reading-to-write task for graduate students who may not possess the required skills to write a full-length paper. By engaging with N&Vs, these students can develop their academic writing skills, acquaint themselves with the basic organizational structure of article reviews and the disciplinary conventions prevalent in broad disciplinary fields such as NS, SS and TE, and enhance their skills in critically evaluating academic discourse. This process can effectively prepare them for the future composition of RAs.

It is worth noting that the three clusters of disciplines demonstrated a remarkable degree of similarity in the core move of N&V, evaluation move. The uniformity in the presentation of evaluations across different fields suggests that comparable communicative strategies, such as contextualizing and evaluating the source RA, are employed to achieve the overarching objective of N&V, which is the critical evaluation of the reviewed RA. Specifically, the two key steps in the evaluation move, positive evaluation and negative evaluation, did not reveal any substantial differences between the disciplinary groups, implying that there might be a generic feature to the evaluation move that applies across disciplines. However, the lack of differences observed in this study does not necessarily mean that the linguistic strategies employed by these disciplinary groups are identical, which highlights the need for further research on this topic.

The current study holds several pedagogical implications. Firstly, the identification of distinct disciplinary clusters and their corresponding textual structures in N&Vs suggests that students within the same cluster, such as the hard pure, soft pure, and hard applied disciplines, could be grouped together in an EAP class. This would enhance classroom instruction convenience and cost-effectiveness, striking a balance between a one-size-fits-all EAP teaching approach and students’ specific academic needs. In cases where administrative or teaching conditions do not allow for discipline-specific teaching, the organizational structures of our disciplinary clusters can serve as a valuable framework for EAP teachers. Utilizing examples generated from this study, teachers can illustrate the common core elements and disciplinary variations in N&V articles to raise students’ awareness and sensitivity to genre knowledge, which may better prepare students for effective participation in interdisciplinary communication and cooperation. Secondly, the framework established in this study can also benefit discipline-specific teachers who employ N&V as the writing and assessment task. By providing students with the moves and steps outlined in the three disciplinary areas identified, teachers can offer clearer instructions on the organizational patterns of N&Vs within their respective fields. Lastly, our study offers a heuristic framework for early-career academics seeking to improve their writing and publishing skills in article reviews. The framework can be used as an analytical tool to analyze additional N&V articles, enabling scholars to acquire the necessary writing skills for this genre.

One limitation of the study is the imbalanced distribution of N&V texts across specific disciplines within the three corpora, which might have impacted the obtained results. Future studies could utilize corpora with a balanced number of N&V articles from each specific discipline, which would allow for a more rigorous examination of whether the proposed model remains effective across disciplines. Another limitation is that our corpora did not include all disciplines within the three broad disciplinary groups. Consequently, the textual features of the disciplines not covered in our corpora may present a different rhetorical structure. It is important for future research to explore the textual characteristics of these additional disciplines to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of N&V organization. Besides, while the three disciplinary clusters demonstrated similar organizational patterns in terms of the N&V moves and steps, it is worth noting that the linguistic devices employed to achieve each move or step, particularly the key move of evaluating the reviewed article, may vary across disciplines. Future studies that examine linguistic strategies, such as the use of lexical bundles within the evaluation move, would greatly benefit students learning to write N&Vs or other critical reviews.

# Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

# References

Basturkmen, H. (2012). A genre-based investigation of discussion sections of research articles in dentistry and disciplinary variation. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 11(2), 134-144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2011.10.004.   
Bazerman, C., Little, J., Chavkin, T., Fouquette, D., Bethel, L., & Garufis, J. (2005). Reference guide to writing across the curriculum. West Lafayette: Parlor Press.   
Becher, T. (1989). Academic tribes and territories: Intellectual enquiry and the cultures of disciplines. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.   
Becher, T. (1994). The significance of disciplinary differences. Studies in Higher Education, 19(2), 151-161. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079412331382007.   
Biber, D. (2006). University language. John Benjamins.   
Bruce, I. (2008). Cognitive genre structures in methods sections of research articles: A corpus study. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 7(1), 38-54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2007.12.001.   
Bruce, I. (2009). Results sections in sociology and organic chemistry articles: A genre analysis. English for Specific Purposes, 28(2), 105-124.   
Bruce, I. (2014). Expressing criticality in the literature review in research article introductions in applied linguistics and psychology. English for Specific Purposes, 36, 85-96.   
Carter, M. (2007). Ways of knowing, doing, and writing in the disciplines. College Composition and Communication, 58(3), 385-418.   
Connor, U., & Mauranen, A. (1999). Linguistic analysis of grant proposals: European union research grants. English for Specific Purposes, 18(1), 47-62. https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(97)00026-4.   
Cotos, E., Huffman, S., & Link, S. (2017). A move/step model for methods sections: Demonstrating rigour and credibility. English for Specific Purposes, 46, 90- 106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.01.001.   
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TESOL Quarterly, 34(2), 213-238. https://doi.org/10.2307/3587951.   
Devitt, A. (2015). Translating practice into theory in genre studies. In N. Artemeva, & A. Freedman (Eds.), Genre studies around the globe (pp. 386-401). Edmonton AB: Inkshed Publications.   
Diani, G. (2009). Reporting and evaluation in english book review articles: A cross-disciplinary study. In K. Hyland, & G. Diani (Eds.), Academic evaluation: Review genres in university settings (pp. 87-104). Palgrave Macmillan.   
Durrant, P. (2017). Lexical bundles and disciplinary variation in university students’ writing: Mapping the territories. Applied Linguistics, 38(2), 165-193. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amv011.   
Gabril, A., & Plakans, L. (2014). Assembling validity evidence for assessing academic writing: Rater reactions to integrated tasks. Assessing Writing, 21, 56-73.   
Gardner, S., & Nesi, H. (2013). A classification of genre families in university student writing. Applied Linguistics, 34(1), 25-52. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/ ams024. (Eds.), Academic evaluation: Review genres in university settings (pp. 122-142). Palgrave Macmillan.   
Holmes, R. (1997). Genre analysis, and the social sciences: An investigation of the structure of research article discussion sections in three disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 16(4), 321-337. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(96)00038-5.   
Hyland, K. (2002). What do they mean? Questions in academic writing. Text, 22(4), 529-557.   
Hyland, K. (2005). Metadiscourse: Exploring interaction in writing. London: Continuum International Publishing Group.   
Hyland, K. (2008). As can be seen: Lexical bundles and disciplinary variation. English for Specific Purposes, 27(1), 4-21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2007.06. 001.   
Hyland, K. (2014). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.   
Hyland, K., & Diani, G. (2009). Academic evaluation: Review genres in university settings. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Kanoksilapatham, B. (2005). Rhetorical structure of biochemistry research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 24(3), 269-292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp. 2004.08.003.   
Kanoksilapatham, B. (2015). Distinguishing textual features characterizing structural variation in research articles across three engineering sub-discipline corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 37, 74-86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.06.008.   
Kolb, D. A. (1981). Learning styles and disciplinary differences. In A. Chickering (Ed.), The modern american college (pp. 232-255). San Francisco: Jossey Bass.   
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
Kwan, B. S. C. (2006). The schematic structure of literature reviews in doctoral theses of applied linguistics. English for Specific Purposes, 25(1), 30-55. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2005.06.001.   
Kwan, B. S. C. (2017). A cross-paradigm macro-structure analysis of research articles in information systems. English for Specific Purposes, 45, 14-30. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2016.08.002.   
Latucca, L. R. (2002). Learning interdisciplinarity: Sociocultural perspectives on academic work. The Journal of Higher Education, 73(6), 711-739.   
Lau, K., & Gardner, D. (2019). Disciplinary variations in learning styles and preferences: Implications for the provision of academic English. System, 80, 257- 268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2018.12.010.   
Li, C., & Yang, L. (2022). A case study of learner agency in an academic reading and writing course from the lens of sociocultural theory. Modern Foreign Languages, 45(3), 394-405.   
Lim, J. M.-H. (2010). Commenting on research results in applied linguistics and education: A comparative genre-based investigation. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9(4), 280-294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2010.10.001.   
Lim, J. M. (2014). Formulating research questions in experimental doctoral dissertations on applied linguistics. English for Specific Purposes, 35, 66-88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.02.003.   
Lim, J. M. H. (2006). Method sections of management research articles: A pedagogically motivated qualitative study. English for Specific Purposes, 25(3), 282- 309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2005.07.001.   
Lin, L., & Evans, S. (2012). Structural patterns in empirical research articles: A cross-disciplinary study. English for Specific Purposes, 31(3), 150-160. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2011.10.002.   
Liu, J., & Xiao, L. (2022). A multi-dimensional analysis of conclusions in research articles: Variation across disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 67, 46-61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2022.04.003.   
Liu, X., Li, S., Fan, W., & Dang, Q. (2023). Corpus-based bundle analysis to disciplinary variations: Relocating the role of bundle extraction criteria. English for Specific Purposes, 70, 151-163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2022.12.004.   
Liu, Y., & Buckingham, L. (2018). The schematic structure of discussion sections in applied linguistics and the distribution of metadiscourse markers. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 34, 97-109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.04.002.   
March, S. T., & Smith, G. F. (1995). Design and natural science research on information technology. Decision Support Systems, 15, 251-266.   
Miser, W. F. (2006). Finding truth from the medical literature: how to critically evaluate an article. Primary Care: Clinics in Office Practice, 33(4), 839-862. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pop.2006.09.012.   
Motta-Roth, D. (1995). Book reviews and disciplinary discourse: Defining a genre. In Paper presented at the the 29th Annual Meeting of the Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages, Long Beach, CA.   
Omidian, T., Shahriari, H., & Siyanova-Chanturia, A. (2018). A cross-disciplinary investigation of multi-word expressions in the moves of research article abstracts. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 36, 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.08.002.   
Peacock, M. (2002). Communicative moves in the discussion section of research articles. System, 30(4), 479-497. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0346-251X(02) 00050-7.   
Samraj, B. (2005). An exploration of a genre set: Research article abstracts and introductions in two disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 24(2), 141-156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2002.10.001.   
Simpson-Vlach, R., & Ellis, N. C. (2010). An academic formulas list: New methods in phraseology research. Applied Linguistics, 31(4), 487-512. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/applin/amp058.   
Stoller, F. L., & Robinson, M. S. (2013). Chemistry journal articles: An interdisciplinary approach to move analysis with pedagogical aims. English for Specific Purposes, 32(1), 45-57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2012.09.001.   
Swales, J. (1990). Move analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Trowler, P. (2014). Depicting and researching disciplines: Strong and moderate essentialist approaches. Studies in Higher Education, 39(10), 1720-1731.   
Trowler, P., Saunders, M., & Bamber, R. (Eds.). (2012). Tribes and territories in the 21st-century: Rethinking the significance of disciplines in higher education. London: Routledge.   
Williams, I. A. (1999). Results sections of medical research articles:: Analysis of rhetorical categories for pedagogical purposes. English for Specific Purposes, 18(4), 347-366. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(98)00003-9.   
Xie, J. (2016). Direct or indirect? Critical or uncritical? Evaluation in chinese english-major ma thesis literature reviews. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 23, 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.05.001.   
Yang, R., & Allison, D. (2003). Research articles in applied linguistics: Moving from results to conclusions. English for Specific Purposes, 22, 365-385. https:// doi.org/10.1016/s0031-9422(03)00295-4.   
Ye, Y. (2019). Macrostructures and rhetorical moves in energy engineering research articles written by chinese expert writers. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 38, 48-61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2019.01.007.   
Ylonen, A., Gillespie, H., & Green, A. (2018). Disciplinary differences and other variations in assessment cultures in higher education: Exploring variability and inconsistencies in one university in England. Assessment Evaluation in Higher Education, 43(6), 1009-1017.   
Yeo, M., & Boman, J. (2019). Disciplinary approaches to assessment. Journal of Further Higher Education, 43(4), 482-493. https://doi.org/10.1080/0309877X. 2017.1367371.   
Yin, Z., & Parkinson, J. (2021). Critical review of literature: The case of the news and views genre. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 51, 100972. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.100972.   
Zou, H., & Hyland, K. (2020). Managing evaluation: Criticism in two academic review genres. English for Specific Purposes, 60, 98-112. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.esp.2020.03.004.

Xinyuan MEI is an MA student at the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her research interests mainly focus on academic discourse analysis and academic writing research.

Honghui ZHANG is associate professor working at the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has interests in EAP reading and writing, intercultural communication, etc.