# Peer Tutoring in a Graduate Writing Centre: Identity, Expertise, and Advice Resisting

Article  in  Applied Linguistics $\cdot$ June 2005   
DOI: 10.1093/applin/amh041

# 1 author:

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Post-observation Conferences View project

# Peer Tutoring in a Graduate Writing Centre: Identity, Expertise, and Advice Resisting

HANSUN ZHANG WARING

Teachers College, Columbia University

Compared to research on the giving of advice (e.g. Hutchby 1995), relatively less work has been conducted on the receiving or resisting of advice, where the interactionally problematic nature of advising is crystallized (e.g. Heritage and Sefi 1992). Moreover, the notion of advising in education settings has predominantly concerned procedural matters such as planning course schedules (e.g. He 1993). The purpose of this paper is to describe how advice resisting is accomplished in 'peer tutoring' in a graduate writing centre. Peer tutoring constitutes a privileged site for observing the complexities of advising episodes. Tutoring sessions between a tutor and a graduate student have been audio-taped and transcribed in detail. Using the methodology of conversation analysis, I show how the tutee resists the tutor's advice on general academic writing issues, content-related matters, or the mechanics of writing. I argue that the pattern of resistance can be accounted for by the tutee's identity claim as well as the competing expertise carried by the tutor and the tutee.

The purpose of this paper is to explore the nature of interaction in peer tutoring in a graduate writing centre, and I focus further on one specific aspect of peer tutoring-that of advice resisting. Of particular interest is the relatively fluid, uncertain relationship between the tutor and the tutee. Unlike other dyads in educational advising where the expert-novice relationship is relatively clear-cut (e.g. professor-student, counsellorstudent), the tutor and tutee carry competing areas of expertise. The tutor is equipped to offer advice on writing, but s/he is not necessarily knowledgeable about the specific discipline in which the tutee is being formally trained. Relatedly, tutoring differs from teaching in that the tutor does not have any power over the tutee in terms of grading. Finally, engaged in real-time tutoring are not only the voices of the tutor and the tutee but also those of the tutee's course instructor or advisor. Thus, due to the competing expertise, the tutor's lack of any consequential power over the tutee, and the presence of both onstage and behind-the-scene participants, in tutor-tutee interaction exhibits great potential for negotiation and thereby richness and complexity. Advice resisting is one focal area in which such negotiation becomes manifest.

More specifically, in this paper, I hope to show how advice resisting is accomplished in and through talk. I also hope to take a step further and connect the practices of advice resisting to the specific features characterizing peer tutoring as outlined above. In other words, an attempt will be made to not only describe the practices of advice-resisting but also understand such practices within the specific institutional context of peer tutoring.

Although the tutoring to be considered in this paper occurs outside of a classroom and sometimes even outside of the writing centre, the interaction is primarily institutional (Drew and Heritage 1992). First, it is goal-oriented. The tutee comes to the writing centre with the specific goal of producing or improving the quality of a manuscript. Second, special constraints exist upon what is an allowable contribution to the business at hand. Although conversation between the tutor and tutee may slip into chatting from time to time, those portions of talk are typically not considered as doing tutoring, and are thereby often marked as digressions and quickly abandoned. Finally, inferential frameworks and procedures particular to the tutoring context may be in operation. For example, questions normally interpreted as information seeking in ordinary conversation might be understood to be conducive and doing advising.

# BACKGROUND

Advice giving is interactionally problematic (Heritage and Sefi 1992; Hutchby 1995; Kinnell and Maynard 1996). Hutchby (1995: 221) called it 'an activity which assumes or establishes an asymmetry between the participants'. A comprehensive treatment of the difficulties involved in advice giving and receiving can be found in Goldsmith and Fitch's (1997: 8) large-scale ethnography study, which yielded three dilemmas of advice episodes: (1) being helpful and caring versus butting in; (2) being supportive versus being honest; (3) showing gratitude and respect versus making one's own decisions.

Most of the research so far has concerned the giving of advice. For example, the host on a radio advice programme was shown to use 'probing strategies' such as 'restatement, focusing, clarification, and reassurance' (DeCapua and Dunham 1993: 525-6). Houtkoop (1987) presented three ways of dealing with weak acceptance of proposals in Dutch telephone conversations: clarifying proposal, accounting for proposal, and prompting a new response. He (1994a: 299) found that in academic counselling the counsellors withheld answers to questions that concerned personal opinions or judgements (e.g. 'Which instructor should I choose?') and those that were unanswerable (e.g. 'What can I do with a math degree?'), in keeping with their primary duty of providing information and letting the students make their own decisions. They also used high modality to establish facts and norms and low modality to make suggestions (He 1993: 523).

Some studies have detailed specifically the ways in which the dilemmas in advice giving are dealt with. One practice is to fit the advice to the recipient instead of delivering a general piece of advice to an unprepared recipient. Maynard's (1989) 'perspective display sequence' constitutes a basic mechanism by which such 'fitting' can be done. By asking for another's opinion before giving one's own, it becomes possible to 'hook' one's opinion onto another's. As Kinnell (2002: 389) noted, 'counselors must have a warrant for giving clients information about risk and presentation rather than simply providing information in a didactic manner'. Another practice is to create ambiguities. One can package the advice as something else or blur the distinction between advice giving and some other 'innocuous' activities such as information giving (Kinnell and Maynard 1996: 405). One can also render the target of advice vague or indeterminate ('oblique proposals' in Peyrot 1987; 'agent de-emphasis' in Hudson 1990; 'hypothetical questions in Perakyla 1993; 'pragmatic ambivalence' in Wajnryb 1998; 'hypothetical case formulation' in Linell et al. 2o02). A third practice is to frame the problem that calls for advice as normal ('normality talk' in Bredmar and Linell 1999).

Compared to the body of research devoted to the giving of advice, studies on advisee talk have been relatively few. The advisee's role has often been conceived of as that of an advice-requestor. In DeCapua and Dunham's (1993: 521) study on a radio-advice programme, for example, specific requests for advice were found to be uncommon, and there were either vague requests or no requests at all. In addition, callers used explanation, elaboration, and narration in seeking advice as a result of the host's probing (DeCapua and Dunham 1993: 525-6). He (1993: 523-34) found that in academic counselling the students used high modality to project the obligatory course of action and low modality to make a request. In Bardovi-Harlig and Hartford's (1990: 491) study on academic advising. initiating mitigated suggestions allowed students to assert independence without jeopardizing the relationship with their advisors. In other words, in order to counter the negative attribution of competence implicated in advice giving, the advisee can initiate candidate suggestions to be accepted or rejected, rather than wait passively for advice to be delivered.

Only a handful of studies have addressed the receiving or resisting of advice. Callers to a mental health peer support warm-line resort were found to employ a range of responses to advice, including straightforward rejection (Pudlinski 2002: 495), straightforward acceptance, (Pudlinski 2002: 481), and minimal acknowledgements that 'signify rejection, mere recipiency and/or acceptance of the advice' (Pudlinski 2002: 481). According to

Pudlinski (2002: 481), these methods helped the callers to balance their needs for assistance, friendship and autonomy'. Heritage and Sefi (1992) reported three practices of advice receiving: marked acknowledgement 'oh' unmarked acknowledgement $' _ { \mathbf { m } \mathbf { m } } ~ \mathbf { h } \mathbf { m } ^ { \prime }$ , and assertion of knowledge or competence, showing that mothers of new born babies resisted health visitors' advice by asserting competence. In a revealing study, Jefferson and Lee (1992) attributed the rejection of advice to the mixing of two different sequences: the trouble telling sequence and the advising sequence. When trouble telling, which anticipates trouble receiving, is interpreted as advice seeking, advice can be given prematurely, and as a result, receipted with rejection. Finally, in a series of studies on academic advising sessions done by Bardovi-Harlig and Hartford (1990, 1991, 1993, 1996), rejection was investigated as a challenging speech act for non-native speakers to perform and acquire. The authors found, for example, that non-native speakers tended to reject the advisors' suggestions without sufficient mitigation.

Besides the fact that studies on advisee talk, especially those on the receiving or resisting of advice, have been much less extensive, the notion of advising in academic settings has been predominantly applied to procedural matters such as the planning of course schedules (Bardovi-Harlig and Hartford 1990; He 1993, 1994a, b). It is against this general background that I explore one specific area of advice receiving--that of advice resisting, and I do so using a previously unexamined setting in the 'advising literature--'peer tutoring' in a graduate writing centre.

# CONVERSATION ANALYSIS

In order to analyse the tutorial interaction by means of a rigorous method that affords systematic attention to interactional details, the study was conducted within a conversation analytic framework. Briefly, CA is the study of the orderliness of naturally occurring talk-in-interaction (e.g. Atkinson and Heritage 1984). Due to its capability to objectively capture the complexities of interaction, CA has been used to analyse talk in a wide range of institutional settings, such as the news media (Heritage and Clayman 2002), healthcare institutions (Heath 1992; Maynard 2003), job interviews (Button 1992), courtrooms (Drew 1992), airline cockpits (Nevile 2001), mediation (Greatbatch and Dingwall 1999), academic advising (He 1998), graduate seminars (Waring 2001, 2002a, b), and language learning and instruction as well as other pedagogical contexts (Kasper in press; Koshik 2002; Markee 2000; Mori 2002; Seedhouse 1997). The insights gleaned from these studies have formed an important knowledge base upon which practitioners in a variety of social capacities can draw to identify problems, devise solutions, and enhance efficacy.

For the purpose of this study, two related CA concepts will be briefly outlined: adjacency pair and preference. 'Adjacency pair' is a basic unit of organization in conversation, consisting of a sequence of two utterances produced by different speakers and ordered as first pair part and second pair part (e.g. question-answer, greeting greeting, offer-acceptance/ refusal). Upon the production of a first pair part, a second pair part is made conditionally relevant (Schegloff and Sacks 1974). Once a question is asked, an answer is expected to be forthcoming. The pairs are not succeeding actions that invariably occur adjacently. The adjacency pair organization is a normative framework, not an empirical generalization. It shapes the expectations, understandings, and actions of interactants.

A useful explication of 'preference' based on Sacks' (1992) original lectures can be found in Boyle's (2o00) critical review of the concept. Preferred actions are 'seen but unnoticed'. They are the 'natural', 'normal' actions'. Dispreferred actions are, on the other hand, noticeable and accountable. For example, after an invitation, acceptance is often preferred but refusal dispreferred. In the tutoring context, since the tutee seeks to benefit from the tutor's expertise, advice acceptance would be the natural 'seen but unnoticed' action while rejection/resistance would be the noticeable and accountable dispreferred one. In addition, preferred actions (e.g. acceptance) are produced in unmarked formats without any delay, preface, accounts, mitigators or indirectness, whereas dispreferred actions (e.g. refusal) are marked with features such as delay and accounts (Pomerantz 1984).

# THE DATA SET

Tutoring sessions between an American tutor (Liam) and an Indian graduate student (Priya) (pronounced as prEE-ya)' in a major graduate school of education on the East coast of the United States were audio-taped from Fall 2001 to Fall 2003. I did not attempt to obtain video-recording out of a concern for authenticity. Liam and Priya had often chosen to meet in noisy public places such as Starbucks or the university cafeteria. I believed that asking them to meet in a quiet room where a video camera could be set up instead would change the authenticity of the interaction. But the lack of video has certainly posed some problems for the analysis, especially in cases where nonverbal features of the interaction might have clarified what the participants accomplished through talk or silence. I will call attention to such problems in the analysis of relevant extracts. For this study, the first five sessions between Liam and Priya, which lasted approximately three hours have been transcribed in detail using the system developed by Gail Jefferson (see Appendix A).

The tutors at the Center are either fellow graduate students or graduates of the same school who continue to work there. Liam, for example, is a graduate of the International Education Program (IED) from this school. The clients are graduate students who seek help with their course papers master's theses or doctoral dissertations. They pay the Center for a minimum of four hours of service in advance. A ledger is kept by the tutor to keep track of the hours, and when only one hour is left, the tutee is required to make another payment for at least four hours of tutoring before the service is continued. The tutoring can take place at the Center or any other place of the tutor and tutee's choice. Priya is an MA student in the Art Education Program, who intends to pursue a doctorate. When the taping started in Fall 2o0l, Liam and Priya had already been working together for a year. Both characterized their relationship as pleasant and productive. It ought not be assumed by virtue of the focus of this paper, then, that Priya resists Liam's advice all the time but that advice resisting is an integral part of (peer) tutoring.

Most of the exemplars cited in my analysis relate to one paper written for a course on artistic development, wherein Priya attempted to compare Indian children's drawings of an earthquake with those of American children (earthquake paper' henceforth). The paper was due on May 15 of the previous semester. During the tutoring sessions, Priya, on more than one occasion, voiced her frustration with the paper: 'I hate it', I don't even want to do this freaking paper', 'I'm so sick of this', or 'I'm just doing it becuz (). just get that stupid incomplete out of my pap- out of transcript'. The discussions surrounding this paper turned out to be particularly lengthy and heated. The main difficulty concerns Liam's assessment of some disconnection between Priya's literature review and her comparison of the drawings. His advice to specify the link between the two is repeatedly resisted by Priya. She first cites the lack of literature on India. When Liam proceeds to point out that her literature review provides background on the psychological make-up of children, she emphatically claims that psychology is not relevant to her project. Much of the interactional tension, then, revolves around the large presence of psychological materials in Priya's literature review and her insistence on the irrelevance of psychology to her comparison of the children's drawings.

# PATTERNS OF ADVICE RESISTING

A detailed analysis of the data shows Priya to be employing five practices of advice resisting, which can then be organized into three major groups with reference to the type of advice being resisted (see below). In other words, different practices of advice resisting are exercised depending on which aspect of writing (i.e. general academic writing issues, specific content-related matters, or the mechanics of writing) is being targeted in Liam's advice. For the purpose of this paper, general academic writing issues concern non-discipline specific matters, such as clarity and relevance. Specific content-related matters, on the other hand, are contingent upon the knowledge and requirements of specific disciplines. For instance, when the advice-giver moves from saying 'Make the literature review relevant' to 'This is what's relevant and important in the literature', s/he may be venturing into 'interfering' with specific content-related matters, since the ability to recognize what is important and relevant in a field often calls for a certain degree of familiarity with and expertise in that field. It should be noted, however, that the distinction between the two may be negotiable and not always clear-cut. Below is a list of the five advice-resisting practices organized according to the aforementioned three aspects of academic writing:

1 Resist advice on general academic writing issues cite resource difficulty   
2 Resist advice on specific content-related matters assert own agenda invoke authority doing being irrational   
3 Resist advice on mechanics of writing minimize import of advice

In what follows, these three groups of advice resisting practices are considered in turn. Some general characterizations are offered to differentiate the three groups of practices, but the bulk of the analysis is devoted to showing how each practice is produced and treated as doing advice resisting. In order to accurately grasp the sequential environment of the advice resisting turns, part of this analysis also involves detailing how the advice turns are heard to be doing advising. In most cases then, for each data extract, the general order of analysis moves from the advice turn to the advice resisting turn and finally the receipt of the advice resisting turn. The notion that different sorts of advice are resisted differently will be taken up further in the conclusion, where I argue that this differential treatment is bound up with issues of identity and expertise inherent in peer tutoring.

# Resist advice on general academic writing issues

Liam's advice on general academic writing issues is typically accepted rather than resisted. For example, in response to the general advice of linking the literature to her project, Priya produces follow-up questions that display her orientation to promoting the course of action proposed in Liam's advice:

(1) 1 Liam: (lines omitted)) 2 In mty mi:nd there's a retlationship. You just have to3 ((knocking on the table perhaps with a pen/pencil)) (1.0) 4 discover it. 5 Priya: What is the relationship. 6 (3.0) 7 What is [the relationship.   
(2) 1 Liam: ((lines omitted)) Link it (.) somehow. 2 [>Come up with an idea.< 3 Priya: [Ho:w do I link it.

When Priya does display resistance to general academic writing advice, she resorts to one specific practice cite resource difiaulty, which typically takes the forms of Nobody has done $\mathbf { X ^ { \prime } }$ , 'X is not there', or 'I/we couldn't find $\mathbf { \boldsymbol { X } } ^ { \prime }$ . and done, often in a delayed or mitigated form, as an account for not answering a prior question. As a brief illustrative example, when Liam first advises Priya to specify the relevance of her literature review, his appended question 'why is it important to this paper' (line 5) remains unanswered but is responded to, after a slight delay (line 6), with the account that there is no literature related to India (lines 8, 10, 12-13). In other words. Priya is unable to explain why her literature review is important to her specific paper because the literature that does hold import for this paper does not exist.

(3) 1 Liam: ((lines omitted)) So what I- what I thought, the main (.) 2 thought was (.) try: to link (.) the literature mo:re to what 3 you're doing. Wh:y is it important to what you're doing. 4 (0.5) 5 Why is it important to this paper. 6 (.) 7 [Each one of them has to have- has to be like a building $\vDash$ 8 Priya: [That's9 Liam: $=$ block of what you're sa:ying. 10 Priya: But that's what- is not the:re. 11 (.) 12 All written work is- >because literature doesn't $<$ connect tc 13 India. 14 (0.2)

I now turn to a more detailed analysis using a second segment, which contains 'multiples' of cite resource difficulty. Prior to its beginning, Liam has reinitiated the need to demonstrate the relevance of the literature review, noting methodology as a candidate area in which such relevance can be explored (see lines 372-399 in the extended transcript in Appendix B available at www.applij.oupjournals.org). The question in line 2 is heard as doing advising insofar as it is produced as part of a follow-up of Liam's 'link' advice:

(4) 1 Liam: [Okay, >s' the methodology is 2 compare $=$ what other () people have done this. 3 (0.5) 4 kind of comparison. and what were the results. $^ { \circ } =$ 5 Priya: $= ^ { \circ }$ Nobody's done that. 6 (0.5) 7 We couldn't fi:nd anything. 8 Liam: Okay has anybody done it (0.7) in any other fie:ld. any 9 othe:r (1.2) >there's no comparative $\tt a r t 2 <$ 10 Priya: ((high voice) () we couldn't find any [literature () 11 Liam: [> okay, alright< 12 Priya: becuz it's ha:rd to find literature about India. 13 Liam: >Okay.<

14 Priya: S- it's very difficult for me to get something   
15 [that relates to $=$ this ()   
16 Liam: $\{ \mathbf { N } \uparrow \mathbf { o }$ but it doesn't ha.ve to be ( ) what   
17 you miss- you're missing a point.   
18 (.)   
19 $^ { \circ } { > } \mathbf { I }$ think. $< ^ { \circ }$   
20 It doesn't ha:ve to be India.   
21 (0.7)   
22 You can transpo:se other (.) authors- let's say somebody   
23 did a comparison of- of- of- Japanese an- an- American   
24 Children.   
25 (.)   
26 You can take that methodology and bring it o:ver and   
27 use it.   
28 (0.2)   
29 becuz it's similar circumstances.   
30 Priya: ${ \mathfrak { o } } _ { \mathrm { { I } } } .$ couldn't find any.   
31 Liam: >Okay [ $) < \mathsf { D o n ^ { \prime } { \cdot } }$ don't think it has to be I:ndi

Priya's response in line 5 provides an account for not answering Liam's question (Heritage 1984: 249-50) of who has done this kind of work and what the results are. The noticeable absence of an answer attests to the dispreferred status of Priya's no-resource claim, which is interpretable as resistance in the advising context. In addition, 'Nobody's done that."' eliminates the possibility that comparative methodology may be a basis for creating a 'link', thereby demonstrating resistance to both the specific option of invoking comparative methodology and the general advice of 'link'. The soft tone in which Priya's response is delivered further contributes to its interpretation as doing the dispreferred resisting rather than the preferred acceptance.

The practice of cite resource dificulty is then invoked three more times in lines 7. 10 and 30, exhibiting a general trend of decreasing strength. In line 7. Priya slightly backs away from the definitive answer by switching from a statement about objective reality to one of subjective effort. 'We couldn't find anything' This might have been prompted by Liam's (0.5) second silence in line 6. At issue now is not the nonexistence of, but the inability to locate, such resources. In line 10, Priya insists on her claim of resource difficulty in response to Liam's incredulously delivered '>there's no comparative art?<' (line 9)?. In line 30, even after Liam has made a second attempt to broaden the scope of his query (see his first attempt in lines 8-9) by explaining that the literature doesn't have to be related to India, Priya holds onto her original claim, albeit in a much softer tone: bI: couldn't find any.  (line 30). Her pronoun change from We' to 'I' may be another sign of backing down as it pronows che exent of her claim. Two observations are in order at this pont. One, the overall decreasing sength of Prya's resourcerelated da ps presents one oyepe of ecridence ne increasingly broadened scope of Liam's probe shows him to be persistently pushing the possibiliy that a link can be made on the basis of methodology. In so doing, Liam displays his understanding that Priya's acceptance of his advice is yet to come. In other words, Priya's resource-related claims are also oriented to doing advice resisting.

The resistance instantiated in cite resource difficulty is relatively 'mild' compared to the other practices to be shown later on in this paper. In citing resource difficulty, Priya is not questioning the validity of Liam's advice per se, but is offering an account for the difficulty in its implementation. In other words, what is accomplished in this particular practice is mitigated resistance. Heritage (1984: 269-73) pointed out that of all the possible accounts available to an interactant performing a dispreferred action, the one most frequently invoked is 'inability to comply' or 'lack of need', which has the 'no fault' quality, and that these accounts work to resolve the face threatening aspects of the dispreferred action. One might argue that Priya's claim of 'resource difficulty' is one such 'no fault' account deployed to explain her noncompliance to Liam's advice. It allows Priya to do advice resisting by attributing her noncompliance to an external factor-one that she has explored but Liam hasn't and which neither party has control over. It does resistance without threatening the face of either participant. After all, while Priya is seeking service in the realm of Liam's expertise--academic writing admitting to the availability of resources undermines her basic obligation and competence as a graduate student.

# Resist advice on specific content-related matters

Three practices are used by Priya to resist Liam's advice on specific content-related matters: assert own agenda, invoke authority, and doing being irrational. Compared to cite resource difficulty, which is typically delayed or produced in a mitigated form, these tend to be done interruptively, or 'pushed to the front', as it were. The first two practices, in particular, accomplish advice-resisting by accentuating the viewpoints associated with precisely the expertise that Liam lacks. For example, when Liam goes beyond the general link' advice by suggesting that the link may be a psychological one, Priya demonstrates resistance by both asserting her own agenda and invoking her professor's voice.

# Assert own agenda

One practice Priya engages in to resist content-related advice is to assert her own agenda by characterizing it as unrelated to Liam's advice. Most typically, she uses the construction I don't want/need to do x', I'm not doing X, or I'm only doing Y, wherein the tirst person pronoun 'I appears to underscore a contrast between the nature of the advice and the agenda Of the ascise. comedaely peor o the iolowing smet (see exteded transcript), Liam had asked Priya to link her literature review to what she wansdong, and Priya raised the problem of no relevant literature. As the weas ant begins, Liam suggests that she make the best of what she has (eit' referring to the literature review), and proceeds, after the (1.0) second silence in line 3, to suggest a psychological link (lines 4-6).

(5) 1 Liam: [W- you have to try to $\mathbf { m } \uparrow \mathsf { a } \colon \mathbf { k } e$ it. Try to make it () useful. 2 Uh:m 3 (1.0) 4 So there's a- there is a link betwee:n (0.2) using uhm (1.0) 5 drawings to understand (1.2) uh::m the psychological (.) 6 makeup of the children, the maturity age of the children, 7 Jall of 8 Priya: [I'm not doing that. 9 (.) 10 Liam: [I know you're not doing that 11 Priya: [I don't want to get there. 12 Liam: I kno:w you're not doing that. 13 Priya: ((high whining voice)) 14 $ \mathrm { ~ \bf ~ I ~ }$ don't (want to get in there because I don't- [that- I mean15 Liam: [but- [but- that's what 16 the literature ta:lks about. 17 Priya: The literature ta:lks about it but I don't wan- becuz- the 18 ps:ychology makeup doesn't (happen to them) I don't even 19 kno:w any one of these kids. So how am I going to make 20 a statement (there's Ia literature to it

To that, Priya responds emphatically in line 8: I'm not doing that, elaborated upon with an equally emphatic 'I don't want to get there' (line 11), which is in turn followed by a whiny attempt to offer an account (lines 14-15). The resistance is thus done by bringing Priya's agenda, which is incongruent with Liam's suggestion, unequivocally to the fore.

We now turn to how Priya's turns are responded to and whether they are oriented to doing advice-resisting. Using the concept of adjacency pairs, we may posit that, upon the production of advising, acceptance or resistance/ rejection becomes conditionally relevant. Acceptance may be followed by an acknowledgement-end of story. Resistance/rejection, on the other hand, may be responded to in a variety of ways. The one who produced the advice may, for example, strengthen his/her initial suggestion by providing further support/accounts, launch a counter-argument, initiate repair (Schegloff et al. 1977), or back down.

Liam's response of $\mathbf { \mathcal { ~ T ~ } k n } \uparrow \mathbf { o w }$ you're not doing that' (line 10) with its accent on know implies that his suggestion was given with the knowledge of Priya's agenda, thereby areating the laner's asserion of agenda as not afeting he sa  h   epned a ee talks abou s 5 wh ms s aempt no redo her overlapped turn. Thus, Priya's I'm not doing $\mathbf { X } ^ { \prime }$ and 'I don't want to do $\mathbf { X ^ { \prime } }$ are also treated as doing advice resisting.

In a second exemplar of assert own agenda, which comes after the previous one, the advice turn(s) are not single-handedly produced but co-constructed. To establish that the advice being resisted is content-related, we shall turn to the extended transcript in Appendix B (available at www.applij. oupjournals.org). As shown, prior to 'You want me to rewrite everything?' Priya has failed to prevent Liam from pursuing the psychological link by both asserting that I'm not doing that' and using her professor's voice as a backup (see discussion on 'invoke authority' in the next section). The statement 'I don't need to connect it' in the segment below occurs in the aftermath of such failures.

(6) 1 Priya: You want me to rewrite everything? 2 Liam: Ah? 3 Priya: You want me to rewrite everything? 4 (1.2) 5 Essentially. 6 Liam: Essentially, yea::h. I- I- (1.0) Hh- I don't understand 7 where any of this (1.0) 8 Priya: It's a literature revie:w. I don't need to conne:ct it, $=$ 9 Liam: =but- (1.5) oka:y I'm gonna- I'm () >this is I- this is 10 what it's like. $<$ 11 (0.5) 12 $\uparrow \Gamma \mathbf { m }$ writi:ng a pape:r (.) o:n (1.2) developmental 13 psychology. 14 (0.5) 15 Okay? 16 (0.5) 17 an' my literature revie:w is o:n (0.5) the war of eighteen 18 twelve. 19 (1.2)

Let's first consider the co-constructed nature of the advice. Instead of saying 'Rewrite everything', Liam, in line 5, accepts Priya's formulation of what he wants her to do (Essentially, ytea::h.), and follows up that acceptance with an account. The incompletely uttered account I don't understand where any of this (l.0)' can be recovered from the talk immediately prior to this segment (see extended transcript), where Liam noted that he had no idea how any of Priya's literature review related to her research. Hence the advice: rewrite everything to rectify the missed connection.

Priya's response to this advice, in line 8, is launched interruptively at a non-transition-relevant place (TRp in Sacks et al. 1974), that is, at a point where Liam has not reached his tum completion despite the 1.0 second silence (line 7). By saying 'I don't need to conne:ct it, she treats the absence of connection as irrelevant rather than problematic, prefacing her claim with 'I's a literature revite:w' implying that a literature review by its very nature stands alone. The contrastive stress placed on 'don't' further shows her to be specifically challenging the 'need to connect'.

Priya's resistance has also been lurking in the sequential details prior to this directly voiced objection, where not only Priya's but also Liam's turn designs have been oriented toward Liam's advice being rejected. At the beginning of the segment, by formulating the candidate advice in an extreme version ('rewrite everything') (cf. 'extreme case formulation' in Pomerantz 1986), Priya may be launching an implicit complaint (Pomerantz 1986) or framing the advice as nonserious (Edwards 2000). She may be expecting Liam to back down from such a radical or inconceivable suggestion. Liam's orientation toward Priya's potential resistance, on the other hand, is visible from his response, which is laced with delay and self-repairs, to Priya's extremely formulated question. Priya's 'Essentially' in line 5 displays her understanding of Liam's repair initiation (Schegloff et al. 1977) in line 2 and 1.2 second silence in line 4 as indications of an incipient dispreferred response and what that dispreferred response will be. Liam repeats that formulation verbatim, confirming the allusion (Schegloff 1996) that Priya should rewrite the literature review. Although with the ensuing higher-pitched 'yea:h, he appears to be gearing up toward a fully-fledged commitment, that trajectory is very quickly abandoned as he produces two consecutive cutoffs followed by a one second long pause, a cut-off sigh, and an incompletely delivered account (lines 6-7). Thus, Liam's tentativeness in receipting Priya's formulation suggests that he was anticipating resistance from Priya.

Finally, Priya's 'I don't need to do X' turn is also receipted as doing advice resisting. Note that Liam offers a hypothetical case which illustrates the ludicrousness of an irrelevant literature review, or conversely, the 'need to connect'. This illustration displays Liam's understanding that Priya's uptake of his initial 'need to connect' argument is less than favourable (i.e. some resisting is under way), and thus his initial advice warrants further support.

But the 'I don't need to $\mathbf { X ^ { \prime } }$ design serves to resist not only actually constructed advice but also potentially forthcoming advice. In the following case, although the alleged advice of trying to be more critical does not appear to be ostensibly related to discipline-specific content, one might argue that being critical is one of those discipline-specific elements since some disciplines prioritize descriptions and others evaluations.

(7) I Priya: S- I'm getting somewhere. 2 (1.8) 3 And I- does it sound critical where it needs to be? 4 (0.5)

5 Liam: Ah?   
6 Priya: Does it sound critical where it needs to be?   
7 (0.3)   
8 [No.   
9 Liam: [I don't think you're that critical. No. I- I  
10 Priya: I don't need to be critical.   
11 (0.8)   
12 D'you want me [to be more critical?   
13 Liam: [I don't know if you need to be that critical   
14 in this pa:per? Ahm in your dissertation you need to   
15 compare and contrast,

By asking 'Does it sound critical where it needs to be?', Priya offers a candidate assessment of her paper to be confirmed or rejected. The question is designed to display Priya's understanding that some parts of the paper need to be critical and to prefer an agreement response from Liam (as opposed to 'It doesn't sound critical where it needs to be, does it?') (Sacks 1987). It is not surprising, then, that based on Liam's absence of uptake (lines 4 and 7) and repair initiation (line 5) (Pomerantz 1984), Priya formulates the latter's forthcoming response as the dispreferred 'No' (line 8) as in 'It does not sound critical where it needs to be'-a situation which clearly calls for rectifying and thereby implicates Liam's advice for her to be more critical.

Liam's actual response which overlaps with Priya's 'No' formulation. however, has a more ambiguous design. 'I don't think you're that critical provides a simple comment on whether Priya is critical, leaving untouched the 'where it needs to be' part of her question. Moreover, note that Liam says $\mathbf { \underline { { \Pi } } }$ don't think you're that critical', not 'I don't think it's that critical'. The reference change from 'it' to 'you' may display Liam's shift of focus from the particular piece of writing to the writer in general.' Being critical, as it turns out, is not considered by Liam to be a relevant element of this particular paper (lines 13-15).

Liam's ambiguously designed turn, which is not entirely congruent with Priya's 'No' formulation, may have created a puzzle for Priya: does he want her to be more critical? Despite the ambiguity, she proceeds to treat Liam's assessment of her not being critical as potentially advising her to be more critical. The contrastive pitch on 'need' in her subsequent interruptively launched proclamation 'I don't need to be critical' (line 10) may be targeting specifically Liam's potential move from 'You're not that critical' to 'So you need to be more critical.' The resistance instantiated in this particular 'I don't need to do $\mathbf { \boldsymbol { x } } \prime$ thus takes the form of nipping the advice in the bud. It is notable that Priya did not initiate repair on Liam's ambiguously produced response but treats it as potentially doing advising. One explanation may be that the specific inferential framework in the institutional context of tutoring favours the interpretation of tutor talk as doing advising, in keeping with his/her institutional role.

'I don't need to be critical' is also oriented to doing advice resisting. Recall that in the previous segment Priya's 'I don't need to connect it' is followed by Liam's further support for his initial advice. In this current segment, however, the 'don't need' statement is followed by a 0.8 second gap. For Liam, Priya's 'don't need' statement may have caught him off-guard since she seems to be resisting what he never suggested. For Priya, the lack of further support (or counter-argument) from Liam may indicate that there is nothing to support in the first place--Liam may never have intended for her to be more critical in this particular paper. Thus, a second look at the advice she thought to be resisting is in order: 'D'you want me to be more critical?'4

# Invoke authority

In situations when Priya and Liam cannot see eye to eye with each other on a content-related issue after extended discussions, Priya would invoke the voice of her professor to back up the assertion of her own agenda. The following segment occurs somewhere between 'I'm not doing that...I don't want to get there' and I don't need to connect it!'

(8) 1 Liam: Okay. 2 (1.0) 3 The link i::s, (1.0) are you looking at the art work (.) to learn 4 something about the two groups of (.) children? 5 Priya: No? ((querulous)) 6 (.) 7 I'm only looking at the art work to see how two groups of 8 children depi- depict the incident. That's all. 9 (.) 10 depict a natural disaster $=$ what are the characteristics of drawing. 11 That's all what we're looking at $\bumpeq$ we're not looking at anything 12 else. 13 Liam: 'cuz I found [>three different things $<$ One, 14 Priya: [You know what? 15 [I have Janine's' tapes. ] You can listen to that. 16 Liam: [stages of art development,] 17 Two, creative and mental growth, co:nflict and growth. 18 Priya: Creative and mental growth is totally ( ). Let me 19 give what Ju- let me give you Janine's tape. What she said. 20 She wants me to do. 21 (0.2) 22 I go:t it. You can listen to it. 23 ((sounds of fiddling with a tape)) 24 ((more sounds)) 25 It's ve.ry straightforward. 26 (.)   
D5v27 There's no complication at all.   
((Liam listens to the tape using the earphone))

29 Priya: There's not even (.) a mention of doing psychological.   
30 (0.2)   
31 Liam: b- that's $\bar { \mathbf { n } } \uparrow \mathbf { o t - }$ that's not the Iproblem.   
32 Priya: [No but I can't link it. becuz if   
33 1 link it it'll get so complicated.   
34 Liam: I don't wanchu to link it.   
35 (.)   
36 if you can't link it.   
37 Priya: >Then what do you want me $<$ [to do.:.   
38 Liam: {I wanchu to get rid of it.

I argue that The Iink i::s, (1.0) are you looking at the art work (.) to leam something about the two groups of (.) children?' (line 3) is produced to offer the following advice: make the link that you are looking at the art work to learn something about the groups of children. On four prior occasions Liam has explicitly advised Priya to make the link between her literature reyiew and her research (see extended transcript: lines 1-4, 28--29, 49-50, and 80-81). He has also suggested on three prior occasions that a link can be made based on psychology (see extended transcript: lines 31-33, 110-112, and 154-156). What I propose to be the advice done in the above turn is in line with what Liam has been pushing all along. More important, the design of The link i:s' shows that this turn is initiated as giving a straightforward suggestion on what the link is, which is then redone by Liam through a selfinitiated repair (Schegloff et al. 1977) as a yes/no question, perhaps based on his earlier failures to convince Priya. The yes/no question, however, prefers a 'yes' answer and, in addition, is backed up in line 13 as if it were an assertion. The wording of 'looking at the art work to learn' also mirrors the structure of an earlier made assertion: 'So there's a- there is a link betwee:n (0.2) using uhm (1.0) dra: wings to understand (1.2) uh:m the psychological (.) makeup of the children, the maturity age of the children, (lines 31-33 in the extended transcript). Hence the implication: the link is a psychological one.

Priya's initial response to Liam's advice is a dispreferred 'No' (line 5) followed by a reassertion of her own agenda as only doing x (line 7) and not doing Y (lines 11-12). This practice has already been discussed earlier as doing resistance and thus does not constitute the focus of the current analysis. Note, however, that Priya's assertion of her agenda (plus her three earlier attempts: lines 35-38, 115, 116, 157-158 in the extended transcript) has not stopped Liam from proceeding to enumerate the three things that can be learned from looking at the art work (line 13). In response, Priya invokes the voice of her professor, and she does so by interrupting (line 15). In invoking the voice of her professor, Priya essentially offers an account for why Liam's suggestion is incongruent with the specific needs of this paper, thereby resisting the advice of making the specific link. By accentuating 'What she said. She wants me to do, Priya puts forward someone at a higher rank, with greater credibility, and more important, someone for whom this paper is written and by whom this paper is to be Jjomeone she aso characterizes her professors words as being very. Juageh.forward (line 25) with 'no complication at all (line 27) and 'not. stran a mention of doing psychological' (line 29), in contrast to Liam's ong-winded' finding of three different things' (line 13) and his attempt to delve into the complexities of psychology.

Finally, Liam's two-part uptake orients to Priya's resistance. In the first part, in line 17, he firstly ignores Priya's pre-announcement (You know What?), then her mention of the tapes, and presses on to the second of his three points. Since Priya's speech is done by interrupting, it may deserve being dismissed. However, had Liam understood Priya's turn incursion to be something other than a backup for her earlier resisting action 'we're not looking at anything else', he would perhaps have taken up the topic of the tapes since the existence of the tape did not come up in prior interaction and is therefore potentially newsworthy. In the second part, after finishing Iistening to the tapes and in response to Priya's formulation of 'no mention of doing psychological', he retorts: b- that's $\mathbf { n } \uparrow \mathbf { o t - }$ that's not the problem.' (line 29), dismissing Priya's backup as irrelevant. Priya's adoption of her professor's voice, then, is oriented to being something to be contended with- something other than a problem-free receipt.

Agnes He (1994b: 160) discusses 'voicing' as a strategy jointly used by both counsellors and students in academic counselling sessions in constructing a solution to a problem. The students report advice from another to seek a second assessment or to challenge the counsellor; and the counsellors frequently 'appropriate the voice of the university institution' in their delivery of information. In the tutoring data, the practice of invoking authority typically co-occurs with repeatedly unresolved differences between Liam and Priya, and as a last resort, Priya brings out the voice of authority to argue that Liam's advice, does not address the specific needs of her situation.

In fact, the voice of the professor is so present in the tutoring sessions that sometimes Liam would be the one who invokes that voice in the course of delivering his advice. Even though it is not clear from the audiotape what Liam is referring to in the segment below, he is clearly about to proffer some negative assessment in preparation for suggesting a change.

(9) 1 Liam: >I don- $<$ does he want you to do it like this? or jus. 2 Priya: Yeah this has to be like [thato it's Janine McCarthy's ( 3 Liam: [All right a'right a'right 4 That's the way she does $\mathbf { i } \mathbf { \uparrow } 2 \mathbf { = }$ 5 Priya: $\mathop { \bf { \equiv } }$ Yea:h this is like a straight-forward ( ).

Instead of proceeding on his incipient negative assessment in line 1, Liam comes to a cut-off, and asks whether whatever is being done is the idea of Pry's professor. In other words, he anticipates that Prya might resist Ias yet-to-be-delivered advice by invoking the professor's voice. And by oking that voice himself, Liam manages to address the potential resistance preemptively. Note that he continues to remain a bit incredulous (That's the way she does it?') even after Priya's confirmation, further indicating that some suggestion for change was indeed underway.

# Doing being irrational

One final practice Priya employs to resist Liam's content-related advice is doing being irrational. The segment occurs after 'I'm not doing that' and before I have Janine's tapes'. The three 'why' questions (lines 1-2) are heard as doing advising based on their production as follow-ups of Liam's 'link' advice. When Liam first proffers the link' suggestion, 'try to link... it is immediately followed by 'Wh:y is it important to what you're doing (lines 6-7 in extended transcript), which serves as a reformulation or extension of the former. Similar questions were then raised on three other occasions (lines 24, 50-51, 68-69 in extended transcript) as Liam continued to push his advice, prior to the segment below. To establish that the advice being resisted is indeed content-related, we refer to the segment's immediate context, where Liam and Priya expressed diametrically opposed views with regard to whether psychology is involved. The 'why' questions are asked by Liam along the lines of 'if they have nothing to do with psychology then why are they there?'

(10) 1 Liam: >Okay< th' why did you pick these authors.=why are they 2 there. Why am I reading [about () 3 Priya: $\mathrm { \Phi } >$ They're there becuz they were 4 there. ((whining voice)) 5 Liam: >What d'y mean they're there becuz they're there $\mathbf { \sigma } < = \mathbf { Y 0 u }$ 6 chose them [they weren't there? $<$ 7 Priya: $[ >$ 1 ) that's tall. $<$ 8 (2.0) 9 I (h) know you're (thinking ). I can't do this. 10 ${ \^ \circ } \mathbf { I }$ don' want to. 11 (.) 12 Liam: >a'right $<$ you can't $\prime _ { \mathfrak { n } }$ you don't want to are two different 13 things.o 14 Priya: $^ \circ \mathrm { I }$ don't want to. I'm just doing it becuz ( ). just get 15 that stupid incomplete out of my pap- out of transcript. 16 (1.0) 17 Liam: All right. 18 (1.0) 19 D'you understand what I'm saying?

In re-initiating the question at the beginning the segment, Liam displays his understanding that the answer sought is yet to come. What Priya offers in response, interrupting, however, only qualifies as an answer in appearance (They are there because...' in response to 'why are they there'). In content, her proposed reason repeats precisely what she is supposed to give a reason for, implying that the inclusion of these authors is self-justified. This type of answer may remind one of remarks such as 'because I said so'. which are not heard as real, serious answers, but irrational, autocratic pronouncements. Similarly, 'They're there because they're there' doesn't count as an answer, and is not designed as such. This non-answer character is also partially cued in the whiny voice in which it is delivered. But more is accomplished than not answering or mere silence. In delivering this particular 'non-answer' answer, Priya treats Liam's question not as unanswerable (at least not necessarily so), but specifically as not to be considered rationally and not open to further discussion. Hence the resistance.

Not surprisingly, Liam subsequently formulates Priya's response as irrational, thereby unacceptable. The rhetorical question of 'What do you mean they're there becuz they're there' is quickly followed by the assertion that thev're there as a result of Priya's decision. In particular, the stress placed upon 'chose' highlights the deliberateness involved in Priya's decision of including certain authors, thus insinuating, contrary to what Priya implicates, that such inclusion is subject to rational reasoning.

A case may be made that the trajectory of doing being irrational is maintained after Liam's counter-argument, but some of Priya's inaudible utterances (lines 7 and 9) make it difficult to stick to a tight sequential analysis. With this caveat in mind, I will venture two observations. First, 'that's all' appears to align with 'no further discussion is to be entertained'. Second, the emphatically frank assertion of 'I can't do this' is appended, not with a rational account, such as the difficulty of obtaining resources but with an irrational expression of unwillingness (lines 9-10). The irrational nature of $^ { \prime \circ } \mathrm { I }$ don' want $\mathbf { t o } ^ { \circ }$ as well as the later account, after Liam's repair initiation (lines 12-13), of 'just doing it to get the stupid incomplete out of transcript' (lines 14-15), is particularly marked in the institutional context of tutoring, where the tutee voluntarily seeks advice to improve the quality of her work. The characterization, then, of not being interested in doing what is suggested and not caring about the quality of the paper is grossly incongruent with the rights and obligations associated with the tutee's role.

# Resist advice on mechanics of writing

# Minimize import of advice

Advice on the mechanics of writing is generally resisted by Priya through minimizing the importance of the advice. More specifically, she resists Liam's agenda of doing micro-editing by initiating a new topic to prioritize general academic writing issues such as clarity or relevance. In so doing, she treats issues of mechanics as too inconsequential to be, worthy of her attention, and by extension, her monetary investment. In the following segment, for example, Liam is offring a particular type of advice--a correction-by changing 'was' to 'is'. In her immediate response of 'Yeah I'll change all my typos' (line 5), Priya acknowledges the necessity of fixing typos ('Yeah'). asserts her competence in carrying out the task herself ('I'll change...'), and upgrades that assertion by indicating the thoroughness with which she can get the job done ('all my typos').

(11) 1 Priya: Make sense? $\underline { { \underline { { \mathbf { \Pi } } } } }$ 2 Liam: Yea:h. It's very good. 3 (0.5) 4 I.s. The purpose of- ${ } ^ { \circ } \mathbf { i } ; : : \pmb { \mathscr { s } } ^ { \circ }$ 5 Priya: Yeah I'll change all my typos $\mathbb { I }$ want someone check ( ). 6 Liam: [ah::m 7 (1.0) 8 Priya: >Is it clear?< 9 (1.8) 10 Liam: Yeah this sentence I- "children of Indian experience the 11 earthquake as opposed to the children in the United States." 12 (2.0) 13 Change that "I was curious to see the descrip- the

In line 8, Priya quickly initiates a new sequence by prioritizing clarity over typos: '>Is it clear? $< ^ { \prime }$ Because Priya begins the segment with 'Make sense?' (line 1), it might be argued that it is not necessarily a change of topic but return to her original topic that is being done in '>Is it clear? $< ^ { \prime }$ (line 8). In either case, however, Priya manages to get Liam off the path he is on, thereby indirectly resisting the advising agenda he was putting forth. Note that in the subsequent turn, Liam tuns to a matter unrelated to typos.

Observe a similar instance below:

(12) 1 Priya: [very (.) very important (.) in the $\uparrow$ culture. 2 ((continues reading)) 'the importance of friends 3 highly increases.' 4 Liam: Increases highly. 5 (1.2) 6 Priya: D' that make sense? 7 Liam: Yes. 8 (0.2) 9 Priya: Okay. ((continues reading))

It is possible that during the 1.2 second gap Priya acknowledged, nonverbally, Liam's correction from 'highly increase' to 'increases highly'. But without video data, it is impossible to tell. What is noticeable, however, is Priya initiation of a new topic soon thereafter, in which she again prioritizes content over form. Once more, Liam is compliant with Priya's redirection.

In cases where Liam does not let go of his agenda of micro-editing Priya would go on-record to state her lack of interest in receiving this type of advice.

(13) 1 Liam: Minute, and then period. So it's minutes. 2 (0.2) 3 Priya: Yeah. 4 Liam: See that? 5 Priya: What I'm going to do is Liam, I'm going to comtple:te the 6 literature review, and the methodology section, and then I'll 7 edit it and I'll change- make everything accurate then, you 8 read it word by word. 9 Liam: Ok[ay. 10 Priya: [This is so badly typed. 11 (0.2) 12 Liam: Yteah I mean there's s- there's a lot of13 Yea[h you need editing. >Okay. Don't worry. $<$ 14 Priya: [Yeah I don't want you to waste your time now. 15 I'd rather complete and then give it to you. 16 (0.2) 17 and then you can (.) slash it the way you want.

Liam's editing (line 1) is receipted with a 0.2 second micro-gap (line 2) followed by a minimal acknowledgement toke 'Yeah. (line 3), which potentially closes the topic at hand. The micro-gap in line 2, suggesting a forthcoming dispreferred response (Pomerantz 1984), may also indicate that the ensuing 'Yeah' is produced with a slight tinge of reluctance. When Liam ignores these indications of topic closure and dispreferred uptake and proceeds with a follow-up confirmation-check 'See that?' instead of giving the confirmation sought, Priya switches to explicate her agenda, which does not involve the type of advising Liam is currently engaging in (lines 5-8). She even characterizes the micro-editing as wasting Liam's, and by implication, her own time (line 14).

In general, minimizing the import of advice through topic change is typically associated with getting Liam off the track of proof-reading, and it is typically preceded by some form of token acceptance, which potentially closes the prior topic. It is Priya's way of exercising control over where the tutoring is going, and ultimately, where she wants to spend her money. It is her way of going beyond being a mere advice requester and receiver to being an equal participant in and contributor to the advising process.

# DISCUSSION

I have shown how advice resisting is accomplished during the interaction of one tutor-tutee pair, where the tutor's expertise in academic writing is juxtaposed with his lack of knowledge in the discipline in which the tutee is being formally trained. The rational organization of such peer tutoring may be observed by considering what is being resisted and its relationship to ways of resisting. On the institutional level, Priya appears to be specifically resistant to content-related advice or that on the mechanics of writing, but relatively open to advice on non-subject-specific academic writing matters. When she does resist advice on general academic writing issues, her resistance is done in a delayed and/or mitigated form, such as offering an account of resource difficulty, which presents a sharp contrast to the interruptively launched practices of resisting when Liam appears to be 'interfering' with the subject content of her paper. In resisting advice on content matters, Priya alludes to the contrast between the agenda of her own and her professor's on the one hand and the advice given by Liam on the other. This contrast draws upon the discipline-specific expertise carried by Priya herself and her professor in formulating a counter-argument to what Liam, the non-expert, proposes. Thus, rather than pointing to an external factor such as resource difficulty as an account for noncompliance. in assert own agenda and invoke authority, Priya places upon herself the responsibility for advice resisting and uses the voice of her professor as a backup for such resistance. When it comes to advice on the mechanics of writing, Priya tends to reject Liam's entire agenda by minimizing the import of such advice on punctuation, spelling, grammar, and so on. This is typically accomplished through switching the topic and prioritizing academic writing issues such as clarity or relevance.

This pattern of resistance may be explicated on two accounts: (1) Priya's identity claim, and (2) the complex knowledge asymmetries between Priya and Liam. Priya's identity claim becomes visible in her assertion of competence not only as a graduate student but also as someone who is being formally trained in art education. This is evident in her rejection of Liam's advising agenda on the mechanics of writing since advice on grammar and punctuation may undermine her basic competence as a graduate student. It is also evident in the unabated assertion of her own agenda when Liam's advice steers into the content area of art education, where she clearly knows more. The resistance pattern may also be accounted for by the complex knowledge asymmetries between Priya and Liam. The competing areas of expertise explain why Priya is relatively open to Liam's advice on general academic writing matters in which he is well versed, but resistant to advice on content-related matters in which he is not trained but she is. In a sense, this 'selective' resisting also reveals the inherently problematic nature of Liam's role as a tutor.

I suspect that the scenario of competing expertise may be a prevalent reality faced by writing tutors at or above the tertiary level of education. After all, it is unrealistic to expect those with a forte in academic writing to be well-versed in all subject areas in which writing advice is being sought In the case of Priya, she comes from Art Education--a graduate programme that attracts dancers, musicians, and artists to whom writing tends to be a particularly alien skill. The chances of having a fellow artist who is also a skilled writer as a tutor are not nonexistent, but are admittedly rare. What is observed between Liam and Priya, then, may be relevant to others involved in peer tutoring.

However, insomuch as this study is based on the interaction of one peer set, generalizability may be at issue, especially to an audience of applied linguists. I will address the question of generalizability from a CA perspective since the analysis has been undertaken within a CA framework. CA studies, in effect, work on the particular and the general simultaneously. By analysing individual instances, the machinery which produced these individual instances is revealed (Benson and Hughes 1991: 130-1). In other words, each instance is evidence that 'the machinery for its production is culturally available, involves members' competencies, and is therefore possibly (and probably) reproducible' (Psathas 1995: 50). Additional instances provide 'another example of the method in the action, rather than securing the warrantability of the description of the machinery itself' (Benson and Hughes 1991: 131). Wootton (1989: 243) also points out that 'within the framework of conversation analysis infrequently occurring responses would be as significant as those of frequent occurrence to the task of specifying forms of conversational organization which are in one sense shared and accessible to members of the society under investigation'

The generalizability of the observed practices can also be considered in the way these individual instances are rationally organized in relation to the institutional context of peer tutoring as discussed above. As one reviewer points out, by explicating the organization of the micro-interaction in an institutional setting, CA studies may at the same time be providing a generalizable description of the interactional organization of the setting because institutional interaction is seen as rationaly organized in relation to the institutional goal (Levinson 1992: 71).

Although it is not empirically clear whether less resistance is the equivalent of more effective tutoring, two practical implications may be extracted from these findings. First, for the least amount of resistance to occur, it may be advantageous that the tutor is knowledgeable not only about academic writing in general but also about discipline-specific content. A related issue is that content and structure are intricately connected components of academic writing and cannot be treated separately, at least not always, or not easily so. This is not to say, however, that someone who does not have disciplinespecific knowledge cannot take on the job of offering academic writing advice to someone who does. The prolonged and productive tutor-client relationship between Liam and Priya has clearly provided support for the feasibility of a dual-competence relationship. But even in Liam's case, steps may be taken to compensate for the discipline-specific expertise that he lacks, which brings me to my second point of practical implication.

The tutee's perspective needs to be elicited fully prior to the delivery of advice to preempt some of the potential resistance, especially in the scenarios of mismatched agendas with regard to either content-related matters or mechanics of writing. Previous research has shown that one cause for resistance is that 'the advisee's perspective is not elicited in great enough detail (Silverman in Vehivilainen, 2001: 393), and that one way to avoid such resistance is to employ the stepwise entry to advice, which has been documented in both health care (Heritage and Sefi 1992; Kinnell and Maynard 1996) and education counseling (Vehvilanen 2o01). In a step-wise entry, questions are asked to elicit the client/student's perspective so that the advice to be delivered may better fit that perspective and that resistance may be minimized. In Vehvilanen's (2o01) educational counselling study, for example, by eliciting the students' opinions, the counsellors were able to present their advice as either justified by, or commenting on, the students' perspective. In the case of Liam and Priya, had Liam fully elicited from Priya the requirements of the paper, Priya's agenda, and her professor's expectation, he might not have suggested the 'psychological link' or proceeded to work on the writing mechanics.

Besides such practical implications that may be derived from the specific findings of this study, studies like this may also offer useful insights to tutor training in general. First, at the policy level, the empirical evidence generated by these studies can constitute the basis upon which tutoring guidelines. approaches. and techniques may be developed. Second, transcripts and analyses in studies like this may be used to sensitize tutors toward the interactional nuances and complexities of tutoring, and consequently, cultivate their ability to design their own talk and decode tutee talk with greater efficacy. Finally, findings from studies like this may be drawn upon to engender such preparedness as understanding what sorts of moves tutors may expect from tutees or when, where, and how advice may be resisted. This understanding may in turn provide some of the basic resources that tutors mobilize in dealing with resistance.

One final note: tutoring on academic writing may be a holistic process that goes beyond content, structure, mechanics, and so on. The tutee's a priori emotional stance toward a particular task may play an important role in explaining the amount of resistance involved. In the 'earthquake paper' situation, one cannot help but wonder whether the amount of resistance involved also has to do with Priya's very negative attitude toward the paper at the outset. This is, of course, an empirically unsubstantiated speculation. And whether Liam could have done anything, or anything beneficial to the tutoring of writing, in addressing the emotional aspect of Priya's participation, remains a challenge for future inquiries.

In closing, I hope that the practices observed in this study have broadened our conceptualization of advising in education settings, illuminated certain problems of communication in peer tutoring, provided some baseline data for future comparative studies in this area, and initiated an endeavour to formulate an empirically grounded repertoire for developing effective practices in this setting

# APPENDIX A: TRANSCRIPTION NOTATION

untimed perceptible pause within a turn (.) underline stress CAPS very emphatic stress high pitch on word sentence-final falling intonation Yes/no question rising intonation ? phrase-final intonation (more to come) a glottal stop, or abrupt cutting off of sound lengthened vowel sound (extra colons indicate greater lengthening) latch - highlights point of analysis overlapped talk 'softo spoken softly/decreased volume > < increased speed () (empty parenthesis) transcription impossible (words) uncertain transcription (() comments on background or skipped talk

# ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I gratefully acknowledge the detailed, thoughtful, and constructive comments made by the three anonymous reviewers and Gabriele Kasper. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 89th Annual Meeting of the National Communication Association in Miami Beach, 20-23 November, 2003. I would also like to thank Beth Haslett, Jean Wong. and Michael Waring for valuable feedback. Any remaining errors are a result of my own 'advice resisting'.

# NOTES

1.According to Maynard (1989), perspective display sequence is a strategy for giving one's opinion after soliciting another's. For example:

A: What do you think of the movie?   
B:  Oh I love it.   
A: Yeah it's fantastic.

2 These are pseudonyms. 3 Here is a case where Liam might be crossing the line between giving . general academic writing advice to ..interfering' with content-related matters. Being a student of art education, Priya is arguably much more qualified to answer the question of whether there is comparative art, which may explain the unmitigated delivery of 'We couldn't find any literature'.

4 As one of my attempts to clear up the ambiguity of this response, I asked Liam himself whether he meant Priya was not critical enough or he meant she was too critical, he paused and said, 'Hm, that's odd', looking noticeably baffled. He then blurted out, 'Oh! Oh! Oh! I was saying she was not critical in general because usually she wasn't!

5 A final interesting observation about this segment is that Priya's claim of I don't need to be critical' in line 10 contradicts the presupposition in her question in line 6, i.e. there are parts of the paper where she does need to be critical. This has shades of doing

# REFERENCES

Atkinson, J.M. and J. Heritage. (eds) 1984. Structures of Social Interaction: Studies in Conversation Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Bardovi-Harlig, K. and B. S. Hartford. 1990. 'Congruence in native and nonnative conversations: status balance in the academic advising session, Language Learning 40/4: 467-501.   
Bardovi-Harlig, K. and B. s. Hartford. 1991. 'Saying "no" in English: native and nonnative rejections' in L. Bouton and Y. Kachru (eds): Pragmatics and Language Learning, Monograph Series Vol. 2. Urbana-Champaign, IL: Division of English as an International Language, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, pp. 41-57.   
Bardovi-Harlig, K. and B. H. Hartford. 1993 'Learning the rules of academic talk: A longitudinal study of pragmatic change,' Studies in Second Language Acquisition 15: 279-304.   
Bardovi-Harlig, K. and B. H. Hartford. 1996. 'Input in an institutional setting,' Studies in Second Language Acquisition 17: 171-88.   
Benson, D. and J. Hughes. 1991. Method, evidence and inference- evidence and inference for ethnomethodology' in G. Button (ed.): Ethnomethodology and the Human Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 109-36.   
Boyle, R. 2000. Whatever happened to preference organization?' Journal of Pragmatics 32: 583--604.   
Bredmar, M. and P. Linell. 1999. 'Reaffirming normality: The constitution of reassurance in talks between midwives and expectant mothers' in S. Sarangi and C. Roberts (eds): Talk, work and Institutional Order: Discourse in Medical, Mediation and Management Settings. Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 237-70.   
Button, G. 1992. Answers as interactional products: Two sequential practices used in job interviews' in P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds): Talk at Work Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 212-34.

being irrational' discussed later in this paper. I thank an anonymous reviewer for this insight. 6 This is a pseudonym.

DeCapua, A. and J. F. Dunham. 1993. 'Strategies in the discourse of advice, Journal of Pragmatics 20: 519-31.   
Drew, P. 1992. 'Contested evidence in courtroom cross-examination: The case of a trial for rape' in P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds): Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 470-520.   
Drew, P. and J. Heritage. (eds) 1992. Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Edwards, D. 2000. 'Extreme case formulations: softeners, investment, and doing nonliteral' Research on Language and Social Interaction 33/4: 347-74.   
Goldsmith, D. J. and K. Fitch. 1997. The normative context of advice as social support' Human Communication Research 3: 454-76.   
Greatbatch, D. and R. Dingwall. 1999. 'Professional neutralism in family mediation' in S. Sarangi and C. Roberts (eds): Talk, Work and Institutional Order: Discourse in medial mediation and management settings. New York: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 271-92.   
He, A. w. 1993. 'Exploring modality in institutional interactions: Cases from academic counseling encounters, Text 13/2: 503-28.   
He, A. w. 1994a. Withholding academic advice,' Discourse Process 18: 297-316.   
He, A. w. 1994b. 'Constructing facts and stances through voicing: Cases from student-counselor interaction, Pragmatics and Language Learning 5: 16-161.   
He, A. w. 1998. Reconstructing Institutions: Language Use in Academic Counseling Encounters. Greenwich, CT: Ablex.   
Heath, C. 1992. The delivery and reception of diagnosis in the general-practice consultation' in P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds): Talk at Work. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 235-67.   
Heritage, J. 1984. Garfinkel and Ethnomethodology. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.   
Heritage, J. and S. Clayman. (2002). The News Interview. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Heritage, J. and s. Sefi. 1992. Dilemmas of advice: aspects of the delivery and reception of advice in interactions between Health Visitors and first-time mothers' in P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds): Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Sertings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 359-417.   
Houtkoop, H. 1987. Establishing Agreement: An Analysis of Proposa-Acceptance Sequences. Dordrecht-Holland/Providence USA:Foris Publications.   
Hudson, T. 1990. The discourse of advice giving in English: "I wouidn't feed till Spring no matter what you do' Language and Communication 10/4:285-97.   
Hutchby, I. 1995. 'Aspects of recipient design in expert advice-giving on call-in radio,' Discourse Processes 19: 219-38.   
Jefferson, G. and J. R. E. Lee. 1992. The rejection of advice: managing the problematic convergence of a "troubles-telling" and a "service encounter"' in P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds): Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversityPress, pp. 521-48.   
Kasper, G. in press. Participant orientations in conversation-for-learning,'  Modern Language Journal.   
Kinnell, A. M. 2002. 'Soliciting client questions in HIv prevention and test counseling,' Research on Language and Social Interaction 35/3: 367-93.   
Kinnell, A. M. and D. Maynard. 1996. 'The delivery and receipt of safer sex advice in pre-test counseling sessions for HIV and AIDs, Journal of Contemporary Ethnography 24: 405-37.   
Koshik, L 2002. Designedly incomplete utterances: A pedagogical practice for eliciting knowledge displays in error correction sequences' Research on Language and Social Interaction 35/3: 277-310.   
Levinson, S. 1992. 'Activity types and language' in P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds): Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press, pp. 66-100.   
Linell, p., V. Adelsward, L. Sachs, M. Bredmar, and U. Lindstedt. 2002. 'Expert talk in medical contexts: Explicit and implicit orientation to risks' Research on Language and Social Interaction 35, 195-218.   
Markee, N. 2000. Conversation Analysis. Mahwah. NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Maynard, D. W. 1989. Perspective-display sequences in conversation,' Western Journal of Speech Communication 53: 91-113.   
Maynard, D. W. 2003. Bad News, Good News: Conversational Order in Everyday Talk and Clinical Settings. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
Mori, J. 2002. Task design, plan, and development of talk-in-interaction: An analysis of a small group activity in a Japanese language classroom.' Applied Linguistics 23/3: 323-47.   
Nevile, M. 2001. Understanding who's who in the airline cockpit: pilots' pronominal choices and cockpit roles' in A. McHoul and M. Rapley (eds): How to Analyze Talk in Institutional Settings: A Casebook of Methods. New York: Continuum, pp. 57-71.   
Perakyla, A. 1993. 'Invoking a hostile world: Discussing the patient's future in AIDS counseling, Text 13/2: 291-316.   
Peyrot, M. 1987. 'Circumspection in psychotherapy: Structures and strategies of counselor-client interaction, Semiotica 65/3-4: 249-68.   
Pomerantz, A. 1984. 'Agreeing and disagreeing with assessments: some features of preferred. dispreferred turn shapes' in M. Atkinson and J. Heritage (eds): Structures of Social Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Pomerantz, A. 1986. 'Extreme case formulations: a way of legitimizing claims, Human Studies 9: 219-29.   
Psathas, G. 1995. Conversation Analysis: The Study of Talk-in-Interaction. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   
Pudlinski, c. 2002. Accepting and rejecting advice as competent peers: Caller dilemmas on a warm line,' Discourse Studies 4/4: 481-500.   
Sacks, H. 1987. 'On the preferences for agreement and contiguity in sequences in conversation' in G. Button and J. R. E. Lee (eds): Talk and Social Organization. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. pp. 54-69.   
Sacks, H. 1992. Lectures on Conversation. Cambridge. MA: Blackwell.   
Sacks, H., E. A. Schegloff, and G. Jefferson. 1974. 'A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking in conversation, Language 50: 696-735.   
Schegloff, Er A. 1996. Confirming allusions: Toward an empirical account of action, American Journal of Sociology 102/1: 161-216.

Schegloff, E. A. and H. Sacks. 1974. Opening up closings' in R. Turner (ed.): Ethnomethodology. Harmondsworth: Penguin, pp. 233-64. Schegloff, E., G. Jefferson, and H. Sacks. 1977. Thepreferenceforself-correction in the organization of repair in conversation, Language 53: 361--82. Seedhouse, P. 1997. The case of the missing "No": The relationship between pedagogy and interaction,' Language Learning 47/3: 547-83. Vehvilanen, S. 2001. 'Evaluative advice in educational counseling: The use of disagreement in the "stepwise entry" to advice,' Research on Language and Social Interaction 34/3: 371-98.

Wajnryb, R. 1998. Telling it like it isn't: Exploring an instance of pragmatic ambivalence in supervisory discourse, Journal of Pragmatics 29: 531-44.   
Waring, H. z. 2001. Balancing the competing interests in seminar discussion: peer referencing and asserting vulnerability, Issues in Applied Linguistics 12/1: 29-50.   
Waring, H. z. 2002a. Displaying substantive recipiency in seminar discussion,' Research on Language and Social Interaction 35/4: 453-79.   
Waring, H. Z. 2002b. 'Expressing noncomprehension in seminar discussion,' Journal of Pragmatic 34: 1711-31.