# Attitudes towards linguistic variation in the Ukrainian community in the United Kingdom

Katie Harrison

To cite this article: Katie Harrison (2024) Attitudes towards linguistic variation in the Ukrainian community in the United Kingdom, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:9, 1169-1181, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2021.1931019

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2021.1931019

# Attitudes towards linguistic variation in the Ukrainian community in the United Kingdom

Katie Harrison

Department of Modern Languages and Cultures, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK

# ABSTRACT

This paper examines the language attitudes of first-wave members of the Ukrainian community in the UK towards the two varieties of Ukrainian present in the community (labelled Diasporic Ukrainian and Contemporary Ukrainian), and considers the language ideologies underpinning these attitudes. Drawing on the analysis of data obtained through semi-structured interviews with second- and third-generation community members, I demonstrate how attitudes towards the two varieties of Ukrainian are mixed, but internally consistent. Positive attitudes towards Diasporic Ukrainian coincide with negative attitudes towards Contemporary Ukrainian, which is considered ‘Russified’ and ‘impure’. A contrasting set of attitudes is also identified, in which informants express negative attitudes towards ‘archaic’ Diasporic Ukrainian and positive attitudes towards Contemporary Ukrainian. I show that attitudes towards the two varieties of Ukrainian appear to be connected to attitudes towards Russian and are influenced by purist ideologies and interviewees’ perceptions of the relationship between Ukrainian language and identity. I consider how the mixed nature of these language attitudes may have a negative impact on future language maintenance efforts in the community, as the choice to teach one variety of Ukrainian over another may prevent attendance at Ukrainian complementary schools, which play a key role in language maintenance in the community.

ARTICLE HISTORY Received 4 May 2021 Accepted 6 May 2021

# KEYWORDS

Language attitudes; language ideologies; Ukrainian; community languages; language maintenance

# Introduction

The Ukrainian community in the United Kingdom comprises two distinct waves of migration: the first wave took place in the late 1940s after World War II, and the second after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 (Kubal, Bakewell, and de Haas 2011). One consequence of the contrasting backgrounds of members of either migration wave is that their linguistic repertoires also differ considerably. It is not simply the case that the community language (Ukrainian) exists alongside the societal majority language (English). Instead, broadly speaking, two varieties of Ukrainian – which I have labelled Diasporic Ukrainian and Contemporary Ukrainian – as well as Russian, are present within the community. Diasporic Ukrainian, refers to the Ukrainian brought to the UK by first-wave Ukrainians, and has subsequently been transmitted across generations. This first wave of migration, which took place after World War II, comprised individuals who predominantly originated in western Ukraine, which up to this point had neither been part of the Russian Empire or the Soviet Union, meaning Ukrainian had not been subject to any policies of Russification. Contemporary Ukrainian refers broadly to the Ukrainian transferred into the diaspora by second-wave Ukrainians (alongside Russian), who migrated to the UK after Ukraine gained independence from the Soviet

Union in 1991. In contrast to Diasporic Ukrainian, this variety of Ukrainian has been subject to various Russification policies over the course of history. As will be outlined in more detail below, the differences between these two varieties reflect – and are influenced by – the somewhat tumultuous history of Ukraine, the sociohistorical backgrounds of each migration wave, and the language policies implemented across the territories comprising contemporary Ukraine, particularly since the nineteenth century (Bilaniuk 2005; Bilaniuk and Melnyk 2008a; Fouse 2000; Shevelov 1989). Against this background, this paper examines the attitudes of first-wave Ukrainians towards the two varieties of Ukrainian through the thematic analysis (Braun and Clarke 2006; Ryan and Russell 2003) of data obtained through semi-structured interviews with second- and third-generation (first wave) community members as part of a larger project that provided the first detailed sociolinguistic examination of the Ukrainian community in the UK (Harrison 2019). Specifically, I address the following questions:

. What are the language attitudes of members of the Ukrainian community towards the linguistic variation present in the community (and in Ukraine)?   
. What are the language ideologies underpinning these attitudes?   
. What are the potential implications of these attitudes and ideologies on the maintenance of Ukrainian in the UK?

In recent years, an increasing amount of attention has been paid to exploring language within diasporic communities in the UK. A number of such (socio)linguistic studies have explored the language attitudes and ideologies of community members; often in the context of complementary schools.1 Some studies have explored language ideologies related to bilingualism and the use of English and the community language in complementary school settings (Blackledge and Creese 2010a, 2010b; Creese 2007; Creese and Blackledge 2011; Huang 2021), thus focusing on inter-linguistic variation. However, studies have increasingly also attended to intra-linguistic variation, particularly standard and non-standard varieties of community languages.

In their ethnographic study of complementary schools serving four communities (Bangladeshi, Chinese, Gujarati and Turkish), Creese and Blackledge found that standard varieties were preferred over non-standard varieties of the community language (Blackledge and Creese 2010a; Creese 2007). For example, in the Bangladeshi schools, teachers and administrators considered it imperative to teach Standard Bengali (as opposed to Sylheti), considering it a more ‘educated’, valuable variety (Blackledge and Creese 2008, 2010a). Huang (2021) identified the presence of a standard language ideology in a Birmingham Chinese complementary school, which despite teaching both Mandarin and Cantonese, had a general tendency to privilege the use of Mandarin over Cantonese. This shift in the standard language was received differently by teachers and administrators, with some celebrating it, and others contesting it. Thus, individual attitudes towards the new standard were not consistent across the group.

Similarly, Lytra (2012) found that Standard Turkish was privileged over other varieties of Turkish in Turkish complementary schools in London. Interviews with parents of students attending these schools revealed that some parents replicated the institutional discourse that promoted Standard Turkish; however, this ideology privileging Standard Turkish was not exhibited by all parents. Instead, those who were active in the promotion of Cypriot Turkish culture and language resisted the standard language ideology and considered Cypriot Turkish a key part of their identity. More recently, Çavuşoğlu (2019) found that in another Turkish complementary school in London, Standard Turkish was promoted by teachers and administrators, and students’ use of Cypriot Turkish was frequently corrected. However, students resisted teachers’ calls to use the standard variety, stating that in using Cypriot Turkish they were using ‘their’ language; their reluctance to switch to the standard variety was rooted in the fact that Cypriot Turkish formed part of their identity (Çavuşoğlu 2019, 10).

Resistance to the promotion of the standard language in the classroom was also observed by Yilmaz (2018) in observations conducted in Kurmanji Kurdish classes for adults. Some students resisted the standard language ideology of the teachers – who promoted the use of the Bohtan variety of Kurmanji – and persistently used the Maras variety; Yilmaz interpreted this resistance as a means through which students constructed and negotiated their identities (Yilmaz 2018, 193). Finally, Karatsareas (2018) found that attitudes towards Standard Modern Greek and Cypriot Greek among second-generation Greek Cypriots in London mirrored those held in Cyprus, and that complementary schools played a critical role in transmitting such attitudes. Overall, community members’ attitudes towards Standard Modern Greek were positive; it was considered ‘prestigious’ and ‘proper’. On the other hand, interviewees exhibited mixed – both positive and negative – attitudes towards Cypriot Greek, which was described as ‘broken’ and ‘villagey’, but was also considered an important part of Greek Cypriot cultural identity (Karatsareas 2018, 412).

The existing research demonstrates that although standard varieties of the community language are promoted in institutional contexts, some community members nevertheless hold positive attitudes towards non-standard varieties due to their perceived link to identity. This article contributes to this growing body of research by exploring attitudes and ideologies towards community language variation and identifies mixed attitudes towards the two varieties of Ukrainian present in the Ukrainian community in the UK. However, in contrast to the studies outlined above, these varieties of Ukrainian considered are not regional variants; instead, they relate to the two distinct waves of Ukrainian migration to the UK, reflecting the contrasting backgrounds and histories of those belonging to either wave.

In this paper, I first outline the concepts of language attitudes and language ideologies. I then provide an overview of the Ukrainian community in the UK, showing how the respective histories of those belonging to each migration wave have shaped their linguistic repertoires. After outlining the research methods and data collection procedures, I then present and analyse the interview data, exploring individuals’ attitudes towards linguistic variation in the community. The article concludes by considering the potential impact of community members’ language attitudes on the maintenance of Ukrainian in the UK and making suggestions for future research on linguistic variation in diasporic contexts.

# Language attitudes and language ideologies

The analysis of the data presented in this paper explores the language attitudes expressed by individuals, but also considers the language ideologies that underpin such attitudes. Thus, it will be helpful to begin by distinguishing the concept of language ideologies from language attitudes, which are the main focus of attention in this paper.

A familiar term in everyday usage, an attitude is ‘a disposition to respond favourably or unfavourably to an object, person, institution, or event’ (Ajzen 1988, 4). Attitudes are generally understood to have three components: affective (evaluative), cognitive (knowledge), and conative (action) (Agheyesi and Fishman 1970; Baker 1992; Garrett 2010). Thus, language attitudes can be defined as ‘any affective, cognitive or behavioural index of evaluative reactions toward different language varieties and their speakers’ (Ryan, Giles, and Sebastian 1982, 7). As for language ideologies, one broad and frequently-cited definition is ‘shared bodies of common-sense notions about the nature of language in the world’ (Rumsey 1990, 346). More recently, Piller (2015, 920) has provided a fuller definition:

Language ideologies are […] best understood as beliefs, feelings, conceptions about language that are socially situated and relate language and society in a dialectical fashion: Language ideologies undergird language use, which in turn shapes language ideologies; and together, they serve social ends, in other words the purpose of language ideologies is not really linguistic but social. Like anything social, language ideologies are interested, multiple, and contested.

The similarities and differences between language attitudes and language ideologies have been comprehensively explored by Dyers and Abongdia (2010), whose argument I summarise here. In terms of similarities, both language attitudes and language ideologies may influence processes such as language maintenance or shift, or patterns of language learning. Both attitudes and ideologies may vary between individuals; neither are uniformly distributed across a society, and both are influenced by social, cultural, and economic background.

In terms of differences, the two concepts have different disciplinary origins: the study of language attitudes originates from social psychology, and language ideologies from linguistic anthropology (Baker 1992; Garrett 2010). More crucially, language ideologies, while they can be observed through individuals’ language practices and language policies, are often unstated. Thus, studying language ideologies ‘relates the microculture of communicative action to political economic considerations of power and social inequality’ (Woolard and Schieffelin 1994, 72). Conversely, while language attitudes are not directly observable, they may be overtly expressed. Language ideologies tend to be shared across a society or group within society, whereas language attitudes are a more individual phenomenon. Crucially, the language ideologies present in society may influence the formation of individuals’ language attitudes, and thus language ideologies arguably precede attitudes. Even if an ideology is rejected by an individual, it may have preceded, and impacted, on their attitude. The societal nature of language ideologies also implies that ideologies are long-term and enduring, whereas language attitudes may be more prone to change.

The relationship between language attitudes and ideologies can thus usefully be summarised as follows:

. Language ideologies are a ‘macro-phenomenon’, shaped by and shared across societies; language attitudes are held by individuals;   
Language ideologies – as a societal phenomenon – precede and influence language attitudes;   
Language ideologies are long-term and enduring across a (section of) society; language attitudes are more temporary and prone to change;   
. Language ideologies are naturalised beliefs; language attitudes tend to be an individual’s reaction towards a given stimulus.

One language ideology of particular relevance to this study is that of linguistic purism, which seeks to protect the variety of language considered standard from either foreign borrowings or internal changes (Thomas 1991). Various definitions of linguistic purism exist; narrower definitions tend to focus on protecting a language from foreign elements (Hohenhaus 2002; Trask 1999), whereas broader definitions focus on resistance to variation and change more generally (Lodge 1993). In the analysis presented below, we shall see that in some cases, individuals’ attitudes towards Diasporic Ukrainian and Contemporary Ukrainian appear to be influenced by purist ideologies, particularly in relation to Russian influences on Contemporary Ukrainian, the variety commonly spoken by second-wave migrants in the UK and in Ukraine itself.

Another language ideology that is relevant to the analysis presented in this paper is the belief in a one-to-one relationship between language and (Ukrainian) identity; this essentialist perspective views the relationship between language and identity as ‘fixed, ascribed, natural and unproblematic’ (Jaffe 2007, 58). This ideology appears to underpin negative attitudes towards the use of Russian expressed by some informants, who believe that Ukrainians should speak Ukrainian. This ideology is at times implicit in attitudes expressed about the Ukrainian community in the UK, it also underlies attitudes in relation to language use in Ukraine, where it may be considered a ‘one nation, one language’ ideology, ‘the belief that monolingualism or the use of one single language is important for social harmony and national unity’ (Piller 2015, 6).

# Language in the Ukrainian community in the UK

The respective backgrounds and histories of the two migration waves from Ukraine to the UK have given rise to significant linguistic differences between them, both in terms of linguistic repertoire and the variety of Ukrainian spoken by those belonging to either migration wave.

The first wave of migration comprised some 20,000 of the two to three million displaced Ukrainians who found themselves in western Europe after World War II (Pawliczko 1994, 117). They were brought to the UK between 1946 and 1948 as European Voluntary Workers (EVWs); the majority were from western Ukraine, which did not become part of the Soviet Union until after the war (Dobriansky 1988; Jenkala 1994; Kubal, Bakewell, and de Haas 2011). The origins of this migration wave are important from a linguistic perspective, as since the nineteenth century, the western regions of Ukraine were part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, whereas the eastern and southern regions were part of the Russian Empire, and the treatment of Ukrainian differed greatly between the two (Bilaniuk and Melnyk 2008b). In eastern parts, in the Russian Empire, decrees in 1863, 1876, and 1881 aimed at the elimination of Ukrainian from public life (Shevelov 1989); Ukrainian was banned from being used in various domains, resulting in it being associated with the peasantry, while Russian was deemed prestigious (Andriewsky 2003; Wilson 1997). In contrast, in Western Ukraine, fewer restrictions were placed on the use and development of Ukrainian, and although it was treated in different ways in different administrative regions, people nevertheless had greater linguistic autonomy than those living in regions under the rule of the Russian Empire (Bilaniuk 2005). The first wave of Ukrainian migration to the UK came from areas of Ukraine that were never part of the Russian Empire and did not become part of the Soviet Union until after the end of World War II, so had not been subject to policies implemented both under the Russian Empire and from the 1930s in Soviet Ukraine that aimed to promote Russian at the expense of Ukrainian.

Soviet restrictions on migration meant that it was not possible to emigrate from the Soviet Union, so the second wave migration to the UK did not take place until after Ukraine gained independence in 1991. Although the exact number of Ukrainians that have migrated to the UK since 1991 is unknown, those belonging to this second wave of migration are from a broader range of regions of Ukraine than those belonging to the first wave. The linguistic repertoires and language practices of members of this migration wave have inevitably been influenced in particular by language policies implemented throughout the Soviet era, as well as earlier Russification policies implemented in regions that were part of the Russian Empire, and more closely resemble those in contemporary Ukraine. Within this migration wave, Russian-Ukrainian bilingualism is widespread (Bilaniuk 2005; Harrison 2019), and – although internal variation within this wave is somewhat inevitable – broadly speaking, the variety of Ukrainian spoken reflects changes made to Ukrainian under the Soviet Union as well as through earlier Russification policies.

In the early years of the Soviet Union, non-Russian languages – including Ukrainian – were supported through a policy called korenizatsiia (‘nativisation’) (Liber 1991; Smith 1998). However, from the early 1930s Russification policies promoted the status of Russian throughout the Soviet Union, and made changes to Ukrainian to make it more similar to Russian (Bilaniuk 2005; Shevelov 1989). In 1933 an amended Ukrainian Orthography was published, in which multiple changes – as listed by Karavans’kyi (1994, 103–09) – were made to Ukrainian; and in the decades that followed, a large number of further changes were made (Karavans’kyi 1994; Masenko 2004; Taranenko 2007).

The two waves of Ukrainian migration to the UK, and the linguistic differences between members of either wave, are yet to be explored in detail, and indeed the Ukrainian community in the UK has received little attention to date. Jenkala (1991) provided a brief account of the sociolinguistic situation within the community up to the late 1980s, but that account predates the second migration wave. The research presented in this paper is the first exploration of attitudes that takes into account the impact of the second wave of migration on the (socio)linguistic situation in the community.

# Methods and data

The data presented below were obtained through semi-structured interviews as part of a larger sociolinguistic examination of the Ukrainian community in the UK (Harrison 2019). The interviews, which complemented data collected through questionnaires and ethnographic observations at a

Ukrainian complementary school, allowed for in-depth data to be obtained on a broad range of topics, including linguistic variation in the community (Edley and Litoselliti 2010, 169; Silverman 2006, 120). However, one important caveat is that such interviews are not a straightforward means to obtain data that revealed objective truths (Atkinson and Silverman 1997). Rather, these data should be considered the product of communicative events in which all participants played a role in shaping the interaction that took place; in interpreting the data, it should be remembered that they were inevitably discursively constructed by the interviewer and interviewee (Copland and Creese 2015, 35; Edley and Litoselliti 2010, 160).

Interviews were conducted with seven members of the Ukrainian community (six first wave, one second wave), all recruited through a combination of convenience and snowball sampling. In this paper, data obtained from four first-wave interviewees are presented; two of these are secondgeneration Ukrainians who were in their sixties when the interviews were conducted (Halyna, Taras), the other two are third-generation (Natasha, Bohdan), who were in their twenties. The data were analysed thematically, combining both inductive and deductive approaches to identify themes in the data (Boyatzis 1998; Braun and Clarke 2006; Ryan and Russell 2003). English was the main language used, but in some instances, Ukrainian was used by informants, in which case transliterations and translations have been provided.

# Attitudes towards linguistic variation in the Ukrainian community

This section presents data regarding interviewees’ attitudes towards the two varieties of Ukrainian, Diasporic Ukrainian and Contemporary Ukrainian, and the language ideologies underpinning them. Overall, attitudes were mixed, but internally consistent: those who exhibited positive attitudes towards Diasporic Ukrainian often expressed negative attitudes towards Contemporary Ukrainian, and vice versa. Moreover, these attitudes appear to be connected with, or related to, informants’ attitudes towards Russian, and its use both in the diaspora and in Ukraine.

# Attitudes among second-generation informants

Two second-generation (first-wave) interviewees – Halyna and Taras – both discussed Diasporic Ukrainian and Contemporary Ukrainian in ways that implied positive attitudes towards the former, and negative attitudes towards the latter. In the following extract, recalling conversations she has had with Ukrainians in Ukraine (thus, like second wave Ukrainians in the UK, speakers of Contemporary Ukrainian) Halyna discusses some of the differences between the two varieties:

Halyna: Speaking to Ukrainians when we were there last time, I said to them ‘OK, how do you identify us so quickly?’, and they said that it was the accent, it’s not just the vocabulary, although there is that. One of the obvious differences is we say ‘дев’ятдесят <dev’iatdesiat> [ninety]’ and they say ‘дев’яносто <devianosto> [ninety]’ for ninety, and words like that, you know, which are much more Russified.

Here, Halyna cites the example of the different words for ninety; both words can be used in Contemporary Ukrainian, but the latter, дев’яносто, is a cognate of the Russian word, and thus presumably a product of Russification policies. Key to this extract is Halyna’s description of the vocabulary used by speakers of Contemporary Ukrainian as ‘much more Russified’, as this, combined with her attitudes towards Russian (outlined below), implies a negative attitude towards this variety, due to its Russian influence. Additionally, it is also notable that in referring to speakers of Diasporic Ukrainian (firstwave Ukrainians in the UK) as ‘us’ and of Contemporary Ukrainian ‘them’, Halyna effectively others second-wave community members (and Ukrainians in Ukraine), and dismisses any internal variation among speakers of either variety.

Halyna exhibited the most overtly negative attitude towards Russian of all interviewees, expressed whilst recalling various incidents in which she encountered people speaking Russian in Ukraine, as in the following excerpt:

# Halyna:

I remember watching the rehearsal for the military parade and next to us was a chap, probably in his forties, with a daughter in her early teens and they were speaking in Russian, but they were thrilled, they were Ukrainians who were really proud of being Ukrainian, but why can’t they speak Ukrainian?

Interviewer: Do you think that when you hear Ukrainians?   
Halyna: Yeah, I do. I want them to speak Ukrainian – мова то найважніше <mova to naivazhnishe $>$ [language is the most important]. Actually, while we were there, we saw a little [pro-Ukrainian language] demonstration coming up Khreshatyk [the main street in Kyiv], you know, people with big banners, you’ve got to keep your own language, and you have to.

In recalling this incident, Halyna expresses her dissatisfaction about the use of Russian by people in Ukraine, and often links this back to the fact she feels Ukrainians should speak Ukrainian; Halyna therefore indicates that she believes the Ukrainian language (and the use of it) is an important part of Ukrainian identity. Thus, she appears to exhibit a quite traditionally nationalist (one nation, one language) view of the relationship between language and identity; she indicates that she believes people should speak Ukrainian, because they are (living) in Ukraine. This is conveyed through phrases such as ‘they were really proud of being Ukrainian, but why can’t they speak Ukrainian?’, and ‘I do want them to speak Ukrainian – language is the most important’. Halyna’s dissatisfaction towards Ukrainians using Russian is not just limited to Ukraine, but also applies to diasporic settings. In the following excerpt, her response to being asked how she would feel if she were to encounter people speaking Russian in a Ukrainian community centre mirrors the negative attitudes expressed in the previous excerpt, and also reinforces the idea that Halyna believes that the use of Ukrainian is crucial for Ukrainian identity:

Halyna: I would find that a bit offensive. I don’t like it. You’re Ukrainian, you’re in the Ukrainian Club.

The attitudes expressed by Taras towards Diasporic Ukrainian and Contemporary Ukrainian in the following excerpt resemble those exhibited by Halyna:

Taras: The Ukrainian language that we speak here is different from the Ukrainian language back in Ukraine, because when our parents left Ukraine in the early forties their language was very basic, it’s what I call village language. My parents were from the Lvov [sic] region, which meant that their Ukrainian was very clear. There was a lot of clarity within the language – the Ukrainian within our family and a lot of the people who are actually in this country. In the eastern side of Ukraine, it was more Russified, so there was a lot of Russian mixed in there, and you still get that.

Although initially describing Diasporic Ukrainian as ‘very basic’ and ‘village language’, which seem intended as negative judgements, Taras proceeds to also describe it as ‘very clear’ and possessing ‘a lot of clarity’, and so signals a positive attitude towards this variety. The adjective ‘clear’ is itself ambiguous – it could be intended in the sense of being easy to comprehend, but may also imply that Taras considers this variety ‘clear’ in the sense that it has not been clouded by any ‘foreign’ influences. The latter interpretation of Diasporic Ukrainian as pure is arguably supported by his comment on the Ukrainian of Eastern Ukraine as Russified. The juxtaposition of these two descriptions may imply that Taras considers this ‘more Russified’ variety a less clear, less pure variety of Ukrainian. Despite this, however, it is striking that Taras himself refers to the region his parents were from using the Russian ‘Lvov’, as opposed to Ukrainian ‘L’viv’.

In addition to noting linguistic differences between first-wave Ukrainians and both second-wave migrants and those currently living in Ukraine, Taras and Halyna also appear to extend the linguistic differences observed to other cultural differences between first-wave UK Ukrainians and other Ukrainians (both second-wave and those in Ukraine):

Halyna: I think it’s different now, there are people I know who’ve got children at shkola [lit. ‘school’, i.e. Ukrainian Complementary School] who – they were born and brought up here, so we’re talking second-, third-generation, and they’re in the same class – one assumes – as the children who have come over from Ukraine. So you’ve got not just mixed ability, you’ve almost got two different languages going on, and certainly two different cultures, because they behave differently in church as well, for example.

Taras:

If you want an honest opinion from the point of view of me being a British-Ukrainian, compared to a Ukrainian-Ukrainian, we don’t have the same, we’re not on the same wavelength necessarily with our Ukrainian brothers, their way of living is different from the way that we live, and it’s sometimes very hard.

In outlining some of the other differences that they perceive between the two migration waves – ‘their way of living is different’, ‘they behave differently in church’ – the distinction between ‘us’ and ‘them’ is made again; second-wave Ukrainians are othered by the first-wave informants, without any acknowledgement of similarities between members of either migration wave, or any variation present within either group. Thus, in addition to exhibiting negative attitudes towards Contemporary Ukrainian, Halyna and Taras also seem to hold generally quite negative attitudes towards members of this group, based on a number of factors, and consider them different to themselves despite having a shared heritage.

The positive attitudes towards Diasporic Ukrainian and negative attitudes towards Contemporary Ukrainian expressed by Halyna and Taras in the excerpts presented in this section appear to be influenced by an ideology of linguistic purism (Thomas 1991); these informants reject Russian influences in Contemporary Ukrainian as a threat to Ukrainian’s integrity as a language. This variety of Ukrainian, is, with its Russian influences, considered by some purists in Ukraine to be a mere variety of Surzhyk – the term used to refer to varieties of language that combine both Ukrainian and Russian (Bilaniuk 2004). More specifically, because Contemporary Ukrainian is distinguished from Diasporic Ukrainian by the influence of Soviet policies of Russification, Contemporary Ukrainian would appear to most closely align with what Bilaniuk (2004, 415) has categorised as ‘Sovietised Ukrainian’ Surzhyk.2 Ukrainian purists who consider Contemporary Ukrainian a variety of Surzhyk argue that pre-Soviet Ukrainian (which closely resembles Diasporic Ukrainian) should be reinstated as the standard language, despite the fact people in Ukraine habitually use Contemporary Ukrainian (Bilaniuk 2005, 100–01). Thus, the negative attitudes towards Contemporary Ukrainian held by some members of the Ukrainian community in the UK resemble those held by purists in Ukraine. The fact that it is specifically the Russian influences which are identified as the problem with Contemporary Ukrainian may also imply an anti-Russian ideology in addition to an ideology of purism.

# Attitudes among third-generation informants

A reversed set of attitudes – more negative towards Diasporic Ukrainian and positive towards Contemporary Ukrainian – was exhibited by third-generation (first-wave) Bohdan and Natasha, who also appeared to hold the most positive attitudes towards Russian. In the following excerpt, Bohdan implies that Diasporic Ukrainian is somewhat old-fashioned and out-of-date:

Interviewer: Do you think the newly-arrived Ukrainians sound different? Bohdan: Oh yeah, absolutely. We talk like backwards, forties, village yokel Ukrainian.

Similarly, Natasha also suggests by implication that Diasporic Ukrainian is out of date, and not particularly useful or relevant compared to Contemporary Ukrainian. Throughout her interview, Natasha recalled various incidents in which her use of Diasporic Ukrainian has resulted in her not being understood and has caused her embarrassment, such as in the following example:

Natasha: This is the thing, it’s all such archaic Ukrainian. We’ve had discussions [in the community] about this before. Essentially, the type of Ukrainian that we’ve learnt isn’t prevalent anymore in Ukraine, we need to update our language to be able to survive out there. The type of Ukrainian we speak is so specific to our little group of diaspora people that I went over to L’viv last summer and I was trying to speak Ukrainian to my mum’s family who were with us and they just laughed at me and were like ‘what are you saying?’, and I was just like ‘is this not Ukrainian?’. It is because if you speak Ukrainian in the Ukrainian community everyone understands you and everyone responds to you and its fine. You go to Ukraine and you try and speak the same language and they’re literally just like ‘what are you saying?’

Here, Natasha’s negative attitude towards Diasporic Ukrainian as being poorly adapted to the modern world is clearly evident in her description of the variety transmitted to her as ‘such archaic Ukrainian’ and not ‘prevalent anymore in Ukraine’. At another point in the interview, Natasha again recalls her experiences of not being understood in Ukraine when speaking Diasporic Ukrainian, and also describes how her grandmother (who came to the UK after World War II) modernised her Ukrainian through the use of English borrowings. This attempt at modernising Diasporic Ukrainian by drawing on English demonstrates how this variety developed independently from Contemporary Ukrainian, which was instead adapted and developed through the implementation of Russification policies in Soviet Ukraine:

Natasha: My grandma [first-wave, first-generation] just makes up words. So they’ll [her generation] just combine English and Ukrainian, so for the majority of my life I thought a fridge in Ukrainian was a ‘фріджу’ <fridzhu> because that’s what my grandma called it and I don’t know any different. […] So that’s why we have issues in Ukraine as well – when you think a word is Ukrainian and it isn’t Ukrainian, it’s just an adapted version of English.

Natasha reports instances where others, like her, fail to make themselves understood in Ukraine when using Diasporic Ukrainian:

Natasha: My sister and my friend only speak [Diasporic] Ukrainian and they were trying really hard but there were some times where certain words that they would use and it was just, like, even I could tell they were archaic Ukrainian and they [people in Ukraine] weren’t going to understand them [Natasha’s friends] kind of thing so I just had to repeat it with the Russian word.

This experience of not being understood when using Diasporic Ukrainian in contemporary Ukraine is also corroborated by Satzewich (2002, 199), whose observations from the Ukrainian diaspora in North America found that ‘[W]hen diaspora Ukrainians who consider themselves to be reasonably competent speakers of Ukrainian go to Ukraine, they are sometimes made to feel that are using a quaint, but ossified and corrupted form of the language that has not kept with the times’. The negative attitude towards Diasporic Ukrainian expressed by Natasha – and the positive attitude towards Contemporary Ukrainian that is implied through this – is seemingly influenced by such experiences, which appear to also be shared with members of the Ukrainian diaspora more generally, and not be limited to first-wave Ukrainians in the UK.

The negative attitudes towards Diasporic Ukrainian exhibited by both Bohdan and Natasha, and the suggestion that they hold more positive attitudes towards Contemporary Ukrainian, appear to coincide with more relaxed attitudes towards Russian. Natasha and Bohdan were the most accepting of Russian. This, alongside Halyna’s strongly negative attitude towards Russian, indicates that attitudes towards the two varieties of Ukrainian are related to (or influence and are influenced by) attitudes towards Russian. In the following excerpt, Bohdan expresses his acceptance of the use of Russian:

Bohdan: I’m going to sound really snobby here – but I think for the few of us that are a bit more enlightened and travel to Ukraine a bit more, we’re not bothered by it [Ukrainians speaking Russian]. Personally, I’m not bothered by it.

Here, Bohdan attributes his more relaxed attitude towards Russian to being more ‘enlightened’. He also believes that the fact he has travelled to Ukraine more than others has also helped to shape this attitude. This might be understood to mean that he has encountered Ukraine’s widespread bilingualism and regional differences in language use (Bilaniuk 2005; Bilaniuk and Melnyk 2008a), influencing his acceptance of the use of Russian by Ukrainians. Natasha also expresses a very similar view, that those who have spent more time in Ukraine and visited different parts of the country are more understanding of Russian-speaking Ukrainians:

Natasha: I think the people that have travelled more [in Ukraine] are more open-minded about it, whereas the people that have literally been to Ukraine once and it’s Kyiv or L’viv – like most of the diaspora community goes to L’viv because they like it there because they speak Ukrainian and they don’t speak Russian, whereas they’re reluctant to go to Kyiv because people speak Russian in Kyiv as well and they think they’re not going to be understood and they think it’s going to be more Russian and Soviet over there.

Bohdan and Natasha both appear to suggest that greater awareness of the linguistic situation in Ukraine today – and more exposure to this situation – leads to a rejection of the ideology that the Ukrainian language is an important part of Ukrainian identity, and so to an acceptance of Russian-speaking Ukrainians. It would appear that, to them, language does not define national or even cultural loyalty or identity. These attitudes appear to closely mirror attitudes towards the relationship between language use and Ukrainian identity in contemporary Ukraine (Kulyk 2016a, 2016b).

# Discussion and conclusion

Overall, the data presented in this article suggest that there may be generational differences in language attitudes in the Ukrainian community in the UK. The two second-generation interviewees held similar attitudes towards the different language varieties present in the community, as did the two third-generation interviewees. Second, attitudes towards Russian and the varieties of Ukrainian present in the community appear to be connected and mutually influence each other. For example, Halyna’s negative attitude towards Contemporary Ukrainian because of its Russified nature correlates with a strongly negative attitude towards Russian. In contrast, Natasha and Bohdan exhibit negative attitudes towards Diasporic Ukrainian, but are more accepting and understanding of Ukrainians using Russian. The attitudes expressed by informants therefore appear to be influenced by the acceptance or rejection of language ideologies which posit that language and identity are linked, as well as by an ideology of linguistic purism in the case of the two varieties of Ukrainian.

The mixed, but internally consistent, nature of these informants’ language attitudes raises questions about the future transmission and maintenance of Ukrainian as a community language in the UK. This is particularly pertinent given that Ukrainian complementary schools are a key facilitator of language maintenance within the community (Harrison 2019). First, teaching one particular variety of Ukrainian towards which some community members hold negative attitudes may discourage parents from sending their children to complementary school. This is evident in the following excerpt, in which third-generation Natasha outlines how Contemporary Ukrainian would be the only variety she would transmit to future generations, as opposed to the ‘archaic’ Diasporic Ukrainian of her grandparents’ generation:

Natasha: I think if I wanted to teach a child Ukrainian I’d want to improve my own Ukrainian first if that makes sense, because I’d want to be teaching them an actual language rather than a little diaspora version of a language, so they’ve actually got the base knowledge of that rather than just being some little archaic language that might die out in a couple of decades or something like that instead.

Second, if teachers in Ukrainian complementary schools correct students’ use of a variety of Ukrainian that is not promoted in the complementary school – as has been observed in other complementary school settings (Çavuşoğlu 2019; Karatsareas 2018), this has the effect of rejecting, or at least questioning the validity of, that student’s variety of Ukrainian. Such corrections were not encountered during the observations conducted at a Ukrainian complementary school, but this may have been because the majority of participants (teachers and students) were second-wave Ukrainians. However, students’ use of Russian was frequently corrected by teachers, even though Russian is part of many contemporary Ukrainians’ linguistic repertoire (Harrison 2019).

This study has provided an initial insight into linguistic variation within the Ukrainian diaspora in the UK. Future research on Ukrainian communities – in the UK and beyond – could now usefully further explore attitudes towards linguistic variation, particularly in relation to the differences between the linguistic repertoires and resources of post-war and post-Soviet migration waves. Although Satzewich (2002) has alluded to inter-wave linguistic differences in the North American diaspora, they have not previously been explored in detail. Examinations of linguistic variation and inter-wave dynamics within other communities (e.g. Karatsareas 2021) would allow for more comparative work across different community languages in the UK and has the potential to reveal commonalities between different languages and communities.

# Notes

1. Complementary schools are defined as ‘voluntary schools – often called ‘community language’ or ‘supplementary’ schools – which serve specific linguistic or religious, or cultural communities, particularly though community language classes’ (Creese and Blackledge 2008: 270; Creese and Martin 2006: 1).   
2. In response to Surzhyk being primarily employed as an umbrella term and treated as a monolithic entity, Bilaniuk (2004) developed a typology of five major types of Surzhyk. Defined primarily by the historical and ideological conditions from which they emerged, the five types of Surzhyk identified are: ‘urbanised peasant’, ‘village dialect’, ‘Sovietised Ukrainian’, ‘urban bilinguals’’, and ‘post-independence’ (Bilaniuk 2004, 415).

# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Nicola McLelland and the two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this article.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

# Funding

The research presented in this paper was funded by a Midlands4Cities PhD scholarship, which is a DTP that is part of the AHRC. The website for the DTP is: https://www.midlands4cities.ac.uk/. The grant reference number is AH/L50385X/1.

# Notes on contributor

Katie Harrison completed her PhD in Linguistics (Modern Languages) at the University of Nottingham in January 2020. She currently works as a Research Associate for Multilingual Manchester, based in the School of Arts, Languages and Cultures at the University of Manchester.

# ORCID

Katie Harrison $\textcircled { 1 0 }$ http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5534-1417

# References

Agheyesi, Rebecca, and Joshua A. Fishman. 1970. “Language Attitudes: A Brief Survey of Methodological Approaches.” Anthropological Linguistics 12 (5): 137–157.   
Ajzen, Icek. 1988. Attitudes, Personality and Behaviour. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.   
Andriewsky, Olga. 2003. “The Russian-Ukrainian Discourse and the Failure of the ‘Little Russian Solution’, 1792-1917.” In Culture, Nation and Identity: The Ukrainian-Russian Encounter, 1600-1945, edited by Andreas Kappeler, 182–214. Edmonton: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies Press.   
Atkinson, Paul, and David Silverman. 1997. “‘Kundera’s Immortality: The Interview Society and the Invention of the Self’.” Qualitative Inquiry 3 (3): 304–325.   
Baker, Colin. 1992. Attitudes and Language. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.   
Bilaniuk, Laada. 2004. “A Typology of Surzhyk: Mixed Ukrainian-Russian Language.” International Journal of Bilingualism 8 (4): 409–425.   
Bilaniuk, Laada. 2005. Contested Tongues: Language Policies and Cultural Correction in Ukraine. Ithaca, N.Y.; London: Cornell University Press.   
Bilaniuk, Laada, and Svitlana Melnyk. 2008a. “A Tense and Shifting Balance: Bilingualism and Education in Ukraine.” In Multiligualism in Post-Soviet Countries, edited by Aneta Pavlenko, 66–98. Bristol, UK; Buffalo, NY: Multilingual Matters.   
Bilaniuk, Laada, and Svitlana Melnyk. 2008b. “A Tense and Shifting Balance: Bilingualism and Education in Ukraine.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 11 (3-4): 339–372.   
Blackledge, Adrian, and Angela Creese. 2008. “Contesting “Language” as “Heritage”: Negotiation of Identities in Late Modernity.” Applied Linguistics 29 (4): 533–554.   
Blackledge, Adrian, and Angela Creese. 2010a. Multilingualism: A Critical Perspective. London; New York: Continuum.   
Blackledge, Adrian, and Angela Creese. 2010b. “Opening up Flexible Spaces: Ideology and Practice in Complementary Schools.” In Sites of Multilingualism: Complementary Schools in Britain Today, edited by Vally Lytra, and Peter Martin, 3–17. Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham Books.   
Boyatzis, Richard E. 1998. Transforming Qualitative Information: Thematic Analysis and Code Development. London: Sage.   
Braun, Virginia, and Victoria Clarke. 2006. “Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology.” Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 (2): 77–101.   
Çavuşoğlu, Çise. 2019. “Standard Language Ideologies: The Case of Cypriot Turkish in Turkish Schools in London.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 1–16. doi:10.1080/01434632.2019.1687711.   
Copland, Fiona, and Angela Creese. 2015. Linguistic Ethnography: Collecting, Analysing and Presenting Data. London: Sage.   
Creese, Angela. 2007. Investigating Multilingualism in Complementary Schools in Four Communities. Birmingham: University of Birmingham.   
Creese, Angela, and Adrian Blackledge. 2008. “The Social, Cultural and Linguistic Significance of Complementary Schools.” In Transforming Learning in Schools and Communities: The Remaking of Education for a Cosmopolitan Society, edited by Bob Lingard, Jon Nixon, and Stewart Ranson, 270–287. New York: Continuum.   
Creese, Angela, and Adrian Blackledge. 2011. “Separate and Flexible Bilingualism in Complementary Schools: Multiple Language Practices in Interrelationship.” Journal of Pragmatics 43 (5): 20–35.   
Creese, Angela, and Peter Martin. 2006. “Interaction in Complementary School Contexts: Developing Identities of Choice.” Language and Education 20 (1): 1–4.   
Dobriansky, Mykhailo D. 1988. “Great Britain.” In Encyclopaedia of Ukraine, edited by Volodymyr Kubijovyč, 87–91. Toronto; London: University of Toronto.   
Dyers, Charlyn, and Jane Francis Abongdia. 2010. “An Exploration of the Relationship Between Language Attitudes and Ideologies in a Study of Francophone Students of English in Cameroon.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 31 (2): 119–134.   
Edley, Nigel, and Lia Litoselliti. 2010. “Contemplating Interviews and Focus Groups.” In Research Methods in Linguistics, edited by Lia Litosseliti, 155–179. London: Continuum.   
Fouse, Gary. 2000. The Languages of the Former Soviet Republics: Their History and Development. Lanham, Md; Oxford: University Press of America.   
Garrett, Peter. 2010. Attitudes to Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Harrison, Katie. 2019. “Ukrainian in the United Kingdom: Language Use, Attitudes, Ideologies, and Identites in the Ukrainian Community.” Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Nottingham.   
Hohenhaus, Peter. 2002. “Standardization, Language Change, Resistance and the Question of Linguistic Threat: 18thCentury English and Present-Day German.” In Standardization: Studies from the German Languages, edited by Andrew R. Linn, and Nicola McLelland, 153–178. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Huang, Jing. 2021. “A Shifting Standard: A Stratified Ideological Ecology in a Birmingham Chinese Complementary School.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 42 (2): 165–177.   
Jaffe, Alexandra. 2007. “Discourses of Endangerment: Contexts and Consequences of Essentialising Discourses.” In Discourses of Endangerment: Ideology and Interest in the Defence of Languages, edited by Alexandre Duchene, and Monica Heller, 57–75. London: Continuum.   
Jenkala, Marta. 1991. “The Ukrainian Speech Community.” In Multilingualism in the British Isles, edited by Safdar Alladina, and Viv Edwards, 157–169. London: Longman.   
Jenkala, Marta. 1994. “Ukrainians in the United Kingdom and Ireland.” In Ukraine and Ukrainians Throughout the World: A Demographic and Sociological Guide to the Homeland and its Diaspora, edited by Ann Lencyk Pawliczko, 292–307. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.   
Karatsareas, Petros. 2018. “Attitudes Towards Cypriot Greek and Standard Modern Greek in London’s Greek Cypriot Community.” International Journal of Bilingualism 22 (4): 412–428.   
Karatsareas, Petros. 2021. “Negotiating Ethnolinguistic Heterogeneity in Greek Complementary Schools in the UK: Teachers’ Perspectives on Post-2010 Diversification.” International Jounral of the Sociology of Language 267: 99–121.   
Karavans’kyi, Sviatoslav. 1994. Secrety Ukrains’koi Movy [Secrets of the Ukrainian Language]. Kyiv: Kobza.   
Kubal, Agnieszka, Oliver Bakewell, and Hein de Haas. 2011. The Evolution of Ukrainian Migration to the UK: Scoping Study Report. International Migration Institute: University of Oxford.   
Kulyk, Volodymyr. 2016a. “Language and Identity in Ukraine After Euromaidan.” Thesis 11 136: 90–106.   
Kulyk, Volodymyr. 2016b. “National Identity in Ukraine: Impact of Euromaidan and the War.” Europe-Asia Studies 68: 568– 608.   
Liber, George. 1991. “Korenizatsiia: Restructuring Soviet Nationality Policy in the 1920s.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 14 (1): 15–23.   
Lodge, Anthony R. 1993. French: From Dialect to Standard. London: Routledge.   
Lytra, Vally. 2012. “‘Discursive Constructions of Language and Identity: Parents’ Competing Perspectives in London Turkish Complementary Schools’.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 33 (1): 85–100.   
Masenko, Larysa. 2004. Mova i Suspil’stvo: Postkolonialnyi Vymir [Language and Society: A Postcolonial Perspective]. Kyiv: KM Akademiia.   
Pawliczko, Ann Lencyk, ed. 1994. Ukraine and Ukrainians Throughout the World: A Demographic and Sociological Guide to the Homeland and its Diaspora. Toronto: Toronto University Press.   
Piller, Ingrid. 2015. “Language Ideologies.” In The International Encyclopedia of Language and Social Interaction, edited by Karen Tracy, Cornelia Ilie, and Todd Sandel, 917–927. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.   
Rumsey, Alan. 1990. “Wording, Meaning and Linguistic Ideology.” American Anthropologist 92: 346–361.   
Ryan, Ellen Bouchard, Howard Giles, and Richard J. Sebastian. 1982. “An Integrative Perspective for the Study of Attitudes Towards Language Variation.” In Attitudes Towards Language Variation, edited by Ellen Bouchard Ryan, and Howard Giles, 1–19. London: Edward Arnold.   
Ryan, Gery W., and Bernard H. Russell. 2003. “Techniques to Identify Themes.” Field Methods 15: 85–109.   
Satzewich, Vic. 2002. The Ukrainian Diaspora. New York: Routledge.   
Shevelov, George Y. 1989. The Ukrainian Language in the First Half of the Twentieth Century (1900-1941): Its State and Status. Cambridge: Mass.: Harvard University Press.   
Silverman, David. 2006. Interpreting Qualitative Data. Methods for Analysing Talk, Text and Interaction. 3rd ed. London: Sage.   
Smith, Michael G. 1998. Language and Power in the Creation of the USSR, 1915-1953. Berlin; New York: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Taranenko, Oleksandr. 2007. “Ukrainian and Russian in Contact: Attraction and Enstrangement.” International Journal of the Sociology of Language 183: 119–140.   
Thomas, George. 1991. Linguistic Purism. London: Longman.   
Trask, Robert Lawrence. 1999. Key Concepts in Language and Linguistics. London: Routledge.   
Wilson, Andrew. 1997. Ukrainian Nationalism in the 1990s: A Minority Faith. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Woolard, Kathryn Ann, and Bambi B. Schieffelin. 1994. “Language Ideology.” Annual Review of Anthropology 23: 55–82.   
Yilmaz, Birgül. 2018. “Language Ideologies and Identities in Kurdish Heritage Language Classrooms in London.” International Journal of the Sociology of Language 2018: 173–200.