Book review

# Teaching International Foundation Year: A Practical Guide for EAP Practitioners in Higher and Further Education, Anne Stazicker, Nancy Woods. Routledge, Abingdon/New York (2022). 156 pp \$Us32.95, UK24.99, ISBN: 978-1-03-218258-2

In a market of increasing EAP publications, this particular book stands out by fillig ahithrto unclaimed gap, focusing specifically on EAP provision in the context of International Foundation Years in Higher and Further Education.

Foundation Year (FY) courses, commonly designed to bridge the gap between school and universty studies, are not exclusively aimed at international students at every institution. They form an important part in achieving wider participation, particularly for those who may have out f dctional sings for some time or do not posses the conventional qualifications required for direct acces to tertiary education. I is submitted that EAP courses have the potential to be a highly valuable element to the FY experience for many students, and as such, this book should find wide appeal amongst instructors teaching at that level.

The authors themselves state that their understanding of EAP teaching involves \*the development of the transferable academic study skill and lngage that students ill ne n order to be successul in a British univrsity environment (.vii) thus employing a paradigm beyond mere vocabulary acquisition. The emphasis on the British context notwithstanding, the work itself is not overly concerned with either UK law or policy. Recent local developments and trends, such as compassion-based teaching and decolonisation of the curriculum have been addressed, but in a manner which remains relevant for the understanding of diversty and inclusion in general.

The book is designed as a guide for instructors new to EAP teaching, with chapters intended to be self-contained to allow for ad-hoc consultation as required. As a result, parts of the writing can be considered repetitive, which however supports its purpose as a reference work. The volume contains seven substantive chapters, which are prefaced by a useful glosary of key terms and an introduction to the material..

A distinct fature is the inclusion of relevant BALEAP competencies at the beginning of each chapter. The British Association of Lecturers in English for Academic Purposes (BALEAP) is responsible for the accreditation of EAP courses in the UK higher education sector, and by organising their advice around the 208 Competency Framework for Teachers of English for Academic, the authors have ensured their work rests on a structure of shared principles and understanding, relevant to anyone involved in EAP delivery. While BALEAP have announced a review of ther framework, the authors ssert that the pedagogy of teaching wil remain unchanged, and as such the relevant principles will not only remain applicable but pertinent to settings outside the UK as well.

The practical usefulness of the volume becomes apparent in the first chapter, which contains sample tasks to help students acclimatise to a higher educational environment. Various facets of cultural awareness have been broken down into sub-headings dealing with student expectations, communication and inter-personal skills The technological and online dimension of course delivery is addressed, as a issues relat  criticlt, unonscious as and admic intit. strations ar taken from  arit of contexts, and instructors are supplied with concrete suggestions and ideas to support their practice beyond content teaching. The chapter, as indeed each successive one, concludes with reflective exercise for intructors, which can be undertaken y teaching teams jointly or on a solitary basis. By providing clear prompts for reflection, critical engagement with the suggestions contained in the work is stimulated, increasing likelihood of their adoption by the reader.

In their discussion of sllabus development as presented in Chapter 2, the authors urge instructors to taken into consideration a broad range of factors, including cohort composition by way of nationalit, age and language skill. oncrete sample task are supplied to asst in encouraging student engagement. The authors make a detailed case for EAP courses to be cognisant of the relevant degree on which students are embarking, and in that context urge collboration between subjectexpert staff and EAP instructors. This analysis links back to an evaluation of the difference between ESAP (English for Specific Academic Purposes) and EGAP (English for General Academic Purposes) as contained in their introductory section. A divide exists in EAP scholarship with regard to the extent to which an instructor should be expected to be an expert in content. The authors reference various works for further exploration, and while seemingly advocating a balanced approach in the matter, advise that how much content knowledge i deemed necessary or sufficient presents the "biggest questiont (p.34) to be settled prior to planning an EAP syllabus. The chapter does not iscuss modern teaching approaches in English language teaching generall. I is submitted that an exploration of the Communicative Language Teaching (CLT) approach is particularly relevant to the ESAP/EGAP discourse (se for example the work by Plumb, 2009), and could have been explored here.

The various components of materials design are elucidated in Chapter 3, and analysed through various skill and competencies to be acquired by FY students. In this part of the volume it becomes evident that the authors understand EAP provision to be closely aligned with study skill teaching. The chapter contains various sample work shets which can be directly used by instructors. The authors also examine the question of how a sense of belonging can be generated through appropriate choice of materials. In ths context, the issue of decolonisation of the currculum as reviously mentioned is given a brief but indpndent section, as i the impact of Covid-19. Assessment design is the topic of Chapter 4, and addressed in a manner rlevant beyond EAP or FY teaching. The principle of constructive aligment, wherey a clr correlation between leaning outcomes, teching and asssment is established, is heey at the forefront. Concets such as leson aims, scaffolding" and \*recycling" are explored, as are the purposes f formative and summative assessments. An extensive part of the chapter is devoted to achieving assessment literacy in students, by addressing issues such as student expectations, blame culture as wel as pervading myths surrounding grading practices. Instructors are encouraged to adopt an attitude of transparency, and are provided with examples of alternative forms of assessment.

Notably, Chapter 3 and 4 do not address the skill of language production and concepts rlevant to processing in detal. As such, for a comprehensive analysis of these aspects (as contained in de Chazal, 2014), one would be required seek out other works.

Chapter 5 is another chapter in which content i applicable well beyond the EAP or FY context, in that it addresses questions relevant to team management. Broad recommendations for successul leadership are followed by guidance on assessment administration, including a detailed guide on writing asessment rubrics and advice on matters such as standardisation, descriptor matching and plagiarism. The role f counsellor is addressed in hapter , which dicusses the different aspects f personal ttorig This part of the volume is comparatively short but provides a helpful overview of various mattrs instructors may encounter in their position. Duties towards students under the age of 18 are given special consideration, as are issues related to confidentiality, special circum stances and when to seek further help. The final chapter (Chapter 7) adress the subject of student autonomy within the context of an average FY experience. Age factors are highlighted again, as are relevant cultural difference and affective engagement. A sample task is provided to llustrate task-based learning (TBL) as a motivational teaching approach, particularl in language acquisition. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the benefits of employing reflective logs.

The utility of the discussions contained in the final three chapters is evident in that their topics are commonly not covered in the majority of EAP publicatios. On concluding the volume, i is flt however that the work would have benefitte from a small range of case studies on course development (as contained for example in Basturkmen, 2010). The authors posses wide and distinct specialisms, an examination of which would have added to the practical usefulness of the work.

The book succeeds as aconstructive and helpful resource. In each chapter the inclusion of BALEAP principles at the beginning and the reflective questions at the end ensure that the relevance of the material to teaching practice is maintained. While the book has been written in an EAP context, its utility will apeal to anyone engaged in the delivery of FY courses. A potentil drawback are the absolutes in which some of the guidance is set, for example the assumption that al FY students are very young, but these observations are based on the authors personal experiences and identified as such. Further, as an EAP publication, the work perhaps fall short on addressing relevant pedagogical methodologies, which however would have made for a longer volume. As the title indicates, the book's ambit is teaching on international FY courses. For novice EAP instructors who may be unaccustomed to that environment the volume admirably anticipates important isues likely to be encountered in an accessble way. Given the specific purpose for which it has been written and the distinctive contribution it makes, the volume is currently without rival and to be thoroughly recommended.

# References