# Young vs old? Truancy or new radical politics? Journalistic discourses about social protests in relation to the climate crisis

Diana Jacobsson

To cite this article: Diana Jacobsson (2021) Young vs old? Truancy or new radical politics? Journalistic discourses about social protests in relation to the climate crisis, Critical Discourse Studies, 18:4, 481-497, DOI: 10.1080/17405904.2020.1752758

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/17405904.2020.1752758

# Young vs old? Truancy or new radical politics? Journalistic discourses about social protests in relation to the climate crisis

Diana Jacobsson

Department of Media and Communication, Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden

# ABSTRACT

The aim of this critical discourse analysis is to examine how the agenda and actions of the global protest movement ‘Youth for Climate’ are understood and constructed in Swedish mainstream press and to highlight how the journalistic recontextualization contributes to empowering and disempowering the critical voices and their demands. The article problematizes the journalistic ideal of objectivity in the case of the climate crisis and adds to discussions about the role of media and journalism in the political dynamics surrounding various responses and solutions to the crisis. It suggests that journalism’s objectivity claim hampers the journalistic coverage – what stories can be told and how. This suggestion is based on findings that show how journalism neutralizes conflict and social critique by emptying it of its political content and incorporating it into consensus discourses as well as by focusing on a moral pseudo-struggle that allows journalism to cover conflict without acknowledging real political controversies. It is argued here that journalism contributes to disempowering the climate protests by means of evasive, transformative and emptying discursive strategies.

# ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 9 September 2019   
Accepted 3 December 2019

# KEYWORDS

Climate crisis; social protests; neoliberal ideology; journalistic objectivity; critical discourse analysis

# Introducing the problem

It has been argued (Hampton, 2015) that research approaching climate change in various ways (should) all revolve around one overarching question posed by Newell and Paterson (2009, p. 7): ‘what will determine whether, as a society, we can avoid the most dangerous aspects of climate change?’ According to Carvalho (2010b) one important contribution from media scholars is their investigation of the role of the media in shaping resistance in climate change related movements. The aim of this critical discourse analysis is to examine how the agenda and actions of the global protest movement ‘Youth for Climate’ are understood and constructed in Swedish mainstream press and to highlight how the journalistic recontextualization contributes to empowering and disempowering the critical voices and their demands. The study uncovers the logics, voices, and interpretations that are made use of in the discursive shaping of protests against insufficient political measures to address the ongoing global climate crisis. It problematizes journalistic objectivity and discusses how the ideal of remaining objective can preserve a strong ideological bias and hamper the possibility to cover stories that challenge the social status quo (cf. Carpentier & Cammaerts, 2006; Dahlberg, 2005; Hall et al., 1978; Hartley, 1982; Raeijmaekers & Maeseele, 2017; Taylor & Willis, 1999). The ‘Youth for Climate’ movement criticize the political and economic elite; politicians and big corporations and sees the capitalist logic of constant economic growth as incompatible with saving the planet. This means a focus on systemic and structural issues in relation to climate crisis. There is a growing body of research pointing to how society, even when faced with global climate crisis, is largely guided by the question of what can be done within the capitalist system and without critically reflecting on its role. Discourses related to climate crisis are instead focused around the catch-all concept of sustainability, which leaves open the possibility of continuing with business as usual (Jacobsson, 2019; Raco et al., 2012; Redclift & Woodgate, 2013; Tahvilzadeh et al., 2017). The consensus-oriented concept of sustainability has been said to prevent the critique of power structures in modern society (Raco, 2014; Fuchs, 2017). Studies examining other discourses in relation to climate crisis reveal that individualized understandings and measurements in line with neoliberal logic have so far been a major focus in the debate about what can be done to meet the challenges (Dale et al., 2016; McCarthy, 2015; Parr, 2015; Swyngedouw, 2009). According to Parr (2015) discourses about sustainable solutions use neoliberalism as a point of reference where ‘the principles of the free market, privatization, individualism, consumerism, and competition all shape the current direction of climate change politics’ (p. 72). It has been argued that climate change solutions springing from a neoliberal logic prioritize economic profit and avoid addressing the enormous asymmetries of power in our global economy, which leads to prescribing the problem as cure (Kenis & Lievens, 2014). This avoidance strategy has also been identified in ‘The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development’ (United Nations, 2015) which contains goals for a roadmap to a sustainable future without mentioning systemic and structural issues; how the capitalist system and social class structure can have a negative impact on sustainability (Fuchs, 2017). Baeten (2000) stresses that the focus on sustainability favors a conflict line running between generations instead of through them, allowing an escape route that does not undermine the broad political consensus about what actions can and cannot be taken in response to the climate crisis. ‘Youth for Climate’ strives for a sustainable future by also voicing critique against the way society is organized in terms of power and political responsibility. This study takes an interest in how the agenda and actions of the global protest movement ‘Youth for Climate’ are discursively constructed in Swedish mainstream press – what parts are made salient and what aspects are suppressed, and how suggested solutions and responsibilities for a sustainable future are understood and shaped by journalism.

# Climate crisis, mainstream discourses and opposing voices

The climate crisis, its causes, consequences and possible solutions, is one of the most pressing issues facing society today. News media and journalism play an important part in bringing public attention to and explaining matters concerning climate change and sustainability (Berglez et al., 2017; Boykoff & Yulsman, 2013; Carvalho, 2010a). The specific discourses that are amplified by journalism strongly affect the social construction of problems (Carvalho, 2010b: Fairclough, 1995) and previous studies point to the central role of media in transforming political ideas into common sense (e.g. Hall, 1988, 2011). News coverage of the climate crisis was first occupied with debating whether man-made climate change is fact or mere speculation. Studies show that in the early 2000s news coverage of the climate crisis gave too much weight to the opinions of climate contrarians – a pattern of reporting claimed to be an outcome of the journalistic norms of objectivity and balance (Antilla, 2010; Boykoff & Boykoff, 2004; Boykoff & Mansfield, 2008). During the last decade, however, the focus of media representations has shifted to debating what aspects of human activities are the most problematic and how to best define sustainable solutions to an existing crisis (Schmid-Petri et al., 2015; Tandoc et al., 2018). As pointed out by Carvalho (2010a), this is a conceptual struggle with material consequences, as the definition of the problem will determine what solutions and responses do or do not seem reasonable. An analysis of 23 broadsheet newspapers from five different countries1 between 2000 and 2016 found that when climate change and sustainable solutions are discussed in media, the focus is largely on matters like biodiversity, green growth and cleaner technologies, while socio-economic challenges are more neglected and show a decline in coverage over time (Barkemeyer et al., 2017). In a Swedish context, research has shown how the climate issue has turned into a normal part of everyday news during the last decade, where media has established it as a scientific certainty (Olausson, 2009), constructed it by focusing on emotions (Höijer, 2009), and allowed citizens as individuals to play an important part in the mitigation of climate change (Berglez et al., 2009). Sweden is seen as a leading country in climate mitigation and was one of the first nations to move from a rejection debate to a solution debate (Broadbent et al., 2016). Consensus regarding a common roadmap to a sustainable future can describe the dominant Swedish viewpoint, and the main frame of Swedish news coverage (Olausson, 2009). Studies of official Swedish sustainability action plans and public authorities’ communications show how salience is often given to specific actions focused on individual responsibility: recycling, replacing light bulbs, engaging in environmentally friendly consumption, cycling instead of driving a car, not using plastic bags, and so on – while other issues are neglected. Political responsibility, regulation of big corporations, critical discussions about the role of an economic growth system, the importance of increased socio-economic equality, and so on, are often obscured, as is how the interests of these domains might collide (Jacobsson, 2019; Tahvilzadeh et al., 2017).

Stories about social protests expressing discontent with insufficient or unequal measures to address the climate crisis represent a second shift in climate news coverage. Social movements often interfere with dominant public opinion and reject the reassurance from power elites that actions taken – or planned – are sufficient (Amenta et al., 2010; Giugni, 1998). How both the public and the concerned authorities respond to the protest agenda is said to be dependent on the dominant perception of their legitimacy and worthiness (Taylor & Van Dyke, 2004; Tilly, 1999; Uba, 2016). This puts news media and the journalistic constructions of social movements at the center of attention and motivates a critical examination of how mainstream news journalism constructs social protests in relation to climate crisis and sustainability. Research on media discourses about other social protests in Sweden stresses how activists are positioned as ‘dreamers’ in relation to political possibilities, and concludes that inherent journalistic resources make it possible for journalistic discourse to include activist voices but at the same time to denude activism of its political relevance (Persson, 2016). Studies in other contexts show that ordinary citizens mostly have been left out of media discourses about the climate crisis or portrayed in disadvantageous ways – as irrational, unreliable and inconsistent (Höppner, 2010a). It has been claimed that news media and journalism have hindered rather than promoted political engagement by failing to recognize citizens as political agents with ideas and proposals for addressing the climate crisis. Instead citizens have been expected to simply get in line: to perform prescribed behaviors and agree to measures decided by authorities (Carvalho, 2010b; Höppner, 2010a, 2010b). In conclusion, previous studies performed in different contexts and focused on various movements reveal that the relation between social protests and the media is a complicated one. Mainstream journalistic constructions of civic action have been identified as dismantling it or as antagonistic toward it, either emptying it of its political content or portraying it as an undesirable social disorder (Gitlin, 1980; McFarlane & Hay, 2003; Opel & Pompper, 2003).

# Journalism – agency and constraints

News journalism holds a special position in democratic society and is embedded in specific social contexts. Media institutions are influenced by particular traditions, routines, and policies, but at the same time also have clear agency and agenda-setting power (Berglez, 2011). This power operates in decisions about how to portray an issue, which can restrict or encourage public debate (Happer & Philo, 2013). Journalism’s output can partly be explained by how journalistic logic promotes standardization and simplification, encouraging certain stories and explanations above others. The journalistic practice is however also governed by other contextual constraints: the ideological, political and economic circumstances which surround it (Phelan, 2014). Therefore, when examining news journalism’s performance, one must also give attention to the realm of political economy (Boykoff & Yulsman, 2013). Under-staffed and over-worked, the journalistic profession is expected to deliver 24/7 updates, be commercially viable and produce quality content while staying within framing conventions and argumentative positionings set by editorial standpoints and market forces. Taken together, this has been identified as an equation that does not add up (Molek-Kozakowska, 2018). These organizational limitations hold true in most Western countries today, including Sweden, as previously separate media systems are increasingly being combined into a liberal, commercial, conformist one (Hallin & Mancini, 2004). Another common demand placed on (or ideal of) journalism, is to deliver in accordance with the steadily growing professional ideal of objectivity (Anderson et al., 2013) involving the concepts of truth, relevance, balance, and neutral presentation (see Westerståhl, 1971). A study of how highly experienced environmental journalists view objectivity when covering climate change shows a strong journalistic norm: to use objective practices and refrain from revealing individual biases, including advocating for the environment. The study however shows a renegotiated understanding of objectivity, where over time the ‘balance’ component has shifted toward a ‘weight-ofevidence’ approach. Briefly put, this means that stories are seen as unbiased when they reflect scientific consensus (Shipley Hiles & Hinnant, 2014). This renegotiated objectivity makes it possible for journalism (at least in a European context) to start from the assumption that the climate change crisis is real and ongoing without jeopardizing its objective posture. The journalistic claim of objectivity has, however, been identified as a factor that makes it difficult for journalism to go from ‘what is going on’ to ‘what we should do about what is going on’ when reporting on climate change (Boykoff & Yulsman, 2013; see also Raeijmaekers & Maeseele, 2017). Even though mainstream journalism in many countries today can report about climate change crisis as an established fact, the difficulty seems to lie in how to understand and construct stories about solutions and responses to the crisis without risking the stance of objectivity. Hallin (1986) claims that the objectivity ideal becomes as most important when journalism is situated in what he calls the sphere of legitimate controversy. It is suggested here that reporting about protests in relation to climate crisis is positioned within this sphere as the demands and responsibilities put forward by the climate movement are still open for debate. In this situation, according to Hallin, objectivity turns journalism into merely an observer and reporter of events that makes it possible to avoid any part of the controversy that could jeopardize the objective stance. This means that analysis of journalistic discourses situated in the sphere of legitimate controversy can contribute to knowledge about what objectivity means and also reveal ideological common sense assumptions. As noted already by Hartley (1982), although the main focus of news is driven by conflict and disagreement, the basic journalistic understanding is rooted in consensus – in an underlying agreement on how the world is constituted. In our day and age this agreement is largely based on a neoliberal understanding of society where the capitalist system and its way of organizing life are seen as a condition without alternatives (Harvey, 2010). The journalistic ideal of objectivity works in favor of dominant ideology, as it is rooted within a paradigm of social consensus and therefore both reflects and shapes the prevailing values within society (Fairclough, 2013). Journalistic objectivity builds on the idea that journalism can depersonalize and rationalize its practices in line with this ideal, which will lead it to report an unbiased truth and a carbon copy representation of society. The underlying assumption then is that society – as the carbon original – is balanced and ruled by consensus as well (Raeijmaekers & Maeseele, 2017). Social protests however imply the opposite. Analysis of news coverage on conflict therefore reveals ideological assumptions about what is viewed as reasonable and how these are shaped in line with dominant common-sense discourses.

# Journalism in a neoliberal context

Critical analysis can expose how power, exploitation and domination work through communication practices, in this case journalistic practice. Critical Discourse Analysis focus on ideology and can reveal how neoliberal logic is justified and rationalized through a process of naturalization, through which the role of capitalism is made invisible (Fairclough, 2000; Fuchs, 2017). Neoliberalism is often referred to as a system where depoliticization, individualization and marketization are both core and outcome, and as an ideology serving as a normative worldview containing a set of values and norms that guide what we individually and as a society believe to be valuable and possible. These interpretations are not, however, made explicit but instead are naturalized and taken for granted as the only reasonable way of life (Amable, 2010; Giroux, 2015; Harvey, 2010). In the specific case of global climate crisis, Parr (2015) argues that:

the logic of the free market has resulted in a new brand of capitalism – climate capitalism – that has led to the creation of a market in pollution (cap and trade, or emissions trading) which has placed the limits climate change poses for capitalism back in the service of capital accumulation. (p. 70)

The dynamic nature of capitalism has been said to dismantle critique by incorporating it into its own logic. Protests and opposing voices have been neutralized ‘either by direct response to critique aiming to appease it by acknowledging its validity; or by attempts at circumvention and transformation, in order to elude it without having answered it’ (Boltanski & Chiapello, 2005, p. 165). Given the central role of communication in perpetuating social systems, it is pertinent to examine the role of journalism in the recontextualization of social protests. Instead of being political, conflicts in the neoliberal context are rather understood as a struggle between right and wrong, creating a situation where rejecting the neoliberal rationale has become almost impossible and is perceived as a radical act (Mouffe, 2005). This is a piece of ideological common sense, which limits the space for an objective journalism to maneuver (Raeijmaekers & Maeseele, 2017; see also van Dijk, 1988). At the same time it can perhaps be expected from an institution that has been given a central function in democratic society to give attention to social protests that can stimulate critical debate about the role of our capitalist system and the logics created within it in relation to the ongoing global climate crisis.

# Desperate times, fearless journalism

It has been said that desperate times call for desperate measures. In a time when numerous scientific warnings tell us that humankind is heading for a climate disaster, more and more people are starting to accept this threat as something real and ongoing. The climate crisis does indeed represent desperate times, raising fundamental questions about humanity’s relationship with the planet (Hampton, 2015). But what about the desperate measures that are called for? Can they be applied – and if so, how – to the journalistic profession? Global crisis or not, news journalism is still guided by the ideal of operating in an objective manner (Raeijmaekers & Maeseele, 2017). Recent public and academic debates, however, have questioned whether it is reasonable or even desirable for journalism to remain objective when the very future of the planet and life as we know it is at stake. The project, ‘Covering Climate Change: A New Playbook for a 1.5-Degree World’, initiated by Columbia Journalism Review, wishes to reframe the way journalists cover issues related to climate change. In their article ‘The media are Complacent while the World Burns’, Hertsgaard and Pope (2019) introduce this project which aims to educate U.S. journalists and news organizations about how to avoid the ideological trap and not let themselves be limited by powerful economic and political interests. Their text addresses the topic of desperate measures and what is needed for journalism to engage in ‘more fearless coverage’. They conclude that being objective in the case of climate change is not desirable, as it means that journalism fails in its responsibility to keep the public informed and to hold power accountable. Journalism should instead focus on its responsibilities to awaken and rouse the people to action.2 The call for news coverage that avoids traps and limitations implies that news discourses, despite the objectivity ideal that is often put forward as proof of unbiased journalism, often leads to the opposite outcome: attempts to be in line with the dominant common sense and the perceptions of the powerful. In North America this can still mean fear of reporting climate change as an ongoing fact, while in Sweden it can rather mean the foregrounding of some problems and solutions while neglecting others that conflict with established, common-sense sustainability discourses. The Columbia Journalism Review project that encourages journalism to be braver is situated in a North American context and perhaps has little to do with the practice and output of Swedish mainstream journalism. That, however, is an empirical question that the current analysis aims to examine.

# Case, material and method

Youth for Climate has since the fall of 2018 grown into global movement inspired by the Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg. In Sweden, as in many countries in Europe, America and Australia, numerous school strikes for the climate have gathered hundreds of thousands of young people in the streets and attracted media attention. The protesters’ demands mainly focus on how governments worldwide need to strive to bring their climate policies into accord with the Paris Agreement and disentangle themselves from the interests of big corporations. The movement identifies the capitalist system and political unwillingness as problems that need to be addressed to save our planet, and stresses that 100 companies stands for 70 percent of the total greenhouse gas emissions (twitter.- com/GretaThunberg, ukscn.org/ys4c). The findings presented in this study are the result of an analysis of all (32) individual news articles published in the four largest (both print and online) Swedish national daily newspapers3 : Dagens Nyheter (DN), Svenska Dagbladet (SvD), Aftonbladet (AB) and Expressen (EXP), from the start of the school strikes during fall 2018 until the beginning of May 2019. The choice of material departs from the same argument as voiced by Mautner (2009) regarding the print press as an excellent entrance for CDA scholars as ‘it is already out there ready to be gathered’. Mainstream press is an obvious source for analysis of the recontextualization of specific events for those interested in dominant discourses (p. 33). The four newspapers chosen here represents both morning and evening press. Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA)is applied as a method to examine how the agenda and actions of the global protest movement ‘Youth for Climate’ are understood and discursively constructed in Swedish mainstream press. CDA sees discourse as a form of social practice and is particularly concerned with the ‘relations between discourse, power, dominance and social inequality’ (Van Dijk, 1993, p. 249) In CDA, discourses refer to the broader ideas that texts are communicating. Doing CDA means aiming to discover underlying discourses and ideologies by looking at how the text gives priority to certain understandings and interpretations while downplaying others and how these choices challenge or sustain the social order (Fairclough, 1995, pp. 106–107). Van Leeuwen (2009) stresses that the shaping of discourses transforms actions and events by the choice of what aspects are made salient or being suppressed in a process of recontextualization, i.e. the ways in which these actions and events are put into context and given meaning. This analysis takes an interest in how journalism contributes to the production and reproduction of a neoliberal understanding of the climate crisis by examining how Swedish mainstream news journalism recognizes and discursively constructs social protests related to this crisis. This is done by focusing on some questions, inspired by common approaches when doing CDA (see for example Fairclough, 1995, 2000, 2013; Van Leeuwen, 2009): What logics, voices, and interpretations are made use of? How is conflict understood and constructed? Which discursive strategies become visible? In what ways can the journalistic constructions be understood in terms of empowerment and disempowerment, i.e. how are the actions and agenda of the protest movement depicted in ways that can bring forward or take the edge of their demands?

# Turning conflict into consensus – disempowerment through the neutralization of critique

The analysis shows how the Youth for Climate strikes are recontextualized and how specific discourse topics are constructed in the news stories. Two overarching topics are identified. The first is that the event itself is what is made salient, along with the shape, form, location and organization of the strikes; and shallow descriptions of hopes and demands for a better future are constructed through an infantilization of the protests. The journalistic focus establishes the conflict as being between generations, giving the impression the young are protesting an anonymous ‘adult world’ instead of specifically targeting the ignorance of society’s elite. The second main topic to which journalism devotes vast attention is the pseudo conflict within the conflict: voices debating whether it is ok for children to strike instead of attending school. The actual social critique – the content of the protest movement’s demands and how it relates to systemic issues – is often absent in the news stories, or is suppressed by only being mentioned in a few sentences at the end of a longer news piece, and without any journalistic follow-up on critical statements by the demonstrators. It is argued here that journalism contributes to disempowering the climate protests by means of evasive, transformative and emptying discursive strategies. Evasive strategies give the conflict positive connotations and cite authoritative voices speaking convincingly as a way to recognize the parts of the movement’s critique that can be attended to without disrupting the status quo. This act of recognition gives the impression of commitment while avoiding directness on a more concrete level, and serves to obscure how other parts of the critique remain ignored (cf. Boltanski & Chiapello, 2005). Transformative strategies shift focus away from structural and systemic issues and depict the conflict as being between generations instead of within them (cf. Baeten, 2000). These discourses steer away from politically charged questions about the specific responsibility of politics, and divides the blame evenly among all adults in society, regardless of position and power. Emptying strategies drain the protests of power by turning conflict into consensus. This is done, for example, by placing emphasis on ways to legitimize that the strikers neglect their (school)work, by suggesting compensating arrangements (special assignments, schoolwork on Saturdays, requesting permission, etc.). The following analysis highlights examples that are characteristic for the news coverage and shows how the discursive strategies allow the depoliticized, individualized and marketized sustainability logic of neoliberal capitalism to operate in news discourses, and how journalism incorporates acts of resistance into common-sense understandings that sustain the status quo.

# Infantilization of conflict

The actions of the young protesters are constructed with positive connotations about hope for the future. This way of understanding and discursively shaping the school strikes could be argued to be a form of empowerment and, if not an example of fearless journalism, at least a journalism that gives ‘silent approval’ to the protests by representing them in a positive way. The stories largely draw on admiration for Greta Thunberg and other young people engaging with the climate issue, and on fascination for how the movement is organized, spreading, steadily growing and receiving attention.

In less than half a year the 16-year-old has become an icon of the environmental movement. She currently has almost 140,000 followers on Twitter and more than 200,000 on Instagram. She has been celebrated by Swedish politicians as well as the Norwegian princess Märtha Louise and action hero Arnold Schwarzenegger. Media giants such as CNN, the Guardian and the New York Times have repeatedly reported on the 16-year-old and the climate strike. (AB 2019-02-16)

This discursive construction also means, however, that journalism incorporates the young people’s act of resistance into a consensus frame with which the majority can agree without questioning the status quo. The following example illustrates a common way that journalism recontextualizes the school strikes.

The article ‘Greta Thunberg an idol’. ‘I came here to watch her’ (SvD 2019-03-16) introduces the event:

The global climate strike attracted hundreds of thousands of pupils on Friday. SvD’s correspondent was there. The cheers of encouragement sounded out loud in the hometown of the strikes and the place where it all began – Mynttorget in Stockholm. The text moves on to describe how the young people have gathered to show their support, commitment and anger: “enough is enough” was written on several signs. – We are on strike because we want to have a future, Thunberg proclaimed from a stage in the middle of the crowd, and she was met by loud applause and cheering. The school strikers Ella Welin-Berger and Alexandra Berggren were indeed jumping with enthusiasm. – I came to watch her, says 17-year-old Ella Welin-Berger, standing on her toes to get a glimpse of her idol.

The protesters’ anger and what stand in the way of their having a future are not further developed in this part of the article. Instead the journalistic focus lies on the event, the number of people attending and their excitement. The journalistic shaping is recognizable from sports and music events. In this case it serves to empty the protests of social critique and to evade politically charged content. The political and economic elite identified by Youth for Climate as responsible for both creating the crisis and responding inadequately to it is often absent or backgrounded in the journalistic texts examined in this analysis. The above article continues, however, by mentioning the role of politics:

Others went to the square hoping to influence politicians – such as the sisters Sarah and Kate O’Callaghan who had been there since early morning. – The politicians have to listen. They must do something, says 9-year-old Sarah O’Callaghan, and gets support from her sister who vigorously wags a sign “We have no planet $\mathsf { B } ^ { \prime \prime }$ . – We do what we can. Since August we have only biked to school and we don’t use plastic bags. But we have to do more, says 11- year-old Kate O’Callaghan.

It is noticeable how the mention of politics shifts to a focus on the question of individual responsibility here. What prompts the interviewed girls move on to talking about their own responsibility is not visible, but it can be assumed they are answering a question from the journalist. What is visible, however, is how journalism neglects to elaborate on the role of politics. A summary of the main criticisms put forward by this protest movement can easily be found online, as well as in most longer speeches given by Greta

Thunberg. Here journalism chooses to exclude such information, which creates a shallow and non-provocative story about energetic, hopeful children gathering to watch their idol on stage and hoping to be heard by those in power, while striving to make individual ecofriendly choices.

The article ‘Greta-inspired protests expected in more than 1500 cities’ (Dagens Nyheter, 2019-03-15) follows the same pattern of a personalized focus on Greta Thunberg and on the event; with information on where the strikes take place, how they are organized and coordinated, and the number of people participating. However, this article also addresses the content of the strike:

The purpose of the demonstrations is to draw more attention to the climate question, which the adult world has failed to take seriously. The exact goal is formulated differently dependent on where and by whom the strikes are organized. Greta Thunberg herself, who is the inspiration behind the global strikes, has demanded among other things that the EU reduce its emissions by 80 percent until 2030. A goal shared by all, however, is the demand that the Paris agreement, signed in 2015, be realized.

What becomes visible here is the transformation of responsibility. Once again, it is ‘the adult world’ that has failed, which makes the issue a conflict between generations instead of within them. The mention of concrete demands implies that some spheres of society have more power than others to make sure that emissions are cut and agreements followed. A journalistic choice in conjunction with this could be to follow up on the content of these demands in the interview with Greta Thunberg at the end of the article. Two slightly different questions, however, are asked by the journalist: ‘What are you hoping will happen on Friday?’ and ‘Are you nervous?’ Both questions refer to the event itself and the speech Greta Thunberg will give.

The article ‘Löfvén: We will work really hard’ (Dagens Nyheter 2019-03-15) is an interview with Swedish prime minister Stefan Löfvén who gives his view on the climate strikes. ‘– I find it extremely positive that initiatives are being taken to highlight the climate question’. This must be moved up on the agenda and these young people are passionate about it’. The vagueness of this sentence contributes to evading the actual content of the protests and their criticism of political actions as being insufficient. It is an example of how resistance is incorporated into the dominant logic by praising it and legitimizing parts of the critique without having answered it. The follow-up questions from the journalist and the prime minister’s answers show the same pattern of statements with positive connotations but without details about how the Paris agreement will be enacted.

Q: What is your impression of the protests? A: It is a reminder that emissions in the transport sector must be solved. I want a public movement for climate adaptation, and we are well on our way. We have a number of projects up and running across the country with solar cells, biogas plants and charging stations, says Stefan Löfvén. Q: But these children and young people find the actions of the adult world to be insufficient. What is your comment on that? A: I have the greatest respect for that, and that is why every day we will roll up our sleeves and work really hard to meet their expectations.

The interaction between journalism and politics in this extract shows the creation of evasive and transformative discourses as naturalized responses to social criticism. The extract could be seen as journalism doing accountability work and politics owning up to its responsibility, while the journalistic recontextualization in fact is serving as a neutralization of criticism. For example, what does it mean to work really hard in this context? The great respect for the young people’s views that the prime minister mentions – how is it manifested concretely? Instead of holding politics to account and emphasizing that the protests are based on widespread dissatisfaction with the speed and direction of climate politics, journalism constructs a text where the prime minister gets to express decisiveness and advertise how the new, green capitalist logic is successful in its climate adaptation. The avoidance of critical examination of systemic aspects of the crisis points to a common-sense logic where this is not important (or possible) to address. The closing sentences of the text explain that the prime minister does not want to place too much of a burden on the individual; people still need to be able to drive a car. ‘We must help people to make the right choices about this’. The we in this sentence implies political responsibility, and help suggests political measures. This is however not clarified or elaborated on by the journalist.

The demands from Youth for Climate that explicitly point to politics not doing enough to decrease corporate power are consistently absent or downplayed in the news articles. The following extract is from one of the few times they are included, in this case taking the form of a direct quote when reporting about school strikes in France and the UK:

– But it is not enough to buy eco-food or sort waste. The government is trapped by the interests of big corporate lobby interests – that is what we have to do something about, says 17- year-old Marie Garrabos.

This article is different in the way it gives attention to how the movement demands a system change. In the next extract (following the above quotation) the word but is noteworthy, as it indicates a journalistic understanding of Youth for Climate as being in opposition to the French Yellow Vest movement, which has been specifically connected to system critique and demands for class justice.

But among the demonstrators there is no noticeable grudge against the Yellow Vests; on the contrary they emphasize how they want a “system change” that also fights social injustices. The fighting method is civil disobedience – something that is illustrated by hundreds of pupils blocking cars on the streets. (DN 2019-02-16)

The tone and focus of this article shape a different perception of the young strikers. The mention of social injustices and system critique is immediately followed by a shift of attention to the ‘fighting method’. Blocking streets is an action that has more negative connotations than the common focus on energetic, cheering and sign-waving children admired by the elite for their courage and engagement.

In summary it is argued in this section that in its recontextualization of the strikes journalism disarms the politically controversial content of the movement and largely obscures the part where the capitalist system, big corporations and political unwillingness are identified as problems underlying the climate crisis.

# Constructing pseudo-conflict

Expectations that the young protestors should attend school instead of taking part in the strikes is another recurrent topic in the news articles. At first, it seems as if this is the only factor that interrupts the otherwise positive connotations given to the movement, something problematic that disturbs the overarching consensus frame. However, the amount of coverage this part of the school strikes gets is identified here as another journalistic strategy to secure consensus. Focusing on the school-or-strike debate transforms the actual conflict into a moral debate about right and wrong (cf. Mouffe, 2005) and obscures the content: the sharp social critique put forward by this movement. It makes it possible for journalism to ‘report conflict’ by devoting space to contradictory opinions and thereby to produce a balanced news story. The voices of authority figures are used to stress the fact that the protesters have other obligations, but also that society is prepared to ‘legitimize’ their protests by allowing them not to attend school. This legitimization of the conflict empties it of political power and turns the strikes into harmless events incapable of disrupting neoliberal common sense.

As prime minister, I do have to say that we have compulsory schooling in our country. But if it can be arranged in a way that works it would be good. (…) It is positive that young people are engaging with an important question, it is encouraging for the future, but Friday is a school day, says Lee Orberson, head of primary schools in Stockholm. (DN, 2019-03-15)

This extract points to an ambivalence about priorities; quoting a top politician and a highlevel education administrator establishes a consensus that acknowledges the importance of both political engagement and education. The journalistic understanding and the dominant common sense are rooted in this consensus. Journalism is therefore able to develop this part of the conflict without challenging the social order or risking its own objectivity (cf. Hartley, 1982). This focus can give an impression of journalism as being conflict oriented, and a great deal of attention is devoted to the moral issue of whether society can sanction this behavior and if the adult world collectively can agree on arrangements to compensate for the lost time in school.

Sixteen-year-old Greta Thunberg’s climate strike is spreading. On Friday thousands of pupils demonstrated with her in Hamburg – something that is celebrated by chancellor Angela Merkel. Is it ok to strike on school days? (AB 2019-03-05)

This extract is a question posed to ordinary citizens who get a chance to express their differing opinions in the newspaper. Mentioning Merkel’s opinion adds an extra dimension and invites answers where journalism allows criticism of the political elite, or at least opinions that oppose their position. Questions that allow skepticism towards political decisions and political (in)action in conjunction with the climate crisis are not, however, present in the analyzed material from the four leading Swedish newspapers. The way that emphasis is placed on political support for the strikes by news journalism conceals the fact that the motivation for the strike springs from anger about the failure of the very same politicians that are praising it to take effective action.

The following example illustrates how journalism gives priority to some parts of the conflict while suppressing others.

Greta Thunberg is controversial; she not only encourages truancy but also radical new politics. She is criticized for this and sometimes receives hateful or mocking reactions. But here she has the status of a hero. – We have a Latin test today but our teacher is letting us do it tomorrow instead. As long as we notify [the school]in advance, we are allowed to come here, says Olivia Engels. (DN 2019-03-11)

The text continues with other young voices bearing witness to a conflict in society where some schools, cities, and teachers are in favor of allowing children to strike, while others oppose it.

It is often argued that journalistic logic and the standardization of news explain why journalism favors some aspects of a story while neglecting others. But can this explain why journalism gives priority to the truancy question rather than the radical politics in the conflict? It is suggested here that a closer look at the objectivity ideal in journalism, situated in an ideologically strong context, could bring us closer to an understanding of this issue. In summary, it is argued in this section that the journalistic choices of salience and suppression are the outcome of avoiding aspects that represent the real conflict. Matters that risk disrupting common-sense assumptions about how to create a sustainable future are absent from the analyzed material. The recontextualization of the protests points to depoliticized understandings, where leading politicians are approached with questions about the strike itself rather than being held accountable for their insufficient determination and action. The discursive shapings all share one trait in common: they harmonize with a logic that seeks individual rather than political solutions, and only look for explanations and arrangements that are possible within the market rationale and in line with common-sense perceptions about sustainability.

# Concluding remarks

The introductory sections of this article discuss the climate crisis as a complex and contested issue, and also an urgent one. The analysis shows how journalism, in its role as objective observer, fails to capture the dynamics of social protests focused on criticizing insufficient political measures. The evasive, transformative and emptying discursive strategies of journalism rather serve to reinforce the status quo around common-sense sustainability perceptions and the interests of the political and economic elite, while disempowering the Youth for Climate movement. The main discourse topics are constructed by shallow stories about enthusiastic young people waving signs, feeling inspired and being admired by the political elite for their courage and engagement, and debates about the pseudo-conflict of whether it is morally defensible to skip school, and how the students’ absence could be managed to satisfy societal obligations. The journalistic choices to highlight some parts of the movements’ demands, to ask certain questions of protestors and politicians, and to quote certain answers and extracts of comments while avoiding others raise questions about the reasons behind this selection and recontextualization. It is argued here that answers referring to journalistic logic and routines do not fully explain why some parts of the conflict are emphasized while others are neglected. It is suggested that journalistic objectivity hampers the possibility to cover this social protest, as the protesters’ demands represent a kind of systemic critique that could force journalism to highlight the role of our capitalist system and in what way it can be incompatible with solutions to climate crisis. With reference to Newell and Paterson’s question (about what can help society to avoid the most dangerous aspects of climate change) the findings of this investigation can be an indication that journalism in its current state is not part of the answer. If we believe that journalism has a key role in society’s search for climate crisis solutions, we should perhaps ask whether it is at all reasonable to expect that mainstream media outlets could develop beyond current perspectives. Boykoff and Boykoff (2007) argued just over a decade ago that journalism in the US, by operating in accordance with journalistic norms (such as personalization, dramatization and objectivity), paradoxically neglected the extraordinarily high level of scientific consensus regarding anthropogenic climate change. In the case of Sweden today the debate is rather centered around what solutions are needed to meet the challenges of the crisis. What is similar however is that, despite the high level of scientific consensus and reports about climate crisis that identifies the growth logic of the capitalist system and society’s structural inequalities as issues that need to be addressed, mainstream journalism seems incapable of seriously putting issues of capitalism and class on the news agenda. Cunningham (2003) has suggested that journalism/journalists, instead clinging on to the objectivity ideal, are in need of increased freedom and encouragement to develop expertise that can be used to sort out competing claims, to identify and explain the underlying assumptions of those claims and to make judgements about what readers really need to know to understand what is going on and what to do about it. In the case of covering the protests in relation to climate crisis this would perhaps mean not steering away from the critique against structural inequalities and the capitalist system that is an essential part of the young climate movement’s agenda.

# Notes

1. Australia, Canada, Germany, UK, USA.   
2. https://www.cjr.org/special_report/climate-change-media.php.   
3. https://tu.se/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Mediefakta_2018_juni_04.pdf.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

# Notes on contributor

Diana Jacobsson is a Senior Lecturer in Media and Communication Studies at Jönköping University where she teaches critical media theory and sustainable communication. Her main research fields are critical discourse analysis of the neoliberalization of society and studies of class and inequality. She holds a PhD in Journalism, Media and Communication from Gothenburg University.

# References

Amable, B. (2010). Morals and politics in the ideology of neo-liberalism. Socioeconomic Review, 9(1),   
3–30. https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwq015 Amenta, E., Caren, N., Chiarello, E., & Su, Y. (2010). The political consequences of social movements. Annual Review of Sociology, 10(36), 287–387. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-070308-120029 Anderson, P., Williams, M., & Ogola, G. (Eds.). (2013). The future of quality journalism: A cross continental analysis. Routledge. Antilla, L. (2010). Self-censorship and science: A geographical review of media coverage of climate tipping points. Public Understanding of Science, 19(5), 240–256. https://doi.org/10.1177/   
0963662508094099 Baeten, G. (2000). The tragedy of the highway: Empowerment, disempowerment and the politics of sustainability discourses and practices. European Planning Studies, 8(1), 69–86. https://doi.org/10.   
1080/096543100110938   
Barkemeyer, R., Givry, P., & Figge, F. (2017). Trends and patterns in sustainability-related media coverage: A classification of issue-level attention. Environment and Planning C: Politics and Space, 36(5), 937–962. https://doi.org/10.1177/2399654417732337   
Berglez, P. (2011). Inside, outside and beyond media logic: Journalistic creativity in climate reporting. Media Culture Society, 33(3), 449–465. https://doi.org/10.1177/0163443710394903   
Berglez, P., Höijer, B., & Olausson, U. (2009). Individualisation and nationalisation of the climate issue: Two ideological horizons in Swedish news media. In T. Boyce & J. Lewis (Eds.), Climate change and the media (pp. 211–223). Peter Lang.   
Berglez, P., Olausson, U., & Ots, M. (red.). (2017). What is sustainable journalism?: Integrating the environmental, social, and economic challenges of journalism. New York: Peter Lang.   
Boltanski, L., & Chiapello, E. (2005). The new spirit of capitalism. Verso.   
Boykoff, M., & Boykoff, J. (2004). Balance as bias: Global warming and the US prestige press. Global Environmental Change, 14(2), 125–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2003.10.001   
Boykoff, M., & Boykoff, J. (2007). Climate change and journalistic norms: A case-study of US massmedia coverage. Geoforum; Journal of Physical, Human, and Regional Geosciences, 38(6), 1190– 1204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2007.01.008   
Boykoff, M., & Mansfield, M. (2008). “Ye olde hot aire”: Reporting on human contributions to climate change in the UK tabloid press. Environmental Research Letters, 3(2), 024002. https://doi.org/10. 1088/1748-9326/3/2/024002   
Boykoff, M., & Yulsman, T. (2013). Political economy, media, and climate change: Sinews of modern life. WIRES Clim Change, 13(4), 359–371. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.233   
Broadbent, J., Sonnett, J., Botetzagias, I., Carson, M., Carvalho, A., Chien, Y.-J., Edling, C., Fisher, D., Giouzepas, G., Haluza-DeLay, R., Hasegawa, K., Hirschi, C., Horta, A., Ikeda, K., Jin, J., Ku, D., Lahsen, M., Lee, H.-C., Lin, T.-L. A., … Zhengyi, S. (2016). Conflicting climate change frames in a global field of media discourse. Sociological Research for a Dynamic World, 2(1), 1–17. https:// doi.org/10.1177/2378023116670660   
Carpentier, N., & Cammaerts, B. (2006). Hegemony, democracy, agonism and journalism: An interview with Chantal Mouffe. Journalism Studies, 7(6), 964–975. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 14616700600980728   
Carvalho, A. (2010a). Reporting the climate change crisis. In S. Allan (Ed.), Routledge companion to news and journalism (pp. 485–495). Routledge.   
Carvalho, A. (2010b). Media(ted)discourses and climate change: A focus on political subjectivity and (dis)engagement. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 1(2), 172–179. https://doi.org/10. 1002/wcc.13   
Cunningham, B. (2003). Re-thinking objectivity. Columbia Journalism Review, Retrieved November 25, 2019.   
Dahlberg, L. (2005). The Habermasian public sphere: Taking difference seriously? Theory and Society, 34(2), 111–136. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-005-0155-z   
Dale, G., Mathai, M., & de Oliveira, J. (Eds.). (2016). Green growth: Ideology, political economy and the alternatives (pp. 336). Zed Books.   
Fairclough, N. (1995). Media discourse (p. 214). Edward Arnold.   
Fairclough, N. (2000). New labour, new language? Routledge.   
Fairclough, N. (2013). Critical discourse analysis. The critical study of language (p. 608). Routledge.   
Fuchs, C. (2017). Critical social theory and sustainable development: The role of class, capitalism and domination in a dialectical analysis of un/sustainability. Sustainable Development, 25(5), 443–458.   
Giroux, H. (2015). Against the terror of neoliberalism. Politics beyond the age of greed. Paradigm.   
Gitlin T. (1980). The whole world is watching. Mass media in the making and unmaking of the new left (pp. 240–249). University of California Press.   
Giugni, M. (1998). Was it worth the effort? The outcomes and consequences of social movements. Annual Review of Sociology, 24(1), 371–393. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.24.1.371   
Hall, S. (1988). The hard road to renewal. Thatcherism and the crisis of the left. Verso.   
Hall, S. (2011). The neo-liberal revolution. Cultural Studies, 25(6), 705–728. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 09502386.2011.619886   
Hall, S., Critcher, C., Jefferson, T., Clarke, J., & Roberts, B. (1978). Policing the crisis: Mugging, the state and law and order. Palgrave Macmillan.   
Hallin, D. (1986). The uncensored war: The media and Vietnam. University of California Press.   
Hallin, D., & Mancini, P. (2004). Comparing media systems: Three models of media and politics. Cambridge University Press.   
Hampton, P. (2015). Workers and trade unions for climate solidarity. Tackling climate change in a neoliberal world. Routledge.   
Happer, C., & Philo, G. (2013). The role of the media in the social construction of public belief and social change. Journal of Social and Political Psychology, 1(1), 321–336. https://doi.org/10.5964/ jspp.v1i1.96   
Hartley, J. (1982). Understanding news. Methuen.   
Harvey, D. (2010). The enigma of capital and the crises of capitalism. Profile Books.   
Hertsgaard, M., & Pope, K. (2019). The media are complacent while the world burns. Columbia Journalism Review. https://www.cjr.org/special_report/climate-change-media.php   
Höijer, B. (2009). Emotional anchoring and objectification in the media reporting on climate change. Public Understanding of Science, 19(6), 717–731. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963662509348863   
Höppner, C. (2010a). Rereading opinion polls on climate change in the UK press. International Journal of Communication, 4(1), 977–1005.   
Höppner, C. (2010b). What’s the matter with public engagement in climate change? Disjunctions, tensions and blind spots in the UK. IOP Conference Series Earth and Environmental Science, 8(1), 19–27.   
Jacobsson, D. (2019). In the name of (un)sustainability. Triple C, 17(1), 19–37. https://doi.org/10. 31269/triplec.v17i1.1057   
Kenis, A., & Lievens, M. (2014). Searching for “the political” in environmental politics. Environmental Politics, 23(4), 531–548. https://doi.org/10.1080/09644016.2013.870067   
Mautner, G. (2009). Analyzing newspapers, magazines and other print media. In R. Wodak & M. Kryzanowski (Eds.), Qualitative discourse analysis in the social sciences (pp. 30–53). Macmillan.   
McCarthy, J. (2015). A socioecological fix to capitalist crisis and climate change? The possibilities and limits of renewable energy. Environment and Planning A, 47(12), 2485–2502. https://doi.org/10. 1177/0308518X15602491   
McFarlane, T., & Hay, I. (2003). The battle for Seattle: Protest and popular geopolitics in the Australian newspaper. Political Geography, 22(2), 211–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0962-6298(02)00090-2   
Molek-Kozakowska, K. (2018). Popularity-driven science journalism and climate change: A critical discourse analysis of the unsaid. Discourse, Context & Media, 21(73), 1–3.   
Mouffe, C. (2005). On the political. Routledge.   
Newell, P., & Paterson, M. (2009). The politics of the carbon economy. In M. Boykoff (Ed.), The politics of climate change: A survey (pp. 23–44). Routledge.   
Olausson, U. (2009). Global warming—global responsibility? Media frames of collective action and scientific certainty. Public Understanding of Science, 18(9), 421–436. https://doi.org/10.1177/0 963662507081242   
Opel, A., & Pompper, D. (Eds.). (2003). Representing resistance: Media, civil disobedience, and the global justice movement. Greenwood Press.   
Parr, A. (2015). The wrath of capital: Neoliberalism and climate change politics – reflections. Geoforum; Journal of Physical, Human, and Regional Geosciences, 62, 70–72. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.geoforum.2015.03.012   
Persson, G. (2016). Ideological struggle over epistemic and political positions in news discourse on migrant activism in Sweden. Critical Discourse Studies, 13(3), 278–293. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 17405904.2016.1169195   
Phelan, S. (2014). Neoliberalism, media and the political. Palgrave Macmillan.   
Raco, M. (2014). The post-politics of sustainability planning: Privatisation and the demise of democratic government. In J. Wilson & E. Swyngedouw (Eds.), The post-political and its discontents: Spaces of depoliticisation, spectres of radical politics (pp. 25–47). Edinburgh University Press.   
Raco, M., Imrie, R., & Lin, W.-I. (2012). Community governance, critical cosmopolitanism and urban change: Observations from Taipei, Taiwan. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 35(2), 274–294.   
Raeijmaekers, D., & Maeseele, P. (2017). In objectivity we trust? Pluralism, consensus, and ideology in journalism studies. Journalism, 18(6), 647–663. https://doi.org/10.1177/1464884915614244   
Redclift, M., & Woodgate, G. (2013). Sustainable development and nature: The social and the material. Sustainable Development, 21(2), 92–100. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.1560   
Schmid-Petri, H., Silke, A., Schmucki, I., & Häussler, T. (2015). A changing climate of skepticism: The factors shaping climate change coverage in the US press. Public Understanding of Science.   
Shipley Hiles, S., & Hinnant, A. (2014). Climate change in the newsroom: Journalists’ evolving standards of objectivity when covering global warming. Science Communication, 36(4), 428–453. https://doi.org/10.1177/1075547014534077   
Swyngedouw, E. (2009). The antinomies of the postpolitical city: In search of a democratic politics of environmental production. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 33(3), 601–620. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2427.2009.00859.x   
Tahvilzadeh, N., Montin, S., & Cullberg, M. (2017). Functions of sustainability: Exploring what urban sustainability policy discourse ‘does’ in the Gothenburg metropolitan area. Local Environment, 22(1), 66–85. https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2017.1320538   
Tandoc, E., Takahashi, B., & Thomas, R. J. (2018). Bias vs. Bias. Journalism Practice, 12(7), 834–849. https://doi.org/10.1080/17512786.2017.1343095   
Taylor, V., & Van Dyke, N. (2004). Get up, stand up: Tactical repertoires of social movements. In D. Snow, S. Soule, & H. Kriesi (Eds.), The Blackwell companion to social movements (pp. 262–293). Blackwell.   
Taylor, L., & Willis, A. (1999). Media studies: Texts, institutions and Audiences (p. 274). Oxford: Blackwell.   
Tilly, C. (1999). Conclusion: From interactions to outcomes in social movements. In M. Giugni, D. McAdam, & C. Tilly (Eds.), How social movements matter (pp. 253–270). University of Minnesota Press.   
Uba, K. (2016). Deliberative protests? Persuading politicians not to close schools in Swedish municipalities. Revista Internacional de Sociologica, 74(4), 1–3.   
United Nations. (2015). Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable development. Retrieved May 9, 2019.   
van Dijk, T. A. (1988). News as discourse. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
van Dijk,, T. A. (1993). Principles of critical discourse analysis. Discourse and Society, 4(2), 249–283. https://doi.org/10.1177   
Van Leeuwen, T. (2009). Discourse as the recontextualization of social practice. In R. Wodak & M. Meyer (Eds.), Methods of critical discourse analysis. Sage.   
Westerståhl, J. (1971). Objektiv nyhetsförmedling. Akademiförlaget.