# Supervisory feedback, reflection, and academic discourse socialization: Insights from an L2 doctoral student's paper writing experience

Min Yang

Deparment of Forign Lngges and Litre, Nationl Chng ChengUniverity, 168, e.1, University Rd, Minsiug, Chiyi, 621301, awn

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

# Keywords:

Early-stage L2 doctoral student   
Reflective practice   
Supervisor's feedback   
Paper writing   
Academic discourse socialization

Handling Editor: Guangwei Hu

In this qualitative case study, the researcher explored an early-stage L2 doctoral student's reflective practice about her supervisor's feedback on the drafts of her research article and the role of reflection in her academic discourse socialization (ADS) as a researcher and an English academic writer. Data was collected over one and a half year from semi-structured interviews with the student and her supervisor, the student's drafts with supervisory feedback, informal conversations with the student, the student's written self-reflection, and observation of the student in academic activities. Qualitative and inductive analysis revealed that the supervisorstudent dyad had a shared goal of paper writing, which was to provide the student cognitive skill training for research and academic writing. They also had different goals of paper writing, which characterized the social and negotiated nature of the student's ADS. Moreover, the student digested feedback through an interactive process of reflection-on-feedback, reflection-in-feedback, and reflection-for-feedback at different stages of writing, showing that reflective practice is indispensable for feedback to serve as useful and readily available resources for writing. Such reflective practice about feedback was found to contribute to the student's ADS cognitively, emotionally, and socially. The findings provide implications for L2 doctoral supervision, learning and socialization.

# 1. Introduction

As a key activity in the doctoral community, academic writing is often integrated with research. For example, in a paper or a thesis (i.e., genres of academic writing), doctoral students need to write about how their literature reading informs current reearch, which requires not only knowledge and skill in writing a literature review but actual experience of reviewing literature. As such, doctoral students have to demonstrate and integrate at least two competencies in writing. One is the ability to navigate the specific rhetorical structure, style, and language uses of the specific genre; the other, the knowledge and skillsof research. This research-integrated writing task is demanding for doctoral students, especially those who are at an early stage of studies. For those who use English as an L2, writing academicall in English can pose greater challenges, causing anxiety and frustration (Huerta et al., 2016). Thus, early-stage L2 doctoral students may need support from significant others to navigate academic writing.

Among different academic writing activities, paper writing has earned itef a reputation - a challenging but crucially important task for academics. Ifluenced by the publish-or-perish discourse (Le, 2014), academics, including doctoral students, are striving to write and publish papers or are learning to do the task to survive (Yang & Yuan, 2023). It has ben a common practice that doctoral students in sciences and engineering start writig research articles early in their studies under their supervisor's guidance in order to publish. Their thesis is often in the form of acompilation thesis composed of their published or publishable research articles. This experience provides them on-the-job training" for their future carer and saves them time to rewrite a thesis into publishable articles (Dong, 1998, p. 371), possibly giving them an advantage in securing a desirable job as they graduate. Meanwhile, to publish, doctoral students ned to take up the identity of capable researchers and competent academic writers (Palridge, 2002), as manifested in their skill of tackling criticalfeedack, undergoing rounds of revisions professionally, or handing rejections from journals with reilience (Li, 2006). That is, while they are trying to survive through writing and publishing papers, the experience alsoallows them to acquire essential academic and social skills for working in academia.

In contrast, many doctoral students in social sciences and humanities such as TEsoL and applied inguistics are not required or expected to publish early. They ofen target most ifno all f her ffort towars completing a single large-scope study by diving deely into relevant literature, colecting and analyzing data, and reporting the results in a thesis following a simple traditional format (Paltridge, 2002). As such, they possibly do not have an opportunity to sharpen skill associated with paper writing and publication, which are however essntial for thir future work in academia. Influenced by the survival discourse, scholars in social sciences and humanities are experiencing a change of mindset and practice in the past decade. They start to encourage or prepare doctoral students to write papers in the hope that this experience can equip them wth necessary reearch, writing, and socil kills as well ashelp them accumulate academic credits for their career (Cuthert et al., 2009; Kwan, 2010; Nejad et al., 2020; Nolan & Rocco, 2009; Nygaard & Soll, 2020. To date, however, compared to studies on doctoral students in sciences and engineering, limited research has examined how those in social sciences and humanities engage in paper writing during their studies, especially how they receive, tackle, and reflect upon critical fdack, and how this proces mediates ther acadmic lning and socialization. This goup of doctoral students and their academic socialization proces through paper writing and publishing merits reearch attention, a the findings can add to the current understanding of doctoral supervision and socialization.

Through the lens of academic discourse socialization (ADs) (Kobayashi et al., 2017), this qualitative case study examines how an early-stage L2 doctoral student in TEsOL was guided by her supervisor to write and publish a paper and how this processfacilitated her ADS. Building upon related literature (i.e., Aitchison et l., 2012; itchener et al., 2010; Lei & Hu, 2019; Li, 206), the doctoral student's AD is concetualied as cognitie, ocial, and emotional proceses mediatd by the draft--drat fdack interactions with her supervisor. Informed by the notions of reflection-on-action relection-in-action (Schon, 1983), and refectio-for-action (Van Manen, 1991), thfk r ti  htion-fek io-fek, infr-fek, which contributes to her ADS as a budding researcher and an English academic writer. Three research questions are addressed.

(1) How do the doctoral student and her supervisor perceive the role of paper writing in the student's ADS? (2) How does the student engage in reflection-on-feedback, reflection-in-feedback, and reflection-for-feedback as she digests the supervisor's feedback on the developing draft of the paper? (3) How does the student's reflective practice about feedback contribute to her ADS at the beginning years of studies?

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Doctoral students' ADS through paper writing

Paper writing is a rewarding but challenging task for doctoral students (Ho, 2017; Li, 2006; Yu & Jiang, 2022). The writing and publishing process i often characterized by an interaction between doctoral students and diffrent academics and thus involves negotiated processes of academic learning and socialization. Whereas diffrent terms have bee used to conceptualize the learning processes (ie., academic literacies, disciplinary socialization), this study adopts the perspective of academic discourse socialization (ADS), because it precisely captures the social and negotiated nature of larning (Duf, 2010). Iformed by the language socialization theory (Schieffelin & Ochs, 1986) and insights from second language socialization (Zappa-Hollman, 2007), ADS explains the sociallyand linguistically-mediated processes through which newcomers learn to participate in the academic discourse of their community (Kobayashi et al., 2017). Academic discourse refers to disciplinary-specific language use, or different forms of oral- and written-language-related practices expected and prerred in an academic community (Duff, 2010; Leki, 2007). ADS is therefore to learn certain language style and its related knowledge, practice, values, and identities.

Doctoral students ADS is reflected in their paper writing process. They have to master the use of academic languages to put forth an argument. They need to display research knowledge and certain thinking patterns preferred by the community they are writing for. They are also expected to show certan idtities and manage relationships in relation to those they interact with in the writing proces. Moreover, they have to tackle anxiety and stress in paper writing, feedback, and revision. That is paper writing provides doctoral students opportunities for ADS, which involves the cognitive, social, and emotional dimensions, as evidenced in empirical studies (Aitchison et al., 2012; Carter & Kumar, 2017; Casanave, 2002; Ho, 2017; Huang, 2010; Lei & Hu, 2019; i, 206; Wei et al., 2019; Yu & Jiang, 2022). Cognitively, in the draft-by-draft writing proces, doctoral students may receive fedback from different academics, including their supervisors, reviewers, or journal editors. The feedback, covering dimensions such as content, genre, rhetorical structure, and language (Bitchener et al., 2010), shows the expected ways of writing and knowledge construction in their disciplinary community (Li, 2006). Thinking through feedback, doctoral students may reach new understandings and thus experience cognitive growth (Yu & Jiang, 202). Sociall, when tackling feedack from different others, doctoral students have to manage relationships with them and project certain identities. For example, they need to respond appropriately to journal editors and reviewers in the review and publishing proces, trying to manage their dual identity as a student and an expert writer (Lei & Hu, 2019). Negotiating power with iffen socliig ages is alomust in the wring procs Huang, 2010; Li, 2006). For instance, a doctral studnt in Ho (2017)tried to negotiate with his supervisor in order to participate more in their paper writing proces, which allowed him to lean useful academic writing skills and to develop as an academic writer.

Doctoral students paper writing also reflects an emotional process of ADs. Empirical studies revealed that in the writing proces, they may experience multiple and mixed emotions, some of which are positive such as excitement or pride (Cotteral, 2013; Wei et al., 2019) and others are negative such as frustration, confusion, uncertainty, and anxiety (Aitchison et al., 2012; Wei et al., 2019). These emotions may arise because they are aware that the written work would be read, commented, and evaluated by ignificant others, such as their supervisors, journal editors, or reviewers (Wei et al., 2019). Their motions can also result from differences or even conflicts between their previous and current learning and writing practice. For example, they may have negative emotions because of tensions in perspectives about how research knowledge should be constructed and represented in an academic discipline, which influences their academic writing experience (Casanave, 2002). They may also feel negative when negotiating feedback with those who they are in an imbalanced power relation (i.e, reviewers) in the writing proces (Yu & Jiang, 2022). Handing emotions during paper writing is thus an important part of their academic learning and growth (Carter & Kumar, 2017; Cotterall, 2013).

Overall although the above reviewed studies are not based on the ADS framework, their findings exhibited how paper writing provides doctoral students opportunities for ADS from cognitie, social, and emotional perspectives. Since a focus on doctoral students paper writing provides a window into the complicated processe of ADS, more research on this underexplored topic is needed to enhance the doctoral pedagogy. Therefore, this study aims to investigate a TEsoL doctoral student's paper writing, feedback and revision as well as her publishing experience and its role in her ADS from the perspectives of the student and her supervisor.

# 3. Feedback as a site for reflective practice in doctoral students' ADS

Feedback on leaning refers to \*information provided by an agent (teacher, peer, self, experience, etc.) regarding aspects of one's performance and understanding" (Hattie & Timperley, 2007, p. 81). Feedback on doctoral students' drafts of a research paper therefore helps them develop their knowledge and skill (Lei & Hu, 2019; Li, 2006; Yu & Jiang, 2022), which concerns the cognitie dimension of their ADs. Specificall, feedback conveys how researchers in a community are expected to write and think, allowing doctoral students opportunities for reflection and revision of writing that may enhance their knowledge of writing and research (Quinton & Smallbone, 2010). For example, as Lei and Hu (2019) found, a doctoral student efectively improved her knowledge about research methodology from reading journal articles suggested by a reviewer in the comments on her paper.

In addition to the cognitive aspect, feedback also serves to facilitate doctoral students ADS socially and emotionally. Regarding the social dimension, the given feedback provides doctoral students a sense of readership that urges them to respond to feedback in an appropriate manner and learn to manage relationship with the feedback providers (Wang & Li, 2011; Yu & Jiang, 2022). In fact, their capacity to handle feedback can also influence their self-perceptions and identity building. As Wang and Li (2011) revealed, some doctoral students were unable to handle critical fedback from their supervisors and reported a generall negative feedback experience, which resulted in their elf-doubt and hindered their socialization as academics. As for the emotional dimension, when doctoral students rive feack from sigficn thr, a roces tht is ote accompanied y diffe mtions (Cral, 013), they are afforded opportunities to learn to manage emotions in order to enhance the proces and results of ADS (Carter & Kumar, 2017; Casanave, 2002; Wang & Li, 2011; Yu & Jiang, 2022). For example, a doctoral student in Yu and Jiang (2022) managed to stay resilint and adopted different tratgie e., self-encouragment, extenal help to adres fedback from reiewers in the paper writing and publishing process. This ffort allowed her to graduall regulate negative emotions and develop a gratitude minset towards critical feedback.

Whereas doctoral students' interaction with feedback on their paper can contribute to their ADS, reflection is necessary for such learning tocr. Reflection, or relective practice, refers to individuals engagement and exploration of their experiences to reach a new understanding (Boud et al. 1985). Through reflection, doctoral students can turn feedack into available resources for them to learn and developcognitively, scal, and emotionally in their academic community. Specifically, thistudy borrowed the notions of reflction-on-ction, reftion-in-ction (Sch, 1983), and reftion-f-ction (VanMnen 1991) frmh techerctioiteraue to conceptualize the relationship between reflction and feedback on paper in doctoral students ADs. While reflection-in-action is one's active thinking and involvement while doing the job (Schon, 1983), reflectionin-feedback happens upon doctoral students reception of feedback and refers to their immediate thinking and responses to it. Reflection-on-action refers to one's thinking and evaluation of ther past teaching for improvement (Schon, 1983), and thus reflection-on-fdback refers to doctoral students revisiting the given feedback and further thinking and evaluating the feedback to respond to it. As reflection-for-action rests upon the previous two and is one's thinking and anticipation of future teaching problems for taking actions to enhance professional development (Burhan-Horasanl & Ortactepe, 2016; Van Manen, 1991), reflection-for-feedack is also a complicated proces. Assuming an agentive and active role, doctoral students not only try to respond to the given feedack but use it to generate new feedback for their own learning. Overall, the thre forms of reflection are interrelatd and sere to help doctoral students un the fdack they receive into useful and readily available resources for their development as an English academic writer and a researcher, characterizing and contributing to their ADS.

# 4. The study

# 4.1. Participants, context, and the researcher's role

The participants of this qualitative case study included a dyad of a PhD student and her supervisor at a Hong Kong university. They were recruited from the social network of the author, who, in addition to being a researcher, was also a junior colleague of the su. pervisor and afresh doctoral graduate who served asa criticl riend to the doctoral student. Ethical approval from the university and the participants consent to join the study were obtained. Both the supervisor, Steve, and the student Sally, speak Mandarin as the L1 and use English as the L2 (see Table 1). Steve owns a PhD degree in education and is a competent researcher and English academic writer who has published more than 80 research articles in international peer-reviewed journals and books. Having a MA degree in education, Sall has limited experience in English academic writing and research. Before PhD, she had taught English for several years.

During this study, Sally was writing a paper under Steve's guidance, as proposed by the later. The paper examined an issue in Sall's previous teaching. Steve and Sall started by writing the findings first,followed by methodology, introduction, literature re. view, discssion and conclusion. For every section, al wrote the frst draft for Ste to givefedack, based on which she then made revision.It tok them more than 20 rounds of feedback and revision to complete the 8000-word paper, which was published in an international journal after several rounds of careful revision based on reviewers' comments.

# 4.2. Data collection

Data was collected from multipl sources over an one-and-a-half-year period, which started when Sally began writing the findings and ended when the paper was accepted for publication. The irs source of dat wasallys wrtten drats with Steve's edack, which allowed the author to understand their style of interaction, provision of feedback, and reception of feedback. As Table 2 shows, the collected data included 16 drafts of findings (with Steve's feedback on the third draft to the 15th draft, three draft of methodology (with feedback on them all, the drat of inroduction and literature review (with feedack on the later wo drafts), and two drafts of discussion and conclusion (with feedback on the second draft. On the drafts, Steve's fedback was provided via track changes and comments.

Individual semi-structured interviews were also conducted with Steve and Sally at the beginning, toward the middle, and at the end of the paper writing proess see Table 3). The intrvie data, used in tandm with allys drafts and Stee's feack erved to reveal how they netiated gols and exptations in the papr writing proces and how ly egagd i reflection in this proces. Inthe first interview, the participants were asked about their perceptions of the paper writing task. Also, Sally was asked about her previous experience of English academic writing and research and her goal of the PhD degre; Steve, his style of research supervision. The second interview with all entered on her perceptions of Ste's edback, reponses t feedback, and self-percived development in the processof reflecting upon feedback and making revision. The second interview with Steve focused on his feedback style and perceptions of Sally's responses to his feedback. Both participants were asked if they encountered challenges in their feedback interactions, which could be cognitive, social, or emotional, and their coping strategies. Similar questions were used in the final interview. In ation, Salls goal of the ret of her PhD studie as wel as Steve's plan for superving Sally wre foused on. They were also prompted topredict the challenges Sally may encounter in thesis writing. Each interview, conducted in Mandarin, astd for 60 to 120 minutes and was audio-recorded for transcription.

To further understand Sall's reflective practice in paper writing, feedback, revision as well as its role in her ADs, the author collected data from the other three sources (see Table 4). In the informal conversations, Sally shared her feedback experience and how she reflected upon feedback to improve the paper. With Sally's consent, these episodes (i.., eight in total) were noted down immediately after the conversations. all's self-reflection (i., around o00 words) writte during the irs four months of paper writing, which explained her struggles in writing the findings and reflection of research and writing in different site, including coursework. peer discusso, and literature reading, was also collected. Moreover, Sally was observed in academic activities that aided her paper writing, including a course about qualitative data analysis taught by Steve and a meeting with Steve. Fieldnotes were taken to document her academic learning and connection between her onsit earning and her responses to Steve's fedback on her developing draft.

# 4.3. Data analysis

Data analysis ollowed a qualitative and inductie aproach (Emerson et al., 2011). Firs, the data was read and reviewed tobtain an overall understanding of the content. Second, the interview transcripts, plus three sources of data (i.e., informal onversations written selfreflectio, and fieldnotes of observation), were reviewed to identify episodes related to paper writig, fedback and revision. Open coding of the episodes was then conducted. This initial coding resulted in rudimentary codes for Steve, such as supervisionstyl, fedack tyl, Sally stngths, Salls challenge, ad gol of paper wtig, as wells for ally, such as inteaction with Steve, pereption of Steves feack, chllenges in paper writing laning oportunitis in paper writing, and gol of paer writing. These codes were further categorized with reference to the conceptualization of paper writing as a site for ADS (Kobayashi et al., 2017; Quinton & Smallone, 2010) as well as reflection-on-feedback, reflectio-in-feedback, and relection-for-feedac developed based on Schon, 1983; Van Manen, 1991). For example, Sally's interview account of her revisiting the given feedback for thinking was caterizd as refetion-n-feack hen this pf dtas fuh t ntf the aspt f  i. cni, sci motional t facilitaed and how he proessoccurred. Meanwhil, Sl deeloping draft with tees fedack was usedo vrify the analysis. Finall, based on the research questions, the catgories were thematized. Member checking (i.., the participants' reading of the findings and provision of eedback for refining the analysis) was conducted. Generally, they agreed with the interpretation and analysis, which ensured the trustworthiness of the findings.

Table 1 The participants.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Participant</td><td>L1</td><td>Qualification</td><td>Title</td><td>English academic writing &amp; research experience</td></tr><tr><td>Steve</td><td>Mandarin</td><td>PhD in education</td><td>Associate professor</td><td>Over 80 publications</td></tr><tr><td>Sally</td><td></td><td>MA in education</td><td>First-year PhD student</td><td>Limited experience</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Sally's drafts and Steve's feedback.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Parts</td><td>Total drafts</td><td>Drafts with Steve&#x27;s feedback</td></tr><tr><td>Findings</td><td>16</td><td>Draft 3 to Draft 15</td></tr><tr><td> Methodology</td><td>3</td><td>Draft 1 to 3</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction &amp; Literature Review</td><td>3</td><td>Draft 2 and 3</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion &amp; Conclusion</td><td>2</td><td>Draft 2</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 The interviews with Sally and Steve.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Round of interview</td><td>Stage of paper writing</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>At the beginning</td><td>Sally&#x27;s and Steve&#x27;s perceptions of paper writing, Sally&#x27;s previous experience of English academic writing and research, Sally&#x27;s goal of PhD, Steve&#x27;s supervision style</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>In the middle</td><td>Sally&#x27;s perceptions of Steve&#x27;s feedback, responses to feedback, and self-perceived development, Steve&#x27;s feedback style and perceptions of Sally&#x27;s responses to his feedback, Sally&#x27;s and Steve&#x27;s challenges in feedback interactions and coping</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>At the end</td><td>strategies Same as interview 2, plus Sally&#x27;s goal of the rest of PhD studies and Steve&#x27;s plan for supervising Sally</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 The other sources of data.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Data sources</td><td>Data collection</td></tr><tr><td> Informal conversations with Sally</td><td>8 entries (800 to 1700 words each)</td></tr><tr><td>Sally&#x27;s written self-reflection</td><td> 5000 words</td></tr><tr><td>Observation of Sally in academic activities</td><td>A course about qualitative data analysis &amp; a meeting with Steve (fieldnotes taken)</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 5. Findings

# 5.1. The role of paper writing in Sally's ADS

Being influenced by the publish-or-perish discourse, Steve had a practical goal for Sall's ADS, which explained why he gave Sally the paper writing task.

I need to ensure that my students will graduate with at least one published paper because they need it to find a job or to receive a promotion. Practically, a paper is more useful than a thesis. (Steve, Interview 3)

Moreover, he intended to use this paper writing task to sharpen Sally's knowledge and skills of English academic writing anc research, which she lacked.

In paper writing, my students rceive systematic training. If they want to be an academic, they ned to become very competent in English academic witing nd eearch. his i like the fact tht f someon wants to be  chef, they need to be good  ooking. (Ste, Interview 3)

This competence in academic writig, as Steve conceived, included the writer's ability to effctively use rhetorical structure and academic language to organize the research content (Steve, Interview 2). As for research, Steve believed that all neded to lean to 'tell coherent story" with a sharp argument, interesting findings, deep discussions, and meaningful contributions to the field (Steve, Interview 2). He devised his feedback strategies accordingly.

I focused on different isues at different stages of writig. In the first few rounds, I focused more on macro stuff such as structure and logic. After the writing becomes more logical, I started to comment more n language like English nd writingstyl. (Steve, Intrview 2)

That i, in Steve's perception, the paper writing task could provide Sall intense cognitive training for her writig and research. He also intended to kill two birds with one stone by helping Sally start accumulating academic credits (i.e., having a published paper) early.

Instead of publishing, Sally saw paper writing more as an opportunity for reaping useful knowledge and skill for her PhD journey Sally, Informal conversation). She explained:

Publication is nice but it's not the main reason why I write the paper. I do it primarily for practicing English academic writing and research skills. (Sally, Interview 1)

Sally's focus on sharpening knowledge and skills was because of the cognitive challenges she encountered during the initial writing stage. She shared many language- and content-related difficulties, as the representative quotes show:

Paper writing is cognitively overloading. I spent the whole morning writing this small paragraph, but Steve revised it and changed almost everything I felt th paagraphis nt mine. I don hink  canmet his standard f ffetve ngish aademic wriing. (Sally, Interview 1)

I couldn't find the data excrs that mach the theme or argument I m making. It takes a lot of ime and effort to write this paper, which is simply too challenging for me. (Sally, Interview 1)

Her cognitive challenges also resulted in negative emotions in paper writing:

Maybe I wasn't that resilient. I felt frustrated and was stresed out because the knowledge and skill were justoo dificult to master. (Sally, Interview 1)

Fortunately, she did not lose hope but was highly motivated to write welland take related actions because she wanted to improv. herself. Thus, she regarded Steve's feedback as useful resource to achieve the goal.

Steve is an outstanding academic writr. I really want to larn from him and improve my [academic] writing. With his help, I'l surel] improve. (Sally, Interview 1)

Sally's high motivation in paper writing was also related to her goal for professional development as an English teacher. She hoped to use research to solve the practical problems in her teaching (Sall, Informal conversation). This professional goal supported her throughout the challenging task.

Research and paper writing help me explore my teaching, like how effective it was, which I really want to know. The paper willbe a reference point for my future teaching. (Sally, Interview 1)

Overall, the supervisor and supervise regarded paper writig as a site for skilltraning (i.e, academic writing, research) which pertained to the cognitive dimension of the student's ADs. Meanwhile, they had different beliefs as to where this cognitive skil training would lead the student to. The differencefocuses between the two, coupled with the time needed for them to tackle Sally's difficultie in writing and research, resulted in a nice and slow paper writing proces (Steve, Interview 2), during which publication became a secondary concern (Sally, Interview 2).

# 5.2. Sally's reflective practice about feedback on the drafts

Sally was regarded as being reflective" by herelf and Steve, as manifested in her constant self-evaluation and analytic thinking in response to Steve's feedback on the draft. Specificly, she had different degrees of engagement in the three forms of reflection at different stages of paper writing, which allowed her to gradually develop academic writing skills and knowledge of research.

At the beginning, Sall devoted most time and effrt in reflection-on-feedback. She could not revise the drafts immediately after reading the feedback because she needed time to think about what Steve was trying to convey. She could only start revision after deliberate refection-on-feedback. The conversation below, whichtook place between Sally and the author i front of the university library ater an afteoon f reing and thinking for Sall, evidenced her relection-on-fedback as a proces of self-examination and self-exploration in the paper writing process.

He said I need to stay "focused" in writing. For example, in my draft I provided a diagram with descriptions, but he said that was unrelated to my research aim. I've been trying to understand this feedback. (Sally, Informal conversation)

In the drafts, Sally repetitively received Steve's feedback that reminded her to select data excerpts relevant to her claims. For instance, in the third draft of findings, she used an interview quote to support a claim that students' genre awareness was improved because they took an academic writing course. However, the quote did not touch upon the students cours-taking experience as Steve commented:

This part has improved, but you missed out the course experience that led to their [students'] enhanced genre awarenes. How did this happen? You need to integrate their course engagement with their learning to write. (Steve's written feedback, Findings, Draft 3)

This mismatch between themes and data excerpts was frequently spotted in Steve's feedback such as \*focused", \*of the topic, and "relevance" on different drafts (Sall, Interview 1). Sometimes the feedback was more extended, as in This part is to long and  get lost when reading. I als cannot find the fus on.. (Steve's written feedback, Methodology, Draft1. To address the feedback, Sally revisited the dataset and spent plenty of time redoing data analysis. She explained how such reflection-on-feedback helped her stay focused and improve the paper:

When reviewing the interview transcripts, I kept telling myself what I was looking for. I thought I found it, but when I received his feedback, Irelized that I was wong again. So I toped again to think and review the dat. In this cycle, lened what releance means. (Sally, Interview 1)

That is, Sall's reflection-on-feedback was an ongoing, trial-and-error process which spanned through an extended timeframe and quired her perseverance and atiece. Whes Stee was aware f Sallys efort and difficulties in deling with his fack, he also elieved that this intensive cogntive trining" as a must for her growth as aresearcher and an academic writer (Ste, Interview 3).

Sall'srflection-on-feedback was also strategic, helping her improve knowledge in research and paper writing. Specifically, she actively connected Steve's feedback with her learning in different academic activities. For instance, in a lesson about qualitive data analysis (i.e., embedded in Steve's course), she reflected on Steve's feedback about a problem in methodology. In the leson, she recalled the fedback when her classmate asked Steve a question about diffrent research designs. It was observed that upon hearing Steve's explanations, Sall leaned back and made an "oht sound (Sall, Observation). Through actively connecting Steve's explanations in clas with his written feedack on her draft previously, Sall came to an understanding of the feedback fully (Sally, Obser. vation). In the written reflection, she explained how this strategic reflection-on-feedback enhanced her knowledge of research, bringing about cognitive learning in the ADS process.

I planned to use the teaching model I built in the literature review to guide the research design and data analysis. However, now I know that I'm not doing an intervention study. Steve' feedback also helped me realize that my understanding of research awaits improvement (Sally, Self-reflection).

Sally's relection-on-feedback paid off gradually. When she reached the ninth draft f findings, she became more able to interpret he feedback accuratel right on the spot and can take immediateactions to adressit This reflection-in-feedback saved her time so that ;he could deal with other more difficult feedback. She explicated,

When I sethefeack I m ighy aware f what ned o look for inthe da. I can just dig int he data, xtact the lean art, nd use them to revise my paper. (Sally, Interview 2)

Moreover, in the draft-by-draft interactions with Steve, Sally also gained trust in him, which contributed to more reflections for learning. This was partly due to his expertise in research and paper writing and partly because of his supportive fedback style. The supervisor-supervisee dyad respectively explained,

Although I worked very slowly, Steve believed that I could manage it. He gave me a lot of time and space to work on my own. He also provided very detiled and useful fdback on my draft and spared no effort to teach me. I really appreciate it (Sall, Interview 2)

Of course, I would let my students know what potential I se in them and to what extent I think they are able to achieve what goals, but do not push them. I respect their style and preference. I try to tailor my feedback style for them. (Steve, Interview 2)

More importantly, Sallys accumulated trust in Steve motivated her to engage in reflection-for-feedback that benefited her ADS as a researcher and an English academic writr. She frequently initiated inner conversations with Steve's feedback. For instance, when reading the feedback, she imagined Steve's tone and facial expression, as if they were in a face-to-face conversation (Sall, Interview 1). When seeing colloquial expressions in his feedback, such as the use of \*right?, Sally responded \*yes' or "no" with more explanations in her mind (Sall, Interview 1). Moreover, as Sally observed, Steve tended to ask questions in the feedback, which triggered her curiosity and iner dialogues. This was verified by Steve, who purposefully employed the questioning strategy and other types of feedback, such as statements aded to his suggestions (i.e., T'm just brainstorming) to give Sally more autonomy in reflction and learning.

Ah! I purposefully tried to be es authoritative and gave her room to tackle the feedback. I felt that she had the blity to deal with the issue by herself. (Steve, Interview 2)

Sally's reflection-for-fedback not only sustained her motivation in paper revision but helped her generate more fedback for her own learning. For instance, when having inner conversations with Steve's feedback on her problems in English academic writing, she was determined to improve. She started to systematically analyze her own writing problems by tabulating Steve's fedback according to its content (se g. 1). This ffort refeted her agcy to expot the otntil of Ste fedack, self-aluate and gnrate more

# Language

1. need to express in a better way (authentic way?)1+1   
2.Inproper use of vocabulary 1+1+1+1   
3.redundant 1+1+1 especially too much for the unimportant/unrelated part 1+1+1   
4.Lack of topic sentence 1+   
5.not direct,not make the theme explicit 1+1+1+1   
6.Not accurate expressions 1   
7.Meaning not clear 1+1+1+1+1+1+1+1+1+1+1+1   
8.Chinglish1

Fig. 1. Sally's tabulation of Steve's feedback on her language problems.

feedback for self-learning (i., eflection-for-feedback. After that, she purposefully analyed the language use in Steve's published articles and imitated it when revising the paper (Sally, Interview 2).

Eventually, Sally's reflection-for-feedback helped her improve academic writing and stimulated her thought for her thesis.

The interactions with Steve's eedback made my learning fruitful. I not only finished writing the paper, but learned academic writing systematically. (Sally, Interview 2)

Constant reflections on the paper topic actually gave me some ideas about what my future rearch should focus on. I felt more prepared for my thesis journey after writing this paper with Steve. (Sally, Interview 2)

Overall, Sal first relied primarily on reflection-on-feedack as a trial and eror proces for improving her knowledge and skill in academic writing and reearch. Also, reflection-on-feedback was astrategy for her to connect the given feedback with her new learning in different academic sites. As her knowledge and skill accumulated and trust in Steve developed, she was able to engage in reflectionin-feedack(i. addess feak may) ad lecin-fr-feack (i. hing n cortion feeack and generate more feedback). Such reflective practice contributed to her ADS as a budding researcher and a developing academic writer.

5.3. Reflective practice in Sally's ADS as cognitive, social, and emotional processes

Sally's reflective practice during paper writing, as an intrplay of eflection-on-feedack reflection-in-fedback, and reflection-forfeedback, contributed to her academic learning and growth cognitively, emotionally, and socially, as also witnessed by Steve. Cognitively, Sally's knowledge and skills in academic writing and research were enhanced. She explained,

Despite thestruggles, the whole paper writing experience is enlightening. The knowledge and skills are the most precious and useful resources I can use for the rest of my academic life. (Sally, Interview 3)

Sally's cognitive growth was also observed by Steve:

Atfrst, honetly, paper writing ws a huge challnge for hr, eill the ogic and writing kill. owever, wet the goal  inish the paper], so I did everything I could to help. She also worked very hard. Indee, she had improved greatly in English academic writing and research. Her learning was quite successful. (Steve, Interview 3)

Feeling ready to move on to her doctoral thesis, however, Sall also believed that she would encounter more cognitive challenge. Sally, Interview 3). This view was shared by Steve:

More obstacles are ahead. She may have problems with conceptualization and theoretical framework. She wil also need to devote huge effort in writing the thesis which is up to 10,o00 words. (Steve, Interview 3)

Emotionall, Sally had cultivated patience as a result of her fdback intraction with Steve and the trust built i this process. Such patience allowed her time to think and reflect, through which her capacity to deal with stress and anxiet increased. She therefore became more resilient in research and academic writing.

I had been worried that he would give up on me because my writing was too bad, but he didn't. He was much more patient than I had been. So I explored his fedback and explored myself, day by day. Slowly I worried les. That actually gave me more time to think. I leaned that as an acadmic we need to accept that we're nt aways prouctive and t akes time t reearch and write (ly, Interview 3)

ensing Sally's resilience, Steve believed that being patient was the most suitable strategy to guide her in paper writing:

She was generally reilient and optimistc. She kept trying hard and hung in there. Based on her progres and peronality, I felt that need to give her time. She should be able to cope with the difficulties and grow. (Steve, Interview 3)

This live and let live feedback and interaction style, which supported Sally emotionally in the paper writing process, were nfluenced by Steve's belief in doctoral supervision, as he explained,

PhD supervisors are facilitators. PhD students have to take the lead and sek supervisor's help when needed. As their supervisor I would definitely help, but I wouldn't tell them what to do. (Steve, Interview 1)

This belief in doctoral supervision, shown in Steve's feedback practice, also supported Sally in the social dimension of her ADS. Specifically, ally gradually became a leader and a decision maker in her own paper writing process For instance, son after she started paper writing, her work with Steve shifted from face-to-face meetings to online meetings given the working-from-home policy during CoviD-19. In response, she took the ntiative to schedule her own writig and revisin (i.., 500 words per day). She explained

Based on our goal [to finish the paper], I arranged my time and managed my writing. From time to time I showed him what I had, and he gave fedback. After that I continued working at my pace. I became more like an independent thinker, researcher, and writer. (Sally, Interview 3).

Also, Sally had gained more confidence as a researcher and academic writer, albeit the rookie status. This growth was evident in her projected identity as a thesis writer with some confidence when describing her next move.

I am not s anxious about thesis writing as my peers are because I have experienced paper writig. I m confident that as long as I could sharpen the thesis focus and finish data collection, I can complete the thesis and graduate. (Sally, Interview 3)

Overall, the paper writing task fforded Sally's ADS cognitively, emotionally, and socially, allof which prepared her tostart the thesis journey. Having gone through the fruitul process Sally cameto the belief that paper writing was a useful and practical approach to start doctoral supervision. In this proces, she opined, both supervisory feedback and the student's reflective thinking and actions played a vital role for the student's ADS (Sally, Interview 3).

# 6. Discussion

This qualitative case study set out to explore an early-stage L2 doctoral student's paper writing under the guidance of her supervisor as well as her reflective practice aut the fack and rision proces. I resonseothe first rearh question, the supervisor and the student had a shared goal of paper writing, which was to provide the student cognitie killtrining for English academic writing and research. While the supervisor also aimed to help the student publish for survival in academia, the student focused on sharpening useful skill for self-improvement. Their different goals and expectations characterized the social and negotiated nature of ADS, testifying that paper writing and feedback provided a site of socialization not only towards appropriate language use and writing stle but associated knowledge, values, goals, and practices (Duff, 2010; Kobayashi et al., 2017; Leki, 007). While contradictions were sometimes seen in previous studies (Wang & Li, 2011) and some even led to student drop-out (Casanave, 2002), the supervisor-supervisee dyad in this study generally negotiated practice harmoniously and achieved a balance between their different goals due to the supervisor's feedback style as well as the student's capacity to reflect upon the feedack to turn it ino available resources for improvement.

For the second research question, the doctoral student engaged in an interactive processof reflection-on-feedback, reflection-infeedback, and reflection-fr-feedback at differen stages of paper wriig. he relied more on reflection-on-feback at the beinning When she lacked the knowledge and skill that could help her comprehend and tackle the feedback instantly. As her knowledge and skills mproved, she was more able to respond to the fedback mmediately, sn in her reflection-in-fedback. She also used reflection for-feedback by having internal conversations with the feedback and actively assembling them, which generated more eedback for her learning and improvement. Whereas ADS research views academic learning as a mediated process and perceives feedback as a form of mediation (Duf, 2010; Kobayashi et al., 2017), the findings added that for feedback to be a mediational tool, rflective practice is indispensable. That is though reflection, fedback, gien  sere the feedack roviders inentios is more likely to be appropriated by the doctoral student. Reflective practice therefore allows doctoral students to use the feedback to improve their academic writing and its ssociated knowledge, values, and practices, rendering feedback available resources for their AD. Also, in doctoral-level paper writing where studets ned to assume  more active and agentive role (s Stee pointed out) ther reetie practice serve to sustain the given feedback for their further thinking and improvement.

Responding to the third research question, the doctoral student's reflective practice about feedback contributed to her ADS in different dimensions. Regarding the cognitive dimension, the finding adds to the current understanding that supervisory written feedback provides a space for thinking and reflection, which is crucial for doctoral students to grow as researchers and academic writers (Lei & Hu, 2019; Quinton & Smallone, 2010). In this study, the doctoral student engaged in reflction-on-feedback by putting the written feedback aside and revisitig it to think about it and act upon it at her own pace. Her reflection-in-feedack helped her address the feedback immediatel and accelerate the leaning process. Her reflection-for-feedback let her sustain and generate more feedback for her own cognitiv learning and growth. Taken together, the thre forms of reflection, prompted by the writtenfeedback, contributed to the early-stage L2 doctoral student's enhanced knowledge and skill in research and English academic writing.

Also, doctoral students experience of engaging in the thre forms of reflection is inevitably fused with the emotional aspect of their ADS. In this study, the doctoral student was able to develop more patience and resilience in the later stages of paper writing, which, compared to the beginning when she was stresed out, evidenced the role f reflection in her learning and growth emotionall. In fact, it is common for doctoral students to experiencedifferent emotions, epecially the negative ones, when dealing with fdback on ther paper (Aitchison et al., 2012; Wei et al., 2019) because the task is cognitively challenging. Without proper and open communication about expectations with their supervisors, students may find the feedback experience negative, possbly influencing their ADS experience (Wang & Li, 2011. While directly initiating conversation with their supervisors may be intimidating for some, having an internal dialogue with the given feedback can be an alternative, as the finding showed. This kind of internal conversation, fueled by ongoing reflection, can offer doctoral students a safe pace to digest the feedbackas well as deal with emotions, which contributes to their growth in the emotional dimension of ADS.

As for the social aspect of AD, doctoral students can develop certain identties according to their goals as  reult of ther relective practice about feedback and paper writig. The findings illstrated how the doctoral student, through feedback-prompted reflective practice, graduall resolved thecognitive challenges in paper writing, coped with her own emotions, and became a more independent academic writer and reseacher taking the lead for her own learning, as she had aspired tobe. Her constant reflection also brought new insights on her future reearch, reulting in the budding identity as a thesis writer with some onfidence. That is the doctoral student's ongoing reflctive practice not only allowed her to address the supervisor's critical fedack on her paper, which as previous studies indicated,can be a challenging task (Wang & Li, 2011), but became the catalyst for her identity development s an English academic writer and a researcher. Overall, the findings enriched the current understanding by verifing that ADS entails complicated cognitive, social, and emotional processes of learning and these processes can be captured by tracking early-stage L2 doctoral students paper writing, feedback, and reflection. Whereas ADS studies have contributed to the current understanding of learners socialization through different academic activities (Kobayashi et al., 2017; Zappa-Hollman, 2007), ths study adds to the literature by identifying and analyzing the three dimensions of ADS with data from the supervisor-supervisee dyad.

As the findings suggested, doctoral students' capacity of reflective practicei the key to turning the given feedback into readily available resources for their ADs. Moreover, their wllingness to reflect, which is influence by two key factors, i also crucial for reflectionto happe. The firt factor isth framing and styl of feedback. Steve's deliberate and careful framing of feedback n Sally's writing successully triggered her curiosity and inner dialogue, leading to reflection-for-feedback that facilitated her academic learning. The second factor is the mentoring relationship between the feedback provider and doctoral students. The trust that Steve and Sally gradually built in their fedback interactions enabled Sally to view Ste's feedback positively. Ste's being understanding of Sall's situation also allowed him to accommodate his feedback and supervision to Sally's preference. Their positive interaction and relationship served to sustain Sally's motivation to continue reflective practice for her learning and possibly explained why they were able to work through the tedious and difficult paper writing, feedback, and revision tasks together successfully.

Finally, although paper writing has been criticizd for being product-oriented (i., writing for publication) (Yuan & Yang, 2020) it can have great value in doctoral education, supervision, and socialization in social sciences and humanities, as supported by the findings. As such, the findings enriched the current conception of paper writing in higher education by illustrating its socialization-and-identity-building orientation. If the paper writing task is designed and administered appropriately (e.g, aligned goals, appropriately framed fedback, enough time for reflection and revision), it would constitute efective doctoral supervision pedagogy. That is, paper writing can be a transformative experience for doctoral students to learn and improve related knowledge and skills in their ADS process.

# 7. Conclusion

Learning to write a paper can usefully help doctoral students gain knowledge and skills as researchers and English academic writers, as exhibited in this study. Despite contributions, ths study has imitations. First, acknowledging ADS as bi-directional (Duff, 2010), this study did not focus on the supervisor's own socialization in the feedback process Future studies can examine how supervisor-supervisee dyads socialize each other in the co-constructed paper writing and feedback process. Second, how the doctoral student dealt with feedback from reviewers and journal editors received relatively litle atention in this study. Future reearch can examine this topic in depthto shed ight on how feedack from dfferent thers serves o promote doctral studet refletive practice and thus enhances their ADS. Finally, whereas this study tracked asupervisor-superviee dyad in TESOL, future research can document paper writing and ADs of supervisor-supervisee dyads from different fields to allow comparison that will provide a more holistic picture of doctoral supervision.

Regarding implications, of foremost importance is the use of the paper writing task as a doctoral supervision and socialization strategy. Compared to a thesis, a paper is shorter and more limite in scope, and may therefore be a more manageable task for early stage L2 doctoral students to sharpen and top up their knowledge and skill in research and English academic writing. Successul use of the paper writing task for lerning res upon efective and approriate dsign of the tas. As the finding illutrated, doctral students and supervisors may have different rationales for writing a paper. Communicating and negotiating goals to reach a mutual understanding and consensus is therefore vital. In this study, Steve's adjustment of his goal (i.e., writing for publication) and taloring feedback ractic fr ally was the key  her willingnestongage n reflective ratice aout fdack, which led to hr gowth lso, it is well-documented in the literature that giving and receiving fedack can be a sensitive and emotional act, especially for students (Cotterall 2013; Huerta et al., 2016). To positively impact octoral students' paper writing, feedback needs to be deliberately and carefully framed. The other implication of the findings is the importance of cltivating doctora students capacity of critical reflection about feedback. Their awareness of different forms f eflection, such as reflection-on/in/-for-feedback, nees to be raised. With refereciffe os f rin th th   doh ht of reout feakmaxmie its potential for their knowledge and skills learning, a crucial part of their ADS.

# Author statement

Yang Min: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Validation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing.

# Declaration of competing interest

None.

# References

At, 31(4), 435-447. https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2011.559195   
Bihr       1, 79-97. https://doi.org/10.6018/ijes/2010/2/119201   
Boud, D., Keough, R., & Walker, D. (1985). Reflection: Turning experience into learning. London: Kogan Page. Teacher Education, 59, 372-382. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2016.07.002   
Carter,   017. e is   lny  wii ini, 1) 68-75. https://doi.org/10.1080/14703297.2015.1123104   
Casanave, C.P. (2002). Writing games: Multiculral case studies of academic liteacy practices in higher ducation. Mawah, NJ: rlbaum.   
Cottrl, . (2013). ore han justa baions  theoa erie ighe tionh nd n, 22, 17418. p/o. 10.1080/07294360.2012.680017   
tert,   . rk 00n wih iwin in  ict h rearch candd i the hmantie, arts and sol scieces. ger cion c and Delont, 282), 137-149.htp:/doi.org/10.1080/ 07294360902725025 for Specific Purposes, 17(4), 369-390. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(97)00054-9   
Duf, . 010  io no a r i.   f edics 30, 169-192. /.10.1017 S0267190510000048   
Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I, & Shaw, L. L. (2011). Writing ethnographic fieldnotes (2nd ed.). The Universty of Chicago Pres.   
Hatie J., Timperle,  (007. The pwer of fedack Reiew of Edcationl Rech, 77, 81-112. htps:/i.org/10.3102/003465430298487   
Ho, M.(2017).iig c wtin nd intional ublisig Inl ay f  L d. l of ish or d Purposes, 27, 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2017.02.004   
Hng,     ti   f 9, 33-44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2009.10.001   
Heta     t    ,   i Education Research and Development, 36(4), 716-729. https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2016.1238881   
baysh,  - f 17f  .) 39254. Springer.   
an .. 10n i  f  .  9556.s/ doi.0rg/10.1007/s10734-009-9233 $\mathbf { - X }$   
Lee (2014) ishr erish Th th and t f ad ubhn.  hng 42), 250-61. /./0.117/026148100504   
Lei, J  219   c e  i  ti  or i  42-4 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2018.12.003   
Leki, I. (2007). Undergraduates in a second language: Challenges and complexities of academic literacy develoment. Erlbaum. 10.1016/j.esp.2005.12.002   
jd,  20  sh   s- ici ies  il sciences. Higher Education, 80, 255-271. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-019-00478-1   
olan, R, & cc. 009.ch ds in th s sci wti or ulictn. niol Jo of ch Education, 20(2), 267-273.   
Nygaard, L. P., & Solli, K. (2020). Strategies for writing a thesis by publication in the social sciences and humanities. Routledge. org/10.1016/S0889-4906(00)00025-9   
Quiton, .  m . 10   i ck   st etion d g-  m. ion i tion Teaching International, 47(1), 125-135. https://doi.org/10.1080/14703290903525911   
Schon, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. London: Temple Smith.   
Van Manen, M. (1991). The tact of teaching: The meaning of pedagogical thoughtfulness. Albany, NY: sUNy Press.   
ang,  1.   kiin 1 (2), 101-112. https://doi.org/10.1177/1469787411402438   
We .   1 and Development, 38(1), 157-169. https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2018.1541074   
g,23     g     g81) 85-100. https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2020.1775191   
Yu . g,  20.l t  w j r akon a wi  i  o 41), 87104. https://doi.org/10.1080/0158037X.2020.1781610   
Yuan,R  g,  2020 dn sit hr r dy cospri  fr   hrs d chng 26 (2), 193-213. https://doi.org/10.1080/13540602.2020.1777961   
apa- . p   ie r Language Review, 63, 72-83. https://doi.org/10.3138/cmlr.63.4.455