Book review

# Ethnographies of Academic Writing Research: Theory, methods, and interpretation, Ignacio GuillenGalve, Ana Bocanegra-Valle (Eds.). John Benjamins, Amsterdam (2021). p. 162 pp \$US 49.95, fUK 40.90, ISBN: 978-90-272-1007-4

Academic writing researchers growing interest in ethnographic aproaches reflects a convergence of methodological rich points, those times when researchers learn that their assumptions about the way research works and the concetual tols they have for doing research are inadequate to understand the worlds they are researching" (Manchon, this volume, p. 87). Concepts and tools from ethnography haveallowed writing reearchers to shed new light, for example, on the consequences of the social tun for understanding situated writing expertise and how individuals larn to negotiate sociall-situated language resources. ther rich points investigated include the time-distributed nature of writing and how it les visible features may negatively impact the processes of text production, control and gatekeeping. Ignacio Guillen-Galve and Ana Bocanegra-Valle's Ethnographies of Academic Writing Research: Theory, methods, and interpretatin furthers this development by supporting both initial forays into ethnographic aproaches and establishing a standard of practice among EAP writing specialists. The volume, published in John Benjamins' Research Methods in Applied Linguistics (R. Manchon, series editor) summarizes the state of the art with theoretically-grounded discussions and empirical-driven explorations of the methodologies and concepts relevant for carrying out ethnographically-oriented academic writing research.

This 162-page volume's appeal is underpinned by thought-provoking reflections from Theresa Lillis (Foreword) and Dwight Atkinson (Afterword) on the opportunities and challenges affrded by ethnographic aproaches, while the volume editors' overview makes a solid case for their timeliness Six further chapters by Christine Tardy, Jennifer Sizer, Sofia Albero-Posac and Maria Jose Luzon, Rosa Manchon, Baraa Khuder and Bojana Petric, and Natalia Avila Reyes each contribute practical eflections on particular aspects of ethnographicall-oriented research. Contributors clarify key concepts like emic perspectives, thick description, thick participation, deep-theorizing, reflexivit, sustained engagement and trustworthiness while demonstrating how data triangulation, reflexivity, member checks, text histories, textographies, personal literacy histories and talk-around-text can be integrated into research practices.

Five core themes as intertextual threads engage readers across the chapters: ethnography as method vs. ethic, reflexivit, trust worthiness the value of storytelling, and negotiating the degree of alignment to ethnographic approaches. The first theme reflects a discussion largely initiated by Lills' (2008) charactrization of ethnographic approaches as 'method, methodology, or deep-- theorizing, and illustrates epistemologically-driven questions about whether the ethnographic methods adopted by writing re searchers constitute ethnography. In partial response, Atkinson (this volume) notes that Cliford Geertz interet in doing ethnography was not about the methods as much as \*the kind of intllectual ffort it entailed]: an elaborate venture in thick description (Geertz, 1973, p. 6, in Atkinson, p. 147). Likewise Lills (this volume sets the stage for exploring how ethnography goes beyond methods when she identifies it as a powerful inellectual endeavor that pushes reearchers t constantly question the value (or not) of the particular methodological and conceptual tools we are using" (p. ix). Tardy picks up on this thread by observing that the ultimate goal of thick description, and thus of etnography, is t strive to "sort winks from twitches and real winks from mimicked ones'" (Geertz, 1973, p. 317, in Tardy, p. 23). Getig to this level f detail, however, require nt just adopting the right techniques but fundamentll shifting outlook: how one considers the people one is studying and criticall integrates those considerations as research. Developing an ethic of this sort requires \*investigating the social world while treating people with respect" (Atkinson, p. 149) and appreciating the vul. nerabilities created by an \*intimate engagement with participants public and private lives (Guillen-Galve & Bocanegra-Vall, p. 8) Practicing this ethic entails being conscious of the precariousnessof iging into people's personal space, as poignantly demonstrated in both Khuder and Petrics study of vulnerable researchers in exile and Albero-Posac and Luzon's review of the challenges in digital academic discoursal practices. Beyond issues of privacy, cultivating this ethic from the individual researcher's point of view means practicing a mindset learned over time, to be onstanty revisited and \*worked at (Lillis p. ix) For Atkinson, \*the ethic is the method" (p. 150, original emphasis).

Two empirically-driven chapters demonstrate how the ethic of ethnography can be put into practice by taking readers through practical exploration of the second theme: reflexivity, the conerstone of thnography. Avila Reyes, or example, shows how reflexivity can be used to understand the researcher's intellectual journey, acknowledging that \*direct answers to our questions [do] not necessarily lead to sigficant findings (p. 140). Likewise, Khuder and Petric preet a blueprint for practicing rflexivity throughout the project life-cycle. In addition to questions of ethic,reflexivity also contributes to data quality by enabling trustworthiness, which constitutes the volume's third theme. Drawing on Guba (1981) and Lincoln and Guba's (1985) work on naturalistic social data, volume contributors reatedy undercore ow validty in social scitific reearch is obtained through trustworthinessinstd of trth value. generalizability, relicability r objtivity: Rater than making neralizabilit f fidings the reonsbility ofthe rearcher  tis up to the reader to judge if and how the reseach appliesto their own situations (Atkinson, p. 148). In collecting and rporting ontheir data, writing reearchers can work toward four criteria readers use to establish trustworthines: credibility, transferabilit, dependability, confirmability, concepts outlined by Sizer (p. 53) and demonstrated by Khuder and Peric (pp. 116-119). Fleshing out the construct of trustworthinessfurther, Sizr and Atkinson each discuss how validity is created in ethnographic approaches as compared to the scientific method.

An important part of achieving trustworthiness through reflexivity relies on storytelling and personal research stories, where "researchers are not simply shadowing participants but acknowledging their situated presence in the research account (Guillen-Galve & Bocanegra-Vall, p. 7) by making their researcher voice part of the text. Regarding this fourth theme, Sizer underscores how storytelling continues to impact evaluations of ethnographicall-oriented academic writing research, noting that some researchers from more positivist and/or deductive research backgrounds may dismissethnographic methodology, including textography, as mere storytellig" (p. 53) lacking validit and bjectivity. Rather than shy away from storytelling, however, several athors (Atkinson, Avila Reyes, Khuder and Petric) highliht how it strengthens research transparency, credibility and trustworthiness. n their ilustration of researcher reflexivit, for example, Khuder and Petric demonstrate how to construct a compelling rearch narrative, showcasing various techniques as opportunities for reflexive storytelling. Explicitly recognizing ethnography's narrational character is central because doing ethnography ultimately entails \*getting to know people for research purposes" and \*involves learning how to listen to their stories [..]. Ethnographic research is part of an ancient human practice - storytelling - and willultimately be judged and evaluated on its storytelling capacity" (Atkinson, p. 150).

As the final theme, the degree of writing researchers' methodological alignment to the aforementioned principles remains a key issue for many writing researchers who, like volume contributors, are trained as inguist, not anthropologists. Although thened for "academic border contol" (Atkinson, p. 147) or arbiters of "whether specific procedures should be regarded as ethnographic (AlberoPosac and Luzon, p. 77) s considered unnecessary, Tardy's observation that writing researchers rarely encounter material conditions conducive to ethnographic research presents an opportunity to reflect on the possibilities affrded by ethnographic approaches, Whether as ethnographically-tinged', ethnographically-oriented' or thickly descriptive. To this end, the chapters provide concrete guidance for helping researchers decide on the degree of methodological alignment appropriate for their unique research purposes and argue for those choices while supporting trustworthiness.

Although the volume leaves ittle to be desired the fluctuating terminology observed in izer, Albero-Posac and Luzon, and Khuder and Petric raises the question of whether it is pertinent for academic writing researchers to continue using qualitative and ethnographic interchangeably. Previously, this distinction was used as a hedge to signal writing researchers hesitation in qualifying their work as properly ethnographic, as sen in Tardy's analysis of researchers self-characterization practices. However, the well-argued standpoint exhibited throughout this volume, with its constructive discussions about validating degrees of alignment through reflexivity, clearly speaks for claiming the latter. Another small ssue concerns the occasional mingling of research traditions which risks masking original contributors' roles. Sizer's historical overview of textography, for example, cites the 2018 edition of Swales' Other floors ther voices, but not his initial 1998 ublication. This becomes problematic in the nsuing literare reviewwhich suses textography through the lens of recent publications which appear to pre-date Swales' original contribution.

Such issues notwithstanding, this volume preents an invaluable reflection on good resarch practices and presents a map of current thinking about ethnography in academic writing reearch. It provides a solid foundation for moving the field forward, e.g., suggesting how reflexivity, storytelig and personal research stories might be consolidated as scientific practice for achieving trustworthines. With the contributors' backgrounds in applied linguisics, EAP and academic literacies, this book wil be useful reading for those interested in viewing second language writing through an ethnographic lens. Given its robust theoretical and methodological foun. dation, it also has broader aplications to first language writing reearch and will prove worthwhil reading to scholars in Writing Across the Curriculum and Writing in the Disciplines.

# References

Geertz, C. (1973). Local knowledge: Further essays in interpretive anthropology. Basic Books. 75-91.   
Lilli, . 208. r  m, g, d  tigthe  d  in win . en Communication, 25, 353-388.   
Lincoln, Y., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage..   
Swales, J. M. (1998). Other flors, other voices: A textography of a small university building. Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers.