Editorial

# Source use in academic writing: An introduction to the special issue

Intertextual relations – building on previous work – form a key element in the academic enterprise, and appropriate intertextuality is an index of successful academic achievement for students. It is a useful index because if intertextuality is appropriate it is likely that learning goals in other areas have been achieved – the intertextuality practices of academic writing are hard to learn. This is most obvious in the area of citation, the deliberate and explicit use of source material. There are a number of reasons for this difficulty. One is that appropriateness is dependent on the purpose, genre and discourse community in relation to which a text is produced. There is not a single model of appropriate source use that applies across all assignment types and in all disciplines across the university. Another reason is that efforts to create intertextual ties can fail not only with respect to those features which are overt and visible, leading to low grades, but also in ways which are not superficially visible and may therefore appear to be deliberately hidden, leading potentially to accusations that the writer has simulated academic achievement without actually going through the required process. Writers must therefore balance the demands of demonstrating community membership with those of avoiding accusations of plagiarism. This problematic situation is compounded by the fact that intertextuality cannot be avoided in academic writing. A text which made no use of any sources would be free of plagiarism but would be fundamentally unacademic.

Thus university students, particularly those studying in a second language, have to go through a complicated process of development in their management of intertextual links and EAP teachers have to guide them through it. The inherent centrality and pervasiveness of intertextuality practices in academic writing have led to quite intense research on the legitimate (e.g., Charles, 2006; Thompson, 2012) and illegitimate (e.g., Howard, Serviss, & Rodrigue, 2010; Pecorari, 2008) forms it takes in various genres and disciplines and on issues of legitimacy and control. More recently attention has been paid to the process of acquiring the relevant skills (or being socialized into the appropriate behavior), and that is the focus of this issue.

Since the objective at present is to get a better qualitative understanding of the processes involved in acquisition and use of intertextual skills, most of our contributors report case studies of small numbers of informants. Students do assessed writing in English as a first or second language in a wide variety of linguistic environments, and the contributors to this issue describe one major group – writers carrying out undergraduate or (mainly) postgraduate studies outside their home context. The student informants are predominantly Chinese, which is a reflection of the contributors’ teaching situations. Consequently four out of six of the studies reported here deal with informants studying in a fairly different academic culture from that of their undergraduate or secondary-school studies. The exceptions are Chinese studying in Hong Kong, and a ‘north west European’ studying in Britain; here we can assume more points of similarity in cultural (and linguistic) terms between earlier education and the stage studied. Nonetheless the emphasis here is, as it should be, on acquiring the practices of the international disciplinary community, rather than on possible relevant differences in background cultures.

These studies use a wide repertoire of qualitative research methods, including text analysis, discourse-based interviews, and think-aloud protocols. Two are longitudinal, following informants over a term or two years, while four focus on practices at a particular point in development, from first-year undergraduate to accomplished graduate student. Most contributors work within a generalized second-language writing framework, though Li aims to gain additional insight by applying the tools of action theory to the development of intertextual skills.

A common theme in the articles in this volume is the embeddedness of academic intertexuality in disciplinary and general academic practices and value systems. Thus a repeated concern is examining the interrelation of EAP training with actual practice in disciplinary dissertation writing. Training may facilitate learning but nothing can guarantee it, and this is a reflection of the complexity of the task. Intertextual references have a wide variety of functions, and the appropriate ones vary across task types, genres, and genre sections, as well as across disciplines.

Part of the difficulty involved in appropriate intertextuality for the types of informant examined in this volume lies in lack of linguistic resources in English. The teaching of intertextuality practices might therefore naturally involve exercises in paraphrase as a necessary part-skill. Hirvela and Du show in this issue, however, that part-skill learning of this type is of limited value because what really has to be learned is the role of paraphrased intertextuality in constructing the writer’s own knowledge and stance toward this knowledge. Their informants were skilled in paraphrasing uncontextualized source paragraphs but said that they preferred quotation in their disciplinary assignments because they were afraid on one side of misrepresenting the source and on the other of accusations of plagiarism for being too close to it. Their training in ‘avoiding plagiarism’ got in the way of mature use of sources. A striking feature of the two informants’ comments is their recognition of the importance of generalized intertextuality – using the discourse of the field.

Teachers may give incomplete or misleading advice about source use and may not always check whether what is presented as paraphrase is in fact direct quotation. Even master’s dissertations and PhD theses contain many instances of the latter (Pecorari, 2008). In the work reported in this issue, Davis followed three Chinese students from pre-Masters EAP to dissertation. One was reasonably competent from the beginning, one developed from a fairly low base to a moderate level of skill in source management, and one appeared to abandon paraphrase in favor of patchwriting, possibly because it was accepted by supervisors. The rather limited progress these three made toward acquiring appropriate intertextuality skills over a long and well-structured introduction to disciplinary writing suggests that they can only develop where both linguistic competence and disciplinary understanding are quite advanced. Like Hirvela and Du’s paper, Davis’ calls into question the amount of transfer we can expect from dedicated writing teaching to disciplinary practice.

Discipline-appropriate source use is thus not only a matter of understanding abstract rules or of having the necessary linguistic skills. It is also something to do with thinking in the way expected while reading and writing. McCulloch’s paper in this issue taps into this dimension by asking dissertation writers to think aloud while reading potential sources. This has the potential to go to the heart of successful or unsuccessful acquisition of disciplinary practices, and provides a useful typology of the types of reaction that EAP teaching could structure reading tasks to model. One of her two informants (both education postgraduates in the UK, one from Argentina, the other from India) more often responded with critical and elaborated comments, while the other was more deferential, adopting a stance of learning rather than discussion. This is doubtless partly a reflection of individual style and disciplinary maturity, but McCulloch points out that the first informant was looking at results and arguments, while the second was searching for appropriate methods and for potential flaws in the method he had chosen. Appropriate source use starts with having an appropriate purpose and strategy in one’s reading.

But reading appropriately presupposes choosing the right sources. Storch, Thompson & Morton’s interview study published here looks at how overseas undergraduates in Australia start to acquire the skills of selecting, incorporating and deploying citations in their writing. They show how their informants gradually, and at varying rates, start to focus on what their teachers will see as appropriate sources, while at the same time exploiting their own multilingual advantages. They gradually come to evaluate their sources with reference to generic and disciplinary criteria as well as ease of access to the sources. At the beginning of the process they are looking for sources that support their own position, while as time goes on they start to perceive a wider range of functions and to see different functions as appropriate in different tasks. The third dimension of development identified in this paper is an increased awareness in a proportion of the informants of their role as participants in the academic conversation.

Writing embedded in the discipline thus involves using sources for purposes which are both recognized by the disciplinary community and appropriate to the current task. It is characteristic of less skilled writers that their references have a limited and inflexible range of functions (mainly support of the writer’s own ideas according to Storch, Thompson & Morton). Petric and Harwood look at a writer who has completed the acquisition process – a skilled user of academic intertextuality who is a ‘northwest European’ business studies postgraduate in the UK. They study her writing in response to two different prompts, one quite tightly directed toward applying the literature to a case and one more that is more open-ended. Their informant’s skill is evidenced by the way she uses sources, for establishing topic relevance in the free task and for acknowledging sources of ideas in the more directed one, for example. It is a mark of her success that the ‘application’ function predominates in the task directed precisely toward application. Other functions, such as supplying definitions, and providing support for one’s own claims, are equally represented in both texts, suggesting disciplinary (management studies) rather than task requirements.

The function and form of intertextuality in academic texts is thus determined by a variety of factors, and their demands may be seen as contradictory until a disciplinary discourse has been internalized that resolves them – as it has perhaps been for Petric and Harwood’s informant. But the tasks faced by university students pose challenges in a variety of ways. Some involve source use and others do not, and teachers need to adjust instruction to this reality. (In fact it is this that makes it a challenge to allocate sufficient resources to teaching intertextuality.) The various demands have not normally been formalized within any general framework, and this is attempted in the paper by Li. She looks at three mainland Chinese exchange undergraduates studying politics in Hong Kong (thus in an environment in which their bilingual resources are fully exploitable), and applies activity theory. The analysis isolates a number of conflicts at different levels. Three come into focus as Li refers to source use: the tension between the wide range of sources and source types available for their use and their personal choice of a specific source, that of using sources in ‘ways that serve their personal goals for the paper’ and that of conflicts between perceived rules and personal goals for using sources. A particularly attractive feature of the activity theory framework is that it allows the modeling of increased understanding of the disciplinary content as deriving from one action in the writing series and then becoming a tool in used for acquiring further understanding and developing the process. This seems an elegant summary of what the successful learners in several of the longitudinal studies reported in this issue have achieved, and what the less successful informants have failed to do.

The papers in this volume all deal with the complexity of the process of acquiring the forms and functions of intertextuality in academic writing and thus underline both the importance and the difficulty of devising instructional routines which will facilitate it.

# References

Charles, M. (2006). The construction of stance in reporting clauses: a cross-disciplinary study of theses. Applied Linguistics, 27, 492–518.   
Howard, R. M., Serviss, T., & Rodrigue, T. K. (2010). Writing from sources, writing from sentences. Writing and Pedagogy, 2, 177–192.   
Pecorari, D. (2008). Academic writing and plagiarism: A linguistic analysis. London: Continuum.   
Thompson, P. (2012). Achieving a voice of authority in PhD theses. In K. Hyland, & C. Sancho Guinda (Eds.), Stance and voice in written academic genres (pp. 119–132). New York: Palgrave MacMillan.

Philip Shaw\* English Department, Stockholm University, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden