# Intertextuality and business communication textbooks: Why students need more textual support

Stephen Bremner \*

Department of English and Communication, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong

# Abstract

The intertextual nature of workplace writing is well attested, and the efficacy of intertextuality as a tool for investigating the ways in which genres are linked in workplace settings is also recognized (Berkenkotter, 2001; Bhatia, 2004). Intertextuality not only accounts for the links between texts, but is also an important factor influencing the way in which texts are constructed. It would therefore seem that a grasp of the ways in which genres are linked intertextually and shaped by this phenomenon could be of benefit to the student writer. However, an analysis of eight currently used business communication textbooks suggests that intertextuality is acknowledged only implicitly, if at all. Moreover, few tasks provide students with the kinds of intertextual support that would help them in understanding the ways in which this aspect of the writing process helps shape the texts they write. Tasks which take account of intertextuality and provide students with a selection of textual resources to draw on would provide more realistic contexts and also help them to understand this important feature of workplace writing.

$^ { © }$ 2008 The American University. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Intertextuality, a much-discussed notion first introduced by Kristeva (1980), is explained by Bazerman as the ‘‘explicit and implicit relations that a text or utterance has to prior, contemporary and potential future texts” (2004, p. 86). The study of intertextuality in relation to genres can be seen as building on Freadman’s notion that genre ‘‘is more usefully applied to the interaction of, minimally, a pair of texts than to the properties of a single text” (2002, p. 40). In recognizing this, a number of researchers have looked at ways in which genres operate as interrelated – and textually linked – components in wider systems of activity: Devitt (1991, 2004) looks at ‘‘genre sets”, saying that to acknowledge their importance ‘‘emphasizes the significance of intertextuality to genre” (2004, p. 55); Bazerman (1994) discusses ‘‘systems of genres”, and Bhatia (2004) talks of ‘‘a set of domain-specific disciplinary genres”. Orlikowski and Yates invoke what they call ‘‘genre repertoires” as an investigative tool (1994, p. 542), while Berkenkotter (2001) claims that ‘‘the professions are organized by genre systems [emphasis in original]” (p. 327) and it is through the study of these that we can understand more about the practices of professional writers. By extension, the study of the ways in which these clusters of genres are linked textually should also provide important information about the way in which texts are constructed: indeed, both Berkenkotter (2001) and Bhatia (2004) see intertextuality as a useful analytical tool for genre analysis.

Swales claims that ‘‘we are all admitted intertextualists now, both in theory and in practice” (2004, p. 21), but while the notion of intertextuality seems well established among analysts, there is less specific discussion of it in relation to the teaching of writing. If genre analysis is a useful approach to the teaching of texts (Bhatia, 1993, 2004; Flowerdew, 1993; Hyland, 2004), then an understanding of the intertextual links that help to shape genres should be similarly beneficial to the learner. Indeed, Devitt says that ‘‘to teach students the rhetorical and cultural significance of one genre will require teaching the significance of its genre set and the place of that genre within that set” (2004, p. 188).

In the context of academic writing, there has been some acknowledgement of this: Hyland (2004) sees intertextuality as ‘‘central to genre knowledge” (p. 80), saying that ‘‘teachers can help students to see that their texts do not stand alone but must be understood against a background of other opinions, viewpoints and experiences on the same theme” (p. 81). Holmes (2004) contends that intertextuality, ‘‘once combined with genre analysis, can offer a powerful basis for a coherent methodology that deals with the teaching of EAP reading and writing skills” (p. 73). Yet there appears to be less explicit mention of intertextuality in the context of teaching workplace genres, nor is the notion discussed in textbooks aimed at the teaching of workplace writing.

Textbook writers, like teachers, have to consider the degree to which they can provide scenarios and tasks which reflect the reality and complexity of writing outside the academy. Mabrito is pessimistic on this issue, saying ‘‘we will never be able to exactly duplicate in our classrooms many of the constraints and pressures that writers experience in the workplace” (1999, p. 105). Other responses to the seemingly intractable differences between the real world of the workplace and the artificial nature of the classroom centre around the notion of creating environments which have their own discourses and which require students to interact in ways that might mirror professional practice (e.g. Doheny-Farina, 1986; Knoblauch, 1989). This paper argues that a richer discursive environment, and one which would give students the opportunity to make more authentic rhetorical responses to different situations, could be achieved with the provision of more complex sets of intertextually linked texts for them to draw on. It discusses the importance of intertextuality as an aspect of workplace writing, examines the extent to which it features in business communication textbooks, and looks at ways in which it can help in teaching writing.

# 2. Intertextuality in workplace writing

Intertextuality manifests itself in workplace settings in a variety of ways. The interlinked nature of workplace communication in general is recognised by Louhiala-Salminen (2002), while Gunnarsson (1997) mentions the ‘‘continuous interplay” between spoken and written discourse, a phenomenon also discussed by Freadman (1994), Loos (1999) and Smart (2006). Devitt (1991) describes three types of intertextuality: referential, functional and generic. Referential intertextuality is seen when one text refers directly to another; this is perhaps the most immediately visible form of intertextuality (e.g. ‘‘Thank you for your letter of. . .”), but its impact on new texts tends to be rather superficial. Functional intertextuality occurs when a text is part of – and influenced by – a larger system of texts dealing with a particular issue. Generic intertextuality is the result of writers drawing on previous texts that have been produced as a response to similar situations, comparable to what Fairclough (1992) terms ‘‘constitutive intertextuality”.

If we take the social constructionist view of genres and contexts as inherently dynamic, as mutually constitutive (Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1993; Goodwin & Duranti, 1992; Smart, 2006), and also recognize that genres are interconnected in wider systems of activity, then we need to look at the ways in which genres influence other genres in the system. A key feature of intertextuality to consider, then, is that it is not simply a link between texts, but a phenomenon that helps shape other texts: as genres combine to achieve different goals, they contribute to the development of new genres as they are recontextualised (Linell, 1998). Thus the generic, linguistic and rhetorical choices that a writer makes will be influenced by the texts that precede or surround the text under construction, and will in turn have an effect on the final textual product.

This shaping influence can be seen in a range of situations, with varying degrees of impact. At the root of intertextuality is the idea that all texts are responses to other texts and that they are part of an ongoing dialogue, thus even the planning stage of the writing process involves the invoking of other textual resources, such as primary and secondary data for reports, or the Request for Proposal (RFP) when drafting a proposal. Another obvious manifestation is seen in the texts produced in direct response to other texts, such as complaints or requests, or to a series of exchanges regarding a particular issue, instances of Devitt’s (1991) referential and functional intertextuality.

Yet there are other, perhaps less obvious ways in which intertextuality exerts its influence on the shaping of texts. A common example is what might be termed institutional templates, referred to as ‘‘preprinted forms” by Thill and Bovee (2005, p. 354), the pre-existing formats used in many organizations to produce genres such as action plans, progress reports or minutes. These templates can make the writer’s task easier by providing pre-selected categories and sections, but they can also act as a form of control mechanism, in that the writer is expected to operate within these predetermined categories. Winsor suggests that writers in organizational contexts ‘‘usually attempt to account for. . . events in ways that are acceptable to authorities and productive in terms of corporate goals” (1999, p. 203), while Yates and Orlikowski say that genres can operate ‘‘both tacitly as habitual mechanisms and explicitly as deliberate devices” (2002, p. 14). Such observations support the notion that the organizational context in itself can be a constraint on the ways texts can be written, with templates serving as overt manifestations of this constraining influence.

Similarly, texts previously produced by other writers as a response to a particular situation can be drawn on by writers creating new texts. These might be established texts, which have become part of what Berkenkotter (2001) calls ‘‘historically sedimented practices” (p. 338) in the institution; they can make the writer’s task easier, but can also act as a form of constraint. The practice of using previously created texts is reported by Flowerdew and Wan (2006) in their study of tax accountants: ‘‘I can find past examples which match my situation and copy from it”, says one of their subjects, while another points out that they ‘‘use the templates and copy because [they] don’t have the time or authority to change what already exists in place” (p. 149), implicitly acknowledging the organizational – and intertextual – constraints under which they write.

A second instance of using other writers’ texts can be seen in situations where texts need to be developed as responses to new situations. In a study conducted by this researcher (Bremner, 2006) in an academic administration, the practice of appropriating a colleague’s work when producing documents such as progress reports and action plans was a common occurrence: when there were no established examples to refer to, colleagues were quick to use the texts created by others to meet the new situation, and appeared quite comfortable in doing so. In fact this form of appropriation was sanctioned by the coordinator of the process, and the texts in question swiftly became the templates for progress reports and action plans in the institution.

This raises the issue of what is seen as acceptable borrowing in a workplace context i.e. the question of plagiarism. The phenomena noted above echo the findings of Freedman, Adam, and Smart (1994), who say that concerns about originality or using colleagues’ ideas did not affect people in the workplace they studied. They go on to say that ‘‘workplace writing is resonant with the discourse of colleagues and the ongoing conversation of the institution. The etiquette for citing is complex and political, but the fact of such intertextual borrowing is a reality and a perceived good” (1994, p. 210). On the one hand, then, there is the question of whether to attribute texts or parts of them to colleagues, and on the other there are practical implications for the kinds of choices student writers have to make, how much they should diverge from what is being borrowed: essentially they need to make decisions about what is generic and what is specific to the situation they are working with, and understand that only part of the text they are using may be appropriate. This question is revisited in the discussion section.

The two forms of intertextuality described above can be seen as generic (Devitt, 1991), the first in effect imposed by the organization, the second intentionally exploited by the writer. Another form appears in contributions, direct or indirect, made by other colleagues, recalling Reither’s contention that writing ‘‘is ‘social’, ‘collaborative’, ‘intertextual’ in that authors challenge, modify, use, build on, and add to the utterances of others to join in ‘co-operative competition’ with them in the process of text and knowledge making” (1993, p. 198), a point also made by Prior (2004). Texts might evolve from working together in overtly collaborative writing sessions, or from including ideas and text that have been constructed elsewhere, such as comments from a supervisor, or organizational considerations in the form of the kinds of institutional template referred to above. These genres that are created out of the presence of the writer, what Swales (2004) refers to as ‘‘occluded genres”, can be influential in shaping a new text. Such intertextual inputs can be seen as a form of ‘‘covert collaboration” (Witte, 1992), whereby the writer, consciously or otherwise, is in effect collaborating with other writers in an organization. In Devitt’s (1991) model this might be considered as functional intertextuality, part of the wider cycle of activity that is focused on a particular goal.

# 3. The importance of intertextuality

The examination of intertextuality is not simply an account of how texts are connected, but an attempt to explain the factors that shape genres as they combine to achieve particular ends. In pointing out these intertextual links to the learner, we can make clearer the key point that writing is an ongoing, dialogic process, and that this dialogue will have an impact on the way that they construct texts: they should not be writing in a vacuum, but producing texts as responses to previous and current situations. At the same time students need to see that writing is context-bound: a text cannot be structured without reference to previous documents, community expectations, organizational styles and so on. In addition to this, the highlighting of intertextuality can show that writing has a collaborative element, overt or less visible, evidenced in the need to draw on other, previously written texts to produce new ones.

# 4. Research aims

It has been suggested that intertextuality as a concept has explanatory potential for the student writer; it will be argued that the provision of intertextual context for model texts and written tasks is therefore helpful. This section examines the degree to which intertextuality as a concept is acknowledged and exploited in a selection of business communication textbooks. Specifically, the following questions are addressed:

1. To what extent is intertextuality recognized, either implicitly or explicitly, in the selected business communication textbooks?   
2. How much intertextual support do the textbook writers provide to accompany sample texts and written tasks?   
3. How could the provision of intertextual support be of benefit?

# 5. The study

Eight books were selected for analysis, on the basis of being recent publications (all were published within five years of the study reported here), and coursebooks that attempt a comprehensive look at ‘business communication’, covering the main topics and genres considered necessary for the workplace: the nature of communication, writing (reports, letters, e-mails), presentations, meetings, etc. They are used in both L1 and L2 environments: the implications of this study are relevant to both in that the aims of these coursebooks are to equip students with specific workplace skills, regardless of their first language. While they differ in their approaches, they all cover to varying degrees the areas mentioned above. The list is shown below:

1. Business Communication (Lehman & DuFrene, 2002).   
2. Business Communication: Building Critical Skills (Locker & Kaczmarek, 2004).   
3. Business Communication for Managers. An Advanced Approach (Penrose, Rasberry, &   
Myers, 2004).   
4. Business Communication: Process and Product (Guffey, 2006).   
5. Communication in Business. Strategies and Skills (Dwyer, 2005).   
6. Contemporary Business Communication (Ober, 2003).   
7. Essentials of Business Communication (Guffey & Almonte, 2007).   
8. Excellence in Business Communication (Thill & Bovee, 2005).

# 5.1. Data collection and analysis

The discussion above identifies a number of areas where the intertextual nature of workplace writing is evident: the fact that it is a dynamic, dialogic process, and that many of the activities surrounding the construction of texts – planning, responding and referring to other documents, using organizational templates and conventions, collaborating – involve recourse to other textual products. It also looks at the concomitant issue of plagiarism or ‘‘intertextual borrowing”: the ways in which writers make use of pre-existing texts produced in their workplace. The study therefore seeks to find out how many of these concerns are addressed in the selected business communication textbooks. The questions were framed thus:

1. The planning process: To what extent are writers asked to refer to and incorporate other previously written documents during the planning process?   
2. The collaborative nature of writing: How is the collaborative aspect of writing addressed – as an interpersonal event or an intertextual event, or both?   
3. Referring and responding to other documents: How explicitly is this addressed? Is it treated as an influence on the shape of the document to be written?   
4. Templates, layouts, organizational conventions: Is there any discussion of what influences these and how these in turn shape the text to be written?   
5. Plagiarism: What is said about plagiarism as an issue or practice?   
6. Writing as a dynamic, dialogic process: Is this acknowledged or discussed?   
7. Intertextually situated tasks: Are there any task types which require the writer to refer to other texts?

# 6. Findings

# 6.1. The planning process

Every book provides guidelines for planning the writing process. Penrose et al. suggest a number of questions, including ‘‘from what sources can (information) be collected? (public, employees, customers, files, experiments, documentation)” (2004, p. 224). Thill and Bovee also list potential sources, including others’ viewpoints, reports, other company documents, news releases, memos, surveys and so forth (2005, p. 98); they also suggest chatting with superiors, colleagues and customers in this regard, a reminder of the link between spoken and written discourse. Guffey’s writing process includes a research stage: ‘‘Gather data to provide facts. Search company files, previous correspondence, and the Internet” (2006, p. 137). Yet although there is a clear sense of writers needing recourse to other texts in order to plan and write new ones, there is no indication as to how these texts might help shape the resulting documents.

# 6.2. The collaborative nature of writing

The notion of writing together is considered in nearly every book. Lehman and Dufrene (2002) talk of ‘‘team environments” (p. 38), while Penrose et al. (2004) mention the increasing value of collaborative writing. Ober contends that ‘‘team writing is becoming quite prevalent” and that ‘‘perspectives of several individuals are often needed” (2003, p. 44). In every case it is addressed as an interpersonal event, in that guidelines are offered for writing in teams (e.g. Guffey & Almonte, 2007) and the interactive skills required to collaborate effectively are discussed. There is, however, no explicit mention of how texts written by other colleagues might be incorporated into new texts.

# 6.3. Referring and responding to other documents

There is implicit acknowledgement of intertextual links in many instances. Texts with implicit – and sometimes explicit – links include letters of authorization and of transmittal, associated with the requesting and delivering of reports. In these letters specific examples of referential intertextuality (Devitt, 1991) can be seen e.g. ‘‘As you requested on August 20, this report. . .” (Thill & Bovee, 2005, p. 380). As noted earlier, while this is an obvious form of intertextuality, its impact on new texts tends to be superficial rather than structural. Other aspects of the report writing process are also mentioned, in particular the executive summary. Thill and Bovee point out how summarizing will be influenced by the larger text (e.g. the report): ‘‘The way you handle a synopsis reflects the approach you use in the text” (p. 419). Meeting agendas and minutes are generally covered: there are clear intertextual links between these two genres and the meetings that they relate to, but these are not specifically highlighted.

E-mail is covered extensively. The way in which this communication tool functions allows for very noticeable forms of intertextuality. For example, attaching a file to a message provides for referential intertextuality, and the ease with which this can be done is mentioned by Locker and Kaczmarek (2004). A second illustration can be seen in the act of hitting ‘‘Reply”, whereby a writer is immediately given the opportunity to build on an existing text, making for a form of functional intertextuality. This is addressed by Lehman and Dufrene: ‘‘Edit the original message when you reply to an e-mail message. . . Cut and paste pertinent sections within a reply that you believe will help the recipient understand your reply” (2002, pp. 205–206).

Another area likely to generate intertextual influence is that of letters written as specific responses to other letters, such as refusal letters. The models imply the need to refer to previous correspondence: in Ober (2003) a model refusal is presented as a response to an earlier letter, but in other books (e.g. Guffey & Almonte, 2007; Thill & Bovee, 2005) the models stand alone without reference to other texts. Indeed, while refusal letters are dealt with as a matter of course in the various books, the role of reference to previous documents is not tackled explicitly.

Finally, most of the textbooks examined look at the genres associated with seeking employment. Letters of application present an obvious chance for writers to refer specifically to another text, in this case the job advertisement. This is recognized by Thill and Bovee: ‘‘You can respond directly to job listings by posting tailor-made resumes (that match required qualifications) and . . . focused cover letters” (2005, p. 483). They provide a sample text, a solicited application letter in which the writer ‘‘mirrors the requirements specified. . . He actually grabs attention by focusing on the phrase ‘proven skills’ used in the ad” (pp. 502–503). Locker and Kaczmarek (2004) also recommend specific reference to the advertisement and to the qualifications required (p. 552). However, in the practice activities provided in these two books there is nothing for the writer to refer to.

In summary, then, while intertextual links are often implied or acknowledged, and in one or two cases mentioned more specifically, there is no explicit discussion of how these links might influence the shape of new texts.

# 6.4. Templates, layouts, organizational conventions

The issue of layout and templates is addressed in several books: Penrose et al. see layout as including established corporate guidelines (2004), and mention interaction with other messages, such as periodic reports or brochures, as factors to consider. Here we see a clear acknowledgement of the intertextual nature of the writing process. Thill and Bovee (2005) discuss preprinted forms, which they say tend to be relatively short, dealing with routine information. The way in which these might serve as a form of constraint or control is not mentioned, although they point out that ‘‘at times the person requesting the report makes the decision about format and length” (p. 354).

Locker and Kaczmarek look at the issue in greater detail, and examine the use of ‘‘boilerplate”, explained as ‘‘language . . . from a previous document that a writer includes in a new document” (2004, p. 79). Writers use form letters and boilerplate, they say, to save time and energy and to use language that has already been approved; this touches on the issue of using other colleagues’ text, discussed in the next section.

# 6.5. Plagiarism

The emphasis is primarily on plagiarism in the academy, with the clear message that it is unacceptable, and that the need to reference material is paramount (e.g. Guffey & Almonte, 2007). Plagiarism in the workplace is also discussed, with a range of views aired: Guffey (2006) points out that ‘‘in school or on the job, stealing ideas or words from others is unethical” (p. 28). However, she suggests that: ‘‘In the business world . . . documentation is often viewed differently. . . In many instances, individual authorship is unimportant”, going on to say that, ‘‘Internal business reports which often include chunks of information from previous reports, also fail to acknowledge sources or give credit” (p. 404). Locker and Kaczmarek make a similar point, saying that in business ‘‘old text may be included without attribution” (2004, p. 79). These views echo those cited earlier, notably the point made by Freedman et al. (1994) regarding ‘‘intertextual borrowing” in the workplace.

As mentioned earlier, there is a dimension to the plagiarism question which has implications for the student writer: if other previously written texts are available for them to draw on, how much of this can be used? Locker and Kaczmarek tackle this issue, pointing out that writers may see situations or audiences as identical when they are in fact different (2004, p. 79). This has a bearing on how the borrowing of other texts should be handled as a pedagogic issue, and is discussed in a later section of the paper.

# 6.6. Writing as a dynamic, dialogic process

With regard to writing, the notion that texts are responses to other texts and springboards for new texts is not discussed specifically, although the dialogic nature of communication in general is touched on in sections where the process as a whole is described. Dwyer mentions Schramm’s circular model of communication (‘‘each person in the communication process is both an encoder and a decoder”), described in Mohan, McGregor, and Strano (1992), as well as Barnlund’s process, outlined in DeVito (1978), which is based on six assumptions, including the notion that ‘‘Communication is dynamic, that is, ongoing, not static . . . continuous . . . circular” (Dwyer, 2005, p. 12). Thill and Bovee also talk of communication as a dynamic process, whose first phase is rendered thus: ‘‘The sender has an idea [emphasis in original]. You conceive an idea and want to share it” (2005, p. 18). The recognition that communication is a dynamic process implies that any communicative act is the consequence of, or a reaction to a previous act, but the question of where this idea comes from, of what has prompted it, is not considered. Indeed, questions such as: What body of work pre-exists this? What happened that prompted this scenario? Is there anything to refer to? do not appear explicitly.

# 6.7. Intertextually situated tasks

All the books provide practice tasks accompanied by information intended to help the writer create the target texts. However, this information does not come in the form of other texts that can be referred to, rather the textbooks tend to provide what could be termed ‘‘scripted context”, whereby the writer is told what has happened and what they want to do. Below is a typical example, taken from Lehman and DuFrene (2002, p. 274):

The auditors from Lindsay & Associates are due to arrive Monday to begin the interim audit of FTE Enterprises. As FTE’s controller, you just learned today (Wednesday) that a group of business executives from Moscow will arrive on Monday to examine your accounting systems. Previously you had agreed to assist this group in implementing similar accounting strategies in their country whenever they could arrange to be in Milwaukee. Because the visitation involves not only you but the entire MIS Department and several employees in the Accounting Department, you must arrange for the interim audit to be rescheduled.

Tasks commonly allude to the existence of other putative texts – an implicit acknowledgement of the intertextual links that should help shape the new text – but as with the example above, the texts themselves are not provided. Another instance of this can be seen in Penrose et al., where the task includes the line: ‘‘In the attached folder are most of the supporting materials and my text so far” (2004, p. 95); this is simply intended to provide a sense of context, it seems, as the texts themselves are not made available. A similar example is found in Thill and Bovee, in which the student is informed that ‘‘she’s left you her ticket stubs and other documents” (2005, p. 225), but again the actual documents are not supplied.

Ober (2003) adopts a slightly different approach, in that the tasks are linked through being associated with the same organisation. Thus the student is presented with a gradually developing context, as each situation builds on or refers to a previous one; what emerges from this, however, is a sense of continuity rather than intertextuality. In one instance the data from a questionnaire form the basis for a presentation (p. 457), but generally there is no accumulation of texts to refer to, either directly or indirectly.

Overall, then, while the existence of other texts is acknowledged to varying degrees in the different textbooks as part of the context for writing, there is little if any discussion of the ways in which these might shape the texts that result or will result from these contexts. Similarly the tasks that require students to produce their own texts have little in the way of ‘‘intertextual surround” as context for writing.

# 7. Discussion

At no point is the word ‘‘intertextuality” found in any of the books analyzed: it is not so much that this concept is unknown, rather that it is not considered directly in the explanation of texts or the provision of writing tasks. Yet if workplace texts are interlinked with and shaped by other texts, as has been shown, then this relationship should be clearly demonstrated in textbook models, and such links made possible in writing tasks. This would make for more realistic contexts and texts: an example from one textbook is shown here to show how the addition of more intertextual surround might lead to a more plausible sample text.

In illustrating her ‘ $3 \times 3$ Writing Process”, Guffey portrays ‘‘a typical business situation”, in which a videoconferencing service provider receives an inquiry at its Website from a prospective customer (2006, p. 137). The intention is to provide a model response (a letter) that is generated through application of the process. The actual text of the inquiry is not supplied: it is presumably understood to be general in nature. What emerges is a letter that displays many of the key moves of a promotional genre, such as establishing need, indicating the value of the product, and soliciting response, terms used by Bhatia (1993) in his analysis of genres of this nature. The letter explains the kinds of things that can be done using videoconferencing e.g. ‘‘conduct several meetings in one day instead of traveling to just one” as well as its advantages: ‘‘reduces staff fatigue, eliminates travel expenses” (Guffey, 2006, p. 138). (A complete copy of the text can be found in the Appendix.) In the first stage of the $3 \times 3$ process, writers are advised to ‘‘ANTICIPATE: Profile the audience. What does the receiver already know?” (Guffey, p. 136). This is followed up: the writer (Kevin Matthews) ‘‘must make a good impression in telling the customer about Kinko’s services. The customer is president of his company, and Kevin anticipated that he would be receptive to the message since he had enquired about the services” (p. 138). The model letter, with its generic moves and explanations as described above, would be appropriate for an unsolicited mailshot, yet as a response to a request for information it seems slightly odd: one can assume that in 2006 the president of a company (the putative enquirer) would know about videoconferencing and its potential benefits. If the original enquiry had been supplied, it is likely that a more realistic sample text might have emerged.

By extension, if the lack of intertextual context can lead to a model that is not completely appropriate, it is possible that students asked to create texts without sufficient context might produce similarly inappropriate texts. A further illustration can be seen in an extract from an application letter, taken from Dwyer (2005), where the writer simply says, ‘‘I have developed the skills identified in the advertisement in previous positions over the last five years. The enclosed references attest to my achievements in these positions” (p. 646). A more persuasive application, linking skills to specific parts of the advertisement, might have evolved had the writer been given an actual text to respond to. In the same way, when writing letters refusing claims, the writer’s task would be made easier with the provision of the original letter making the claim. Examples of model refusals are shown in the textbooks, but often without a copy of the claim letter they are addressing: one opportunity afforded by providing this would be for the writer to make references to specific parts of the text, perhaps to their advantage. This is surely an aspect of the intertextual nature of writing that students would do well to understand and practice.

As mentioned above, tasks tend to be supplied with a narrated context, which tells the writer who they are, what they want, what they’ve decided to do and so forth: this requires different kinds of reading and thinking processes from those which might be experienced in the workplace. More appropriate, and more realistic, would be to ask the students to evaluate textual information, decide what they want to do, select and organize the information relevant to their task, and write on the basis of these. Scenarios whereby students have to make choices of this nature might provide a closer replication of a workplace situation. Above all, wherever possible they should be given a text to which they can respond: this is surely the most fundamental aspect of intertextuality – the fact that nearly every text is a response to a previous text. A number of instances from the textbooks illustrate this need.

Consider, for example, some of the tasks suggested in Thill and Bovee (2005): in one task (p. 217) the student is told that they have received a letter, and that they are planning to send a brochure in response, also that they wish to highlight certain key points from the brochure. To provide a fuller context, the student could be given the original letter and a copy of the brochure (or excerpts from it). Another task (p. 226) requires the writer to say ‘‘yes” to a farmer’s request for a loan (from the manufacturer) to buy some farming equipment. Again a copy of the request itself could be provided, along with key information about the equipment and the nature of the loan. In this way the writer would have textual resources to draw upon, as well as having to process the information provided and make decisions about what should be included.

A more detailed example, also taken from Thill and Bovee (2005), is shown below, to demonstrate how a task could be exploited and given intertextual support. This is then linked to the earlier discussion of Devitt’s (1991) types of intertextuality.

Not this time: Letter from Union Bank of California denying a request for ATM adjustment. You work in operations in the ATM Error Resolution Department at Union Bank of California. Your department often adjusts customer accounts for multiple ATM debit errors. Mistakes are usually honest ones – such as a merchant swiping a customer’s check debit card two or three times, thinking the first few times didn’t ‘‘take” when they actually did.

Whenever customers call the bank about problems on their statements, they’re instructed to write a claim letter to your department describing the situation and to enclose copies of receipts. Customers are notified of the outcome within 10–20 business days.

You usually credit their account. But this time, your supervisor is suspicious about a letter you’ve received from Margaret Caldwell, who maintains several hefty joint accounts with her husband at Union Bank of California.

Three debits to her checking account were processed on the same day, credited to the same market, Wilson’s Gourmet. The debits carry the same transaction reference number, 1440022-22839837109, which is what caught Mrs. Caldwell’s attention. But you know the number changes daily, not hourly, so multiple purchases made on the same day often carry the same number. Also, the debits are for different amounts (\$23.02, \$110.95, and $\$ 47.50$ ), so these transactions weren’t a result of repeated card swipes. No receipts are enclosed.

Mrs. Caldwell writes that the store was trying to steal from her, but your supervisor doubts that and asks you to contact Wilson’s Gourmet. Manager Ronson Tibbits tells you that he’s had no problems with his equipment and mentions that food shoppers commonly return at different times during the day to make additional purchases, particularly for beverages or to pick up merchandise they forgot the first time.

Your supervisor decides this was neither a bank error nor an error on the part of Wilson’s Gourmet. It doesn’t matter whether Mrs. Caldwell is merely confused or trying to commit an intentional fraud. Bank rules are clear for this situation: You must politely deny her request.

Your task: Write a letter to Margaret Caldwell, 2789 Aviara Pky., Carlsbad, CA 92008, explaining your refusal of her claim $\# 7 8 9 9$ . Remember, you don’t want to lose this wealthy customer’s business.   
(Thill & Bovee, 2005, pp. 261–262).

As can be seen here, a substantial amount of background context is provided for this task, although none of it comes in the form of other texts. It is worth looking at this situation and considering what texts are potentially linked to the planned letter, how these relate to notions of intertextuality, and how these might influence the resulting text.

The most important document would be Mrs. Caldwell’s letter: it would include all the information that she thinks relevant to the case, and would thereby give the writer specific points, or textual hooks to hang parts of the response onto, thus allowing for a partial dialogue. She has suggested that the store was stealing from her, and this needs to be refuted in some way: if the writer had her exact words available, they could then make an appropriate response that would meet this point head-on and reassure Mrs. Caldwell that her case was being properly considered, rather than being dealt with by means of a standard refusal. These would be instances of both referential and functional intertextuality. At the same time the writer could decide on a suitable register.

In the same way, other, previously written denials or letters dealing with customer claims would also be a source of help for the writer: this would be seen as a regularly occurring situation. Flowerdew and Wan (2006) report that the tax accountants in their study ‘‘repeatedly draw on previous texts to produce a letter in response to similar situations” (p. 150); the accountants explain that at times they also ‘‘need to delve outside the known standard format and write from a personal perspective” (p. 148). Thus there might be a standard generic format to draw on, with previous examples to refer to; however, alongside this, some sections of the document might need to be tailored for specific circumstances, involving more creativity on the part of the writer. The need to make these judgements in such situations would demonstrate the significance of generic intertextuality.

The issue of generic formats relates to the question of using other writers’ work, or the possibility of plagiarism in the workplace, alluded to in earlier sections. The availability of previously written texts created for similar purposes should not be presented as a model from which large chunks can be copied wholesale, but as a text representing an organization’s standard approach. The task for the teacher would be to develop in the student an awareness of what is generic, and of what requires creativity on their part, and to demonstrate when it is appropriate to diverge from the previous text. The task for the writer would be to create a text that was an appropriate blend of the generic and the specific. The generic might consist of the formulae that help to achieve a tone consonant with other organizational documents, such as opening and closing a letter, or the standard ways of granting or rejecting a claim (e.g. a ‘you-focused’ approach for the former, a more impersonal passive structure for the latter); the specific would be what pertains to Mrs. Caldwell’s claim.

The result of providing intertextual support in this way would be a text that would more obviously be a response to the situation that engendered it: the letter would directly address the specifics of the case as laid out in the original claim, and thus be a more persuasive document; in understanding more about the reader from her claim, the writer could adopt a suitable tone; in having recourse to similar documents, the writer could be more certain that they were following a format and using a style that was accepted by the putative organisation.

In a real workplace even more documentation would be available to the writer, such as the bank’s procedures for dealing with ATM debit error, information about how often the transaction reference number changes, what usually happens, and what to do in specific instances (‘‘Bank rules are clear for this situation. . .”). These procedures would influence how the writer should deal with the situation, acting as both a guideline and a constraint, and this would be a form of generic intertextuality in that the final text (i.e. the denial) would be a more or less standard response to a recurring situation. The phone call with the manager of Wilson’s Gourmet would also have an impact on the letter. The writer might include one or two points from their conversation in the letter itself, demonstrating the kinds of ‘‘continuous interplay” between written and spoken discourse mentioned by Gunnarsson (1997). Additional relevant information could come from documents relating to Mrs. Caldwell’s claim, such as her account statements and a printout of account activity for the day in question. These documents might also be annotated by the supervisor, who could be guiding the writer towards a particular course of action.

However, to provide these extra documents would probably be beyond the scope of the materials/textbook writer in practical terms. The key texts would be the original letter and the example text or texts previously written in the organisation: such texts would provide the support a writer needed and would expect in a workplace context.

In summary, then, the provision of some or all of these texts would make the context more ‘workplace-like’; in addition to the influence on the textual outcomes, it would impact on students in the following ways:

1. They would appreciate the dialogic nature of workplace writing, the idea that texts are not stand-alone products, but components in a wider process (functional intertextuality). 2. With more context they would be able to craft their writing with a sense of audience, addressing the specific concerns and needs of their readers; in personalizing their writing in this way they would perhaps be better able to achieve a more appropriate register, and thereby to be more persuasive (referential, functional intertextuality). 3. They would understand some of the constraints that attend workplace writing if provided with texts that gave them a sense of what was allowable and not allowable e.g. texts previously produced in response to particular situations, organizational templates, possibly even company guidelines. They would begin to address the notion of making choices between what is generic and what is specific to a given task (generic intertextuality). 4. In sorting through a set of texts they would be required to determine which information was necessary for the task, and to make decisions about how this should be ordered and presented; this is more reflective of what happens in the workplace than being given a scripted context to work with.

The practicality of producing huge numbers of texts for every task has already been alluded to. One possible approach might be to build up a set of texts over the duration of a course. As Freedman et al. point out, ‘‘student writing has a relatively ephemeral existence” (1994, p. 209), referring to the fact that many assignments do not survive beyond the grading process. If students could draw on their own texts or even texts produced by other students as part of an ongoing process, the result would be the gradual gathering of a corpus of intertextually linked texts, which could lead to a greater understanding of the importance of intertextuality in workplace writing. In the books analysed, only Ober (2003) comes close to this, but while the same organisational context is used throughout the book, as mentioned earlier there are few if any intertextual moments.

# 8. Conclusion

This study has revisited a concept that is well established in the research community, and has presented a case for making its influence more explicit in teaching contexts. The analysis of a small selection of currently available textbooks can only be an indication of the way in which intertextuality has impinged on the actual teaching of workplace genres. Holmes (2004) reports success in introducing the concept into an EAP environment, but as yet there appears to be no account of a similar attempt at highlighting intertextual influences in the teaching of workplace English. Such work would require more creativity on the part of the task designer: it would necessitate providing an extensive selection of texts to demonstrate how intertextuality influences the construction of workplace genres; more texts would be needed to provide students with the appropriate resources for creating their own texts. Yet if instructors set assignments that provide insufficient intertextual support, then they run the danger of requiring the students themselves to be overly creative, forcing them to invent a context, or to operate without one, a situation that bears little relation to an authentic workplace.

It is difficult to replicate exactly the conditions of work settings in the academy, but if we can get our students to see the texts they read and produce as part of a wider, ongoing system of intertextually related practice, grounded in a professional context, this will surely be a step towards preparing them for the reality of the workplace.

# Appendix A. Full text of letter generated by Guffey’s $\mathbf { 3 \times 3 }$ process (2006)

Dear Mr. Manchester:

We appreciate your recent inquiry about Kinko’s videoconferencing services. Because today’s business moves at a fast pace and often requires face-to-face meetings, we’d like to tell you how you can conduct those meetings worldwide – without ever leaving town!

Kinko’s videoconferencing services can help you launch a product, complete a project on time, or hire a prized job candidate. These and many other tasks demand swift action. Instead of sending employees to remote locations, you can use Kinko’s videoconferencing, available in 150 locations, to conduct effective meetings, make presentations to clients, and meet new business prospects. Other benefits of Kinko’s videoconferencing include the following:

Conduct several meetings in one day instead of travelling to attend just one.   
Express your ideas clearly with slides and other visual aids.   
Present graphs or other documents right from your laptop.   
Access Internet information during your videoconference. Videotape your conference for future viewing.   
Schedule and check room availability $2 4 \mathrm { h }$ a day, seven days a week.

Videoconferencing reduces staff fatigue, eliminates travel expenses, and cuts meeting time. Just think of it – you can actually complete a 1-h meeting in 1 h! At the same time, you can boost the impact and results of your presentation.

If you already have your own videoconferencing equipment, you can extend your network with direct links to Kinko’s 150 videoconferencing sites without incremental equipment costs.

For more information visit www.kinkos.com or call 1-800-669-1235. Better yet, come in for a demonstration of our easy-to-use equipment including voice-activated cameras that track all the action.

Sincerely, Guffey (2006, p. 138).

# References

Bazerman, C. (1994). Systems of genres and the enactment of social intentions. In A. Freedman & P. Medway (Eds.), Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 79–104). London: Taylor & Francis.   
Bazerman, C. (2004). Intertextuality: How texts rely on other texts. In C. Bazerman & P. Prior (Eds.), What writing does and how it does it: An introduction to analyzing texts and textual practices (pp. 83–96). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Berkenkotter, C. (2001). Genre systems at work: DSM-IV and rhetorical recontextualization in psychotherapy paperwork. Written Communication, 18(3), 326–349.   
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. (1993). Rethinking genre from a sociocognitive perspective. Written Communication, 10(4), 475–509.   
Bhatia, V. (1993). Analysing genre: English use in professional settings. London: Longman.   
Bhatia, V. (2004). Worlds of written discourse: A genre-based view. London: Continuum.   
Bremner, S. (2006). The construction of workplace writing: Texts, contexts and interaction in an academic administration. Unpublished PhD dissertation. City University of Hong Kong.   
DeVito, J. (1978). Communicology: An introduction to the study of communication. New York: Harper & Row.   
Devitt, A. (1991). Intertextuality in tax accounting: Generic, referential, and functional. In C. Bazerman & J. Paradis (Eds.), Textual dynamics of the professions: Historical and contemporary studies of writing in professional communities (pp. 336–357). Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.   
Devitt, A. (2004). Writing genres. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.   
Doheny-Farina, S. (1986). Writing in an emerging organization: An ethnographic study. Written Communication, 3(2), 158–185.   
Dwyer, J. (2005). Communication in Business: Strategies and Skills. Frenchs Forest NSW: Pearson/Prentice Hall.   
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge: Polity Press.   
Flowerdew, J. (1993). An educational, or process, approach to the teaching of professional genres. ELT Journal, 47(4), 305–316.   
Flowerdew, J., & Wan, A. (2006). Genre analysis of tax computation letters: How and why tax accountants write the way they do. English for Specific Purposes, 25(2), 133–153.   
Freadman, A. (1994). Anyone for tennis? In A. Freedman & P. Medway (Eds.), Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 43–66). London: Taylor & Francis.   
Freadman, A. (2002). Uptake. In R. Coe, L. Lingard, & T. Teslenko (Eds.), The rhetoric and ideology of genre: Strategies for stability and change (pp. 39–53). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.   
Freedman, A., Adam, C., & Smart, G. (1994). Wearing suits to class: Simulating genres and simulations as genres. Written Communication, 11(2), 193–226.   
Goodwin, C., & Duranti, A. (1992). Rethinking context: Language as an interactive phenomenon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Guffey, M. (2006). Business communication: Process and product. Mason, OH: Thomson/South-Western.   
Guffey, M., & Almonte, R. (2007). Essentials of business communication. Toronto: Thomson, Nelson.   
Gunnarsson, B. (1997). The writing process from a sociolinguistic viewpoint. Written Communication, 14(2), 139–189.   
Holmes, J. (2004). Intertextuality in EAP: An African context. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3(1), 73–88.   
Hyland, K. (2004). Genre and second language writing. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.   
Knoblauch, C. (1989). The teaching and practice of ‘‘professional writing”. In M. Kogen (Ed.), Writing in the business professions (pp. 246–264). Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.   
Kristeva, J. (1980). Desire in language: A semiotic approach to literature and art. Oxford: Blackwell.   
Lehman, C., & DuFrene, D. (2002). Business communication. Cincinnati, OH: South-Western.   
Linell, P. (1998). Discourse across boundaries: On recontextualizations and the blending of voices in professional discourse. Text, 18, 143–157.   
Locker, K., & Kaczmarek, S. K. (2004). Business communication: Building critical skills. New York: McGrawHill/Irwin.   
Loos, E. (1999). Intertextual networks in organizations: The use of written and oral business discourse in relation to context. In F. Bargiela-Chiappini & C. Nickerson (Eds.), Writing business: Genres, media and discourses (pp. 315–332). London: Longman.   
Louhiala-Salminen, L. (2002). The fly’s perspective: Discourse in the daily routine of a business manager. English for Specific Purposes, 21, 211–231.   
Mabrito, M. (1999). From workplace to classroom: Teaching professional writing. Business Communication Quarterly, 62(3), 101–104.   
Mohan, T., McGregor, H., & Strano, Z. (1992). Logic social welfare. UK: Pearson Education.   
Ober, S. (2003). Contemporary business communication. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.   
Orlikowski, W., & Yates, J. (1994). Genre repertoire: The structuring of communicative practices in organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39, 541–574.   
Penrose, J., Rasberry, R., & Myers, J. (2004). Business communication for managers. An advanced approach. Mason, OH: Thomson/South-Western.   
Prior, P. (2004). Tracing process: How texts come into being. In C. Bazerman & P. Prior (Eds.), What writing does and how it does it: An introduction to analyzing texts and textual practices (pp. 167–200). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Reither, J. (1993). Scenic motives for collaborative writing in workplace and school. In R. Spilka (Ed.), Writing in the workplace: New research perspectives (pp. 195–206). Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.   
Smart, G. (2006). Writing the economy: Activity genre and technology in the world of banking. London: Equinox.   
Swales, J. (2004). Research genres: Exploration and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Thill, J., & Bovee, C. (2005). Excellence in business communication. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice Hall.   
Winsor, D. (1999). Genre and activity systems: The role of documentation in maintaining and changing engineering activity systems. Written Communication, 16(2), 200–224.   
Witte, S. (1992). Context, text, intertext: Toward a constructivist semiotic of writing. Written Communication, 9(2), 237–308.   
Yates, J., & Orlikowski, W. (2002). Genre systems: Structuring interaction through communicative norms. The Journal of Business Communication, 39(1), 13–35.