# Developing a genre-based research article reading module for undergraduate students

Guangsa Jin \* , Chenle Li , Ya Sun

School of International Studies, University of International Business and Economics, No. 10, Huixin Dongjie, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100029, China

# A R T I C L E I N F O

# A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: L. McGrath

Keywords: Research article Genre pedagogy Second language reading

Although research articles (henceforth RA) have been widely used in undergraduate teaching as assigned readings or supplementary teaching materials, studies addressing students’ challenges in RA reading are infrequent. We conducted a two-cycle action research to examine the effect of genre instruction on RA reading comprehension of Year 3 and 4 undergraduate students in economics. In Cycle 1, students $( \mathtt { n } = 3 4 )$ ) were introduced to move structures of conventional sections, including Introduction, Method, Results, Discussion, and Conclusion; in Cycle 2, stu dents $( \mathtt { n } = 3 4 )$ ) were introduced to a discipline-specific move model of economics. Apart from the conventional sections, the model used in Cycle 2 also describes the rhetorical structure of discipline-specific sections, such as Theoretical Model, Econometric Model, Robustness, and Mechanisms. Summary writing and multiple-choice tests were used to measure students’ improvements in reading comprehension. The findings show that Cycle 2 instruction significantly improved students’ performance in summary writing (medium effect size) and multiple-choice tests (small effect size), whereas Cycle 1 instruction did not. Also, fewer students in Cycle 2 perceived cognitive overload challenges than their peers in Cycle 1. The findings can be useful for EAP practitioners teaching similar cohorts of students.

# 1. Introduction

Academic reading difficulties faced by second language (L2) learners have been documented in many studies (Ali Alghail & Ali Mahfoodh, 2016; Mehar Singh, 2014; Parkinson et al., 2007; Phakiti & Li, 2011; Porter, 2018; Stoller & Nguyen, 2020). Among the challenges identified in undergraduate students’ reading experience, limited time (Anderson, 2015; Fook & Sidhu, 2015; Hartshorn et al., 2017), a slow reading speed (Hellekjaer, 2009; Liu & Read, 2020; Yeh, 2009), long texts (Liu & Read, 2020; Weir et al., 2009), and inefficiency in locating useful information (S. Evans & Green, 2007; Liu & Read, 2020; Weir et al., 2009; Yeh, 2009) were frequently mentioned.

One possible explanation for these difficulties might be that undergraduate students, who have little experience with academic genres, tend to process unfamiliar long texts in a bottom-up fashion (i.e., reading texts sentence by sentence) (Jamieson & Howard, 2013; Kalbfleisch et al., 2021). For example, Jamieson and Howard (2013) found that $8 3 \%$ of the citations from research articles produced by first-year undergraduate students were based on information in the first four pages, suggesting that students read from the beginning at a slow reading speed. Research articles (henceforth RA) are considerably longer than the text types that pre-university students are familiar with. Naturally, undergraduate students may find it difficult to finish reading assignments within time constraints if they process all reading materials at the sentence level.

Research shows that text structure instruction can help pre-university readers (K-12) improve their recall and comprehension of the main ideas of short passages (expository and narrative texts) (see Bogaerds-Hazenberg et al., 2021; Pyle et al., 2017 for reviews). However, little attention has been paid to the reading of RA, which is a genre much longer than pre-university reading materials and widely used in disciplinary education at the tertiary level (Bitran et al., 2012; Blommaert et al., 1995; Kovarik, 2016; MCcune & Hounsell, 2005; Oldenburg, 2005; Pence & Losoff, 2011).

Findings of genre analysis show that research articles have highly conventional rhetorical structures (e.g., Brett, 1994; Lim, 2006; Swales, 1990). Genre analysts suggest that the findings of their studies on RA rhetorical structure can help novices improve reading comprehension of the genre (Brett, 1994; Holmes, 1997; Jin, Li, & Sun, 2020; Kanoksilapatham, 2005, 2015; Lakic, 1997; Lim, 2006, 2010; Stoller & Robinson, 2013; Williams, 1999; Yang & Allison, 2003). However, there is little empirical evidence supporting this claim.

In this study, we conducted a two-cycle action research to examine the effect of genre-based instruction on students’ RA reading comprehension. It aims to develop a RA reading module for Year 3 and 4 undergraduate students in economics.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. The disciplinary specificity of genre analysis of RAs

There is evidence showing that RA genre features vary across disciplines (e.g., Anthony, 1999; Gao et al., 2024; Gong & Barlow, 2022; Graves et al., 2014; Jiang, 2017; Khaw & Tan, 2018; Samraj, 2002). Two lines of research have been conducted to investigate the rhetorical structure of research articles: Some researchers have made efforts to build general move models based on RAs across dis ciplines (e.g., Cotos et al., 2017; Moreno & Swales, 2018; Swales, 1981), while others developed models describing RA structures in a single discipline or sub-discipline (e.g., Kanoksilapatham, 2005; Kuteeva & McGrath, 2015; Nwogu, 1997; Posteguillo, 1999; Stoller & Robinson, 2013; Tessuto, 2015).

Studies developing general models typically focus on sections in the Introduction-Method-Results-Discussion (henceforth IMRD) structure (Cotos et al., 2017; Moreno, 2021; Swales, 1981). For example, Cotos et al. (2017) developed a “cross-disciplinary” model describing the rhetorical structure of the RA Method section by analysing 900 articles representing 30 disciplines (p. 90). The Method sections analysed were from “IMRD-structured reports of experimental research” (p. 94).

The studies on discipline-specific models are more descriptive, taking RA authors’ macrostructure into consideration when building models describing rhetorical structures (Kwan, 2017; Posteguillo, 1999; Tessuto, 2015; Yang & Allison, 2004). These studies found part-genres other than the IMRD sections (e.g., Kuteeva & McGrath, 2015; Kwan, 2017; P´erez-Llantada, 2013; Posteguillo, 1999; Yang & Allison, 2004). For example, Kwan (2017) analysed the rhetorical structure of 60 articles in Information Systems, and found five discipline-specific sections, including Research Model/Hypotheses, Problem/Requirements Analysis, Research Paradigm, Artefact, and Evaluation.

The two lines of research are connected with each other in that many discipline-specific models that depart from the IMRD pattern also contain all or some of the IMRD sections (e.g., Jin et al., 2020; Kuteeva & McGrath, 2015; Kwan, 2017; Posteguillo, 1999). Research shows that move structures of the conventional sections share similarities across disciplines (e.g., Anthony, 1999; Lakic, 1997; Lim, 2010). General models of the conventional sections can form the basis of discipline-specific models.

There has been much discussion about the specificity of genre pedagogy (Basturkmen, 2003; Belcher, 2009; Costley & Flowerdew, 2017; Hyland, 2002). Empirical investigations into the effects of applying general models and discipline-specific models to EAP teaching practice of different cohorts (e.g., students of different levels and disciplines) and different skills (e.g., reading and writing) may contribute to this discussion.

# 2.2. Research on RA reading instruction

Although great efforts have been made in genre analysis of RAs, studies examining the effect of genre pedagogy on students’ EAP practice were less frequent. Researchers have explored ways of genre-based instruction in writing (Cheng, 2006, 2007, 2008a, 2008b, Cortes, 2011; Feak & Swales, 2010; L. Flowerdew, 2015; Kuteeva, 2013; P´erez-Llantada & Swales, 2017; Swales & Feak, 2012; Yayli, 2011). However, few examined genre-based reading instruction, and those available typically focus on disciplines in which RA authors follow the IMRD pattern (also known as the APA style), such as psychology (Barnett, 1984; Brosowsky et al., 2020; Kershaw et al., 2018; Sego & Stuart, 2016) and life science (Lacum et al., 2014). These studies found that familiarising novice readers with the IMRD pattern and training students to find information in articles following the IMRD pattern improved participants’ reading comprehension.

However, there is evidence showing that RAs in many disciplines deviate from the IMRD pattern (Jin et al., 2020; Kuteeva & McGrath, 2015; Kwan, 2017; Posteguillo, 1999). Since section headings are important signals for readers to locate information (Hyon¨ ¨a & Lorch, 2004), teaching rhetorical structure developed based on RA authors’ headings may increase students’ reading efficiency. No studies have compared the effect of general model instruction (i.e., IMRD) and discipline-specific model instruction on students’ reading comprehension of RAs that follow discipline-specific structural patterns.

In addition, studies on RA reading teaching practice typically focus on novice readers (i.e., lower-level undergraduate students) (Barnett, 1984; Deng et al., 2024; Lacum et al., 2014; Sego & Stuart, 2016). For example, Sego and Stuart (2016) helped first-year undergraduate students enrolled in their introductory psychology course build mental representations of RA structure by training them to identify key information in RAs using 22 guiding questions (p. 41). However, studies examining the difficulties of academic readers who have RA reading experience are scarce. Following Wette (2017), we refer to students who have some experience but not highly experienced in RA reading as “post-novice” readers (p. 48).

# 3. The context

The first author has been teaching an undergraduate academic reading and writing course at a university in China for Year 3 and 4 students who speak English as a foreign language (henceforth the course) to prepare them for writing graduation papers, which require students to review literature in their field and report a study of their own. The course is elective and open to students of all faculties. Since the university that the authors work with is specialised in economics and business, the majority of students have a major or minor in economics-related disciplines, such as political economics, insurance, economics statistics, and fiscal science. Most programmes of the university are taught in Chinese, but many courses use textbooks or other teaching materials in English.

Before this research, the course only focused on writing. The first author found that in literature review assignments, many students only reported the research topic of each reviewed article, providing few details on research method and findings, even though the assignments asked for details. By chatting to students, she realised that students had difficulties in reading RAs. To address this problem, the first author added a four-session RA reading module to the course. Over two cycles of action research, we examined the effect of genre-based instruction using general move models and a discipline-specific move model on students’ RA reading comprehension. Four questions guiding this research are:

1) Was post-novice L2 undergraduate students’ RA reading comprehension improved after the general model instruction?   
2) Was post-novice L2 undergraduate students’ RA reading comprehension improved after the discipline-specific model instruction?   
3) How did students perceive their challenges in RA reading before and after the general model instruction?   
4) How did students perceive their challenges in RA reading before and after the discipline-specific model instruction?

To address these questions, we recruited participants from the first author’s class to explore the effects of the two types of in struction. In the first year, a group of students were given the general model instruction and formed the first instructional group; in the second year, a new group of students were given the discipline-specific model instruction and formed the second instructional group. In addition, a control group was used to exclude the effect of different levels of familiarity with test form in the pre- and post-tests. Before the main study, a pilot was conducted with 20 volunteers to evaluate the level of difficulty of reading comprehension tests (see Table 1).

This course was taught only by the first author and had no parallel classes, so all participants were recruited from the first author’s class in different years. Participation was voluntary and it was made clear that neither grades nor academic relationships with the authors would be affected by either refusal or agreement to participate. WeChat red packets were offered to attract participants. Also, we avoided questions asking students to directly evaluate the course. Instead, we asked about students’ reading process and specific difficulties, which are more objective and students can respond without worrying about threatening the face of the first author, who was the classroom teacher.

# 4. Lesson design

Supplementary Material VI presents an overview of the lessons’ content in two teaching cycles. The RA reading module was administered by the first author from the third to sixth week in both cycles of teaching in her class in two consecutive years. Each lesson lasted for $^ { 1 . 5 \mathrm { h } }$ . The sections of RAs were introduced one by one. In both cycles, the instructor 1) presented a move model for each section, 2) provided definitions and examples of important steps, 3) showed sample sections annotated with moves and steps, and 4) demonstrated how to find key information in each section. Cycle 1 adopted existing move models of the conventional sections, whereas Cycle 2 used a discipline-specific move model developed by the authors based on 20 experimental economics RAs.

# 4.1. Teaching materials used in Cycle 1

We adopted Swales’ Introduction model (1990), Cotos et al.’s Method model (2017), Moreno and Swales’ Discussion model (2018), Brett’s Results model (1994), and Yang and Allison’s model on the closing sections (2003). The first three models were developed based on RAs across disciplines, including economics and business. The last two models have been applied in the analysis of the concluding sections of many disciplines (e.g., Basturkmen, 2009; Lim, 2010). All models are well-known in the field.

Table 1 The overall research design.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Groups</td><td>Types of instruction</td></tr><tr><td>Pilot study (n = 20)</td><td>No instruction: The pilot study was used to test the reading comprehension tests.</td></tr><tr><td> Instructional group 1 (n = 34)</td><td>Cycle 1: General model instruction</td></tr><tr><td>Instructional group 2 (n = 34)</td><td>Cycle 2: Discipline-specific model instruction</td></tr><tr><td>Control group (n = 34)</td><td>No instruction: The control group was used to exclude the efect of different levels of familiarit with test form in pre- and post- tests.</td></tr></table></body></html>

However, after introducing general models in Cycle 1, many students complained that the structure of RAs that they were reading for disciplinary courses did not match the move models that the first author taught in class. The first author realised that the rhetorical structure of economics RAs might depart from the IMRD pattern. Therefore, we decided to develop a discipline-specific move model of economics RAs and examine its instructional effect in Cycle 2.

# 4.2. Teaching materials used in Cycle 2

The move model used in Cycle 2 was developed by the authors based on a genre analysis of 20 experimental economics RAs. The articles used in the analysis were from an economics RA corpus built by the authors in a previous study (Jin et al., 2020). The corpus contains 80 economics research articles of four different research approaches (i.e., experimental economics, theoretical economics, theoretical econometrics, and applied econometrics) randomly sampled from “top five” economics journals published in 2017 and 2018 (i.e. American Economic Review, Econometrica, Journal of Political Economy, Quarterly Journal of Economics, and Review of Economic Studies) (Bornmann et al., 2018, p. 659). The corpus was built based on local students’ needs (Lee, 2023) and the suggestions of our informants, who hold PhD in economics and have been publishing in well-known international journals in economics.

We decided to teach undergraduate students to read experimental economics RAs because causality, which is best established using experiments (Athey & Imbens, 2017), is essential in making policy suggestions and central in economic research (Hoover, 2008). Also, our informants suggest that the mathematical process reported in RAs following the other three approaches published in top-tier journals may be too difficult for undergraduate students; experimental economics is a good start for novices to learn the way of knowledge production and conventional structure of arguments on new knowledge claims in the field.

We generally followed Upton and Cohen’s approach of move analysis (2009). 1) To develop a preliminary coding scheme, we conducted an “inductive analysis of exemplary texts" by annotating five articles from the corpus (Cotos et al., 2017, p. 95). 2) Research assistants segmented the remaining 15 articles into meaningful units, which were then checked by the second author, who holds a PhD in economics and had been teaching and publishing in economics for 9 years at the time of study. 3) The second author read the 15 articles, assigned a move/step code to each segmented unit and added new codes to the coding scheme. 4) The first two authors simplified the coding scheme by removing redundant codes, combining similar codes, and re-classifying moves and steps. Then, the first author re-coded the texts using the new coding scheme. 5) The second author independently coded $2 0 \%$ of the corpus (i.e., four articles) one month later and agreed with $8 3 . 5 \%$ (616/738) of the first author’s annotation at Stage 4 at the sub-step level. Previous genre analysis studies which also checked inter-coder agreement at the step/sub-step level reported similar percent agreement, ranging from $8 0 \%$ to $8 6 \%$ (Ash’ari et al., 2023; Lin, 2014; Sheldon, 2011, 2019). 6) Interviews were conducted with disciplinary experts to explore the epistemological underpinnings of the rhetorical structure. However, we only reached Stage 4 when administering the module in Cycle 2. The coding scheme is relatively stable at Stage 4. We taught students the move structure only and do not know if introducing move structure paired with its epistemological underpinnings would further improve students’ RA reading comprehen sion. Apart from the conventional sections (i.e. IMRDC), the model contains discipline-specific part-genres including Background, Theoretical Model, Econometric Model, Robustness, Mechanisms, and Application (see Supplementary material IV for the move model).

# 5. The pre- and post-tests

Following Kershaw et al. (2018), summary writing and multiple-choice tests were employed to measure changes in students’ RA reading comprehension from pre- to post-tests.

The pre- and post-tests are both a 1-h reading test of an experimental economics research article. Students were asked to read an article while writing a structured summary in $5 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ and answer five multiple-choice recall questions in $1 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ . Following Kershaw et al. (2018), we provided participants with a guide to scaffold their summary writing. Students were asked to write about the purpose, method, major findings, and implications of the study (see Supplementary material V). Multiple-choice tests were developed to test students’ recall of key information on research purpose, sample, experiment design, findings, and implication (see Supplementary material V).

We developed three sets of tests in order to choose two of similar difficulty to be used in pre- and post-tests. The three tests were administered to 20 volunteers in three weeks in a pilot study.

As shown in Table 2, we found that the participants in the pilot study made significant improvements between Test 1 and 2 in summary writing $( \mathrm { m } _ { \mathrm { d i f } } = 2 3 . 5 , ^ { 1 } F \left( 1 , 3 8 \right) = 2 0 . 1 7 , p < . 0 0 1$ , $\boldsymbol \eta ^ { 2 } = . 3 5 )$ , whereas their scores were relatively stable between Test 2 and 3 $( \mathrm { m _ { d i f } } = 3 . 2 5 , F ( 1 , 3 8 ) = . 3 4 , p = . 5 7 , \eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 1 ) .$ The improvement between Test 1 and 2 in multiple-choice test $( \mathrm { m _ { d i f } } = 6 . 2 5 , F ( 1 , 3 8 ) =$ .69, $p = . 4 1$ , $\boldsymbol \eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 2 )$ and that between Test 2 and 3 $( \mathfrak { m } _ { \mathrm { d i f } } = 4 . 2 5 , F ( 1 , 3 8 ) = . 3 5 , p = . 5 6 , \mathfrak { n } ^ { 2 } = . 1$ ) were both insignificant, though there were slight increases in mean scores. The great improvement made by students between Test 1 and 2 corroborates with the findings of Kershaw et al. (2018), who also noticed that students’ test scores may considerably increase in the first few RA reading tests when getting familiar with test forms.

Table 2 Mean scores of summary writing and multiple-choice tests in Pilot Study 1 $( { \bf n } = 2 0 ) ^ { \mathrm { a } }$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Test 1 (Andrabi et al., 2017)</td><td>Test 2 (Banerjee et al., 2018)</td><td>Test 3 (Cai &amp; Szeidl, 2018)</td></tr><tr><td>Summary writing</td><td>m = 29</td><td>m = 52.5</td><td>m = 55.75</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SD = 15.18</td><td>SD = 17.81</td><td>SD = 17.71</td></tr><tr><td>Multiple-choice test</td><td>m = 38.75</td><td>m = 45.00</td><td>m = 49.25</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SD = 21.94</td><td>SD = 25.39</td><td>SD = 19.55</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Note: The maximum score of the tests was 100.

The participants in the pilot study were asked to rank their perceived difficulties of the three articles. The majority of participants (16/20; $8 0 \%$ ) chose that the three articles have similar level of difficulty.

We needed two reading tests of similar difficulty to be used in the pre- and post-tests. As mentioned above, there was no significant difference between the students’ test scores of Test 2 and 3 in the pilot study. In addition, most students’ perceived difficulty of Test 2 and 3 was similar. Therefore, the second and third sets of tests were used as pre- and post-tests in the two teaching cycles. Following van Lacum (2014), the readability of the second and third articles was calculated using Flesch Reading Ease Score (Flesch, 1948). The reading score of the two articles are 44.71 and 45.48 respectively, indicating that they are of similar readability and suitable for college level reading.

Because of a tight course schedule, we can only conduct two tests in class, having no time for students to get familiarised with the test form. To exclude the effect of different levels of familiarity with test form and repeated tests, we recruited a new group of volunteers from a different year as a control group and had them only complete the second and third sets of tests. The final sample of this group contains 34 students. The mean scores of reading tests are shown in Table 3.

As in the pilot study, the participants in the control group again made significant improvements between the first two tests in summary writing $( \mathrm { m } _ { \mathrm { d i f } } = 2 2 . 9 4 , F \left( 1 , 6 6 \right) = 4 8 . 0 0 , p < . 0 0 1 ,$ $\boldsymbol { \eta } ^ { 2 } = . 4 2 )$ , and no significant difference in multiple-choice test $( \mathbf { m } _ { \mathrm { d i f } } =$ 10.73, $F \left( 1 , 6 6 \right) = 3 . 0 6$ , $p = . 0 9$ , $\boldsymbol { \eta } ^ { 2 } = . 0 4 )$ , though the two sets of tests show similar levels of difficulty in the pilot study.

# 6. The participants and data collection

In Cycle 1, all 42 students enrolled in the course gave their consent for the authors to use their data for research and formed the first instructional group. In Cycle 2, 38 out of 41 students gave consent and formed the second instructional group. We excluded three participants who did not attend all training sessions, and six participants who did not have a major or minor in economics-related disciplines. To ensure that participants have similar English language proficiency, we excluded three participants who do not speak English as their second language (e.g., students who speak Tibetan as their first language and Chinese as their second language). The final samples of the two cycles both contain 34 students in each.

We administered surveys before the pre-test to investigate students’ prior RA reading experience, difficulties in prior RA reading experience (open-ended question), future reading needs (open-ended question), and demographic information; we administered another survey after the post-test to learn how students read the article in the post-test (open-ended question) and difficulties encountered in the post-test (open-ended question).

The participants in the instructional and control groups were roughly comparable in prior RA reading experience, future RA reading needs, and English language proficiency.

The participants in the three groups had similar prior RA reading experience: 79 out of 102 students had read English articles, 82 out of 102 students had read Chinese articles, and four students said they had read articles of other languages. The participants read 19.8 articles on average in the previous semester, ranging from two to 55. The top two scenarios for RA reading were “I read RAs found by myself to finish writing assignments” (81/102) and “I read assigned RAs for classroom discussion” (76/102) (see Supplementary material I for more information). This finding corroborates with previous studies in which researchers also found journal articles were frequently used in undergraduate teaching practice (e.g., Oldenburg, 2005).

When being asked to name scenarios in which they may read English RAs in the future, all students except four (the control group: 1; the Cycle 1 group: 1; the Cycle 2 group: 2) mentioned specific scenarios, suggesting that the majority of participants in the three groups were motivated to learn RA reading. The three most frequently named scenarios are 1) writing an undergraduate dissertation (43/102), 2) preparing for postgraduate study (23/102), and 3) acquiring information at professional settings (22/102) (see Supplementary material II for more information).

We compared participants’ English language proficiency using their performance in China’s College English Test (CET), which is a nationwide large-scale English language proficiency tests administered by China’s Ministry of Education to examine university students’ English language level. The test is administered twice a year. Since CET band score is an important reference for both employers and graduate schools in China, many students take the tests several times to obtain their best score. Year 3 and 4 students, who are about to enter the job market or apply for graduate schools, are likely to have a score that can best reflect their English language proficiency. China’s College English Test, band 4 (CET-4) and band 6 (CET-6) correspond to the B1 and B2 level of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages respectively.2 As shown in Supplementary Material III, the English language pro ficiency of the participants in the two cycles were roughly balanced. Although the students in the control group might have higher language proficiency, there was no statistically significant difference between the control group and the two instructional groups in the pre-test of RA reading comprehension.

Table 3 Mean scores of summary writing and multiple-choice tests in the Control group $( \mathtt { n } = 3 4 ) \mathrm { a }$   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Test 1 (Banerjee et al., 2018)</td><td>Test 2 (Cai &amp; Szeidl, 2018)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Summary writing</td><td>m = 28.53</td><td>m = 51.47</td></tr><tr><td>SD = 13.12</td><td>SD = 14.17</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Multiple-choice test</td><td>m = 41.62</td><td>m = 52.35</td></tr><tr><td>SD = 29.56</td><td>SD = 20.20</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Note: The maximum score of the tests was 100.

# 7. Data analysis method

# 7.1. The rating of summaries

The first author developed preliminary rating rubrics for the summaries of pre- and post-tests according to the key facts that students were asked to find. Each summary gets five sub-scores on the description of research purpose, sample, experiment design, findings, and implication. Then, a research assistant and the first author rated the pilot data using the rubrics. The first author discussed ambiguous points in rating with the research assistant and clarified gaining points in the rubric. The summaries written by the control group and students in the two teaching cycles were independently rated by two research assistants using the rubrics (see Supple mentary Material V). The sub-scores of each summary were compared immediately after the rating. The agreement on sub-scores between the raters was $8 9 . 8 \%$ (916/1020). Discrepancies were solved via discussion among the first author and the two raters. A few notes were added to the rating rubrics to avoid ambiguity. The majority of the discrepancies were due to careless rating.

# 7.2. Qualitative data analysis

Content analysis was used to analyse students’ comments on open-ended questions. The first author coded participants’ answers to open-ended questions and developed codebooks, which contain definitions and examples of each code (see Supplementary material II and VII). The first author re-coded students’ answers one month later using the codebooks and clarified some definitions and added examples to the codebooks. The second author, who was blinded with participants’ group information (i.e. Cycle 1, Cycle 2, or control groups) and time of commenting (i.e. before or after instruction, when applicable), independently coded students’ answers using the codebooks. The two coders agreed on $9 5 . 1 \%$ (97/102) of the coding on future reading needs, and $9 4 . 1 \%$ (192/204) on reading dif ficulties. Discrepancy was solved via discussion.

# 7.3. Statistical analysis

A two-way mixed-design analysis of variance (ANOVA) were performed to determine the effects of two cycles of instructional interventions on post-novice L2 students’ RA reading comprehension.

# 8. Findings and discussion

# 8.1. RA reading tests

# 8.1.1. Cycle 1

RQ1: Was post-novice L2 undergraduate students’ RA reading comprehension improved after the general model instruction?

The mean scores of reading tests of Cycle 1 are shown in Table 4. As in the pilot study and the control group, students in Cycle made significant improvements between the first two tests in summary writing $\mathrm { ( m _ { d i f } = 2 3 . 3 8 }$ , $F \left( 1 , 6 6 \right) = 3 6 . 0 3$ , $p < . 0 0 1$ , $\boldsymbol \eta ^ { 2 } = . 3 5 )$ while no significant difference was found in multiple-choice test $\left( \mathrm { m } _ { \mathrm { d i f } } = 6 . 3 2 , F \left( 1 , 6 6 \right) = 1 . 5 4 \right.$ , $p = . 2 2$ , $\boldsymbol { \eta } ^ { 2 } = . 0 2 )$ .

To exclude the effect of different levels of familiarity with test forms in pre- and post-tests, we compared the improvement of the students in Cycle 1 with that of the control group, who did not receive the instruction. A two-way mixed-design analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed with time of test (pre and post) as the repeated measure and group (Cycle 1 group and the control group) as the between-subjects measure.

Table 4 Mean scores of summary writing and multiple-choice tests in Cycle 1 $( \mathtt { n } = 3 4 ) ^ { \mathtt { a } }$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Test 1 (Banerjee et al., 2018)</td><td>Test 2 (Cai &amp; Szeidl, 2018)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Summary writing</td><td>m = 23.53</td><td>m = 46.91</td></tr><tr><td>SD = 14.75</td><td>SD = 17.28</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Multiple-choice test</td><td>m = 38.24</td><td>m = 44.56</td></tr><tr><td>SD = 22.66</td><td>SD = 19.28</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Note: The maximum score of the tests was 100.

The analysis showed that the interaction effect between group and time of test was insignificant $( F ( 1 , 6 6 ) = 2 . 4 5 , p = . 1 2 , \eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 2 )$ , suggesting that the Cycle 1 group and the control group had similar improvements between pre- and post-tests.

In other words, the teaching intervention that we adopted in Cycle 1 was not very effective in improving post-novice undergraduate students’ RA reading comprehension. This finding corroborated with students’ complaint in class that the general move models did not match the structure of RAs in their discipline. Therefore, we developed a discipline-specific move model based on economics RAs and began a second cycle in the next year.

# 8.1.2. Cycle 2

RQ2: Was post-novice L2 undergraduate students’ RA reading comprehension improved after the discipline-specific model instruction?

The mean scores of reading tests are shown in Table 5. Students in Cycle 2 made significant improvements between the pre- and post-tests in both summary writing $( \mathrm { m _ { d i f } } = 4 6 . 4 7$ , $F \left( 1 , 6 6 \right) = 1 7 2 . 9 2$ , $p < . 0 0 1$ , $\boldsymbol \eta ^ { 2 } = . 7 2 )$ ) and multiple-choice test $( \mathrm { m } _ { \mathrm { d i f } } = 2 5 . 0 0$ , F (1, $6 6 ) = 3 7 . 7 6$ , $p < . 0 0 1$ , $\boldsymbol \eta ^ { 2 } = . 3 6 )$ .

To exclude the effect of different levels of familiarity with the test form, we compared students’ improvement in Cycle 2 with that of the control group, who did not receive the instruction. A two-way mixed-design analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed with time of test (pre and post) as the repeated measure and group (Cycle 2 group and the control group) as the between-subjects measure.

The analysis showed a significant interaction effect between group and time of test with a medium effect $\mathrm { s i z e } ^ { 3 } ( F ( 1 , 6 6 ) = 3 3 . 2 5 , p$ $< . 0 0 1$ , $\mathfrak { \eta } ^ { 2 } = . 0 6 4 )$ , suggesting that the Cycle 2 group made greater improvements from pre- to post-tests than the control group.

As for multiple-choice tests, the analysis showed a significant interaction effect between group and time of test, though the effect size was small $( F \left( 1 , 6 6 \right) = 4 . 0 2 $ , $p < . 0 5$ , $\boldsymbol \eta ^ { 2 } = . 0 2 3 )$ , suggesting that the Cycle 2 group outperformed the control group in the im provements made between pre- and post-tests of the multiple-choice test.

In other words, excluding possible effects of different levels of familiarity with test forms, Cycle 2 instruction had a medium effect on RA summary writing and a small effect on multiple-choice test.

# 8.2. Students’ perceived difficulties

RQ3: How did students perceive their challenges in RA reading before and after the general model instruction? RQ4: How did students perceive their challenges in RA reading before and after the discipline-specific model instruction?

We investigated students’ RA reading difficulties before and after the instruction. By analysing students’ comments, we identified five types of difficulties in students’ prior reading experience, including (1) high cognitive load, (2) language difficulties, (3) & (4) lack of genre and disciplinary knowledge, and (5) negative emotions. Apart from the five difficulties, two new challenges (i.e. (6) diffi culties with processing details and (7) lack of summary skills) were identified in students’ comments after the instruction. Although most difficulty types identified by participants before and after the instruction are similar, the number of students who mentioned each type of difficulties varies (see Table 6). In this section, we introduce the seven types of difficulties with examples and discuss the changes showed after the two cycles of instruction.

# 8.2.1. High cognitive load

As found in previous studies on academic reading difficulties (e.g. Anderson, 2015; Liu & Read, 2020), our participants also complained about lengthy text, limited time, slow reading speed, and hard to concentrate (see Table 6). One student wrote: “The article is too long, and it is hard to concentrate”; another student wrote: “My reading speed was slow, and I felt sleepy and tired when

Table 5 Mean scores of summary writing and multiple-choice tests in Cycle 2 $( \mathtt { n } = 3 4 ) ^ { \mathtt { a } }$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Test 1 (Banerjee et al., 2018)</td><td>Test 2 (Cai &amp; Szeidl, 2018)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Summary writing</td><td>m = 24.12</td><td>m = 70.59</td></tr><tr><td>SD = 17.34</td><td>SD = 11.13</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Multiple-choice test</td><td>m = 38.38</td><td>m = 63.38</td></tr><tr><td>SD = 17.35</td><td>SD = 16.18</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Note: The maximum score of the tests was 100.

Table 6 The number of participants mentioned each type of difficulty.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Difficulty themes</td><td rowspan="2">Difficulty codes</td><td colspan="3">Before pre-test</td><td colspan="3">After post-test</td></tr><tr><td>Control (n = 34)</td><td>Cycle 1 (n = 34)</td><td>Cycle 2 (n = 34)</td><td>Control (n = 34)</td><td>Cycle 1 (n = 34)</td><td>Cycle 2 (n = 34)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">1. High cognitive load</td><td> slow reading speed</td><td>1</td><td>6</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>7</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>limited time</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>11</td><td>4</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td> lengthy text</td><td>11</td><td>2</td><td>10</td><td>18</td><td>12</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>hard to concentrate</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">2. Language difficulty</td><td>Overall</td><td>13</td><td>9</td><td>16</td><td>26</td><td>21</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>terms and vocabulary</td><td>16</td><td>11</td><td>17</td><td>11</td><td>27</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td> long sentences</td><td>6</td><td>9</td><td>10</td><td>5</td><td>10</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>General language difficulty</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">3. Lack of genre knowledge</td><td>Overall</td><td>20</td><td>17</td><td>25</td><td>15</td><td>28</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>lack knowledge on RA structure</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Inexperience in RA reading</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Structure does not match IMRD</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>hard to find key information</td><td>7</td><td>6</td><td>5</td><td>7</td><td>8</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>remember nothing after reading</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>4. Lack of disciplinary</td><td>Overall Overall</td><td>10</td><td>11</td><td>10</td><td>10</td><td>15</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">knowledge 5. Negative emotions</td><td></td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>8</td><td>3</td><td>10</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Negative emotions - anxiety</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Negative emotions - impatience Negative emotions -</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>sadness</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">6. Difficulties with processing details</td><td>Overall Did not remember details</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Did not understand some</td><td>0 0</td><td>0</td><td>0 0</td><td>4 0</td><td>1 0</td><td>8 9</td></tr><tr><td>details</td><td></td><td>0</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>17</td></tr><tr><td>7. Lack of summary skills</td><td>Overall</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Other response: Not difficult</td><td>Overall</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>6</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: The definition and example of each code can be found in Supplementary Material VII.

reading”.

According to Baddeley and Hitch (1974), working memory has a limited capacity and can only process and store a limited amount of information. When students complain about long text, not having sufficient time, not reading quickly enough, or highly demanding of attentional resources, they are experiencing cognitive overload.

Since the post-test is time-limit, more participants encountering high cognitive load difficulty in the post-test than in their prior RA reading experience (see Table 6). However, in Cycle 2, fewer students mentioned experiencing high cognitive load difficulty in the post-test $\mathbf { \Phi } ( \mathbf { n } = 1 1 / 3 4 )$ ) than in their prior reading $( \mathbf { n } = 1 6 / 3 4 )$ . In addition, the number of Cycle 2 participants who mentioned high cognitive load in post-test $( \boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } = 1 1 / 3 4 )$ ) is only about half of that in the control $( \boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } = 2 6 / 3 4 )$ and the Cycle 1 groups $( \mathtt { n } = 2 1 / 3 4 )$ . This finding suggests that Cycle 2 instruction may have reduced cognitive load for the participants.

# 8.2.2. Language difficulty

Interestingly, although our demographic information shows that the English language proficiency of the participants in Cycle 1 and 2 was roughly equal, more students in Cycle 1 $\mathbf { ( n = 2 8 / 3 4 } ,$ ) mentioned language difficulties in post-test than their peers in Cycle 2 $\mathbf { \tilde { n } } =$

3/34), suggesting that students in Cycle 2 might have used the saved cognitive resources in looking up new words and processing difficult sentences. Cycle 2 students’ comments on their reading process corroborated with this explanation. One student in Cycle 2 wrote after post-test: “I first identified the overall structure of the article, and then only focused on the parts that contain key infor mation. I closely read these parts, and looked up dictionary. Then I synthesized the key information extracted from these parts.”

# 8.2.3. Difficulties of processing details

Apart from language difficulties, Cycle 2 students may have allocated more cognitive resources to processing details than their peers in Cycle 1. As shown in Table 6, after post-test, more students in Cycle 2 $( \mathtt { n } = 1 7 / 3 4 )$ mentioned difficulties in processing details than their peers in Cycle 1 $( \boldsymbol { \mathbf { n } } = 1 / 3 4 )$ ). For example, one student in Cycle 2 wrote after post-test: “In terms of the implication, I do not understand the purpose of discussing whether companies would like to organise their own meeting”.

Having more difficulties in processing details suggests that Cycle 2 students had allocated more cognitive resources to details. Cycle 2 students’ comments on their reading process corroborated with this inference. One student in Cycle 2 wrote after post-test: “I grasped the main idea, found key information in relevant sections, and paid more attention to details.”

# 8.2.4. Lack of genre knowledge

As shown in Table 6, fewer Cycle 2 students $( \mathtt { n } = 2 / 3 4 )$ mentioned genre knowledge related difficulties than their peers in Cycle 1 $( \mathtt { n } = 1 5 / 3 4 )$ , suggesting that Cycle 2 instruction may have a better effect on the acquisition of economics RA rhetorical structure than Cycle 1 instruction. One student in Cycle 1 wrote: “I cannot find relevant information to write the summary. The structure of the article does not match the IMRD pattern.”

Indeed, since the move model used in Cycle 2 instruction was developed based on economics RA authors’ headings, compared with IMRD models, the discipline-specific model can more efficiently help students match their mental representation of RA structure with the text to be read to build knowledge structure (Mayer, 2014). Thus, the cognitive load of RA reading may have been reduced for students in Cycle 2.

# 8.2.5. Lack of disciplinary knowledge

This difficulty refers to the problem of understanding a particular type of disciplinary knowledge. For example, one student wrote: “I do not understand the formula and models used in the study.” Compared with lack of disciplinary knowledge, difficulty of processing details was used to code students’ problems of understanding specific facts in RAs (e.g. “I did not understand the three interventions.“) or when students explicitly mentioned that they had difficulties with details (e.g. “I cannot remember details in the article.“). It is highly likely that students have difficulties in processing details because of lack of disciplinary knowledge.

Therefore, although there were more students in Cycle 1 $( \mathtt { n } = 1 0 / 3 4 )$ ) mentioned disciplinary knowledge related difficulties than in Cycle 2 $\mathbf { \tilde { \rho } } ( \mathbf { n } = 0 / 3 4 )$ , this does not mean that Cycle 2 students did not have this problem.

# 8.2.6. Negative emotions and other responses

The survey also reveals that students experience negative emotions while RA reading, including anxiety, impatience, and sadness (see Supplementary Material VII for examples). Interestingly, when being asked about their difficulties in post-test, six Cycle 2 students wrote they had no difficulties, whereas no students from other groups did so. For example, one Cycle 2 student wrote: “I gradually understand the logic between the sections. It [i.e. RA reading] is not difficult.” This finding suggests that Cycle 2 instruction may have increased students’ confidence in RA reading.

# 8.2.7. A summary

To sum up, students’ comments on their difficulties and reading process show that fewer Cycle 2 students experienced high cognitive load, language difficulty, and lack of genre knowledge than their peers in Cycle 1, whereas more Cycle 2 students have difficulties in processing details. The findings suggest that Cycle 2 instruction may be more effective in familiarising students with economics RA rhetorical structure and helping them locate key information. By only focusing on key information, Cycle 2 students may have reduced cognitive load and reallocated the saved cognitive resources to language difficulty (e.g. looking up dictionaries) and understanding details of essential information.

# 9. Conclusion

This study explores effective ways of RA reading instruction for post-novice L2 undergraduate students. Our findings suggest that discipline-specific model instruction efficiently improved economics students’ RA reading comprehension. We hope the finding could be useful to EAP practitioners when developing teaching materials for similar cohorts of students.

This study has several limitations. First, we only examined the effect of the two types of models in a single discipline (i.e., eco nomics). Further studies are needed to examine the instructional effect of general and specific models on reading in other disciplines. Second, we only explored the effect on post-novice RA readers, who had experience in RA reading. Further studies are needed to examine the effect on complete novices or more advanced learners. In addition, it would be interesting to explore the effect of combining explicit instruction of move models with implicit genre awareness raising activities, such as collaborative RA reading (Deng et al., 2024) and guided repeated reading practice (Kershaw et al., 2018).

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Guangsa Jin: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Chenle Li: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Ya Sun: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2024.101448.

# References

Ali Alghail, A. A., & Ali Mahfoodh, O. H. (2016). Academic reading difficulties encountered by international graduate students in a Malaysian university. Issues in Educational Research, 26(3), 369.   
Anderson, N. J. (2015). Academic reading expectations and challenges. In N. W. Evans, N. J. Anderson, & W. G. Eggington (Eds.), ESL readers and writers in higher education: Understanding challenges, providing support (pp. 95–109). Routledge.   
Andrabi, T., Das, J., & Khwaja, A. I. (2017). Report cards: The impact of providing school and child test scores on educational markets. The American Economic Review, 107(6), 1535–1563. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20140774   
Anthony, L. (1999). Writing research article introductions in software engineering: How accurate is a standard model? IEEE Transactions on Professional Communications, 42(1), 38–46. https://doi.org/10.1109/47.749366   
Ash’ari, N., Barabadi, E., & Shirvan, M. E. (2023). The rhetorical organization of discussions sections of qualitative research articles in Applied Linguistics and the use of meta-discourse markers. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 66, Article 101310. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2023.101310   
Athey, S., & Imbens, G. W. (2017). The state of applied econometrics: Causality and policy evaluation. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(2), 3–32. https://doi. org/10.1257/jep.31.2.3   
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. (1974). In G. H. Bower (Ed.), Working memory (8, pp. 47–89). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60452-1.   
Banerjee, A., Hanna, R., Kyle, J., Olken, B. A., & Sumarto, S. (2018). Tangible information and citizen empowerment: Identification cards and food subsidy programs in Indonesia. Journal of Political Economy, 126(2), 451–491. https://doi.org/10.1086/696226   
Barnett, J. E. (1984). Facilitating retention through instruction about text structure. Journal of Reading Behavior, 16(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 10862968409547500   
Basturkmen, H. (2003). Specificity and esp course design. RELC Journal, 34(1), 48–63. https://doi.org/10.1177/003368820303400104   
Basturkmen, H. (2009). Commenting on results in published research articles and masters dissertations in Language Teaching. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 8(4), 241–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2009.07.001   
Belcher, D. (2009). What ESP is and can Be: An introduction. In D. Belcher (Ed.), English for specific purposes in theory and practice (pp. 1–20). The University of Michigan Press.   
Bitran, M., Zúniga, ˜ D., & Leiva, I. (2012). Reading strategies used by undergraduate medical students to comprehend scientific publications. Medical Science Educator, 22(Supplement 3), 147–150.   
Blommaert, J., Hartmann, F., & Quadackers, L. (1995). The reading. In W. H. Gijselaers, D. T. Tempelaar, P. K. Keizer, J. M. Blommaert, E. M. Bernard, & H. Kasper (Eds.), Interpretation and usage of scientific articles in undergraduate accounting education BT - educational innovation in economics and business administration: The case of problem-based learning (pp. 78–87). Netherlands: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-015-8545-3_9.   
Bobbitt, Z. (2020). What is eta squared? (Definition & example). Statology. https://www.statology.org/eta-squared/#:\~:text=/28Definition/20/26/20Example/29/ 20by/20Zach/20Bobbitt/20December/2016/2C,effect/20and/20interaction/20effect/20in/20an/20ANOVA/20model.   
Bogaerds-Hazenberg, S. T. M., Evers-Vermeul, J., & van den Bergh, H. (2021). A meta-analysis on the effects of text structure instruction on reading comprehension in the upper elementary grades. Reading Research Quarterly, 56(3), 435–462. https://doi.org/10.1002/rrq.311   
Bornmann, L., Butz, A., & Wohlrabe, K. (2018). What are the top five journals in economics? A new meta-ranking. Applied Economics, 50(6), 659–675. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/00036846.2017.1332753   
Brett, P. (1994). A genre analysis of the results section of sociology articles. English for Specific Purposes, 13(1), 47–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/0889-4906(94)90024- 8   
Brosowsky, N., Parshina, O., Locicero, A., & Crump, M. J. C. (2020). Teaching undergraduate students to read empirical articles: An evaluation and revision of the QALMRI method. PsyArXiv, 1–16.   
Cai, J., & Szeidl, A. (2018). Interfirm relationships and business performance. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3), 1229–1282. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjx049   
Cheng, A. (2006). Understanding learners and learning in ESP genre-based writing instruction. English for Specific Purposes, 25(1), 76–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. esp.2005.07.002   
Cheng, A. (2007). Transferring generic features and recontextualizing genre awareness: Understanding writing performance in the ESP genre-based literacy framework. English for Specific Purposes, 26(3), 287–307. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2006.12.002   
Cheng, A. (2008a). Analyzing genre exemplars in preparation for writing: The case of an L2 graduate student in the ESP genre-based instructional framework of academic literacy. Applied Linguistics, 29(1), 50–71. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amm021   
Cheng, A. (2008b). Individualized engagement with genre in academic literacy tasks. English for Specific Purposes, 27(4), 387–411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. esp.2008.05.001   
Cortes, V. (2011). Genre analysis in the academic writing class: With or without corpora? Estudos Linguisticos, 16, 41–64.   
Costley, T., & Flowerdew, J. (2017). Introduction. In J. Flowerdew, & T. Costley (Eds.), Discipline-specific writing (pp. 1–11). Routledge.   
Cotos, E., Huffman, S., & Link, S. (2017). A move/step model for methods sections: Demonstrating Rigour and Credibility. English for Specific Purposes, 46, 90–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ESP.2017.01.001   
Deng, Y., Lei, J., Jin, T., & Chen, J. (2024). Developing genre awareness in collaborative academic reading: A case study of novice academic learners. English for Specific Purposes, 74, 9–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.11.001   
Evans, S., & Green, C. (2007). Why EAP is necessary: A survey of Hong Kong tertiary students. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6(1), 3–17. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jeap.2006.11.005   
Feak, C., & Swales, J. (2010). Writing for publication: Corpus-informed materials for postdoctoral fellows in perinatology. In N. Harwood (Ed.), English language teaching materials: Theory and practice (pp. 279–300). Cambridge University Press.   
Flesch, R. (1948). A new readability yardstick. Journal of Applied Psychology, 32(3), 221–233. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0057532   
Flowerdew, L. (2015). Using corpus-based research and online academic corpora to inform writing of the discussion section of a thesis. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 20, 58–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2015.06.001   
Fook, C. Y., & Sidhu, G. K. (2015). Investigating learning challenges faced by students in higher education. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 186, 604–612. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.04.001   
Gao, H., Lu, C., & Hu, C. (2024). A corpus-based study of signalling nouns in marketing and economics research articles. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 67, Article 101318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2023.101318   
Gong, H., & Barlow, M. (2022). A corpus-based analysis of research article macrostructure patterns. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 58, Article 101138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101138   
Graves, H., Moghaddasi, S., & Hashim, A. (2014). “Let $\mathbf { G } = ( \mathbf { V } , \mathbf { E } )$ be a graph”: Turning the abstract into the tangible in introductions in mathematics research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 36, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ESP.2014.03.004   
Hartshorn, K. J., Evans, N., Egbert, J., & Johnson, A. (2017). Discipline-specific reading expectation and challenges for ESL learners in US universities. Reading in a Foreign Language, 29(1), 36–60.   
Hellekjaer, G. O. (2009). Academic English reading proficiency at the university level: A Norwegian case study. Reading in a Foreign Language, 21(2), 198–222.   
Holmes, R. (1997). Genre analysis, and the social sciences: An investigation of the structure of research article discussion sections in three disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 16(4), 321–337. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(96)00038-5   
Hoover, K. D. (2008). Causality in economics and econometrics. In The new palgrave dictionary of economics (pp. 1–13). Palgrave Macmillan UK. https://doi.org/ 10.1057/978-1-349-95121-5_2227-1   
Hyland, K. (2002). Specificity revisited: How far should we go now? English for Specific Purposes, 21(4), 385–395. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(01)00028-X   
Hyon¨ ¨a, J., & Lorch, R. F. (2004). Effects of topic headings on text processing: Evidence from adult readers’ eye fixation patterns. Learning and Instruction, 14(2), 131–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2004.01.001   
Jamieson, S., & Howard, R. (2013). Sentence-mining: Uncovering the amount of reading and reading comprehension in college writers’ researched writing. In R. McClure, & J. P. Purdy (Eds.), The new digital scholar: Exploring and enriching the research and writing practices of NextGen students (pp. 111–133). Information Today, In   
Jiang, F. (2017). Stance and voice in academic writing. Kevin International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 22(1), 85–106. https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.22.1.04jia.   
Jin, G., Li, C., & Sun, Y. (2020). Exploring the macrostructure of research articles in economics. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 63(3), 227–243. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPC.2020.3014535   
Kalbfleisch, E., Schmitt, E., & Zipoli, R. P. (2021). Empirical insights into college students’ academic reading comprehension in the United States. Journal of College Reading and Learning, 51(3), 225–245. https://doi.org/10.1080/10790195.2020.1867669   
Kanoksilapatham, B. (2005). Rhetorical structure of biochemistry research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 24(3), 269–292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. esp.2004.08.003   
Kanoksilapatham, B. (2015). Distinguishing textual features characterizing structural variation in research articles across three engineering sub-discipline corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 37, 74–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.06.008   
Kershaw, T. C., Lippman, J. P., & Fugate, J. M. B. (2018). Practice makes proficient: Teaching undergraduate students to understand published research. Instructional Science, 46(6), 921–946. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11251-018-9456-2   
Khaw, L. L., & Tan, W. W. (2018). Establishing a territory in the introductions of engineering research articles using a problem-solution patterns approach. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communications, 61(2), 133–150. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPC.2017.2779661   
Kovarik, M. L. (2016). Use of primary literature in the undergraduate analytical class. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 408(12), 3045–3049. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s00216-016-9467-2   
Kuteeva, M. (2013). Graduate learners’ approaches to genre-analysis tasks: Variations across and within four disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 32(2), 84–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2012.11.004   
Kuteeva, M., & McGrath, L. (2015). The theoretical research article as a reflection of disciplinary practices: The case of pure mathematics. Applied Linguistics, 36(2), 215–235. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amt042   
Kwan, B. (2017). A cross-paradigm macro-structure analysis of research articles in Information Systems. English for Specific Purposes, 45, 14–30. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/J.ESP.2016.08.002   
Lacum, E. B. Van, Ossevoort, M. A., & Goedhart, M. J. (2014). A teaching strategy with a focus on argumentation to improve undergraduate students’ ability to read research articles. CBE-Life Sciences Education, 13(2), 253–264. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.13-06-0110   
Lakic, I. (1997). Genre analysis of article introductions in economics. ASp: La Revue Du GERAS, 15–18, 409–426.   
Lee, J. J. (2023). Corpora, locally sourced: An approach to addressing the specific needs of ESL writing programs. Tesol Quarterly. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.3277   
Lim, J. M. H. (2006). Method sections of management research articles: A pedagogically motivated qualitative study. English for Specific Purposes, 25(3), 282–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2005.07.001   
Lim, J. M. H. (2010). Commenting on research results in applied linguistics and education: A comparative genre-based investigation. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9(4), 280–294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2010.10.001   
Lin, L. (2014). Innovations in structuring article introductions: The case of Applied Linguistics. Iberica: Revista de la Asociacion Europea de Lenguas para Fines Especificos, 28, 129–154.   
Liu, X., & Read, J. (2020). General skill needs and challenges in university academic reading: Voices from undergraduates and language teachers. Journal of College Reading and Learning, 50(2), 70–93. https://doi.org/10.1080/10790195.2020.1734885   
Mayer, R. E. (2014). Cognitive theory of multimedia learning. In The cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 43–71). Cambridge University Press. https://doi. org/10.1017/CBO9781139547369.005.   
Mccune, V., & Hounsell, D. (2005). The development of students’ ways of thinking and practising in three final-year biology courses. Higher Education, 49(3), 255–289. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-004-6666-0   
Mehar Singh, M. K. (2014). Challenges in academic reading and overcoming strategies in taught master programmes: A case study of international graduate students in Malaysia. Higher Education Studies, 4(4), 76–88.   
Moreno, A. I. (2021). Selling research in RA discussion sections through English and Spanish: An intercultural rhetoric approach. English for Specific Purposes, 63, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2021.02.002   
Moreno, A. I., & Swales, J. M. (2018). Strengthening move analysis methodology towards bridging the function-form gap. English for Specific Purposes, 50, 40–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.11.006   
Nwogu, K. N. (1997). The medical research paper: Structure and functions. English for Specific Purposes, 16(2), 119–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(97) 85388-4   
Oldenburg, C. M. (2005). Use of primary source readings in psychology courses at liberal arts colleges. Teaching of Psychology, 32(1), 25–29. https://doi.org/10.1207/ s15328023top3201_6   
Parkinson, J., Jackson, L., Kirkwood, T., & Padayachee, V. (2007). A scaffolded reading and writing course for foundation level science students. English for Specific Purposes, 26(4), 443–461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2007.01.001   
Pence, H. E., & Losoff, B. (2011). Going beyond the textbook: The need to integrate open access primary literature into the Chemistry curriculum. Chemistry Central Journal, 5(1), 18. https://doi.org/10.1186/1752-153X-5-18   
Peng, C., Liu, J., & Cai, H. (2022). Aligning China’s standards of English Language Ability with the Common European framework of reference for languages. The AsiaPacific Education Researcher, 31(6), 667–677. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40299-021-00617-2   
P´erez-Llantada, C. (2013). The Article of the future: Strategies for genre stability and change. English for Specific Purposes, 32(4), 221–235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. esp.2013.06.004   
P´erez-Llantada, C., & Swales, J. (2017). English for academic purposes. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of research in second language teaching and learning (Vol. 3, pp. 42–55). Routledge.   
Phakiti, A., & Li, L. (2011). General academic difficulties and reading and writing difficulties among Asian ESL postgraduate students in TESOL at an Australian University. RELC Journal, 42(3), 227–264. https://doi.org/10.1177/0033688211421417 Porter, H. D. (2018). Constructing an understanding of undergraduate disciplinary reading: An analysis of contemporary scholarship. Journal of College Reading and Learning, 48(1), 25–46. https://doi.org/10.1080/10790195.2017.1362970 Posteguillo, S. (1999). The schematic structure of computer science research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 18(2), 139–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-   
4906(98)00001-5 Pyle, N., Vasquez, A. C., Lignugaris/Kraft, B., Gillam, S. L., Reutzel, D. R., Olszewski, A., Segura, H., Hartzheim, D., Laing, W., & Pyle, D. (2017). Effects of expository text structure interventions on comprehension: A meta-analysis. Reading Research Quarterly, 52(4), 469–501. https://doi.org/10.1002/rrq.179 Samraj, B. (2002). Introductions in research articles: Variations across disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 21(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(00)   
00023-5 Sego, S. A., & Stuart, A. E. (2016). Learning to read empirical articles in general psychology. Teaching of Psychology, 43(1), 38–42. https://doi.org/10.1177/   
0098628315620875 Sheldon, E. (2011). Rhetorical differences in RA introductions written by English L1 and L2 and Castilian Spanish L1 writers. Journal of English for Academic Purposes,   
10(4), 238–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2011.08.004 Sheldon, E. (2019). Knowledge construction of discussion/conclusion sections of research articles written by English L1 and L2 and Castilian Spanish L1 writers. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 37, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.11.002 Stoller, F. L., & Nguyen, L. T. H. (2020). Reading habits of Vietnamese University English majors. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 48, 1–17. https://doi.org/   
10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100906 Stoller, F. L., & Robinson, M. S. (2013). Chemistry journal articles: An interdisciplinary approach to move analysis with pedagogical aims. English for Specific Purposes,   
32(1), 45–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2012.09.001 Swales, J. (1981). Aspects of article introductions. Language studies unit. University of Aston in Birmingham. Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge University Press. Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2012). Academic writing for graduate students: Essential tasks and skills. University of Michigan Press. Tessuto, G. (2015). Generic structure and rhetorical moves in English-language empirical law research articles: Sites of interdisciplinary and interdiscursive crossover. English for Specific Purposes, 37, 13–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.06.002 Upton, T. A., & Cohen, M. A. (2009). An approach to corpus-based discourse analysis: The move analysis as example. Discourse Studies, 11(5), 585–605. https://doi. org/10.1177/1461445609341006 Wang, S. (2018). The application of China’s standards of English language ability to college English teaching. Foreign Language Education, 39(4), 1–4. Weir, C., Hawkey, R., Green, A., Unaldi, A., & Devi, S. (2009). The relationship between the academic reading construct as measured by IELTS and the reading experiences of students in their first year of study at a British university. IELTS Research Reports, 9, 97–156. http://www.ielts.org/researchers/research/volume_9. aspx. Wette, R. (2017). Source text use by undergraduate post-novice L2 writers in disciplinary assignments: Progress and ongoing challenges. Journal of Second Language Writing, 37, 46–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2017.05.015 Williams, I. A. (1999). Results sections of medical research articles:: Analysis of rhetorical categories for pedagogical purposes. English for Specific Purposes, 18(4),   
347–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(98)00003-9 Yang, R., & Allison, D. (2003). Research articles in applied linguistics: Moving from results to conclusions. English for Specific Purposes, 22(4), 365–385. https://doi. org/10.1016/S0889-4906(02)00026-1 Yang, R., & Allison, D. (2004). Research articles in applied linguistics: Structures from a functional perspective. English for Specific Purposes, 23(3), 264–279. https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(03)00005-X Yayli, D. (2011). From genre awareness to cross-genre awareness: A study in an efl context. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 10(3), 121–129. https://doi.org/   
10.1016/j.jeap.2011.02.001 Yeh, C. C. (2009). Student perceptions of an EFL undergraduate research writing project. RELC Journal, 40(3), 314–332. https://doi.org/10.1177/   
0033688209343863

Guangsa Jin is an Associate Professor in Applied Linguistics at the University of International Business and Economics, China. Her research interests are academic reading and writing.