# References

Bakhtin, M. (1981). The Dialogical Imagination. (C. Emerson & M. Holquist, Trans.). In M. Holquist (Ed.). Austin: University of Texas Press.   
Nølke, H. (1989). Polyfoni. En sprogteoretisk indforing. ARK 48. [Polyphony: A language theoretical introduction. ARK 48]. København: Handelshøjskolen i København. [Copenhagen: The Copenhagen Business School.].   
Volosinov, V. N. (1986). Marxism and the Philosophy of Language. (L. Matejka and I.R. Titunik, Trans.). London: Harvard University Press. [1973/1929].

Hilkka Stotesbury Language Centre, University of Joensuu, Joensuu, Finland E-mail address: hilkka.stotesbury $@$ joensuu.fi

doi:10.1016/j.jeap.2008.05.001

Feedback in second language writing: contexts and issues, Ken Hyland, Fiona Hyland (Eds.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press (2006), (pp. 261), ISBN 0-521-67258-9. US\$33.00/UK£20.10

Feedback has always been the sine qua non of writing instruction. While feedback in the early years was limited largely to summative feedback (in the form of a letter grade with a brief end comment justifying the grade) or error corrections by the teacher, the advent of the writing process movement in the latter half of the 20th century made both teacher and peer feedback on all aspects of writingdboth process and productda central focus of writing instruction (Matsuda, 2003; Susser, 1994). The reference point of feedback also expanded from lexical and syntactic issues to genre-specific features as well as larger sociocultural contexts of writing. The advancement of technology also created additional options for both teacher and peer feedback. While there were several books that focused centrally on various aspects of these issues (Ferris, 2002, 2003; Goldstein, 2005; Liu & Hansen, 2002), no single book addressed all of these issues togetherduntil the publication of Feedback in Second Language Writing: Contexts and Issues.

This volume begins with an introductory chapter by Hyland and Hyland, which provides a brief historical background and a broad overview of existing research on various issues related to feedback in the L2 writing classroom, including: teacher feedback, writing conferences, peer feedback, computer-mediated feedback. The remainder of the book, which departs from these conventional categories, is organized in three major sections, including sociocultural dimensions, delivery and focus dimensions, and interpersonal and interactional dimensions.

Part I, ‘‘Situating Feedback: Sociocultural Dimensions,’’ sets the scene for the discussion of feedback by focusing on the sociocultural contexts of L2 peer feedback. In Chapter 2, Olga S. Villamil and Marı´a C. M. de Guerrero situate the discussion of peer feedback in the theoretical context of Vygotskian sociocultural theory, and present a synthesis of a series of previously published studies. In contrast, Gayle Nelson and Joan Carson’s chapter considers issues that arise in heterogeneous peer response groups. In addition, they join a growing number of researchers (e.g., Atkinson, 1999; Li, 2005) in responding to previous criticisms against culture-based explanations of student behavior with an expanded conception of culture.

In Chapter 4, Christine Tardy takes on another controversial notion, appropriation. By incorporating theoretical models of appropriation in recent studies of teacher feedback, including her own recent study, Tardy shifts the focus from the traditional, monological conception to the Bakhtinian dialogical perspective, which not only focuses on the appropriation of student texts by the teacher but also recognizes the appropriation of teacher’s texts by students through the negotiation of teacher feedback.

Part II, ‘‘Shaping Feedback: Delivery and Focus Dimensions,’’ consists of 5 chapters that explore different ways of providing teacher feedback and their effects on student writing. In Chapter 5, Dana Ferris presents a study that addresses one of the major controversies in the field of second language writingdthe efficacy of error feedback. She found that error feedback did improve student revisions but had limited impact on subsequent writing assignments; that the error feedback made by the teachers in the study was largely appropriate; that teachers used a range of feedback strategies yet most of the teacher comments led to improvements in student writing; and that, with a few exceptions, most of the error feedback resulted in short-term improvements regardless of error types.

The next two chapters focus on the use of technology in providing feedback. Chapter 6 by Paige D. Ware and Mark Warschauer provides a broad overview of three strands of research on electronic feedback, including: the potential of machine-generated feedback; computer-mediated human feedback; and differences among various forms of electronic feedback. Noting the complexity of providing feedback in general, they conclude by providing a list of some of the areas where the use of technology in providing feedback on second language writing has been shown to produce positive results. In Chapter 7, John Milton explores issues in computer-generated and computer-mediated feedback and discusses how the software tools he has developed can address those problems. He argues that the contextsensitive online resources can help students become independent writers, and that they can be integrated into other forms of providing feedback.

Chapters 8 and 9 connect feedback with larger instructional practices that encourage reflective learning. Liz HampLyons’s chapter presents a case study to examine whether portfolio-based writing instruction can facilitate a better feedback-revision cycle. While noting the benefits of feedback in the context of portfolio assessment, Hamp-Lyons calls for greater attention to teacher professional development. In Chapter 9, Ann M. Johns discusses a group of resident second language writers who learned a series of research tasks and then engaged in reflective writing on those tasks.

Part III, ‘‘Negotiating Feedback: Interpersonal and Interactional Dimensions,’’ presents 5 chapters that discuss how feedback is interpreted and negotiated by second language writers. Lynn Goldstein begins her chapter with a brief overview of electronic, conference, and written feedback, noting the dearth of information in the first two categories. She then reexamines the cases of two students from previously published studies to illustrate the importance of case studies in understanding how feedback practices work in practice. In Chapter 11, Ken Hyland and Fiona Hyland examine teacher written feedback for their interpersonal features, highlighting the importance of understanding individual students’ needs in constructing a productive relationship through written feedback.

In Chapter 12, Ann Hewings and Caroline Coffin explore the use of computer mediated communication (CMC) in helping master’s students develop their understanding of disciplinary discourses. They argue that CMC can help students learn various disciplinary conventions, although the degree of success depends on the role of the tutors as well as the nature of the tasks. Robert Weissberg’s chapter examines how scaffolding was accomplished in oral interactions between a writing instructor and two second language writers. After providing a careful review of the concept of scaffolding and its theoretical underpinnings, the author presents an analysis of the transcripts to show various ways in which scaffolding was realized in tutoring interactions.

The volume concludes with a chapter by Ilona Leki, which explores how much and what kind of feedback graduate students in various disciplines receive, and how students perceived and used the feedback in developing their discipline-specific literacy. Interviewing 21 students and examining written feedback they had received from faculty members in their disciplines, she found that, although graduate students are eager to receive and incorporate feedback, they are not receiving nearly as much feedback as they would like to.

One of the most distinctive features of this book is the effort to ground the discussion in data-driven research. Some of the chapters use data from previously published studies, while others present original studies. Some use the data to illustrate a range of issues and possibilities for the study of feedback while others seek to move the field forward by contributing new insights in response to ongoing questions. Yet others review various existing studies to provide an overview of research trendsda goal that is difficult to achieve with a single study. Each of the chapters is valuable in its own right, but different chapters seem to have different purposes that appeal to different audiences. The diversity can, however, also be an asset. In fact, I have been recommending different chapters to graduate students and colleagues with varying degrees of expertise and interest in feedback in second language writing. With the broad scope and a variety of contexts and approaches, this book has something to offer to everyone.

# References

Atkinson, D. (1999). TESOL and culture. TESOL Quarterly, 33(4), 625e654.   
Ferris, D. (2002). Treatment of error in second language student writing. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Ferris, D. (2003). Response to student writing: Implications for second language students. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Goldstein, L. (2005). Teacher written commentary in second language writing classrooms. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Li, X. (2005). Composing culture in a fragmented world: The issue of representation in cross-cultural research. In P. K. Matsuda, & T. Silva (Eds.), Second language writing research: Perspectives on the process of knowledge construction (pp. 121e131). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Liu, J., & Hansen, Y. (2002). Peer response in second language writing classrooms. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Matsuda, P. K. (2003). Process and post-process: A discursive history. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12(1), 65e83.   
Susser, B. (1994). Process approaches in ESL/EFL writing instruction. Journal of Second Language Writing, 3, 31e47.