Book review

# Perspectives on Good Writing in Applied Linguistics and TEsOL, Robert Kohls, Christine Pearson Casanave (Eds.). University of Michigan Press, United States of America (2023). p. 296 pp $\$ 39.95$ paperback

The edited volume by Kohls and Person Casanave problematizes the notion of good writing. In reviewing Kohls and Pearson Casanave's work, I find the task both nerve-wracking and rewarding. Writing about good writing brings the anxiety of potential scrutiny against those very lines. Yet, it is rewarding, prompting a deep dive into the essence of foreign language written communication, evaluatig, correcting, judging, and recreating it. This introspection mirrors self-percetion, revealing how our comprehension of good writing shapes our teaching, correction, and assessment methodologies. That is precisely the main objective in the work by Kohls and Pearson, who have edited this book to bring together diverse voices of practitioners and researchers at different levels who disect their individual pereptions (widely shared at acollective level) about what onstitutes good writig in the fields of Applied Linguistics and TEOL The authors, by means of research, reflections, and practical eperiences, advocat for a notion f good writing that goes beyond grammar correctness and hat is ound to contextual, socil and cultual aspets i this sense, thereadership of Assessing Writing Journal wll find in this book an up-to-date discussion on the tenets that lie the heart of asessing and evaluating written production in L2..

In this review, I provide insights from multiple perspectives: firstly, as a PhD Candidate grappling with the challenges of adhering to grammatical correctnes, adopting an academic tone, and meeting international standards while presenting inovative ideas in my dissertation. Secondly, as a Spanish speaker navigating the complexities of writing and publishing in a foreign language. Thirdly, as a teacher educator tasked with introducing future English teachers to multilingual academic writing. The main thesis that the editors unpack throughout the four parts that compose the book is that the concept of good writig i stil underrepresented in 2 literature. and therefore it is imminent for the field to consolidate a flexible yet explicit definition encompassing the voices and perceptions of authors, reviewers, editors, readers and all those involved in the process of writing. Consolidating what good writing means is imperative at this historical moment in which the use of Artificial Intelligence (Al) can produce grammatically and syntactically correct texts, although empty and devoid of the human imprint. While the notion that good writing extends beyond linguistic correctnesshas long ben acknowledged, the use of AI nowadays might be areminder that the assesment of writing should be based on its communicative function and the collborative meaning-making derived from human interaction. Kohls and Pearson's work adeptly explores this concept across four parts, which I will now summarize and discuss.

Part I, entitled Teaching, Learning, and Assesing is composed of 6 chapters. Chapter 1, by Alan Hirvela, explores the concept of travelers' tales to emphasize the power of narratives in understanding good quality in L2 argumentative writing. This chapter transitions smoothly to Penny Kinnear's chapter 2, in which the author shows an example of how her students' diverse backgrounds and multilingual profiles shaped their understanding of good writing" By taking into acount her students' voice, or as Hirvela would put it, their travelers tale, they acknowledged how their experiences influenced their percetions of what good writing means allowing for diverse interpretations to capture intended meanings, transcending linguistic boundaries. A notion that emerges from these frst two chapters is that good writing is about the rapport an author builds with the audience, and therefore that rapport should be at the heart of good writin asssment. But how can we foster the development of good and audience-engaging writing? A useful teaching approach can be found in Chapter 3, by Christine M. Tardy, who proposes the use of emerging multimodal genres, such as videos, podcasts, istice, and academic blogs, to enable academics to engage wider audiences. Tardy argues, despite reistance from seasoned scholars, that graduate students who explore digital genres in academic writing strengthen clarit, audience awarenes, and diverse communication tools.

The last three chapters in Part I are specifically focused on writing ssessment. Chapter 4, by Lynn Goldstein, makes the case that discourse-level feedback is a genre itelf, not a mere collection of corrections. Goldstein explains the features of discourse-level feedback as a genre that serves the purpose of establishing a helpful dialogue with multilingual writers in favor of their writing qualit. Once again, the idea of creting rapport between writing teachers and student, or between authors regardes of their levelof expertise, appears as a central element in the development f ood writing. Such rapport or lack thereof, deends geatly on the beliefs that we hold. In Deborah Crusan's Chapter 5, the author comments on how beliefs shape and inluence the way we asss others writing, and how we owe our students clarity on what good writing is according to our personal belief as teachers. Finall, in Chapter 6, Priyavanda Abeywickrama, Esther Chan, John Holland, Jenifer Trainor, and Todd Walker shift the focus from goo writing to good writers as the main construct for implementing revolutionary asessment that made an impact in a program's curiculum and pedagogy. Throughout a three-year academic project, the authors resisted long-standing definitions -often coming from a deficit perspective- of what good writing means, and delved into what their students as writers do and what they know, in order to reflect upon what (good) writing means for them. In my view, the chapters curated under Part I propose a humanistic approach that places the human being at the center of the writing process, while (good) writig is the result of how such a human being is treated, understod and taken into account. Pinker (2014) has noted that the rapport woven by an author and the audience isas humanly quotidian and effective as a conversation:.

The writer can see something that the reader has not yet noticed, and he orients the reader so she can se for herself ] The reader can recognize the truth when she se it as long as she is given an unobstructed view. And the process of directing the reader's gaze takes the form of a conversation' (p. 3)..

Part I Mentoring, Supervising nd Publishing showcases four chapter. In Chapter 7 Gary Barkhuizen draws atention to the vast array of emotional processes that manifest in academic writing, and through our writing in connecting with an audience. Hence, the author notes t is paramount to understand the emotional impact that fedback may have on learners, and how to anticipate their response to enrich their writing. The author proposes four hypothetical scnarios and their four orresponding archetypal students in an exercise of imagining the emotional and relational connections between expert writers, novices, their audiences, etc. This chapter in particular reminded me of one colleague's research in which the participants highlight asignificant shift in the experience of writig from early childhood to the universty level, contrasting the initial feeins of freedom, imagination, and emotional release associated with writing in childhood with the later academic demands that were perceived as stringent, theoretical, and stifig (Colmenares, 2010). In Chapter eight, by Robert Kohls, Katelyn Endow, Kimani Lincoln, Mona Shat, Rachel Tupper-Eoff and Monique Ubunge, the authors bring up once again the topic of beliefs, in a group of undergraduate students, about what good writing means, and how these beliefs, both of the students and the teacher, inform the ad-hoc construction of adefinition of their own; this must be a contextual definition, linked to the possibilit of evoking sensations in ourselves and in the audience, and therefore, linked to the need to teach others to create sensations and emotions. Chapter 9 displays the intimate vision of Martha Clark Cummings. The author introduces us to allthe people who helped her forge her definition of good writig: her father, her former teachers nd mentors or her muses as she calls them. It is these human connections that end up creating lasting memories and determine our relationship with reading and writing, and therefore, determine the way we help others build their own memories, as both the family and school milieu stand as the places of initiation par excellence, where the human connections largely determine attitudes toward these practices" (Colmenares, 2010, p. 108). Part II comes to an end with Chapter 10, by Christine Pearson Casanave and Yongyan Li, in which the authors addresses good writing in the Book Reviews genre. From their position as book editors and evaluators the authors argue that, beyond the clarity and relevance of the writing, good writing in the field of Book Reviews must be imbued with an intimate, personal point of view on the part of the writer, which means that there may even be room for humor, firt-person writing, anedotes, and any other strategy that makes this academic genre, so predictable in its structure, a text that is engaging, appealing and relatable.

Part I, entited Peronal erpctie, comprises 7 chapters ortraing indvidual voice that iustrate gnrally relatable iues. n Chapter 11, Melinda Reichelt explains how a text, although well crfted, can be boring, and how making room for personal tones and the explicit preence of the first person can improve the quality of academic writing. A notion that shows up recurrently in the book is that it seems that you need to have acquired a certain position within the academic field to get away with spicing up your academic writing, which makes me wonder if novice scholars are expected to be doomed to dull writing. Chapter 12, by Selahattin ilmaz and Diane Belcher,offers an insight into how users of English as a Lingua Franca (ELF) manage to shape a definition of good writing throughout their professional journey in two countries. In a similar fashion, Chapters 13 and 14 display the authors' narratives on becoming academic writers and instructors. In Chapter 13 Lisya Seloni shares her journey transitioning from personal to academic writing, as she argues whether that divide should exist at ll As in most chapters of the book, the idea of imprinting your own self into the writing appears as part of a call for emancipatory writing practices. Likewise, in Chapter 14 Hanako Okada traces his journey to find an authorial voice through reflexivity and reflective practices, a task that, the author notes, is an unfinished endeavor. Another jourey in becomig a writer can be found in Chapter 15, by Icy Lee, who exposes the several vicissitudes she ndured to fially build a definition of good writing along with her rles as an English non-native peaking author and researcher. Chapter 16, by Lia D. KamhiStein, introduces the reader to the translingual processand practces of an author who starts from the concept of not-so-good writing" as a strategy to understand the transformation of her own understanding of good writig. Guillaume Gentil brings Part I to an end with Chapter 17, whereby he advocates for a dialogic approach to understand, and therefore asses, good writing; Gentil warns that such a dialogic approach is no esy task if cros-linguistic and cross-cultural practices are taken into acount, but it surely willinform the discussion on good writing..

In Part IV Readers, Reading, and Writing, two chapters close the book with interesting tenets that need to be taken into account in the construct of good writig. Cheng's Chapter 18 puts forward the argument that the readers and their engagement with our writing are crucial in defining good writing, specificall inthe domain of qualitative research reports. Cheng advocates for areader-orientednes, the kind of audience awarenes that needs to be fostered among research students. Finally, Chapter 19, by Stephanie Vandrick makes the case for reading fiction as a great al of developing good academic writing. By exploring the beliefs her collagues have on good writing, the author displays multiple reasons why fiction and academic writing are complementary and not two parts of a great divide. Norton (2013) puts it this way: "academic institutions have established tacit binary oppositions between the scholarly and the creative, the intellectual and the artistic, oppositions that aren't mutually exclusive at al' (p.5). From my experience as a Foreign Languages teacher educator, I usually notice the paradox that many authors have mentioned before: we often ask our students to read fiction for the sake of language learning, but we demand from them the writing of serious, neutrally toned academic texts as part of their evaluation. That is why this section of the book is as a reminder that good writing depends on how nourished our reading repertoire are. We need to read a great deal of texts, genres, authors, cultures and languages, and only then will we be able to catch a glimpse of what good -and not so good- writing looks like..

Overall, the four sections take the reader on a journey through the different roles and positionings that we assume around writing (as producers, consumers or critics). Kohls and Pearson Casanave's edited book makes is readers confront their own beliefs and practices in the roles they have played in writing. What constitutes ood or poor writing wil continue to be a constantly eolving topic of philosophical, social and cultural debate, since writing is one of the means of expression of the everchanging reality of human beings. The editors suggest that an ultimate answer is far from being established throughout the chapters. Instead, the greatest contribution of this edited volume is that it manages to problematize the concept of good writing, in such a way that the audience is convinced there is no single monolithic answer to such a complex question. The chapters, varied in nature, convey relevant reflections grounded in personal accounts, empirical studie, and pedagogical experiences, reported by authors and reearchers at different levels of expertise. Thus, the book will surely be appealing to a very wide audience, ranging from undergraduate students about to embark in the task of writing, to seasoned scholars interested in the ongoing reflection about writing and its assessment. One thing is certain: contrary to what we have been told in academia that writing should be neutral, impersonal, even frigid, what is considered good writing today is crossed by emotional, personal nuances, where the authors can be explicitly present, where their point of view can be expressed in line with their prsonalit, experiences and backgrounds. I is this mixture of nuances, so unique to each individual on the planet, that must be at the heart f asessment, hand in hand with the traditional mechanical criteria of correct writing. The chapters I have reviewed and that I strongly recommend, make t clear that good writig is a ability under constant construction, ner finished. In that sense, all written production is to be seen as an artifact in the making, always prone to be improved under many lenses. However, in the academic milieu, and epecially when writing is the result of multilingual practices, corrctness remains the fundamental element to getting published and participating in the academic concert; we should think about how to decolonize these precepts alittle especially if we gre that there is a very wide margin, determined by thesocial and cultural, for what good means.

# References