# Questions and answers about teacher written commentary and student revision: teachers and students working together

Lynn M. Goldstein

The Monterey Institute of International Studies, 460 Pierce Street, Monterey, CA 93940, USA

# Abstract

Teachers and students agree that despite the time-consuming nature of providing written commentary and revising using this commentary, teacher feedback is both desirable and helpful. Nonetheless, teachers express concerns about how to provide commentary in ways that their students can effectively use to revise their texts and to learn for future texts. This paper addresses these concerns by helping teachers identify the issues to which they need to attend and by sharing effective practices they can use in providing written commentary to rhetorical and content issues in their students’ writing. The paper first addresses the role of the context within which commentary and revision take place, delineating the issues that teachers need to be aware of and the questions they can ask about context to help guide decisions about commentary. The paper next addresses the process of communication between teachers and students, describing ways of providing such communication that will enhance the effectiveness of the teacher’s commentary and the students’ revisions. The final sections discuss the shape of teacher commentary, with recommendations for what factors teachers can consider in deciding what to comment on as well as recommendations for the forms that effective commentary take.

$©$ 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Teacher feedback; Revision; Teacher commentary; Written feedback

Sunday night—23 student papers—how can I best respond to help my students strengthen their papers and become more effective writers and also let them know I am really listening to what they are saying? What should I respond to first? What should I ignore at this time? How should I respond? Will each student understand and be able to effectively use my commentary? Will they learn from my commentary for future writing? What if they have difficulty? How will I know? What will I do? . .

Tuesday night—reading my teacher’s comments. The next draft is due in a week. What else do I have to do in that time? Do I understand her comments? Do I agree? How will

I use them? What if I don’t understand? What if I don’t know what to do? Where should I begin? . .

To any teacher of second language writers or to any second language writer these questions should sound very familiar. Many questions and issues underlie the processes of reading student papers and providing effective commentary and of reading teacher commentary and revising successfully. Additionally, when I discuss reading student writing and responding with teachers of second-language writing or teacher educators, most comment on the amount of time spent reading and commenting on student papers, and the difficult decisions made in the process of such reading and commenting. My discussions with my writing students, as well as those I have studied, in my research show that as students read and work with teacher commentary they too have many questions and concerns. The intent of this paper, therefore, is to address the needs of teachers of multilingual writers in order to identify the issues to which they need to attend and the practices they can employ to provide effective written commentary on rhetorical and content issues in their students’ writing as they address their students’ needs and concerns.1

With the exception of a few articles published in the mid to late 1980s (see Radecki & Swales, 1988; Zamel, 1985), research on written commentary really did not get much attention until the 1990s. Thus, many issues inherent in commentary have yet to be addressed or adequately addressed in the research literature (see Goldstein, 2001, for a full discussion of the shortcomings in the present body of research). For this reason, while I will use findings from the research, whenever appropriate, to support pedagogical practices, suggested practices are also grounded in the experiences of the author and of others from whom I have been fortunate to learn.

Since providing written commentary on content and rhetorical concerns is time consuming and labor intensive, we might first ask why we should provide such written feedback to students. Despite claims to the contrary (Krashen, 1984), many writing teachers agree that students do not become more proficient writers just by reading and writing. Students need some form of feedback that helps them see how others are reading their writing and what revisions might strengthen their writing. A felt sense of audience is particularly important when we also consider the interactive nature of reading and writing (Ferris & Hedgcock, 1998; Leki, 1990; Reid, 1993). Students need to learn that the words they inscribe on paper are not static and that meaning resides not only in these words but also in what the audience brings to the reading of these words. This can only be understood if students get feedback from readers, feedback that shows the writer where what they have intended has been achieved and where their texts may have fallen short of their intentions and goals. Teachers of second language writers can explain where the text is not accomplishing what the author would like and why and provide strategies for remedying these problems, something that other readers who are not trained to do may not be able to accomplish as well or as readily.

Process approaches to the teaching and learning of second-language writing also argue for teacher intervention and feedback at key points within the process. (My notion of process encompasses attention to both process and product.) Teachers, as expert readers, are able to help students identify what they need to learn or adopt in terms of effective processes and in terms of knowledge of product requirements in producing drafts and arriving at as successful a final product as possible.

Some teachers may feel that conferences are more effective because they believe that conferences provide for better communication between teacher and student than does teacher written commentary. However, in my own research on teacher–student conferences (Goldstein & Conrad, 1990), conferences were not an inherently effective means by which feedback could be given and adopted. Many factors affected how well the teacher and student communicated and how effectively the student was able to use the teacher’s feedback in revising. Similarly, in other research (Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002), teacher written commentary, like conference feedback, was not an inherently effective means for giving usable and helpful feedback either. Students did not necessarily revise better and arrive at stronger texts as a result of such feedback.

In sum, whether we provide feedback through conferencing or written commentary, the key consideration is what makes feedback effective. The discussions that follow are dedicated to providing guidelines for what teachers can do to produce effective written feedback on content and rhetoric in ways that enable students to learn how to revise, to produce more effective texts, and to become more effective writers.

# 1. Considering the role of context

To best understand factors that affect teacher commentary and how students use teacher commentary in revision we need to begin with context. This context is a unique combination of factors stemming from the institution and the program within which the writing, commenting, and revision takes place, and factors that teachers and students bring to the process, as well.

Programmatic and institutional attitudes towards writing, towards writing teachers, and towards different multilingual populations can greatly affect how teachers provide written commentary and how students react to such commentary and use it in their revisions. For example, some teachers and students work in settings where the writing of multilingual students and what they have to say is highly valued. In such contexts, there is support for teachers who believe in responding to the content of their students’ work as well as to rhetorical concerns such as purpose, audience, organization, and development. Other teachers and students work in settings where writing, at least for multilingual writers, is seen as an exercise in developing grammatical and lexical expertise. In these contexts, even teachers who do not believe that writing instruction should have as its primary focus the development of linguistic competence may find it quite difficult to provide written commentary on content and rhetorical concerns in the manner they believe is effective because of pressure to respond to students’ grammatical and lexical errors first and foremost.

Other contextual factors, such as word and length requirements, draft requirements, number of papers requirements, and entrance and exit exams may also exert strong pressure on teacher commentary and student revision. Thus, in situations where such constraints exist, students and teachers alike may feel the pressure to concentrate far more than they would choose to on sentence level concerns and may also avoid substantive revision in the commentary and revision process.

We need to also consider sociopolitical forces (Benesch, 2001). For example, in some institutions, where negative attitudes towards minorities exist, multilingual writers are marginalized. Often this translates into large classes, heavy teaching loads for full time faculty, and an over reliance on adjunct faculty. Full time faculty with classes of 25–30 students each can find it quite difficult to give as much, as frequent, and as effective commentary as they would like. Adjunct faculty, who need to teach at several institutions, may also find it difficult to provide written commentary in ways they would prefer. In other institutions, positive attitudes and welcoming practices await multilingual writers. Class sizes may be smaller, more attention may be paid to the needs of faculty and their students, and everyone may find it easier to be more engaged in writing, responding, and revising.

Thus, it is important to approach each context within which we teach with the full recognition that we do not teach in a vacuum and that we need to understand fully the context within which we are working. Teachers can assess their contexts through observation and informal discussions and through interviews of administrators, fellow faculty, and students. Regardless of program type, key information to be discovered includes:

(1) What are the attitudes and expectations of the institution towards students;   
(2) What are the attitudes and expectations of the program towards students;   
(3) If there are conflicts between the institutional and programmatic attitudes, who mediates these conflicts and how;   
(4) What are the professed philosophies of the program and its administrators towards what teachers should be commenting on and how;   
(5) What are the range of commenting practices the teachers actual employ;   
(6) What are the entrance and exit requirements for the program and for individual courses within the program;   
(7) How do teachers and students mediate between the above requirements and sound commenting and revision practices when there are conflicts between these requirements and such practices;   
(8) What is the workload for the teacher and the student, that is, what is the average class size and what, if any, are the requirements for number of papers, number of drafts and revisions, and number of words completed per semester.

Once teachers have discovered the answers to the above question, decisions need to be made about how to best work within a given set of contextual factors. Rarely do we find ourselves in complete harmony with any one set of contextual factors. As a result, we need to first decide which factors we can accommodate to and how. It is also important to identify and differentiate between those contextual factors that are quite open to modification or change and those that are largely impervious to any modification or change.

In addition to the institutional and programmatic context, we need to also consider what we bring as teachers to the process of reading and responding and what our students bring to the process of composing and revising using our commentary. The unique interaction between teacher factors and individual student factors will affect how we respond and how students use our commentary in revision. Teacher factors can include, but are not limited to, teacher personality, the teacher’s pedagogical beliefs about how to comment, attitudes towards specific student characteristics, attitudes toward each student, attitudes towards the content about which students are writing, knowledge of the content about which students are writing, expectations of students at a particular level, and expectations of particular students. Student factors include, but are not limited to, student personality, age, goals and expectations, motivations, proficiency level, past learning experiences, preferred learning styles and strategies, content knowledge and interest, time constraints, attitudes towards the teacher, the class, the content, the writing assignment, and the commentary itself.

The interaction of these factors and how they affect commentary and revision can be seen in the following example. In a research project on an online course (Goldstein & Kohls, 2002), we examined a quite unproductive interaction between a student and teacher. The student professed to me that she reserved most of her composing and revision efforts for her final draft because that was the only draft on which she would receive a grade. This strategy was borne out of necessity, she believed, because she had so much work in her other degree courses that she had to prioritize. Thus, she ignored many of the teacher’s comments where she felt the revisions were too time consuming or where she did not understand how to revise in response to the comments. The teacher told me she had a negative attitude towards the student because she believed that the student was not putting any effort into her work, as evidenced by the student not using her commentary. As a result, the teacher frequently repeated her comments from draft to draft, something she did not do with the other students. In turn, the student ignored these repeated comments. In the end, because she believed the student to be lazy, the teacher never discussed with the student why the student was ignoring the commentary and whether or not she was having any difficulty. Here we see how the teacher’s attitudes towards the student and the student’s strategies for using commentary because of how the grading was set up and because of her other course commitments affected commentary and revision and interacted with each other.

How do we take into account these teacher and student factors? We need to be very conscious of what we do and why when we provide written commentary on our students’ writing. This awareness should lead to careful examinations of our commentary, both the form and the content of this commentary, to decide on what is working and what is not, so that if any changes are needed, they will be made. In such an examination, we should also consider what attitudes we hold towards particular students, particular types of students, particular types of writing and contents, and what role(s) these attitudes are playing in how and to what we are responding. We need to ask ourselves if we are responding in a manner warranted by each student’s needs and the problems within each student’s text or of we are biased in our commentary. In considering student factors, we can carry out needs analyses with our students to uncover student experiences with, preferences for and attitudes towards written commentary. As well, we need to uncover how students go about using their commentary and the reasons for their strategies.

In the end, when we consider teacher commentary and student composing and revision, what we need to be very aware of is that this is a complex process, with multiple contextual, teacher and student factors interacting and mediating each other, through a cyclical process within which multiple student texts and teacher commentary texts are created.

# 2. Teachers and students communicating

In addition to considering the effect of contextual factors on teacher commentary and student use of such commentary, we should also consider how teachers and students can best work together by communicating their intents, needs, difficulties, and successes.

First, we can build in ways of communicating that allow us to understand what students are hoping to accomplish with a text and therefore avoid appropriation (Campbell, 1998; Charles, 1990; Cheong, 1994; Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Leki, 1990; Mlynarczyk, 1996; Reid, 1994). What is the difference between appropriation and helpful intervention? Commentary that ignores what a student’s purpose is for a particular text and attempts either purposefully or accidentally to shift this purpose is appropriation; commentary that shows a student where he or she is not achieving her/his purpose(s) is helpful intervention; commentary where a teacher demands that a student shift a position or a point of view is appropriation; commentary that suggests a student read about a different point of view or interview others with a different point of view in order to know the other side is helpful intervention; commentary that ‘‘corrects’’ sentences or passages without asking the student about the intended meaning risks changing that meaning and thus risks appropriation; commentary that asks students what they want to say and then helps students find the language to do so is helpful intervention.

One of the major means by which teachers risk appropriating their students’ texts is by reading them without knowing either for whom the student is writing the text or for what purpose or both. The starting point of this communication needs, of course, to be the student. Students need to let us know their intentions, their audiences, their points of view so we can read and respond appropriately. The problem, of course, is that our students are usually not present as we are reading their papers and writing our feedback. Therefore, we need to create mechanisms through which we can help students communicate with us when we are not face-to-face, and specifically through which students can inform us about what they are trying to accomplish. For example, we can create assignments that allow students to let us know their intentions. Students can complete cover sheets and attach them to their papers when they turn them in or directly annotate their texts (Leki, 1990). Computer-mediated mechanisms for annotation can also be utilized. For example, students can send a cover sheet with their papers by email, they can use the comment function in Word to annotate their texts, or if they are working with CommonSpace (see Block & Brutt-Griffler, 2001, for a discussion of implementing CommonSpace in second-language writing classrooms), they can annotate their texts using the columns function in this software program. Cover sheets can indicate to the reader (teacher) who the intended audience is, what points/views the student would like to communicate, and what purposes the student has for the text. Teachers can determine what types of information they need in order to effectively read their students’ papers and then craft cover sheets that will allow students to impart this information. Teachers can also develop the cover sheets with the students for each assignment so that students can use their knowledge critically to determine what they need to be aware of as they write and what they need to convey to their teachers on the cover sheet. In sum, there is no one set format for a cover sheet; cover sheets need to be adjusted to fit the context, the assignment, the draft, and the needs and level of the students.

In addition to a cover sheet, students can also annotate their texts to look not only at the text as a whole but also at the component parts and how they serve to achieve their purposes and meet the needs of their audiences (Leki, 1990). In essence, students can annotate each paragraph, indicating what the paragraph is intended to accomplish in and of itself as well as how the paragraph works within the paper as whole to achieve the writer’s purpose and meet the needs of the audience. Such annotations allow us into the writer’s thinking and decision making processes in a way that we can both avoid commentary that would take our students in directions they did not intend, but can also alert students when the strategies used are not working and what strategies might work.

In addition to appropriation, we need to also consider our students abilities to effectively use our commentary. Studies that examine what individual students actually do with teacher commentary, and in particular examine the relationship between teacher commentary and student revision on macro level issues such as audience, purpose, logic, content, organization and development, have found that students vary in how they use the commentary they receive from their teachers (see, e.g., Chi, 1999; Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002; Hyland, 1998, 2000). While some studies show that students find teachers’ written commentary helpful (Anglada, 1995; Crawford, 1992; Cohen, 1991; Hyland, 1998; Saito, 1994), there is ample evidence that there is variation among students in terms of how helpful they find their teacher’s written feedback and how well they understand their teachers’ feedback.

Students find some commentary confusing (Arndt, 1993; Chapin & Terdal, 1990; Chi, 1999; Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Crawford, 1992; Dessner, 1991; Ferris, 1995, 1998; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002) and they also vary in terms of how much they feel they have understood of their teacher’s commentary (Anglada, 1995; Brice, 1995; Cohen & Cavalcanti, 1990; Ferris, 1995). Additionally, teachers report that sometimes students think they have understood a comment when they have not or that their comments have been misconstrued (Arndt, 1992; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002). Students also report using teacher written feedback without understanding the reasons behind it (Crawford, 1992; Hyland, 1998, 2000) and that even when they do understand a comment, research shows that students may have difficulty figuring out a strategy for revising (Chapin & Terdal, 1993; Cohen, 1991; Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002) or that they vary in terms of how successfully they are able to use the teacher’s feedback to revise (Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Dessner, 1991; Ferris, 1997; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002). Students also differ in terms of how open they are to revising with their teachers’ feedback (Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Enginarlar, 1993; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002; Radecki & Swales, 1988) and some studies show that students differ in terms of how much of their teachers’ feedback they actually use (Chapin & Terdal, 1990; Cohen, 1991; Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Ferris, 1997; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002).

Given all of the above research findings, we need to approach each class with the expectation that our students do not already know the philosophies underlying the way we comment, that our students may have expectations that contradict the ways in which we provide feedback, that even when we believe the intentions of our comments are clear, our comments may not be clear to all students, and that even when the intent is clear, students still may not know how to revise in response to our comments.

We need, therefore, to educate students about our commentary practices and the rationales behind what we do, teach them how to interpret our comments, and foster their ability to revise with the help of our comments. To do so, teachers can use carefully planned and structured activities throughout the semester to teach students how to interpret and enact their comments. The first step is explaining to students what we do and why (Arndt, 1993; Chi, 1989; Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Crawford, 1992; Ferris, 1995; Hyland, 1998, 2000; Reid, 1994) to avoid a mismatch between what we do and what students expect (Paulus, 1999; Radecki & Swales, 1988). All of these discussions can be tailored to fit the level of the student, in terms of the level of the language used and the depth and nature of the discussion, and the actual samples of student papers and commentary.

Yet, even with discussions about the rationales for the teacher’s responding behaviors, the studies cited above strongly suggest that students do not always understand what a particular comment means or what to do in terms of revision in reaction to particular comments. Thus, discussion of why we comment in the ways that we do should then lead to explicit examinations of actual comments, both in terms of what they ‘‘mean’’ and in terms of what types of revision(s) the comments suggest.

The problems students have with teacher commentary do not rest solely in their difficulties understanding the intent of their teachers’ comments but also stem from not knowing how to revise in reaction to comments (Saito, 1994). Here, too, students can benefit from a close examination of comments and what types of revisions should follow from them. The students’ own writing can also be examined to see what they have done in response to the teacher’s commentary throughout the semester, and the teacher can intervene in places where students seem to be having difficulty either understanding a comment or knowing how to revise in response to a comment.

Communication needs to move not just from the teacher to the student as discussed above but also from the student to the teacher. In order for teachers to comment as effectively as possible and for students to be open to using our commentary, we need to understand and acknowledge student reactions and preferences for feedback (Ferris, 1999). In addition, in order to help students strengthen their writing and make effective revisions, provide appropriate commentary, and intervene where help is needed, we need to understand the reasons behind students’ revisions in response to their feedback.

Students have expressed definite preferences for and attitudes towards feedback in terms of the types of feedback they receive and the types of problems on which the feedback is focused (Anglada, 1995; Arndt, 1993; Brice, 1995; Cohen, 1991; Cohen & Cavalcanti, 1990; Enginarlar, 1993; Ferris, 1995; Hyland & Hyland, 2001; Radecki & Swales, 1988). They also report using a variety of strategies for working with their teachers’ feedback (Cohen, 1991; Ferris, 1995; Radecki & Swales, 1988) and a variety of reasons for difficulties using feedback or for not using the feedback at all (Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Ferris, 1995; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002; Radecki & Swales, 1988).

There are a number of ways we can uncover and work with student preferences and strategies for using teacher commentary. First, we can ask students to write autobiographies, detailing their past experiences as writers, including as complete a description as possible of the types of feedback they have received from previous teachers, what they did and did not like about this feedback, and what they did after they received the feedback. We can also devise questionnaires in which we ask students about their preferences. The point of autobiographies or student preference questionnaires is not that these should dictate what we should do. The discussion of student preferences should be coupled with the discussions suggested in the previous section that let students learn about our preferences for commenting. Combining the students’ views and our views allows for open discussion of expectations and exploration of where there is a mismatch between these views. In addition, there may be places where we can accommodate our practices so that the student will be receptive to our feedback. For example, although I have discussed with students my view and the reasons behind it that feedback on sentence level errors should wait until later drafts, some students have told me with great conviction and concern that they want to receive such feedback on earlier drafts. We have been able to find a middle ground, where either the student or I will select some sentence level areas that she/he would like feedback on for earlier drafts.

In addition to a lack of understanding of teacher comments and how to revise in response to them, there are many other reasons for unsuccessful revision or no revision that have been delineated in the literature, including: (1) lacking the willingness to critically examine one’s point of view (Conrad & Goldstein, 1999), (2) feeling that the teacher’s feedback is incorrect (Dessner, 1991; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002), (3) lacking the time to do the revisions (Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002; Pratt, 1999), (4) lacking the content knowledge to do the revision (Goldstein & Conrad, 1999), (5) feeling that the feedback is not reasonable (Anglada, 1995), (6) lacking the motivation (Pratt, 1999), (7) being resistant to revision (Enginarlar, 1993; Radecki & Swales, 1988), (8) feeling distrustful of the teacher’s content knowledge (Pratt, 1999), and (9) mismatches between the teachers’ responding behaviors and the students’ needs and desires (Hyland, 1998, 2000).

Because there are many potential reasons why students sometimes either do not revise successfully in response to their teachers’ comments or do not use their teachers’ comments when revising, we need to understand what factors are working for and against individual students using our commentary effectively. When Gin, in my interviews with her (Goldstein & Kohls, 2002), pointed out that she was citing correctly in her drafts and that her teacher was incorrect when she gave her feedback that said she was using citations incorrectly, that helped me understand why she had not used her teacher’s commentary. (In fact, Gin was correct and the teacher was wrong.) Or consider what happened when another student I interviewed discussed the difficulties she was having with understanding how to enact revisions in response to a particular set of comments about citations. Not knowing how to revise, she decided to ignore these comments and not make the revisions. In response, the teacher not having talked with her, and thus not knowing why she was not revising, kept repeating her comments verbatim on subsequent drafts. The student was frustrated because she did not understand why the teacher kept repeating her comments and did not help her learn how to do the revisions; the teacher was frustrated because she did not understand why the student refused to make revisions in an area where the teacher felt sure the student knew what to do.

Teachers can hold conferences with students where they discuss the students’ revisions, intervene where help is needed, and clarify for students where their feedback has not been understood. Such discussions can also lead to teachers understanding where their feedback might actually be inappropriate, and thus not utilized by the student, or to negotiations where the student feels the feedback is inappropriate when in fact it is quite reasonable in the teacher’s view.

In addition to conferences, there are number of written means through which students can communicate with us about their revisions and their use of our feedback. Ferris (1999) suggests that students attach cover notes explaining how they used their teacher’s feedback and why; that they write about how they addressed the feedback or why they chose not to (Ferris, 1998); or that students attach a revise and resubmit letter detailing how they used the teachers’ feedback (Ferris, 1997). In addition, students can annotate their drafts, explaining throughout what they revised and why, what comments they found difficult to understand, what comments they could understand but did not know how to use for revision, and what comments they chose to not use and why. Such mechanisms give rise to effective communication between teacher and student, encouraging students to use their teachers’ feedback in a thoughtful and critical manner and allowing teachers to understand how their feedback is being used in order to most effectively aid the student.

Finally, students, because they sometimes accord complete power to their teachers, can hesitate to revise anything not commented on by their teachers (Chapin & Terdal, 1990; Chi, 1999). As a result, they may not critically read their work and make self-directed decisions about where their texts can be strengthened and how. By establishing communication and negotiation with students about their papers, their revisions, and their use of our commentary, we can establish an atmosphere where students feel more supported in taking on the responsibility for self-motivated revision.

# 3. The shape of teachers’ commentary

As we have seen, individual factors students bring to the process of reading, interpreting, and using teacher feedback can affect how successfully they use teacher commentary. Thus, we need to approach each student as an individual, learning about each student’s needs, difficulties, and approaches to using feedback. In addition, what we address in our feedback and the shape/form of our feedback may also affect how successfully students use our feedback in revising and strengthening their writing.

# 3.1. What should be commented on

The teachers I have worked with often tell me that when they read a student’s paper, they do not know where to begin, that they are afraid that if they comment on everything they will overwhelm the student, but that they are also afraid that if they do not comment on everything, they are doing the student a ‘‘disservice.’’

‘‘Pencils down; evaluation off; listen to your students’ writing and hear their words, their ideas, their content, and what they are communicating; then listen to their agendas—what they are trying to accomplish, what purpose their writing has, for whom they are writing, with what they are having difficulty.’’ These are my first words of advice, as almost all teachers I have worked with are first inclined to grip their pencils and begin commenting as they read a student’s paper for the first time. I remind them just to read and listen, minus their agenda and minus the student’s agenda, to just read and get a sense of the student’s paper. Then I remind them of the cover sheets we have discussed, and I remind them to read them carefully before they read the student’s paper for a second time, again with pencils down so they can read the paper within the rhetorical context the student has delineated on the cover sheet. I ask them to consider whether or not the student has accomplished what she/he intended for his/her stated audience. And here, I suggest, is where commentary needs to begin. If a student has not succeeded in fulfilling his/her stated purpose, we need to determine why not and address this first, as it makes little sense to discuss development, organization, cohesion, or coherence separate from what the writer is trying to do (Mlynarczyk, 1996) and for whom.

Our starting point also needs to include the areas with which our students tell us they need help (Arndt, 1993; Charles, 1990; Cresswell, 2000; Grabe & Kaplan, 1996; Muncie, 2000). Granted, these may be areas that we might not have responded to at all or not at that time, but importantly, these are the areas about which the writer is most concerned (Cheong, 1994) and students deserve to get help with those aspects of their texts that they feel are problematic.

Thus, each response to each student begins not with an ideal text superimposed over the writer’s text but with where the writer is, what the writer intends, and what the writer says he or she needs from the reader. One student may need to be shown places in the text that do not seem to accomplish the writer’s intentions and to receive questions about whether the writer intends what he or she said on the cover sheet or intends what the text is actually doing. For example, we may have a student who on the cover sheet stated a purpose of demonstrating that capital punishment should be abolished, but the paper discussed why various nations have capital punishment. Here we can point this out to the student and ask the student which the student intends: to delineate the reasons nations give for capital punishment or to argue against capital punishment. What is crucial here is not directing the student in one of these two directions but asking the student which direction the student intends. Such questions need to be accompanied by strategies for revising depending on what the writer decides are his or her intentions. In this example, we could suggest that if the student intends to address why capital punishment should be abolished, the student can move from describing the reasons nations give for capital punishment to providing arguments against these reasons. Alternatively, if the student intends to help the reader understand the reasoning behind different nations’ use of capital punishment, then the student needs to revise the cover note and state their purpose as such.

Another writer might have places in the text so unclear that the reader cannot make sense and thus may need advice on how to untangle these first; another writer might need help with argumentation that does not yet fulfill this writer’s intentions because it has not acknowledged holes in its logic that those who disagree with the writers arguments could exploit. In sum, there are no hard and fast rules about what to comment on in any one draft—no proviso that says main ideas and coherence first, organization second, development third, and so on.

Lest we not forget, students also need to learn from us what is effective in their writing. Praise is important in and of itself for its acknowledgment of the writer and the writer’s strengths as well as the strengths of the writer’s text (Dessner, 1991), and for its strong motivating force (Lipp, 1995; Ferris & Hedgcock, 1998). An important caveat about praise, however, is that it should not be gratuitous, that is, that it should be genuinely deserved (Hyland & Hyland, 2001).

Praise also serves two other very important functions. First, it reinforces for writers their own perceptions of what is working, helping them to build confidence in the choices they make as they compose and as they revise. Second, through commentary on what is effective in their drafts, we can educate our students. Students may be trying something out in their writing they have never before attempted, they may have revised something that was problematic in previous drafts, or they may have created text that no longer evidences problems they may have had with similar types of text in other papers. Learning that what they have done is working and why is empowering and teaches them to use similar rhetorical strategies for future texts.

In addition to responding to what students have written, we can also consider responding to student processes for writing. Essentially what we read at any one time is a ‘‘product,’ and it is quite important to understand how that product came to be. For example, I once worked with a student who seemed to have great difficulty with providing convincing evidence for his arguments and for anticipating the arguments of those who might disagree. I found out from him that the process he undertook in gathering evidence for his arguments was to ask friends (and in fact usually only one, and usually one who already agreed with him) what they thought about a particular issue. He never consulted library resources and he never interviewed a cross section of people to see opposing views. Therefore, my feedback to him focused on what were appropriate resources for discovering sufficient and appropriate evidence and also on the need to consider points of view in opposition to his. Had I not learned his process for discovering evidence, I would have just responded to the ‘‘product,’’ i.e., his support, and told him it was insufficient and not convincing and why, without providing him with more effective processes for discovering the evidence he needed to support his views. In another example, I interviewed a student who had serious and pervasive problems with plagiarism in her texts. My discussions with her uncovered that her problems lay not with a misunderstanding of what plagiarism is and how to avoid it but in her poor reading skills, which undermined her ability to understand the sources she was using in her papers. Here she needed help not with her texts but with her reading skills (Goldstein & Kohls, 2002).

Finally, we can pay careful attention to what our students have revised and how and provide commentary that also focuses on students’ revisions. Whenever students turn in their revised work to be read and commented on, I ask students to hand in two drafts, the current one and the one immediately previous. My intent here is not punitive or evaluative, as I am not checking to make sure that students have followed my every piece of advice from the previous draft nor do I expect them to. What I want to encourage is thoughtful revision that considers my feedback on the previous draft and encourages the student to use the feedback in a critical manner, making decisions about what to use and how. Thus, what I want to learn is what my students are having difficulty revising and what they are able to successfully revise, I want to learn with what comments they did not agree, and I want to learn what they have revised on their own with no help from me. I discover this from looking at the two drafts in what I call ‘‘retrospective reading,’’ shuttling back and forth from the first to the second text. To illuminate my retrospective reading, I also pay careful attention to the cover sheet or the annotations students have made detailing their revisions (see previous discussion on communication). Thus, as I plan my response, here too I consider not only the product, that is the text in front of me and what types of commentary the writer might benefit from as discussed above, but also the process of revision, that is, what the student has revised, how and why. After doing so, in my commentary I include feedback about the writer’s revisions, how these revisions are working, what they might attempt for places where the revisions are not effective, reactions to places where they have not agreed with my feedback (positive or negative), and praise or advice about revisions that they have attempted on their own. In sum, my commentary to the student on the current draft will contain feedback both on the draft itself and on the revisions from the previous draft.

# 3.2. The shape of teacher commentary

Often, one of the first question teachers will ask is what form their commentary should take: Should they ask questions? Should they tell students exactly what to do? Should they show their students exactly how to make a particular revision? Coupled with this, teachers ask where they should put their commentary: in the margins next to what is being commented on, in the beginning of the students’ papers, in an endnote, or perhaps some combination of approaches?

There is no research that addresses the relative effectiveness of end versus marginal versus initial commentary. Ferris and Hedgcock (1998) suggest that marginal commentary has immediacy, appearing right next to the place where revision is needed; as well, marginal commentary leaves no doubt to what the comment applies and it is physically easier to read the text and the corresponding comment together. On the other hand, end commentary can be summative, bringing together major ‘‘themes’’ to educate the writer about particular types of content or rhetorical issues and corresponding strategies for revision. Initial commentary can also serve this summative and educational purpose. Students need to know exactly where textual problems as well as textual effectiveness are located; additionally, they need summative commentary from which they can extrapolate and learn not just for the current draft but also for future writing. Thus, we will need to decide, depending on our knowledge of individual students’ needs and preferences, the nature of the text, and the nature of both what is working and what is problematic within a text, what combination of commentary placement will effectively indicate textual problems and textual effectiveness and provide ‘‘lessons’’ for current and future writing.

Determining what makes the ‘‘form’’ of commentary effective entails a number of considerations. First, common consensus is that commentary should be text-specific (see, for example, Ferris & Hedgcock, 1998). While Ferris (1997) cautions that it is not completely clear-cut what is and what is not a text-specific comment, there is agreement that text-specific commentary is that which could only apply to that writer’s text at that place within the text. Thus, in most cases a comment such as ‘‘you need more development here’’ is not text-specific, while a comment such as ‘‘ here, where you discuss why you feel you can’t live in a city because of bad experiences in cities, I would like to know details of what happened in these experiences and how these events influenced your decision that city living is not for you.’’ is text-specific. Text-specific comments serve to show exactly what difficulties the reader is having with the text and where; they are also motivating as they show the reader actively engaged with the writer’s text.

Even when comments are text-specific, we still need to consider how the forms of our comments influence whether or not students will understand the intent of a particular comment, and second, whether or not students know what revision strategy to employ in response to a particular comment. There is relatively little research that has examined the relationship between comment form and the effectiveness of student revision, and the results of such research are mixed. Conrad and Goldstein (1999) found that neither the syntactic forms of comments (whether they were questions, declaratives or imperatives) nor their pragmatic shape (suggestion versus directive) played a role in how effectively their three case study participants revised using their teacher’s commentary. In contrast, Ferris (1997) found that her subjects revised more or less successfully after certain types of comments. However, Ferris did not find that any one type of comment form unequivocally correlated with degree of revision success or whether or not a revision was attempted.

While Conrad and Goldstein found that comment form played no role in the students’ revision success, they did discover that the type of problem identified as needing revision was strongly related to how successful the students’ revisions were. Problem types other than development were revised successfully $90 \%$ of the time. In contrast, problems dealing with development in terms of examples, facts, and details were revised successfully a little more than half of the time while those dealing with argumentation, explanation and analysis were revised successfully only $10 \%$ of the time. Ferris (2001) also found that revision focusing on logic and argumentation often led to unsuccessful revision. These results suggest that we need to identify the problems areas where many of our students are having difficulty composing and revising. By doing so, we can then create class lessons that address what our students need to learn.

The above discussion suggests that we need not worry about whether we should phrase our commentary as questions, declaratives, or imperatives. Other aspects of comment form, however, do need to be considered. There is some evidence that indirectness and mitigation may, at least in some instances, make it difficult for students to understand the intent of a teacher’s comment (Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Ferris, 1998; Hyland & Hyland, 2001). For example, students may not understand that the word ‘‘might,’’ in a comment such as ‘‘You might consider adding details here to show your reader exactly how you felt about leaving your home’’ does not serve to signal the writer’s choice to consider adding details, but instead serves to mitigate or soften what the teacher is afraid might be perceived otherwise as authoritarian commentary. Ferris (1999) also suggests that indirectness in a teacher’s commentary can be perceived as a lack of confidence or competence on the part of the teacher. Given the above points, we should consider either being very careful about how and when we mitigate our commentary or consider explaining the real intent behind mitigated comments. Thus, we could reword the comment above simply as ‘‘Add details here so that you can show your reader exactly how you felt about leaving your home.’’

In addition, there is compelling evidence that commentary that provides strategies for revision may be particularly helpful to students (Conrad & Goldstein, 1999; Ferris, 1998; Goldstein & Kohls, 2002; Ziv, 1984). Conrad and Goldstein suggest, for example, that the difficulties students had with comments that focused on development might have been lessened if, along with the comments they received that pointed out the problems in their texts, the students had been given revision strategies. The following example from Ferris (2001) illustrates the difference between commentary with and without strategies:

In one example, the teacher wrote the following comment: ‘you might consider what some psychologists have said about the impact of the situation on Jessica.’ To make this suggestion more concrete, the teacher perhaps could have said this instead: ‘In our readings, there were several statements from psychologists about what the effect on Jessica might be if she were returned to her birth parents. You might add a paragraph here which summarizes this information and discusses whether or not these expert opinions support your argument.’ (p. 313)

Notice that the teacher’s actual comment gives no direction to the student about how to enact a revision in response to the comment. The student may wonder what it means to ‘‘consider’’ and then what actually to do after ‘‘considering.’’ In contrast, Ferris’ suggested reworking of this comment gives the student a clear strategy, sending the student back into the reading to review and summarize the psychologists’ views and then back into the writing, showing the student how to use these views.

# 4. Conclusion

When I gave an abbreviated version of this paper at the 2002 TESOL conference (Goldstein, 2002), one participant in our colloquium said ‘‘Lynn, thanks for complicating my life.’’ I do not deny the reality of what my colleague meant when she thanked me. I began this paper with a careful and detailed discussion of context, what creates context, and how contextual factors may affect our practices. Coming full circle, we need to consider how we might enact the suggestions I have outlined in this paper in our individual contexts. We will always have critical decisions to make, decisions such as what is feasible and what is not, and what compromises we might need to make. If we are teaching four sections of writing, each with 30 students, we might need to assign fewer papers, or read fewer drafts, or we may find that we can not respond retrospectively to every draft. If we teach in a context that treats writing as language practice, one where the students must take an exit exam that is scored largely on grammatically accuracy, we may find ourselves assigning in class writing tasks that mimic this exit exam and we may need to respond to the grammatical accuracy in these papers first and foremost. If conditions marginalize us and our students, we may need to consider how to modify our practices so we do not burn out, and in general, we will need to consider what resources might be harnessed to ameliorate these conditions. The suggestions in this paper are guidelines, ones that teachers may need sometimes to bend and shape to fit their needs and their students needs and their particular contexts.

While complicating your life is certainly not my intention, I do hope that I have both ‘‘complexified’’ and clarified the issues involved in providing written commentary to second language writers on their texts. I say ‘‘complexified’’ because I believe that the process of reading student writing and providing helpful commentary is a complex process and should not be simplified. We do need to consider all of the variables that affect the quality of our commentary and the ability of our students to use our commentary to revise effectively and to learn for future writing, and we also need to consider how the variables interact. Thus, my intention in this paper has been to explicitly identify the factors we might consider and give explicit advice about how to work with these factors to arrive at effective commentary.

The research on written commentary is relatively ‘‘young’’ and while some of what we might do can be informed by research, a lot of what we do also needs to be informed through critical examination of our practices. Thus, I also hope this paper is not an ending but a beginning of further inquiry and refinement of practice. To further understand what makes effective practice, my call is for all of us to carefully and systematically examine our commentary practices alongside of how our students use our commentary and to share our findings with each other.

# References

Anglada, L. (1995). On-line writing center responses and advanced ESL students’ writing: An analysis of comments, students’ attitudes and textual revisions. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Texas Tech University.   
Arndt, V. (1993). Response to writing: Using feedback to inform the writing process. In M. Brock & L. Walters (Eds.), Teaching composition around the pacific rim: Politics and pedagogy (pp. 90–116). Cleveland, Philadelphia, and Adelaide: Multilingual Matters.   
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical pragmatism: A politics of L2 composition. In T. Silva & P. Matsuda (Eds.), On second language writing (pp. 161–172). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Block, J., & Brutt-Griffler, J. (2001). Implementing CommonSpace in the ESL composition classroom. In D. Belcher & A. Hirvela (Eds.), Linking literacies: Perspectives on L2 reading-writing connections (pp. 309– 334). Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.   
Brice, C. (1995). ESL writers’ reactions to teacher commentary: A case study. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED394312.   
Campbell, C. (1998). Teaching second-language writing: Interacting with text. Boston: Heinle & Heinle Publishers.   
Chapin, R., & Terdal, M. (1990). Responding to our response: Students’ strategies for responding to teacher written comments. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED328098.   
Charles, M. (1990). Responding to problems in written English using a student self-monitoring technique. ELT Journal, 44, 286–293.   
Cheong, L. K. (1994). Using annotation in a process approach to writing in a Hong Kong classroom. TESL Reporter, 27, 63–73.   
Chi, F. (1999). The writer, the teacher, and the text: Examples from Taiwanese EFL college students. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED442272.   
Cohen, A. (1991). Feedback on writing: The use of verbal report. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 13, 133–159.   
Cohen, A., & Cavalcanti, M. (1990). Feedback on written compositions: Teacher and student verbal reports. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 155–177). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Conrad, S., & Goldstein, L. (1999). ESL student revision after teacher written comments: Texts, contexts and individuals. Journal of Second Language Learning, 8, 147–180.   
Crawford, J. (1992). Student response to feedback strategies in an English for academic purposes program. ARAL, 15, 45–62.   
Cresswell, A. (2000). Self-monitoring in student writing: Developing learner responsibility. ELT Journal, 54, 235–244.   
Dessner, L. (1991). English as a second language college writers’ revision responses to teacher-written comments. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.   
Enginarlar, H. (1993). Student response to teacher feedback in EFL writing. System, 21, 193–204.   
Ferris, D. (1995). Student reactions to teacher response in multiple-draft composition classrooms. TESOL Quarterly, 29, 33–53.   
Ferris, D. (1997). The influence of teacher commentary on student revision. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 315–339.   
Ferris, D. (1998). How does teacher feedback affect student revision?—A pilot comparison between ESL and NES writing teachers and their students. Paper presented at the 32nd Annual TESOL Convention, Seattle, WA.   
Ferris, D. (1999). One size does not fit all: Response and revision issues for immigrant student writers. In L. Harklau, K. Losey, & M. Siegal (Eds.), Generation 1.5 meets college composition (pp. 143–158). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Ferris, D. (2001). Teaching writing for academic purposes. In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for academic purposes (pp. 298–314). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Ferris, D. (2002). Treatment of error in second language writing. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.   
Ferris, D., & Hedgcock, J. (1998). Teaching ESL composition: Purpose, process and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Goldstein, L. (2001). For Kyla: What does the research say about responding to ESL writers. In T. Silva & P. Matsuda (Eds.), On second language writing (pp. 73–90). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Goldstein, L. (2002). Teacher written commentary and student revision. Paper presented as part of the Colloquium on Current/Recurrent Issues in Teaching Multilingual Writers, TESOL, 9–13 April, Salt Lake City, Utah.   
Goldstein, L., & Conrad, S. (1990). Student input and the negotiation of meaning IN ESL writing conferences. TESOL Quarterly, 24, 443–460.   
Goldstein, L., & Kohls, R. (2002). Writing, commenting and revising: The relationship between teacher feedback and student revision online. Paper presented at the American Association of Applied Linguistics Conference, 6–9 April 2002, Salt Lake City, Utah.   
Grabe, W., & Kaplan, R. (1996). Theory and practice of writing. New York: Longman.   
Hyland, F. (1998). The impact of teacher written feedback on individual writers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 7, 255–286.   
Hyland, F. (2000). ESL writers and feedback: Giving more autonomy to students. Language Teaching Research, 4, 33–54.   
Hyland, F., & Hyland, K. (2001). Sugaring the pill: Praise and criticism in written feedback. Journal of Second Language Writing, 10, 185–212.   
Krashen, S. D. (1984). Writing: Research, theory and application. Oxford: Pergamon Press.   
Leki, I. (1990). Coaching from the margins: Issues in written response. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 57–68). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Lipp, E. (1995). Training ESL teachers to write effective feedback on composition drafts. Journal of Intensive English Studies, 9, 50–66.   
Mlynarczyk, R. (1996). Finding grandma’s words: A case study in the art of revising. Journal of Basic Writing, 15, 3–22.   
Muncie, J. (2000). Using written teacher feedback in EFL composition classes. ELT Journal, 54, 47–53.   
Paulus, T. M. (1999). The effect of peer and teacher feedback on student writing. Journal of Second Writing, 8, 265–289.   
Pratt, E. (1999). A qualitative study of peer and teacher response in an ESL writing classroom in Puerto Rico. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Indiana University of Pennsylvania.   
Radecki, P., & Swales, J. (1988). ESL student reaction to written comments on their work. System, 16, 355–365.   
Reid, J. (1993). Historical perspectives on writing and reading in the ESL classroom. In J. Carson & I. Leki (Eds.), Reading in the second language classroom: Second language perspectives (pp. 9–32). Boston: Heinle and Heinle Publishers.   
Reid, J. (1994). Responding to ESL students’ texts: The myths of appropriation. TESOL Quarterly, 28, 272–292.   
Saito, H. (1994). Teachers’ practices and students’ preferences for feedback on second language writing: A case study of adult ESL learners. TESL Canada Journal, 11, 46–70.   
Zamel, V. (1985). Responding to student writing. TESOL Quarterly, 19, 79–102.   
Ziv, N. (1984). The effect of teacher comments on the writing of four college freshman. In R. Beach & N. Bridwell (Eds.), New directions in composition research (pp. 362–380). New York: Guilford.

Lynn Goldstein is professor of TESOL and applied linguistics, at the Monterey Institute of International Studies. Her teaching and research interests include second language writing, sociolinguistics, CALL, and the structure of English. She has been involved in second-language writing since the 1970s as a teacher, writing program administrator, teacher educator, and researcher.