# BALEAP news – June for July

It isn't very long since I wrote the last BALEAP news item, but there has been a surprising amount of activity in that time. In the last issue I ended with the highlight of the spring months, the BALEAP Biennial Conference held at the University of Glasgow, and work is now underway compiling the Conference Proceedings which will be published as an e-book, the future format for our conference publications. Since then, there has been an event held by the BALEAP Accreditation Scheme to launch the new criteria for accrediting institutions' EAP provision, the CEAPA-BALEAP conference held at Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University in Suzhou, China, the Durham Professional Issues Meeting on Leadership and Management, and the launch of the report on the BALEAP funded research on the impact of Covid-19 on the UK EAP sector, with a launch event in early June.

The BALEAP Accreditation Scheme events are held yearly and this year the topic was the new revised Accreditation Scheme with talks of interest to prospective centres (both in the UK and abroad) and existing accredited centres wanting to look more in depth at accreditation and quality assurance. The event took place in May and there was a full programme of talks from speakers based in the UK, Hong Kong, and Turkey. The plenary introduced the new scheme and was followed by talks on the impact of accreditation on individual institutions, and on what makes an accreditation scheme ‘global’ and ‘internationally’ applicable.

At the end of May, the CEAPA-BALEAP conference was held as another very successful online event drawing together speakers and delegates from across the world to discuss ‘EAP as a Glocal Language’. The China EAP Association (CEAPA) is a young organisation “established in 2015 to meet the innovative need for EAP teaching in China … The purpose of this association is to unite and contact language teachers, experts and scholars in and out of China who are engaged in EAP teaching and to carry out academic English teaching research activities.” (https://www.xjtlu.edu.cn/en/conference/ceapa-baleap-2021-conference/ceapa). The conference was a great opportunity to further these aims with a range of stimulating plenaries, featured talks, papers and workshops. The programme can be found here and gives an indication of the range of topics covered.

One week after this, the Durham Centre for Academic Development at the University of Durham hosted the June PIM on Leadership and Management in EAP: Insights, Issues and Experiences. The programme offered a range of presentations with something for everyone in the world of EAP, from teaching practitioners to leaders, managers and beyond. You can find details of the plenary, papers and workshops on the BALEAP website and recordings of talks will be made available in due course. This theme proved to be a popular one with over 100 participants registered to attend.

June also saw the launch of the 142-page report from the research commissioned by BALEAP and carried out by Dr Emma Bruce and Hel´ena Stakounis, An examination of how organisations delivering EAP were affected and responded in terms of academic delivery and operational procedures. The research indicates that overall, despite initial ‘panic and pitfalls … a large number of opportunities arose from the various strategies adopted in terms of provision and administrative and operational procedures, and it is expected that many of these opportunities will be harnessed for the future, even in the return to face-to-face programmes.’ (p.5).

BALEAP continues to support practitioner research and as had been indicated during the Glasgow AGM, we are excited to announce the 2021 iteration of the BALEAP Funding Stream. Following on from two successful rounds of funding centred on BALEAP core values (Collaboration in 2019 and Development/Innovation in 2020) this year's theme addresses another core value identified by the membership – Inclusivity. Research proposals on the theme of “Enacting Social Justice in EAP practice” have been invited and more information on the outcome of the call will be announced in due course.

Finally, there has been a good deal of activity as usual generated by the BALEAP SIGs which has been given an extra boost by the individual events they held at the conference. Our newest SIG, Teacher Education in EAP (TEd in EAP) has established itself firmly following an inaugural event in March, and other SIGs have continued to hold webinars and other networking events, as well as building their infrastructures, setting up twitter accounts, developing their websites and embedding themselves within the EAP community in the UK and overseas. To conclude this issue of the BALEAP News, here is the latest update from the Testing, Assessment and Feedback SIG.

The BALEAP TAFSIG is a forum for sharing knowledge, ideas, practice and research on testing, assessment and feedback, and a facilitator for events that further research and practice in the field of English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and beyond.

Our TAFSIG founding convenor, Fiona Orel, has recently joined the BALEAP Executive Committee as Testing Officer. Rob Playfair and Emma Bruce have taken up the role as co-convenors. Other members of the committee are Wayne Rimmer, Samuel Barclay and Jo Kuckuczka.

Regular events include our informal Coffee Club meet up in which participants raise questions and discuss current issues around testing, assessment and feedback and also our Webinar series. In May we were delighted to host Dr Nicola Latimer from CRELLA who shared her work on What can eye-tracking tell us about academic reading on reading-into-writing tasks. You can access the recording here: https://baleaptafsig.weebly.com/archived-events/webinar-what-can-eye-tracking-tell-us-about-academicreading-on-reading-into-writing-tasks

For upcoming events and our latest blogs, including a recent one from Dr Prithvi Shrestha on how a genre theory informed dynamic assessment approach offers students individualised support with academic writing and conceptual development, visit our website: https://baleaptafsig.weebly.com/

Please do get in touch if you would like to share a blog or would like to speak at a webinar.