# EAP corrective feedback in an EMI setting: Student and teacher beliefs

Robert Weeklya,\*, Andrew Pollardb, James Macphersona

a University of Nottingham, Ningbo, China b Charles Darwin University, Australia

# ABSTRACT

This study examines the oral corrective fedack (CF) belies of Chinese students and English for Academic Purposes (EAP) tutors i an English Medium Instruction (EMI) seting in China. Despite considerable variation in poken English around the world many EAP tutors tend to corret students' spoken language in relation to native speaker norms, whilefor students the native model is constructed as the ideal model. This exploratory study loks at istening and speaking casses on an EMI undergraduate preparatory course at a Sino-Britsh Universt in Chin. This paper lliv    c  o t e t c thr s as  though interviews. The study revealed variation in students opinions about CF, with some asertig the limite importance of CF and an aceptance of language vriabilit, with others stesing the importace of accurate languag. For thir part, the AP teachers fel it is important to correct students ause f lguag policy, asment, and stunt expttions, while o beig opeto angage varition. his paper proposes that CF needs to be rerientated to eflect the changing social environments in which Englishis spoken, from the current form focuse corrction to 'meaning focused correction'.

# 1. Introduction

Despite empirical evidence that corctive feedack (CF) has a positive ffect on students' language use and knowledge (Li, 2010; Lyster et al., 2013; Mackey & Go, 2007), the foundations of CF research stem from a fundamental misunderstanding of language. When researchers find positie evidence of improvement in students' language this is identified as progresson towards a prescribed written language standard, derived from emergent language features codified predominantly between the 18th and 19th century (Hobsbawn, 2000; Makoni & Pennycook, 2007). Epistemological orientations to a standard language ideology have been undermined in multiple linguistic research fields such as World Englishes, English as a Lingua Franca (ELF), multilingualism, critical linguistics, Ianguage ideologies and complexity theory within Second Language Acquistion (SLA). However, the recognition of variaility in the English language, and the criticism of Standard English (SE) ideologie, appears to have had minimal impact on the practice f English teaching, with British English (BrE) and American English (AmE) models maintaining precedence in the classroom, and teachers expected to correct their students' English in relation to these norms. This is evident within English Medium Instruction (EMI) institutions in China, which claim to be international' and promote 'diversity' but maintain a national Anglo-centric approach in relation to language (Jenkins, 2014). Students are expected to conform to BrE or AmE in both spoken and written forms, despite this being their second or third language, and they may be using emerging norms from their own social context. With multiple norms emerging in different contexts, including EMI, it sems imperative to examine ways in which Englis for Academic Purposes (EAP) can respond to this reality that are beneficial to students.

As Sepehrinia and Mehdizadeh (2018) highlight, there are discrepancies between researchers focus and the concerns of teachers. While researchers have been overwhelmingly focused on the effctiveness of diffrent types of CF in varying contexts and settings, teachers recognise that the provision of CF needs to operate against the backdrop of the social world that is always lurking behind every learning and teaching proces' (Sepehrinia & Mehdizadeh, 2018, p. 464). Teachers need to consider other factors such as students' emotional neds, cassroom management and constraints in terms of time and materials. Therefore, i i necessary to move beyond rearch that engage with CF only in terms of is efectivenes. With this in mind, this paper fouses on the beles of three EAP teachers and their Chinese students in a Sino-British University in China.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Theoretical underpinning of CF

Researching CF in language teaching has been an important strand of investigation over the past forty years. Much of this research has been instigated by several hypotheses within SLA and testing these hypothese of how second languages are acquired and learned and the extent CF contributes to this. Krashen (1982, 1985) for example, asserted that CF is only worthwhil if itis aimed at student errors which are part of their conscious knowledge, and therefore argued that CF has negligible classroom value. In contrast, Swain (2005) aserts that CF is beneficial for learning, providing information for learners and contributes to leaners output. Likewise, the noticing hypothes (Schmidt, 1990, 1995, 2001) also support the use of CF in the classroom by suggesting that CF helps to raise learners' awarenes of the gap between their interlanguage (Selinker, 1972, 1992) and the target norm, which may become intake for learning (Loewen, 2012; Mackey, 2006; Rassaei, 2013; Russell & Spada, 2006; Shegar et al., 2013).

Long's (1996) interaction hypothes also stresses an important role for CF, as it provides both direct and indirect information, and positive evidence about the language. Clsroom interactions between pers and teachers may initiate conversational modifications that could lead to focusing on a language feature and enabling students to notice the difference between their interlanguage and the target feature. Long (1996, pp. 451-452) argues that CF facilitate 2 learning through the negotiation of meaning, especially where this involves interactional modifications by the more competent speaker because it connects input, internal learner capacities, particularly selective atention, and output i productive ways'. However, the amount of CF that involves negotiation of meaning is questionable; recasts, for example, are the most widely used CF by teachers, but are unlikely to involve negotiation of meaning. Nevertheles, there is theoretical support for CF within SLA, not just in cognitive and interactional SLA theories, but also in sociocultural approaches (Lantolf, 2011).

# 2.2. Investigating the effectiveness of CF

There is a substantial body of empirical studies that have sought to test different hypotheses and ther relationship to CF. Although these studies have teded to find oflicting reults, hn (2007), tr and Sato (2010 Elis (2012) ster et l. (2013) Le 2016) and i and Vuono (2019 all gree, that overall,they indicate a positive rol for CF in the classoom. Nevertheless as Garcia Mayo and Alcon Soler (2013 p. 224) highlight, Cs contribution to second language acquisition is mediated by [the] degree f explicitness type of interlocutor, and target grammar structure'. In fact, studies have highlighted multiple variational factors involved in CF research and the attempts by rearchers to control thesevariables (Ammar & Spada, 2006 Ellis 207; Li, 2010; Li et al. 2016; Lowen, 2012; Mackey & Goo, 2007; Rassaei, 2015; Russel & Spada, 2006; Sato & Loewen, 2018; Sheen, 2008; Zha0 & Ellis, 2022).

With so many variables to consider when conducting CF research, it is diffiult for researchers to, firstly, control these variables, secondly to argue that any findings can be replicated in other contexts, and thirdly to give anything but rudimentary rcommendations for the rel lassroom context. For example, the laboratory setting has been shown to be more effctive for recasts than the classroom context (Lyster et al., 2013; Mackey & Go0, 2007; Sheen, 2008). However, recasts continue to be recommended for language teachers as a form of CF, being non-intrusive and therefore viable for Communicative Language Teaching (CLT) (Harmer, 2015). Other aspects which deemine the efftivenes of rast is if students notice and interpret the rst as a correctio gi, 2007; Ells et al., 206; Philp, 2003; Rassaei, 2013), whether students are developmentall ready (Ammar, 2008; Ammar & Spada, 2006; G00 & Mackey, 2013; Han, 2002; Lee 2013; Lowen, 2012; Lyster e al., 2013; Sheen, 2004, 2008; Trofimovich et al., 2007) and the degree of explicitness in the delivery of the recast (Nassaji, 2007; Sato & Loewen, 2018; Sheen, 2006; Yilmaz, 2013; Zha0 & Ellis, 2022).

Although recasts can vary in their degre of explicitness as the least intrusive form of F, and perhaps because of the dominance of CLT within LT, recasts have become the most popular CF choice due to the perception that they are the least likely to hinder students communication (Loewen, 2012). However it is questionable whether all recasts can be categorised as CF as they are a functional communicative structure. Recasts are observed in conversation analysis but are labelled repetition repairs (Clift, 2016) and are therefore, a feature of normalised discursive practice.

A further issue with most CF studies (Doughty & Varela, 1998; Ellis, 2022; Elli et al., 2006; Li e al., 2016; Rhimi & hang, 2016, Schmidt, 2001; Sheen, 2008) is that they are framed within the concept of interlanguage (Selinker, 1972, 1992). However,to compare students interlanguage forms with the taget form, and L2 learners with monolingual peakers is a comparative falacy (Jenkins, 207;

Seidlhofer, 2011). Only $5 { - } 1 0 \%$ of second language learners are said to achieve the same level of fluency and accuracy as a native English speaker (NES) (Crystal, 1997), and therefore, i is questionable why the NES model is used as a target. Interlanguage is also semantically associated with another SLA concept, fosilization, which is undersood as the involuntary long-term cessation of interlanguage (Han, 2013; Larsen-Freeman, 2006). Even so, the term fossilization is applied widely and indiscriminately and has simply become a useful metaphor for teachers to describe a lack of progress(Han & Odlin, 2006). As both Han (2013) and Long (2003) note, fosslization is an ambiguous term, as leaners do not stabilize prematurely within and acros each and every lingustic domain. Moreover, thereis an implication in the concept of fosslization that i is acognitive mechanism able to distinguish between native and non-native language while only applying to the latter, and allowing ungrammatical features to continue developing (Han, 2013; Larsen-Freman, 2006). Nevertheles, SLA authors, such as Rezae et l. (2011, p. 26), use fosilization as a reason for the importance of CF in discussions of whether teachers should correc erors as leaving student' errors might lead to fosilization of ll-formed structures'. Although lessexplicit in more recent CF research, there remains an underlying predisposition to viewing standard native English as the superior model and natural target for second language speakers (Li et al., 2016; Sato & Loewen, 2018; Thomas, 2018; Zhao & Ellis 2022). Most CF studies fail to acknowledge the sociolinguistic reality of learners' exposure to the language, and therefore, as both Hall (2017) and Larsen-Freeman (2006, 2018) argue, researchers must consider language targets in non-monolithic terms and always moving. CF, being ideologically constructed as positive for language learning, and NES presented as the 'normalised target' is reflected in research which examines students and teachers' beliefs about CF.

# 2.3. Students' and teachers' CF beliefs

CF beliefs have been defined as attitudes, views, opinions or stances that learners and teachers hold about the utility of CF in second language (L2) learning and teaching and how it should be implemented in the classoom' (Li, 2017, p. 143). Both Ellis (2010) and Sheen (2007) arge that consideration of oth teachers and students belief is important as CF ppears to be moreffective when learners are receptive to it and fundamentall, the noticeability of CF may be mediated by learner beliefs themselves (Kartchava & Ammar, 2014).

Research into CF beliefs tends to focus on either learners or teachers, although there are studies examining both (Jean & Simard 2011; Kainvanpanah et l. 2015; Lee, 2013; Schulz, 1996, 2001). Studies of CF attitudes among L2 leaners have reported positive attitudes acros different educational backgrounds. For example, ladeo's (193) survey f attitudes at secondary and tertiary lels in Singapore showed that $9 0 . 4 \%$ of participants thought CF to be desirable, while large scale studies by Schulz (1996, 2001) at American and Columbian universties found similar levels of positive atitudes among students. Another larg-scale survey at Michigan State University conducted by Loewen et al. (2009) revealed highly positive belefs towards CF. More recently, Zhu and Wang (2019) conducted a large scale questionnaire of Chinese EFL learners in 15 different universities across China. Whilethe results indicate a positive atitude towards CF, pragmatic erors were considered a higher priority than grammatical erors, which may be an indication f changing attitudes among the younger generation of EL students. Similarly, while the Vietnamese students inVan H et al.'s (2021) study desired CF on all errors, they were less concerned with local grammatical errors.

In contrast to those of learners, research into teachers' CF beliefs has found more negative views. In Shult's (2001) study, this misalignment was particularly pronounced, with only $3 0 \%$ of teachers feeling that CF should be provided for students' spoken errors compared to $9 0 \%$ of students holding the same belief. Lee (2013) also observed differences between teachers and students in terms of CF provision, with students reporting astrong preference for immediate explicit feedback, while teachers prefer delivering implicit feedback. More recently, findings have suggested that negative CF beliefs are more prevalent among pre-service or novice teachers (Kartchava et al., 2020; Rahimi & Zhang, 2015). In particular, Rahimi and Zhang's (2015) study of 40 language teachers at private language schools in Iran found that novice teachers held less positive views of CF $( 7 5 \% )$ compared to their more experienced counterparts $( 9 0 \% )$

Other studie report that teachers have expressed concern about the potentia for CF to provoke neative felings in their students and reduce their motivation to learn (Kainvanpanah et al., 2015; Mori, 2011; Vasquez & Harvey, 2010; Yoshida, 2010). As a result teachers have been found to expres uncertainty about explicit forms of correction, favourig indirect forms of fdback, though the use of CF may be more balanced among experienced teachers (Junquiera & Kim, 2013; Rahimi & Zhang, 2015), depending on the cultural background of the teachers (Mahalingappa et al., 2021, pp. 1-21). Lyster et al. (2013) suggest that the divergence in teacher and student attitudes towards types of feedack could be due to teachers feeling that the provision of CF constitutes an unnecessary interruption of a student's atempt to communicat. This would seem to be supported by other studies into beliefs about the timing of CF (Bell, 2005; Brown, 2009; Rahimi & Zhang, 2015; Roothoot, 2014), which indicate that teachers can be reluctant to provide immediat correction on student errors. Overal, whil reearch suggests teachers and students view F as a ool to enable students to approximate a native Standard English, accuracy is not the only, and perhaps not even the most important, factor for providing CF. Moreover, studies which show les positive beliefs towards CF among novice and pre-service teachers (Kartchava et l. 2020; Rahi & Zhang, 2015) and a preference for CF on pragmatic erors (Zhu & Wang, 2019), could be indication of changing beliefs among the younger generation, some of whom have used ELF as the norm.

# 2.4. EAP in an EMI context

In China, EMI has been promoted by the Ministry of Education since 2001, though its top down' implementation has not always been consistent and coherent, lacking engagement between different level of language management (Fang, 2018; Hu & Lei, 2014; Lel & Hu, 2014). It has also been observed that proficiency levels of teaching staf and students and linguistic diversity in China were not fully considered prior to implementation (Fang, 2018; Hu et al., 2014; Zha0 & Dixon, 2017). Despite some universities promoting EMI to recruit students, with the implication that learning English is one outcome of the University degree, the extent of English use is variable (Hu et l., 2014; Hu & Lei, 2014; Kirkpatrick, 2014; Macaro, 2020; Pecorari & Malmstrom, 2018). Depending on the level of students and the degree isciplie, English may not be the sole language used by either theteachers or by the students in the classroom setting (Doiz et al., 2012; Macaro, 2020). Moreover, while the asessment output would be in English, the input through reading may come from different languages. Consequently, several authors have argued that instead of promoting an unrealistic EMI setting, universties should instead be instituting bilingual or plurilingual programs (Galante e al., 2020; Kirkpatrick, 2014). Furthermore, the English that is promoted by the universities is understood to be SE or native speaker English (Doiz et al., 2012; Fang, 2018; Jenkins 2014; Kirkpatrck, 2014; Macaro, 2020), with lttle consideration that students and staff may use a diffrent variety of English.

With EMI institutions adherence to NES norms, CF practices in preparatory courses that align with this variety are viewed as necessary by both teachers and students for language development. However, as Dafouz (2017) argues, greater consideration needs to be given to the Role of English in relation to other languages within multilingual universitie, implying that providing CF using NES norms as a measure may not prepare students for their EMI degrees. For example, the students in Jenkins (2014) study reported inconsistencies among EAP tutors about what constituted academic English and tended to provide negative feedback using native speaker norms as a measure. They also note that heir creativity i languag i restricted, and nonconformity is labelled as erors, while NES academics alow themselves poetic license' in their use of academic English. Consequently, within EMI institutions NNES stu. dents problems - that s their Englishrrors -are therfor at best sometimes tlerated (providedthe outcomeis intligible to aNES reader or istener), but never seen as legitimate forms of expression' (Jenkins, 2014, p. 13). Therefore, the flexible use of language within EMI sttings advocated by several authors (Dafouz, 2017; Jenkins, 2014; Kirkpatrick, 2014; Shohamy, 2012) in terms f English and other languages, should also be reflected in EAP courses that preare students for their EMI degee course. The curent provisionof EAP in EMI institutions i delivered on the basis that the English thestudents need is NES norm-driven, and their language is corrected accordingly. Dafouz (2017) argues that leaners and teachers need to engage in language awareness, which would include fostering a better understanding of the role of all their lingusic resources in effective interaction and communication and heightened intercultural awareness. We argue that a more nuanced aroach to CF focused on meaning in EMI settings would serve to enable this. While Kuteeva (2020) notes that some definitions of EMI exclude the EAP component, in this study, we consider these EAP courses to be an integral part of the Universty and constitute an EMI setting. The research has been guided by the following research questions:

1. What differences are evident between EAP teachers and students in their CF beliefs?   
2. To what extent does the context impact on teachers' and students' beliefs?   
3. To what extent are teachers' and students' CF beliefs governed by a standard language orientation?

# 3. Methodology

As noted previously there has been limited research on oral CF in an EAP context, and the majority of EAP research in relation to CF has focused on written CF. Therefore, this exploratory study examines an under researched area of CF focusing on oral communication in an EAP classroom. The study was conducted in a Sino-British University in China where data was colected during the first semester of the 2018/2019 academic year in listening and speaking classes. The students i the study had recently arrived at the university, and the teaching approaches adopted at the universty may be alien' to what they are used to in a Chinese high school. Teaching English in Chinese high schools tend to be more teacher fronted, have larger clas sizes, restricted speaking opportunities, and the provision of CF might be more explicit than what they would encounter on an EAP course at an EMI institution (Mahalingappa et al., 2021, pp.1-21).

Following the uccessul completion of the EAP course, students enter their chosen department, and most wl encounter both NES and NNES. Within the university around $5 0 \%$ of lecturers are Chinese, and $5 0 \%$ are non-Chinese, including those from Anglophone countries as well as regions spanning Europe, South America, and Southeast Asia. herefore, it would be fair to asert that the majority of academics at the university are NNEs. However, within the English teaching unit, NES constitute a higher proportion. Approximately $7 5 \%$ of staff in the English language unit are NES, which leads to a predominant focus on NES as the standard model, despite the variety of NNES models students will encounter in their departments. While there are around $1 0 \%$ of non-Chinese students at the university, during the preparatory year, most international students pursue diffrent courses, meaning that the classes are largely composed of first language speakers of Chinese. l students participat in the AP courses, deending on thir chosen degree program, and complete other additional courses.

This paper focuses on three listening and speaking classes, which constitute $^ { 3 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ a week and run for 11 weeks in the Autumn Semester. The format of the classes i formulaic. In the first two lessons of the week, a topic and releant vocabulary is introduced, and then students listen and take notes of a lecture lasting approximately $1 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ . There are also discussions related to the topic before and after the lecture. he third eson of the wek is usuall reerved to focus on an aspect f pronunciation, using the vocabulary they have learnt during the week. Despite the formulaic nature of the teaching materials, as we observed in our study, the teachers used the material provided in different ways, which reflected their iffrent tyles. The teachers who participated were recruited through a tenstatement questionnaire about their F belief, using a Likert scale to rank the statement, and were asked to indicat if they would be willing to participate in the study.

We selected three teachers from a poo of pproximately 80 teachers who completed the questionnaire, based on their responses, as the aim was torepresent differing CF beliefs. Speificll, we amed for  balance beween techers whose eliefs were ither form or meaning fosed in ther orienttion, though we rcognise this is not asily discnble fromshort questionnaire. Allthe tachers who participated are NES. While the university has both NES and NNES EAP teachers, it was unfortunate that no NNES EAP teachers volunteered to participate. From this selection, we attended the class and approached the students about the study to gain their consent. The data produced by those who did not consent to the study was not used, and they did not participate in the group interviews or individual interviews. In total, 12 group discussions from the three classes were conducte in weeks 3-4, each of which were approximately 15-20 min each (see Appendix ). During week 3, classrom audio recordings were tarted, and these ran through to week 11 of the course. A digital recorder was atached inconspicuously to the teacher to record the CF provided in clas. These recordings resulted n approximatel 55 h of classoom recordings beteen weeks 3 and 11 acros the the casses. In weeks 10-11, 31 individual interviews of approximately $1 0 { - } 1 5 ~ \mathrm { m i n }$ each in length were conducted. The three teachers were also interviewed individually, with these semi-structured interviews focusing on class delivery and CF beliefs and practices. The interviews were approximately 25-30 min in length. The beliefs unpacked in this paper stem from the itia student group discussions and final teacher interviews, and therefore, the classroom recordings and final student interviews will not be discussed.

The interviews and group discussions were fullytranscribed, and read several times to get a sense of the data with open coding used to identify the main themes in the data (Bazeley, 2013; Charmaz, 2008). After identifying the main themes, focused coding was used and aftr organising the themes in a hierarchical order, coding was confirmed by a second researcher to ensure consistency across coding and analysis. Following this the cross-comparison method was used within and across the two data sets (Bazeley, 2013; Charmaz, 2008). The coding and analysis processes were inductive in nature to highlight the underlying beliefs of the participants.

# 3.1. Participants

The participants of this study consisted of both teachers and students,all of whom were attached to a Sino-British Universt in China. All teachers were experienced EAP teachers holding a master's degreein applied linguistcs as a minimum and had between 8 and 15 years of English language teaching experience. Each teacher was responsible for conducting the listening and speaking clases in the Autumn semester of this study, and from this, accessto the student participants was established. The student participants recruted for this study numbered 48 in total and were all in their first semestr of tertiar study, though not all participated in every stage of the study, as noted above. The following table details the 12 group discussions alongside the respective teacher (see Fig. 1). Teachers have ben anonymised as Teacher 1, 2 and 3 (T1, T2 and 3), and the number of student from each group discussion is listed. If extracts are used from students in this paper, they have been anonymised as Student 1 (\$1), Student 2 (\$2), etc. and the table indicates which group discussion they participated in. The extracts of data are coded according to the teacher and the number of the group discussion.

# 4. Data and analysis

# 4.1. Student beliefs

Group discussons conducted with students in week 3 of the course are underpinned by the theme of fluency vs. accuracy, and traverse areas of how students perceive the provision of CF alongside their needs. Whilestudents consider fluency and communicatin to be interal, much discussio focuses onthe rol of CF in pushing students towards acuracy. The term accuracy in this paper rfers to how students and teachers understand the term; that is, as how close a language form corresponds to SE, native peaker English or BrE and AmE, ll of which tend to be conflated in the data. Students identify how the provision of CF draws atention to areas for improvement and development in their language production, but they also indicate that CF could result in a face threatening act. Underpinning much of the discussion by students i the connection with the expert vs. novice user and who has the adequate status to provide. n this eth stdt tendo op eig from a soure; wer, thy o fe  is nsy check f a correctio is accurate befre thy would consider its uptake. ltimately, despite an awarenes of some aspects of global Englishes the students tend o adopt N ideas i assessg the alue of F. verall, ch f the CF prefeences and bele voed by the stdents are driven by their desire to improve their language production, which largely speaks of a preoccupation with accuracy rather than fluency.

# 4.1.1. Fluency

A focus on fluency was integral for students when considering the act of communication. In these respects, the students see communication as the goal and provided meaning and message are retained, an accurate production is not deemed essential. For instance, S1 commented on whether correct grammar was a pre-requisite for being respected when speaking a second language.

Fig. 1. Student composition of group discussions and number in each group.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Teacher 1 (T1)</td><td>Teacher 2 (T2)</td><td>Teacher 3 (T3)</td></tr><tr><td>Group Discussion 1 (GD1) 2 students</td><td>Group Discussion 1 (GD1) 4 students Student 11 (S11)</td><td>Group Discussion 1 (GD1) 2 students Student 7 (S7) Student 8 (S8)</td></tr><tr><td>GD2 3 students Student 2 (S2) Student 3 (S3)</td><td>GD2 2 students</td><td>GD2 3 students Student 1 (S1) Student 16 (S16)</td></tr><tr><td>GD3 4 students Student 6 (S6)</td><td>GD3 4 students Student 4 (S4) Student 12 (S12) Student 13 (S13) Student 14 (S14)</td><td>GD3 2 students</td></tr><tr><td>GD4 5 students Student 5 (S5) Student 15 (S15)</td><td></td><td>GD4 2 students Student 9 (S9) Student 10 (S10)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>GD5 5 students</td></tr></table></body></html>

S1: Ithik   mr mch) u   mk e  in  h mctio)  i  dy nerstan ) some er do ot mter in dl cmcation oit' ust or t' ust ora aking (0.5 the oly thing e ed todo i to uderstand the ke words (.) so I think some small errors is not important $( \mathrm { T 3 } \mathrm { G D 2 } ) ^ { 3 }$

3 Transcription conventions can be found in Appendix A.

The indication here is that 'small rrors will not impede communication and that these kinds of errors are also common in an interlocutor's L1, and therefore, are not required as a focus for corrective attention. Distinguishing between different types f error reflect recent findings of Van Ha et al. (2021) and Zhu and Wang (2019) that students in their studies seem to be es concerned with local errors that do not impede communication. Van Ha et al. (2021) highlight that although students desire CF for both global and local errors, LA reearcher re fiated on examining theffects of CF on localrrors such as third person singula r pronouns (Sato Loewen, 2018; Zha0 & Elis, 2022). The observations by S1 seem to imply a flexible belief to view language as a communicative tool, rather than a strict aim to achieve a native-like proficiency and is also evident in other group discussions.

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">S2:</td><td>thath  aad n t</td></tr><tr><td>they wa to ex tml er lang ad )) maye eti f he c  the ca) x thr )e e( </td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td>make some self-understood and err (.) grammar rules (.) sometimes it&#x27;s not that (.) of importance (.)</td></tr><tr><td>S2:</td><td>ok (.) so you were saying that it&#x27;s not so important to be accurate all the time</td></tr><tr><td>yeah</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>I: S2:</td><td> as long as (.) as long as you can be understood</td></tr><tr><td>1:</td><td>yeah (.) sometimes it&#x27;s tolerant to accept these errors</td></tr><tr><td>S3:</td><td>uhuh (.) ok what do (.) what do you think about that (.) do you agree S3 (.) erm (.) hm () hm [coughs] I think sometimes when we speak wrong something ()er (.) something wrong () you can understand it and that is ok</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td>erm</td></tr><tr><td>S3:</td><td>but (.) but for example the vocabulary (.) the stress of the vocabulary ma- (.) maybe sometimes will change the meaning</td></tr><tr><td>1:</td><td>uh huh</td></tr><tr><td>S3:</td><td>so I (.) I think it need to be corrected (T1 GD2)</td></tr></table></body></html>

While s2 focuses on the importance of tolerance' towards erors, they also prioritise the essential aspect of succesfully delivering the messge. S2 explicitly notes grammar rules' as perhaps not being important as conveying meaning. It might be expected that students who had recently joined the university from a Chinese high school, which tend to have a strong focus on grammatical accuracy, would not hold such belies. This may imply experiences with English outside the classroom context where English is used as a lingua franca. his fos on meaning is expanded on by 3, who raises the necessity for correctio f a error will hange the meaning. Interestingly, the example given by S3 about an error which would impact on meaning is related to word stres rather than grammatical accuracy, which i perhaps derived from their own experience of miscommunication. Jenkins (2000) notes that phonological differences are more likely to lead to miscommunication than grammatical ones, which leads to the question of why there is an overwhelming focus in CF studies on grammatical features. This suggests that greater adherence needs to be paid to the context where English is being taught, where a strict adherenceto NES grammatical norms may not be appropriat or even desired by students. Belief in the importance of communicating meaning are also evident in the following extract.

<html><body><table><tr><td>S4:</td><td>Ithik  f  n t  i thni t ho   i u cae wit inl the a     st  n  th   n ieor  different places (.) I don&#x27;t think it is really matters (T2 GD3)</td></tr></table></body></html>

S4 acknowledges that variation in English is the norm and that through using English as 'a too to communicate' there is not much urgency required in correcting perceived errors, which interacts with key propositions validating English's contemporary role and position (Cog0 & Dewey, 2012; Vetorel, 2018). S4 recognises English's role as an intenational language, and highlights that English is spoken differently in different parts of th world, again with a focus on pronunciation, and therefore asserts les conce f their own spoken lagage includes errs. Overal, thear indications from the stdents that thy r wecoming of a fluency fous if ffective communication can be maintained, a belief system which coordinates more with the central emphasis of much ELF research, rather than SLA.

# 4.1.2. Accuracy

Despite the asertions from some students giving weight to a fluency focus, the students tend to focus on the multiple roles that accuracy has in their English development belief. At its most fundamental level, the students identify CF as a key component of their developmental journey. Without CF being offred, thestudents claim that they would not have a directed base from which to improve. For instance, S2 and S5 are concerned about errors becoming embedded, or fossilized, in their production.

<html><body><table><tr><td>S2:</td><td>bese rto y   t e</td></tr><tr><td>S5:</td><td>(.) it&#x27;s something that make me feel more embarrassed than I was (.) er (.) correcting at the first time (T1 GD2) hen a   i  c ts th c ret  mak the same mistake (.) and I can&#x27;t improve my language skills (T1 GD4)</td></tr></table></body></html>

The students indicate that they will always' produce errors if they are not identified via CF. While this notion suggests a rela. tionship with the student concern about potential fosilization, there are also underlying connections with who has the authority in the classroom. In both cases, the students are positioning themselves as novices seeking guidancefrom an expert in the classroom space, and their beliefs seem to signal that provision of CF is the key driver in furnishing them with additional language kills In this area, S1 takes this a step further by stating how correcting errors is essential for avoiding the 'wrong habit'.

In order to progress with developing thecorrect habits, the students show an awarenes of how they need to act on CF. Having an open attitude toward the rception of CF is highlighted as a contributing factor in the efectivenes of CF (Elli, 2010; Sheen, 2007). However, the provision of CF itself can also negatively impact on the students through the potential threat to face, as expressed by s4.

Here, S4 indicates that there is initial shame' when being corrected. Despite this, the positive weight of the CF in developing accuracy has the potential to overcome the negative aspect. S6 contributes to this by proffering that it may not be the act of CF provision that initiates a loss of face, rather, it may be related to the group dynamics of the classroom.

<html><body><table><tr><td>S6:</td><td>err (on y t aki ta ) sethink  chr ar ceo robwh a crrt  th) t if make</td></tr><tr><td>1:</td><td>any mistakes (.) sometimes I will feel embarrassed (.) because I (.) I care about others&#x27; opinion (.) err right</td></tr><tr><td>S6:</td><td>err (.) my (.) my (.) when (.) I will wonder (.) err (.) how my classmates think</td></tr><tr><td>1:</td><td>right</td></tr><tr><td>S6:</td><td>so (.) I will feel embarrassed (T1 GD3)</td></tr></table></body></html>

This is explored in more detail by S6, who states that the teachers are so nice, which results in the CF provided posing 'no problem' The fact that 6 continues by stating how they care about other's opinion' suggests it is not just a face threatening act but how this also relates to classroom dynamics and percetions of what others may think I contrast, a broader mindset is expressed by

S7.

While S6 is influenced by what others may think of their erors, S7 suggests that their production is representative of the class and making mistakes is the norm. The belief here sms to indicate that in a language clas, mistakes are to be expected with the mentality that the group is working towards a common goal, which may be an indication of the deire to develop one's English ability given the EMI context. With this though the question of who should be the provider of CF remains.

Whereas some students claim that anyone could correct their mistakes, they also judge the value of CF, which tends to suggest that not alCF may be of equal value. A position behind this claim may relate to not only the appropriacy of the CF in relation to the students target language goals, but also in relation to the standing of the person providing the CF. This can be observed in an exchange with S9 and S10.

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">I:</td><td>ho do you hk hd r hd  t o y hnk  th  yr  y hin hd r hd  crt rs</td></tr><tr><td>(2.0) between the teachers (.) classmates and yourself</td></tr><tr><td>S9:</td><td>if he have a standard pronunciation he can correct me (.) if his =</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td>= is this your classmate or your teacher</td></tr><tr><td>S9:</td><td>if they both can if they are right whether I accept them</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td>how do you know they are right</td></tr><tr><td>S9:</td><td>I have a dictionary @@@@</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td>@@@@ what do you think (.) do you think it is ok for your classmates to correct you</td></tr><tr><td>S10:</td><td>I will accept their er opinions and I will check it later to see if it is right (T3 GD4)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Here, the perception of the students is that CF can be offered, but it may not result in uptake until after they have made the determination of the validity of the CF provided. The comment from s9 that they have a dictionary' may have been intended to be light-hearte in nature, but behind the utterance there may also be an assesment that the accuracy' of CF depends on who holds the expert card. Again, t should be noted here that S9 is guided by pronunciation and perceptions of what may or may not be standard as a determiner in who might be an expert. Oveall, the perception of the students tends tobe that the teacher is the expert in this area, where the teacher is inadvertently acting as the gatekeeper, as is evidenced from the exchange with S4.

The assertion from s4 that they might not agree with per-initiated CF or will confer with the teacher firmly identifies who the expert is in the CF space. Similarly, the belief that the teacher is the expert is exemplified through the exchange with s11, who also introduces the notion of NES.

S11: yeah ( tIey  se  tcer . ar )  tc i ti aker w  rt ) mae am a little bit embarrassed (T2 GD1)

S11's belief appears to be that CF should be provided by the teacher, rather than their peers, positioning the teacher as the default expert due to their nativenes. This belief i closely connected with the ideological construction of the NES as the target (Elli et al. 2006; Schmidt, 2001; Trofimovich t l., 2007). It is noticeable that S11 is embarrassed if corrected by clasmate, which corroborates with S6 in the aboveract that CF telf is not mbarrasing, ut owthis i judgd by er. The stdents in this study alsoatempt to connect NES ideals and accuracy with the notion of respect, which is noticeable in the following exchange.

<html><body><table><tr><td>I:</td><td>what do you think about sentence four (.) people will respect me if I use correct grammar when speaking a second language</td></tr><tr><td>S4:</td><td>I agree with that.</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td>why do you agree with it.</td></tr><tr><td>S4:</td><td>m e e   w ma  ha an  m ot lorc  ath</td></tr><tr><td>ok</td><td>me to know the way native speakers (.) mm (.) how they how they speak</td></tr><tr><td>1:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>S12: 1:</td><td>maybe I will feel proud of myself (.) but I think erm (.) it&#x27;s not the reason why you learn to speak a second language</td></tr><tr><td>S12:</td><td>what is the reason you learn to speak a second language</td></tr><tr><td>1:</td><td>mm just (1.0) learning</td></tr><tr><td>S13:</td><td>what do you guys think.</td></tr><tr><td>1:</td><td>I think because we are learning (.) err so if I use correct grammar (.) it is the (xxx) being respected</td></tr><tr><td>S14:</td><td>do you have anything to add S14 Ithik    the   tie ae t h     l rr )</td></tr></table></body></html>

The connection with the NESis firstly touched on by S4, who introduces the notion of respect with correct grammar and knowing the way native speakers speak' Through this comment, it i clear that S4 classfies the ES as the expert in the equation. However, this view is not maintained by others in the exchange, who perceive language learning ust as language learning, and not a goal to earn respect through using corrct grammar'. Furthermore, S14 draws the conclusion that while ll students may try to use the correct grammar as anative speaker, the presence of lttle rrors' should not be a determining factor in whether respect is present or not. The closing comments here, while attending to accuracy overall draw on hints of communication' and the function of English, which again, highlights the contemporary positioning of English (Jenkins, 2015; Kirkpatrick, 2014; Sedhofer, 2011). Despite this, there til exist indications that NES connections within the CF paradigm continue to act as drivers. For instance, the exchange below begins by addressing how learning 'native speaker's pronunciation' is better..

<html><body><table><tr><td>S15:</td><td>bth thi r    int r  to tgie</td></tr><tr><td>1:</td><td>me more confidence I think ok (.) right ) d t mtter whe that native saker is from ) or examl  you ae ay pree would yo rather e t sak like a</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>American or like a British or Indian or Australian (.) do you have any preference</td></tr><tr><td>S15:</td><td>for me I think British and American maybe the best choice (.) because these English is more native</td></tr><tr><td>1:</td><td>more nativee</td></tr><tr><td>S15:</td><td>yeah</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td>what do you mean by that</td></tr><tr><td>S15:</td><td>bese h ist fi  kisi   e  i thkishtn the to kinds of English is better (T2 GD3)</td></tr></table></body></html>

The exchange with S15 depicts not just how they believe NES pronunciation is better' but how it would also be better for communication'. This would indicate that these students are influenced by ideologies which present the NES model as international and intelligible, despite empirical research indicating that NES models of pronunciation are les intelligible in an international communicative context (Baird et al., 2014; Jenkins, 2007, 2014). S15's belief appears firmly embedded through the discussion surrounding the more native varieties. The view held by this student sems to mirror those that promote a standard language or native target. Importantly, however, this view is not held by all and a more open perspective i also voiced wherey flexbility between and across English varietie can be an element of CF in EAP to engage students with the broader sense of English. Ths sense appears ready for development, but in its current state, is still in its infancy, as introduced in the exchange with S1 and S16.

<html><body><table><tr><td>S1:</td><td>sme f m  Briishish  mfh a mianish)  wdd h ethts st diffe types of pronunciation and it doesn&#x27;t matter so much (.) I don&#x27;t think it is very important to distinguish between them</td></tr><tr><td>S16:</td><td>people from all of the world (.) often speak with different accents (T3 GD2)</td></tr></table></body></html>

In reference to the differences between British and American English, S1 observes that we can understand each other well, which highlights the petion f communctive eficacy across thee two Enlish arities. While the belif is that theedifferent types of pronunciation do not matter so much' it i worth noting that both varieties mentioned by the student are NES. It would be interesting to determine f these pereptions ran beyond the NES varieties into the wider communicative concept of English, and with that, to what extent accuracy remained a topic of focus. In ths area, S16 touches on how different people often speak with different aents, and while his indicates an awareness of the nature of English, theutterance in it ase form is purely descriptive. espite this, displaying this kind of awareness warrants further discussion of how CF in EAP can accommodate global Englishes.

# 4.2. Teachers' CF beliefs

Interviews conducted with the three EAP teachers at the end of the course showed similarity to students' beliefs, with fluency and accuracy being the two main themes related to CF. However, teachers explained that ttempts t create a balance on students levels of fluency and accuracy not only determines decisions on the provision of CF, but also impacts other classroom practices such as class structure, division of lasroom time and the identification of a task as being fluency or accuracy focused. While the teachers tend to argue that fluency, and a focus on meaning and communication are the determining factors in whether to provide CF or not, this did not seem to derive from ideological beliefs about language, but instead, from considering students' confidence and wanting them to speak. However, underlying their CF beliefs is that the NES model is the corrct variety of the language. In addition, they tend to believe there i a need to provide CF to enable students to successflly pass the asessment, which sugests a belief that CF is an effective tool to modify students' language.

# 4.2.1. Fluency

For teachers, the priority in classrom management is to create a positive and cohesive environment, and avoid a negative atmosphere, which CF may contribute to i it impacts on the emotional tat of the students through them perceiving CF as a criticism. T3 for example, focuses on encouraging students to speak any type of English, rather than adherence to SE norms.

(continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>if you&#x27;e  k  t i i</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>some error (.) but (.) I&#x27;d like to think mostly I give the feedback in a way that isn&#x27;t too negative or critical</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td>like what though.</td></tr><tr><td>T3:</td><td>so you know (.) like (.) offering a suggestion or</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td>right (.) ok (.) rather than say it&#x27;s not like that</td></tr><tr><td>T3:</td><td>m    cef ti  is k dont think  would er ie feack n a way f where I&#x27;m sayig that was wong t would e moreften he right wod or questiong t andetng</td></tr></table></body></html>

The three teachers all note that they resist giving CF, because they do not want to damage students' confidence, and also want to avoid upseting the students, with the main aim aligned with encouraging students to speak. Students are characterised by the teachers as shy, sensitive, and lacking in confidence to speak English, which provides justification for limiting the amount of CF the teacher would provide This elief lso impacts on the way the teachers giveF, in 3's case this is in a ositive way by suggesting alternative words, as well as questioning students word choice. This questioning and suggesting act s clarification requests and reformulations, which would be a more implicit than explicit approach to CF. T3 also tends to treat interactions as natural conversation by avoiding interrupting students, focusing on meaning, and belies that corrcting all erors would be demotivating for students, which aligns with the observations of Li (2017). This belief is also evident for T1 who perceives the primary aim of the course as encouraging conversation to help students learn discussion skills, with accuracy a lower-level aim.

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">T1:</td><td>thats somehnll csf n lik rrec ds th n     n hao rie ig r  of xperie netg ni in r thi seer ey rg th ad i le  ll at ergng th oeak</td></tr><tr><td>and o e confdt and toty and counicat their ideas ) er not about the xact grammar  it&#x27; aout being able to comunicat what thy want to cna    t   h a y  ce think  ones gond th ththt mt) is st e omh hts  what thy n hee a little mistake (.) especially when it is little thing (.) I normally let it go</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

The students are transitioning into a different education environment, where speaking is encouraged, and teacher-fronted classes discouraged. This might be disconcerting for some students, but T1 is positioning themself as an expert by determining the preferred pedagogical approach based on their teacher training and language policies, even though it may not be the right approach for all students. This suggests a blanket approach to teaching, derived from a CLT orientation (Harmer, 2015), and although it may have student interests at its foundation, perhaps some aspects of this approach could consider the nuances of the context more completely. There is also the implication that students are novices and do not know which approach is est for them. Within this, T1 has chosen not to focus on errors, irrepective of student needs, belief or desires. T1 also mentions aCF approach oriented towards meaning, asking for clarification and allowing small rrors to pass. Whil this pedagogical aproach is evident in C and task-ase learning, it is also commensurate with an ELF approach to CF, where these pragmatic communicative events tend to occur (Cogo & Dewey, 2012; Vettorel, 2018).

T2, during the interview, tends to draw a distinction with language features and whether to provide CF. They also suggest that in the classroom they primarily focus on corrcting students pronunciation with the implication that it isthis which has the most direct impact on intlligility. This also implie that other language feature, such as lexs and syntax are not  focus of corrction for T2 in the classroom, and instead students are allowed more freedom during classroom discussions.

<html><body><table><tr><td>T2: I: right</td><td>but you try and do it in a way that&#x27;s not just directed at that student (.) you would direct the correction at the whole class</td></tr><tr><td>T2: right</td><td>bease t oably  st th t s ti wth    d f ould pr- thm tht th thi od  y fi</td></tr><tr><td>I: T2:</td><td>yeah ( hae  oouncg  ) ere) e justh roide some omfrt th fthyd monnei wu e o much</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>uh-huh (.) have you ever decided not to correct a learner (.) because the correction might hurt their flings</td></tr><tr><td>T2: 1:</td><td>erm (.) well that&#x27;s why I don&#x27;t with fluency practice uh huh</td></tr><tr><td>T2:</td><td>ee y inr thr ton  d  iith   xtent</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>may hurt their feelings as well (.) yeah</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td>@@</td></tr><tr><td>T2:</td><td>@@</td></tr><tr><td>1: T2:</td><td>ok (.) so how do you, how do you think you normally correct your students&#x27; errors</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>em  ole  omdin the orrt itio) mall thht make thy md liklike oo t hen yu hd d .5 g som id  h iwhw t ha  t ar yu,  th as</td></tr></table></body></html>

T2 considers the students feelings, indicating that they would, pre-warn' students of the pronunciation, reassuring them of the difficulty of the pronunciation, and that students' production may not be acurate. However, t should be noted that consideration of the students' feeling is prompted by the researcher, and the main consideration appears to restrict CF, to allow for communication, which would be interrupted by providing CF. They also mention using choral repetition, so as not to identif a particular students pronunciation. However, 2 discuses other CF strategies, such as providing a model answer and explicitl highlighting to students the correct and incorrectversion of the language form. Therefore, while 2 indicates n orientation towards a focus on meaning, there i an underlying assumption of correct and incorrec forms of the language derived from a standard language ideology. T2 determines what is right and wrong in the classoom asserting a position as the expert, and in another part of the interview alludes to noticing, as justification for CF, so that students become aware of the errors that they are making, which appears to draw on concepts connected with the noticing hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990, 1995, 2001).

There is some consistency in the three teachers' beliefs about how they approach CF in the classoom, however they each also demonstrate their individualit, which is perhaps reflective of how F is treate within tacher training. Clarification requests seem to be T1 and T3's preferred method, which iscommensurate with a CLT pproach to teaching (Harmer, 2015; Scrivener, 2005), but les evident in2's belief system. The teachers tend to relate CF to classroom management, to build students confidence in speaking and to avoid damaging their confidence, with an additional association being the potential promotion of learner autonomy, where through highlighting errors, students would potentially notice the error, and be able to self-correct.

# 4.2.2. Accuracy

Though the teachers tend to focus on meaning, this appears to be derived more in relation to building confidence than to language beliefs, and the teachers demonstrate an orientation to a standard language ideology, and towards a belief that the NES model is the accurate model, as noted by T3.

T3: so sometime you hae o ) ometimes you haveo  step back and say I now what ou mean  now what wod you men) but yu misronounce it ) er  an somtim o a be in dangr of st etig thm g)ut ifit a e w sittio) ae  wu ha tho) maye there's a reason to correct then but yeah (.) I'd say I'd say it comes down to communication

T3 seems to imply that students will encounter NES, and therefore T3 asserts the need to set aside personal levels of receptive inteligibilit for a broader perception of inelligiblity informed by a consideration of whether other people outside the classroom would understand or not. The claim here appears congruent with the role of English in international communication, where sucessul communication is a prime objective (Cogo & Dewey, 2012; Vettorel, 2018). However, the construct of intlligibility is difficlt to determine, and what may be intelligible to one individual, may e unintellgble to another. 2 mentions teachers can become atuned to the way the learners speak, perhaps reflecting a common perception among EAP teachers.

Although T2 aserts they focus on meaning, they would also correct erors that do not impact on meaning, because a NES might not understand. Therefore through consstent interaction with students errors that do not onform to ES norms have become intelligible to T2. However, T2 also assumes that certain errors would not be inelligibl to other NES outside the context of th classom. In effect, they are scond guessing what is and is not intelligible, as their own ability to judge intelligility has become blurred. 2 sees the NES as gatekeepers of the language joined with the assumption that the NES is more intelligible, though this is not supported by empirical research (Baird et al., 2014; Jenkins, 2007, 2014). Another strong motivator for providing CF is related to speaking assessment, which is measured against SE, and mentioned by all the teachers during the interviews.

T1: like I'm s th at thm a w  thik y ike the atl h  i y    somh o oitionit just i t    il  en   s    tht kind f sif u  h indf tae an i ik the til e g fi n he ame th s tht ast f a benchmark if I think actually you know this would probably be failing (.) then I would definitely give them guidance

Though noting personall that they are lessconcerned about students approximating NES, that NES is mentioned at all suggests an underlying consideration. The NES is mentioned by all he teachers during the interviews in some form, een if it i to argue that the NES model is not releant to them persoall. 1 ges on to note that the assessment is not all aout language, and they give feedback on content. About $5 0 \%$ of the grade in the speaking assessment is based on the content of what they are saying, which might have a washback effect on the course that discourages an emphasis on providing CF.

It was evident that these teachers had some pedagogical training through their evaluations of CF provision, and for them, the decision on whether to provide CF or not, and the manner of CF, is based on wanting to develop their students' confidence to speak English, and to develop their fluency It seems clear that theseteachers are influenced in their approach to CF by a CLT orientation, which itslf is ifluenced by SLA, and would seem to indicate that teachers require a more nuanced understanding of language in different contexs through teaching training. Two of the teachers believe that communication, interaction, and negotiation of meaning through clarification requests provides the impetus for second language acquisition. All three teachers belie that CF provides the opportunity for students to notice the difference between their language and the target, epitomised by the NES variety. While communication, interaction and the negotiation of meaning are key tenets of a Global Englishes pedagogy (See Rose & Galloway, 2019), their purpose is not as a means to acquire an approximated native English, but instead as strategie for English usersto be able to engage with each other across different varieties of English where intelligibility may become an issue.

# 5. Conclusion

This paper has evaluated EAP student and teacher beliefs towards CF provision in an EMI context. An underlying point of agreement across both students and teachers sems to be the default position of the teacher as the expert. This is evidenced through students showing deference to CF provided by other sources whil the teachers are confident in displaying their professional standing in deciding what should or should not be corrcted. In both cases, there is astrong alignment with NES or SE values underpinning CF desires and decisions. This also suggests that EMI context makes minimal difference to the CF beliefs of either students or teachers. While this might be expected from student, for their part the EAP teachers appear to draw on beliefs which could qually be applied to other English teaching contexts with no discernible consideration of the EMI context. Nevertheless there is an indication that some students place value in the wider communicative applicability of English beyond these SE boundaries, which is also a view promoted by the teachers. This presents a starting point for moving forward with the promotion of wider exposure to English varieties to enhance student beliefs in this area while also guiding teachers in increasing the aeptance of this view, which holds the potential to further expectations in EMI contexts.

One possible way to initiate this kind of change could be through the revision of asessment practice. As the teachers alluded, oral production i often connected with SE values when under asessment, which influences teachers CF practiceto some extent and may also act as a contributor i informing student beliefs. Promoting a transition away from NES pronunciation descriptors towards a more equitable ELF focus to mirror the contemporary position of English may present students with an empowerment opportunity under the premise that intelligible production and effectie communication take precedence over NES or E norms. Moreover a transitionof this type would promote the international standing of English. Further, ths could have the potential to have a washback effect on the provision of CF in the classroom from form focused CF to meaning focused CF and would be more congruent with ELF pedagogical orientations (Rose & Galloway, 2019; ifakis & Bayyurt, 2018). One aspect which we were unable to address in this paper is whether teachers are naturally responding in the interaction, and the extent that the teachers were conscious of providing CF.

In being unable to address the intent of teachers in providing CF, it does undermine CF studies, which code CF from classroom data without considering the purpose and motivation of teachers in ther communication. t would seem that re-focusing teacher training to CF based on meaning, treating interactions in the classroom as natural, and recognising the connection between CF and natural discourse would be morereflectie of the ELF encounters that students willexperience outside of the classroom. However, i i also important t recognise that rrespective of what the teacher considersto be more beneficial to students needs, students have their own beliefs about how they think teachers should be providing CF.

An additional point worth raising to progres the field is in relation to provision of CF itself. It is interesting to highlight how a recurrent theme from the teachers related to the decision to avoid CF in the hopes of not interfring with communication or t essen the likelihood of placing negative stress on students. While it s true that these points were aso raised by the students, a more powerful comment underscored the extent to which the students value CF and the role it plays in their language development. Fears from the students were housed in the understanding that CF would furnish them with the ability to progressbeyond their current threshold and that if CF were not provided, they would not progress.

# Author's statement

Conceptualization Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson, Methodology, Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson, Software, Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson, Validation, Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson, Formal analysis, Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson, Investigation, Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollad, James Macpherson, Resources Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson, Data Curation, Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson, Writing, Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson, Writing - Review & Editing, Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson, Visualization, Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson, Supervision, N/A, Project adminis tration, Robert Weekly, Funding acquisition, Robert Weekly, Andrew Pollard, James Macpherson.

# Acknowledgements

We would like to thank two anonymous reviewers and the co-editors of this special isue of Journal of English for Academi Purposes, Sarah Brewer and Olwyn Alexander, for their helpful and insightful observations on this paper.

# Appendix A

(continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>=</td><td>Latching</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Overlapping speech</td></tr><tr><td>[...]</td><td>Gap between sections of the transcript that were not included.</td></tr><tr><td>[cough]</td><td>Indicates other verbal noise..</td></tr><tr><td>(.)</td><td>Indicates a pause in talk of less than 0.2 s.</td></tr><tr><td>(2.0)</td><td>Period of silence in tenths of second.</td></tr><tr><td>(XXX)</td><td>Indicates utterance which is unintelligible</td></tr><tr><td>@@@</td><td>Laughter: The length of the @ indicates the length of the laughter.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Appendix B

Guiding schedule for student discussion groups. Which of the following are similar to how you feel about using a second language?

. I don't worry about making mistakes in language classes.   
I get upset when I don't understand what the teacher is correcting.   
: I want to receive corrective feedback when I make an error.   
: People will respect me if I use correct grammar when speaking a second language.   
: When I make errors in speaking a second language, I like my teacher to correct them.   
. Teachers should not correct students when they make errors in class.   
: I like to be corrected in small group work.   
: I dislike it when I am corrected in class.   
: It is more important to practice a second language in real-life situations than to practice grammar rules

Is it important to correct errors related to British English? How often do you want teacher to give corrective feedback on errors? When do you want your errors to be corrected? How often should the teacher correct?

The following people should/should not correct my errors

: Classmates . Teachers . Myself

Which is the best response by the teacher to the following error in your opinion? Teacher: Where did you go yesterday?   
Student: I go to the park.

1. Teacher: Could you say that again?   
2. Teacher: Go?   
3. Teacher: "Go' is in the present tense. You need to use the past tense "went' here   
4. Teacher: Yesterday I went   
5. Teacher: Really? What did you do there?   
6. Teacher: How does the verb change when we talk about the past?   
7. Teacher: I went to the park

# References

Ammar, A (2008). Prompts and recasts: Diffrntia effect on Second Language morphosyntax. Language Teaching Reearch, 122), 183-210.   
Ammar, A., & Spada, N. (2006). One size fits all? Recasts, prompts and L2 learning. Studies in SLA, 28(4), 543-574.   
Baird, R., Baker, W., & Kitazawa, M. (2014). The complexity of ELF. Journal of English As a Lingua Franca, 3(1), 171-196.   
Bazeley, P. (2013). Qualitative data analysis. SAGE.   
Bell, . (005). iors an ites pf ffetive foeg ang tchr: ts of qtionire sty. Fog ng s, 38, 259-270.   
Brown,A. 2009. ts acr ti f ffie f ag  if il.hd  l, 93, 460.   
Chaaz, 008.d try. n J h .), ive cti d h m d , . 1-110  uicti.   
Clift, R. (2016). Conversation analysis. Cambridge University Press.   
Cogo, A., & Dewey, M. (2012). Analysing English as a lingua franca: A corpus-driven investigation. Continuum.   
Crystal, D. (1997). The Cambridge encyclopedia of language (2nd ed.). Cambridge.   
Dafouz,  017. ish-md tio n l t in: nt or   .  rt M s (Eds.), The routledge handbook of language awareness (pp. 170-185). Routledge.   
Doz A r    . r c  s-i t  eiae (Eds.), English-medium instruction at universities: Global challenges (pp. 213-223). Multilingual matters   
Doughty,  Va (198. nctie fs  f .gy, .illia .), s o f  c nd  qustion . 114-138). Cambridge University Press.   
gi T. 00 , k . empirical studies (pp. 249-267). Oxford University Press. acquisition: A collection of empirical studies (pp. 339-360). Oxford University Press.   
Ellis R. (2010). Second language acquisition, teacher education and language pedagogy. Language Teaching, 43(2), 182-201.   
Ellis, R. (2012). Language teaching research and language pedagogy. Wiley Blackwell.   
Ellis, R. (2022). The study of second language acquisition (2nd ed.). Oxford University. 339-368   
n,    h  i pe multilingualism and language support for EMI will be needed in Chinese tertiary contexts. English Today, 34(1), 32-37. instruction in an English program at a Canadian university. Tesol Quarterly, 1-30.   
Garcia ay, D  oe  2013). tt iut and t intctio. n M g-lte d.) Th mbridg hookf snge acquisition (pp. 209-229). Cambridge University Press.   
Goo, J, & Mackey, A. (2013). The case against the case against recasts. Studie in Second Language Acquisition, 35(1), 127-165.   
Hall, G. (2017). Exploring English language teaching: Language in action. Routledge.   
Han, Z. (2002). A study of the impact of recasts on tense consistency in L2 output. Tesol Quarterly, 36(4), 543-572.   
Han,.  k.h  i.6490. Routledge.   
Han,  i006).tio   a in .)  ofion n s  qtion . 10inr.   
Harmer, J. (2015). The practice of English language teaching (5th ed.). Pearson Education Limited.   
Hobsbawn, E. (2000). The age of empire 1875-1914. Phoenix Press   
Hu, G., & Lei, J. (2014). English-Medium instruction in Chinese higher education: A case study. Higher Education, 67(5), 551-567.   
Hu, G., Li, L., & Lei, J. (2014). English-medium instruction at a Chinese University: Rhetoric and reality. Language Policy, 13, 21-40.   
Jen, .  d 01)  n ish d  t d cr  d t. F , 4 465492.   
Jenkins, J. (2000). The phonology of English as an international language. Oxford University Press.   
Jenkins, J. (2007). English as lingua Franca: Attitude and identity. Oxford University Press.   
Jenkins, J. (2014). English as a Lingua Franca in the Intenational University: The politics of academic English language policy. Routledge.   
Jenkins, J. (2015). Repositioning English and multilingualism in English as a lingua franca. Englishes in Practic, 2(3), 49-85.   
uquir  . 013).pg t e  g, ee, acrrrtie fk pti   f ie nd xperienced ESL teacher. Canadian Modern Language Review, 69, 181-206. (1), 1-20.   
Kartchaa,  & Aar, 2014). Lers elies as medar f wat is tid and ned in the ag casso. l Qartely, 48, 86-109.   
arvaci   . Language Teaching Research, 24(2), 220-249.   
Kirkpatrick, A. (2014). the language (s) of HE: EMI and/or ELF and/or multilingualim? The Asian Jounal of Applied Lingustics 1(1), 415.   
Krashen, S. D. (1982). Principles and practices in second language acquisition. Pergamon Press.   
Krashen, S. D. (1985). The input hypothesis: ssues and implications. Longmal   
uteva,  ti t t f s sh  d il ti.o Education and Bilingualism, 23(3), 287-300. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2019.1637395   
Lantlf 11  ii  t n.o h e language teaching and learning (pp. 303-318). Routledge.   
Laron th  t . fossilization in second language acquisition (pp. 189-200). Multilingual Matters.   
Laren-Freman . 018.mlxty ad .  J kin  Bakr, M w .,  R hdook o Esh  i  (. 51-60) Routledge.   
Lee, E. J. E. (2013). Corrective feedback preferences and learner repair among advanced ESL students. System, 41(2), 217-230.   
Lee E. J E. (2016). Reducing intenational graduate students' language anxiety through oral pronunciatin corrctions. System, 56, 78-95.   
Lei .,  014) ish-m ntiti  nh  ih m e Apled Linguistics in Language Teaching, 52(2), 99-126.   
Li S. (2010. The eftiv f crrtie eack in LA: me-ys Lg nng 602) 309-365. p/i.g/1.1075/.0046.   
Li, . 217 t    , applications, implications. Taylor and Francis.   
Li, S., & Vuono, A. (2019). Twenty-five years of research on oral and written corrective feeback in System. System, 84, 93-109. 276-295.   
Loewen, S. (2012). The rolef fedack. In s. M. Gss & Aacke Eds.), Th Rutege hndook of od anguage acqusition p 2440). Rutlege. Language Journal, 93(1), 91-104.   
og sti  n  h .     in p 413-468). Academic Press.   
Lng .H 3.ion  ti na .   .), o in (pp. 487-535). Malden: Blackwell Publishing.   
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective fedback and learner uptake. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19(1), 35-66.   
Lyster, R., & Saito, K. (2010). Oral feedback in classroom SLA. A meta-analysis. Studie i Second Language Acqusition, 32, 265-302.   
Lyster, R., Saito, K., & Sato, M. (2013). Oral corrective feedback in second language classrooms. Language Teaching, 46(1), 1-40.   
acaro,  00    s i  B  i 3 63-2./ doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2019.1620678   
Mackey, A. (2006). Feedback, noticing and instructed second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 27(3), 405-430.   
ackey,   .00)t  L -s a   .   g acquisition: A series of empirical studies (pp. 407-453). Oxford University Press.   
ahal China versus the Us. Language Awareness. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658416.2021.1900211   
kni,  o007n n     . languages (pp. 1-42).   
Mori, R. (2011). Teacher cognition in corrective feedback in Japan. System, 39(4), 451-467.   
Nassji, H. (2007). licitatin and refomulation and thir relationshp with leer repair in dyadic interaction anguge Leaing, 574), 511-548.   
Oladejo, J. A. (1993). Error correction in ESL: Learners' preferences. TESL Canada Journal, 10(2), 71-89.   
Pecorari, D., & Malmstrom, H. (2018). At the crossroads of TES0L and English medium instruction. Tesol Quarterly, 52(3), 497-515.   
Philp, . 003.ntso ig th g ive r in f r -nci. e i qson 51) 99-126.   
Rahmi,   hng 015). pi ni is-ki c io  orie fac hi ish cati. System, 55, 111-122.   
Rahmi,   hg,  J. 2016). he l dl roms d   iish   g c.e Learning Journal, 44(2), 257-268.   
Rassaei, E. (2013). Corrective feedback, learners' perceptions, and second language development. System, 41(2), 472-483.   
Rassaei, E. (2015). Oral corrective feedback, foreign language anxiety and L2 development. System, 49, 98-109.   
Reaei   1.ti  t t   1) 21-29.   
Roothoft, H. (2014). The relationship between adult FL teachers oral feedback practices and their beliefs. System, 46(1), 65-79.   
Rose, H., & Galloway, N. (2019). Global Englishes for language teaching. Cambridge University Press. language learning and teaching (pp. 133-164). John Benjamins Publishing. Language Learning, 68(2), 507-545.   
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11(2), 129-158.   
Schmidt,  (195.    in the  of in   n  .)in nd awareness in foreign language learning (pp. 1-63). University of Hawai'i.   
Schmidt, R. (201). Attntion. In P. Robinson (Ed.) Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 3-32). Cambridge Applied Linguistics.   
chl    . 29, 343-364.   
Sch, 1)     t Modern Language Journal, 85(2), 244-258.   
Scrivener, J. (2005). Learning teaching. Macmillian Education.   
Seidlhofer, B. (2011). Understanding English as a lingua Franca. Oxford University Press.   
Selinker, L. (1972). Interlanguage. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 10(3), 209-231.   
Selinker, L. (1992). Rediscovering interlanguage. Longman.   
Sehrii 018 tiak r  d i   , 464,83-500   
Sheen, . 0.t   r a tie  r n  nc (, 263-30.   
Shee,. (2006). Exploin h rationsh twee chrtritics f explcit corctions and r uptake. gge chn ch, 10, 361-392.   
he, i interaction in Second Language acquisition: A collection of empirical studies (pp. 301-322). Oxford University Press.   
Sheen, Y. (2008). Recasts, language anxiety, modified output, and L2 learning. Language Learning, 58(4), 835-874.   
hear, J  13   st 4] (2), 443-461.   
Shhy 0iai    r , medium instruction at universities: Global challenges (pp. 196-211). Multilingual matters.   
Sifakis,   rt,  (2018)-hg, g a cr t  J ,  akr,   .), Th English as a lingua franca (pp. 456-467). Routledge.   
wain, 205.   y  h.   d.) o frh  d  hg  . 71483) Lawrence Erlbaun Associates.   
Thomas 018).ag xpict e-d - rrie eckg - ri kd Journal, 102(2), 371-391.   
Trofimovich, . mar, , & Gonton,  (200). Hw effctie ar rsts? The ro f ation, emory, ad naltcl aiit. I AMckey d.) Conversational interaction in Second Language acquisition: A series of empirical studies (pp. 171-195). Oxford University Press.   
n Ha,a 1)     i   a. Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching, 11(2), 235-264.   
asqu  e 10  i  21-4.   
Vettorel, P. (2018). ELF and communication strategies: Are they taken into account in ELT materials? RELC Jounal, 9(1), 58-73.   
Yiaz, . 13t  et a it k  o   y d  ic a ics 34, 344-368.   
Yoshda, 010). H hr d r ie tive ack in the Jae aa cohed  Jol, 94 293314   
Zhao, J., & Dixon, L. Q. (Eds.). (2017). English-medium instruction in Chinese universities: Perspectives, discourse and evaluation.   
hao   2tif  ci  t tikteif   s classroom-based study. Language Teaching Research, 26(3), 361-381. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168820903343   
hu,  1)    ti Awareness, 28(2), 139-161. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658416.2019.1620755