In his thought-provoking paper published in this isue, Hyland (2023) discusses how the attention economy operating in the arena of scholarly publishing has been fuelling self-citation in academic publications. While there are good reasons to cite one's own work. for example to demonstrate programmatic research over an extended period of growth (Hyland, 2023, p. 7), many self-citations only serve the interests of their producers. Self-ehancing citation has been a perennial problem that is becoming ever more acute because of a growing metrics mania. As an illstration on a personal level, a new paper by an old acquaintance of mine published in an open-acces journal has 29 self-citations out of 58 references. My acquaintance pales in comparison with a prolific autism researcher whose list of 86 references for a paper was found to include 65 self-citations (Montanari, 2023) and a highly cited computer scientist who, according to a Nature news feature, "received $9 4 \%$ of his citations from himself or his co-authors' (Van Noorden & Chawla, 2019, p. 578). These eye-catching cases are just the tip of the self-citation iceberg. Excessive self-citation is a main form of citation manipulation that games citation-based metrics, rewards dishonesty, ills the scientific literature with noises, and wastes fellow re searchers' time.

To curb self-citation gaming, a small minority of journals limit the number of self-citations, for example, 5 or $1 5 \%$ of total references; some funding agencies forbid the provision ofcitation statistics in grant applications; few major citation index providers produce metrics with and without self-citations. These stategie re ineffective in combating the problem because self-promoters can turn to other journals or present citation metrics including self-citations for job hunting and promotions. Clearly, there is an urgent need for more radical cures for the chronic disease. One radical cure lies in developing an efficient algorithm that can reliably identify authors who have manipulated their reference lists (Wren & Georgescu, 2022) and publish the results in a public leaderboard of self-citers to deter citation manipulation. Another radical cure would be for major indexing databases such as Scopus and Clarivate to exclude publications whose self-citations exceed a threshold that accounts for disciplinary and other systematic differences. This wil obliterate excessive selfcitations, together with the papers producing them, from the various metrics based on these widely used databases. As a result, such self-itations would be much ado for nothing. Only when self-citation gaming incurs more losses than gains can the problem be halted.

# References