# Effects of task-based language teaching on functional adequacy in L2 writing

Ran Weia,\*, Xiaoyan Zhaob

a School of Foreign Studies, Jiangsu Normal University, China b The High School Attached to Huaiyin Normal University, China

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Task-based language teaching (TBLT)   
Pragmatic performance   
Functional adequacy   
L2 writing   
Chinese English learners

Task-based language teaching (TBLT) has generally been reported to enhance second language (L2) writing on linguistic features such as complexity, accuracy, and fluency. The research on how it influences pragmatic dimensions, however, has been scarce. Drawing upon a pretest-posttest design, this study investigates the potential of TBLT in pragmatic development in Chinese high school students' English writing. Eighty Chinese senior high school students from two parallel classes participated in this study over four weeks. One class as the experimental group received TBLT writing instruction while the other class as the control group maintained the traditional product approach of writing teaching. Pragmatic outcomes were assessed in terms of functional adequacy (i.e., content, task requirements, comprehensibility, and coherence/cohesion) with functional adequacy rating scales. Results showed the salient effects of TBLT in helping students become more functionally adequate in English writing. In particular, it promoted the content, task requirements, and comprehensibility of students' writing. The coherence and cohesion performance in writing, however, did not demonstrate considerable improvement. Intriguingly, a significant correlation was identified between students' English proficiency and the coherence/ cohesion dimension in their written texts. The study highlights the effectiveness of TBLT in facilitating L2 writing performance from the perspective of pragmatic dimensions and emphasizes the importance of developing students' pragmatic writing ability. These findings have significant implications for Chinese high school English writing instruction.

# 1. Introduction

Writing, as an important expressive skil, efectively promotes the intenalization of language knowledge, which in turn facilitates the progression of overall language proficiency (Graham, 2019). The acquisition of writing skills i asecond language (L2) presents significant challenges for L2 learners (Moses & Mohamad, 2019; McNamara et al., 2010). These challenges extend beyond the linguistic fatures of written L2 performance and are closely associated with the effectiveness and appropriateness of writig. Chinese learners of English as L2 in particular have been reported to exhibit a discrepancy between their pragmatic performance and their linguistic development (Luo & Gao, 2011; Shen, 2013). This is evident in their writing, where they struggle to adequately perform crucial communicative tasks such as writing lettrs to ask for and respond to advice request and provide assistance, or draft appli cations for internships. The importance of the pragmatic dimension as an integral component of L2 performance has been underscored by several cholars (de Jong et al., 2012; Kuiken & Vedder, 2017, 2022; Revesz et al., 2016). This emphasis implie that efective L2 writing peformance is not confined  linguistic factors but also requires an appreciation of ragmatic principles. Itis threfore posited that appropriate writing instruction could enable students to identify their weaknesses and subsequently produce more suitable and appropriate texts (Kuiken & Vedder, 2022).

Since the 1980s, Task-based Language Teaching (TBLT) has gained much attention in the field of instructed second language acquisition (ISLA) for its role in enhancing L2 teaching and learning through students' engagement in meaningful tasks over the isolated mastery of grammatical and lexical forms (East, 2021). TBLT is particularl enefica for L2 writing as it employs real-world, authentic tass as activities to connect writing with authentic contexts. It also fosters the development of writing skills such as brainstorming, idea organizing, and drafing, and provide collaborative environments through group work or pair work (Ahmed and Bidin, 2016; Milarisa, 2019). A real-life production in L2 writing entails not only the successul completion of tasks, but also task accomplishment in an appropriate manner that aligns with social, interpersonal, and cultural expectations. Therefore, the communicative functions of writing proficiency using tasks in TBLT deserves increasing attention in both TBLT and L2 writing research (Loewen, 2022). In other words, the evaluation of writing proficiency is not confined to the mastery of linguistic knowledge, but also necesstaes an understanding of communicative functions of inguisic forms and the context within which the communication takes place. However, current TBLT studies have primaril focused on grammar and lexis as learning targets, leaving the pragmatic aspects largely unexplored (Plonsky & Kim, 2016). Given the limited attntion paid to how TBLT impact L2 writing in terms of pragmatic dimensions (Bui & Tai, 2022) and considering the potential f TBLT in both linguistic and pragmatic aspects of L2 wiring, itis esential to pay more attention to its contribution to pragmatic development in L2 writing.

Functional adequacy, a task-related construct, features a robust correlation between the successful completion of atask and the appropriateness of linguistic output. Recently, it has been introduced as a welcome addition to the evaluation of task performance, underscoring the importance of pragmatic appropriateness in linguistic output. Therefore, this study attempts to bridge this gap by investigating the efects of TBLT on functional adequacy in L2 writte texts of Chinese senior high school students. A rating scale developed by Kuiken and Vedder (2017, 2018) distinguished four dimensions to asss functional adequacy of L2 performance, namely task requirements, content, comprehensibility, and coherence/cohesion. This study will examine how TBLT nfluences global functional adequacy and its four dimensions to ascertain the development of students' pragmatic competence in the TBLT context. Both theoretical and pedagogical contributions will be provided to the domain of L2 writing instruction. Theoreticall, this study further enriches the currnt ISLA theory by combining TBLT with the pragmatic asessment of functional dequacy. Additionally, this study broadens the scope of application of Kuiken and Vedder's (2017) functional adequacy rating scales with evidence support from Chinese senior high school English learners. Pedagogicall, the research findings will encourage English instructors to take into ac. count student' pragmatic performance when imparting linguistic features in their writing performance and willdemonstrate the feasibilit of using TBLT to increase students' pragmatic development, which provides a useful reference for further pragmatic and writing teaching in classroom contexts.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. TBLT

Task-based Language Teaching (TBLT) emerged in the early 1980s with it roots in communicative language teaching. Task is the key construct in TBLT (Ellis, 2009; East, 2021). The construct has been defined variously by diffrent scholars. Prabhu (1987) characterized a task as an activit for learners to use reasoning skill and critial thinking to arrive at an outcome or conclusion based on analysis of presented information. Wills (1996) described tasks as communicative activities in which learners use the target language to achieve a real-world goal or objective. Elli (2003) stated that tas involve meaning conveyance and language practice in a purposeful way. Synthesizing these definitions, a task can be summarized as a teaching activity grounded in students' interests abilities, and real-world needs, with an emphasis on exchange of meaning rather than analysis of language forms alone. In selecting and designing taks, consideration should be given to making them authentic, relevant, and engaging for leaners. Overal, tasks are at the center of TBLT and serve as vehicles for developing communicative language abilities.

TBLT can be characterized as an instructional approach that uses task completion to facilitate language learning. It aims to simulate authentic, real-world situations within the classoom context and uses communicatie goals as the foundation for task design (Elis 2003). Three key principles have been proposed for developing efective TBLT activities (Nunan, 1999. The authenticity principle states that tass should replicate real-world uses of language as closely as possible. The form-function principle emphasizes that attention to linguisti forms should aris from communicative functions needed to carry out the task. Finall, the task dependency principle holds that tass should be sequenced and linked together to provide scafolding and progressin in language development. By attending to these principles during task creation, instructors can maximize the relevance and benefit of TBLT activities for learners communicative abilities and second language acquisition processes. Careful consideration of authenticity, form-function links, and task sequencing are important steps in implementing TBLT in the classroom context.

Wills (1996) outlined a three-stage framework of TBLT consisting of the pre-task, task cycle, and language focus stages. The pre-task introduces the topic, activates background knowledge, and provides relevant vocabulary and expressions to prepare learners for completing the main task (Willis 196). ts purpose is to equip stdents with the tools needed to sucessully perform th ask. The task cycle itself involves three steps: the task, planning, and report (Wills, 196). During the task, learners complete the activity in pairs or groups using the target language. Next, they plan how to convey what transpired during the task. Finally, arepresentative from each group presents a report summarizing thir process and outcomes. The instructor observes, monitors, and provides asistance as needed during this phase. The language focus stage shift attention to analyzing linguistic elements that surfaced during the task cycle (Willis, 1996). Target forms are identified and explicitl practiced. In this way, Wilis framework moves learners from primarily meaning-focused language use during the task to deliberate form-focused study in the final phase.

# 2.2. TBLT in L2 writing

In recent years, TBLT has emerged as a prominent area of inquiry within ISLA research. Numerous studies have primarily inves tigated the potential of TBLT in developing L2 skils such as reading (e.g., Al Muhaimeed, 2013), speaking (e.g., Gonzalez-Loret & Nielson, 2015; Harris & Leeming, 2022), and writing (e.g., Phuong et al., 2015; Nguyen & Jaspaert, 2021; Hanh & Tuan, 2018)

These studies have predominantly reported positive findings for TBLT in promoting skills such as reading and speaking in foreign language contexts. When it comes to writing skills however, mixed effects of TBLT on L2 writing have been reported. For instance, Hanh and Tuan (2018) investigated the effect of TBLT on EFL learners' writing performance and found that TBLT played a facilitative role in improving vocabulary, grammar, content, organization, and mechanics of writing. They argued that interpersonal interaction and rich exposure to authentic materials contrbuted to the learners' improvement in writing performance. Likewise, Nguyen and Jaspaert (2021) compared TBLT with a traditional teaching method (TTM) - a teacher-centered approach combining form-focused instruction and Presentation/Practice/Production or PP - in teaching Vietnamese EFL learners language skill. Their resuls revealed superior performance of the participants in the TBLT context than in the TTM context for writing. This was because learners were engaged in collaboration and performed communicative target tasks from a self-related writing proces, rather than following a strictly controlled method in the TTM approach. In a similar vein, however, Phuong et al. (2015) revealed mixed efects of TBL on L2 writing with regard o lexical richness and accuracy. They examined the differentl effcts f the TBLT aproach and the traditional PP approach on the English writing performance of Vietnamese students. Their findings indicated that while both approaches nhanced the text qualit ofVietnamese EFL learners, TBLT was superior i promoting lexical diversity in L2 writig, whereas PP was more efective in enhancing leaners' lexical accuracy. The researchers attributed the contribution of TBLT to lexical richness to the diverse exposure to a broader range of language input from both sample texts and other written/oral resources, which provided learners with opportunities for pushed output. Conversely, the uperiorit of the PP approach in inguistic ccuracy was atributed to its focus on formal accuracy in error-free written texts.

Based on the mixed findings of previous studies, it can be inferred that TBLT may contribute to L2 learners' writing performance to some different extents. Despite the growing interest in the impact of TBLT on L2 writing, the evaluation of L2 writing in these studies has primarily focused on linguisic dimensions as evidenced by measures of linguistic accuracy, fluency, and complexity. In contrast, little attention has been placed on the pragmatic dimension of writing.

# 2.3. Functional adequacy and pragmatics

Beyond linguistic features, it i essential to consider pragmatic competence in aessing L2 leaners oral and written performance (de Jong et al., 2012; Kuiken & Vedder, 2017, 2022; Revesz et al., 2016). As stated in China's General Senior High School Engish Curriculum Standards, senior high schoo students should be able to utilize language appropriatel for different contexts, roles, and intentions (Ministry of Education, 2017). This highlights the ned to develop pragmatic competence in Chinese L2 learners. However, relatively ittl attention has been paid to the pragmatic aspects of learners language use. Commonly used metrc for evaluating L2 production, such as complexity, accuracy, and fluency, focus solely on lingustic features (Housen & Kuiken, 2009). While the measurement of linguistic features provides valuable insights, overreliance on these measures paints an incomplete picture of learners communicative abilitie. Incorporating pragmatic competence into asessments would provide a fuller representation of how well students can use language in socilly and culturally appropriate ways for authentic purposes. Further research on pragmatic competence development and its measurement is warranted.

Various terminologies have been utilized to describe learners pragmatic competence, such as "communicative competence" (Bachman & Palmer, 1996) and \*successul task performance (de Jong et al., 2012). Based on Palltt's (2009) sugestions, Kuiken et al. (2010) adopted the term \*communicative adequacy' to refer to a dynamic and interpersonal construct that centers on the successful completion of a communicative task by the speaker or writer, as well as the interlocutors perception of the messge. More recently, Kuiken and Vedder (2017, 2018) revisited this construct within the framework of TBLT and proposed the term \*functional adequacy" to beter capture the task-specific, goal-oriented nature f the concept. As Kuiken and Vedder (2022) argue, functional adequacy aligns well with the objectives of task-based performance asessment, as it focuses on task fulfllment and conveys the interactive, co-constructed nature of pragmatic competence. With its emphasis on effective communication within specific contexts and tasks, functional adequacy has emerged as a pivotal construct in contemporary studies of L2 pragmatic ability and its measure ment. Further research is needed to continue refining the constructs and tools used to asess this critical component of learners language proficiency.

Kuiken and Vedder (2017) have developed and refined a holistic rating scale to assessfunctional adequacy in task-based language performance. Building on initial pilot studies (Kuiken & Vedder, 2014; Kuiken et al., 2010), their six-point Likert scale evaluates four dimensions of functional adequacy: content, task requirements, comprehensibility, and coherence/cohesion. Content adequacy in. volves assessing whether the learner includes an appropriate quantity of ideas relevant to the task topic. The task requirements dimension examines how wel the performance meets the register, genre, and speech act demands specified by the task intructions (Kuiken & Vedder, 2017). Comprehensibility refers to the clarity of the message and ease with which the listener/reader can understand it. Finally, coherence and cohesion relate to the texual features used to create logical flow and connections between ideas. As

Kuiken and Vedder (2017) discuss, examining these multiple facets of functional adequacy provides a robust evaluation of learners ability to effectively communicate meanings within specific task contexts. The scale represents a valuable asessment tool to complement trditional lingustic measures and provide deeper insights into learners' pragmatic competence in task-based performance. Further validation in diverse educational settings is still needed.

Since its development by Kuiken and Veder (2017), the functional adequacy rating scale has been utilized in several experimental studies assessing the pragmatic dimension of second language proficiency. Research has supported the validity, reliability, and versatility of the scale across diffrent contexts As Kuiken and Vedder (2018) discuss, the holistic functional adequacy measure demonstrates substantial interrater reliability even when used by non-expert raters. The scale can be applied flexibly to varied learner populations, proficiency levels, and task types without significant adjustments (Herraiz-Martinez & Alcon-Soler, 2019; Nuzzo & Bove, 2020, 2022). The functional adequacy construct operationalized through the six-point ratig scale provides a usable, robust framework for evaluating functional aspects of learners' language performance. Studies have confirmed its utility for assessing pragmatic competence in task-based performance by raters with diverse backgrounds. Existing findings confirm the applicabilit of the functional adequacy scale for researching L2 learning across educational settings.

# 2.4. Assessing the functional dimension of L2 writing

The importance of pragmatic competence in language learning has been gradually emphasized with a growing number of studies on functional adequacy in L2 writing. The studies have attempted to identify effctive pedagogical approaches for improving written functional adequacy and have explored the relationship between functional adequacy and various aspects of language learning. Taguchi and Kim (2016) examined how different task desig factor affected the acquisition of L2 pragmatics among junior high school English learners in Korea. Their study revealed that collborative tass were more ffective than individual tasks, owing to the opportunities for negotiation during collaboration. Kim et al. (2018) further inestigated the efects of collaborative writing tasks on the acquisition of Korean honorifics in aU.s. foreign language classrom.Their findings supported the eficacy of collaborative writing in the acquisition of L2 language sils, especially pragmatics. Alcon-Soler (2018) studied the impact of task-supported language teaching on L2 English learners pragmatic learning outcomes. It was found that students who engaged in per-to-per interactions during tasks demonstrated greater improvement in their pragmatic awarenes compared to those who interacted with their instructors. It was also noted that learners might transfer their pragmatic knowledge from L1 to L2. Herraiz-Martinez (2018) and Herraiz-Martinez and Alcon-Soler (2019) found that greater exposure to English and higher proficiency led to superior writen functional adequacy in English-medium instruction contexs. Strobl and Baten (2022) observed weak relationships between functional adequacy and fluency and no correlation between functional adequacy and syntactic complexity in L2 writing development during study abroad.

Despite the increasing recognition of the importance of functional adequacy in L2 writing, related research on this topic remains scarce among Chinese English leaners. Recently, a few Chinese cholars began to shift their attention to the importance of pragmatic development in L2 writing. However, the participants i their studies were alloverseas students in China learning Chinese as aforeign language. For example, Wu et al. (2019) demonstrated a high correlation between linguistic features, functional adequacy scores, and writing skils among Korean Chinese learners. The researchers modified Kuiken and Vedders(2017) functional adequacy rating scale to suit ther reearch purposes and utilized objective textual indicators to evaluate language features. In a subsequent study, Xiao and Xu (2021) conducted a comparison of the predictive power of functional adequacy and language features (accuracy, fluency, and complexity) in relation to writing scores. They analyzed Chinese picture compositions written by 132 Indonesian students and found that the functional adequacy indicaor was relatively independent f CAF, thus indicating the potential for using objective tex features to evaluate functional adequacy.

Previous studies have mainly focused on the relationship between linguistic features of accuracy, fluency and complexity and functional adequacy in writing and factors that could promote functional adequacy. However, ittle research has ben conducted on the development of functional adequacy in a specific pedagogical context. TBLT is arguably beneficial for L2 pragmatic instruction in that it provides students with goal-oriented meaningful activitie that encourage authentic communication in the classroom. Despite this, no previous studies have examined the writen functional adequacy of Chinese English learners from the perspective of TBLT, particularl in senior high schoo language classooms. This study therefore intends to combine TBLT with the pragmatic asessment of functional adequacy to investigate the feasibility of using TBLT to increase students pragmatic development. The following research question was addressed:

To what extent does TBLT influence functional adequacy in Chinese senior high chool students' English writing as a whole and on each dimension, namely (1) content; (2) task requirements; (3) comprehensibility; and (4) coherence/cohesion?

# 3. Research methodology

# 3.1. Design

A pretest-postes quasi-experimental design was employed in the present study to investigate the efects of TBLT on functional adequacy in Chinese senior high students' English writing. The experimental group received writing instruction using the TBLT approach, while the control group maintained their previous traditional writing instruction and product approach. To asses students' functional adequacy in their writing after the instructional intervention, two writing tets (.., pretest and posttest) were administered to both the two groups. The pretest-postest design enabled a comparison of students written functional adequacy before and fter the

TBLT intervention in the experimental group, as well as a comparison of gains in writen functional adequacy between the experimental and control groups. It alowed for an examination of the potential influence of TBLT implementation on improvements in written functional adequacy.

# 3.2. Participants

80 Year One students (53 males and 27 female) from two intact classes at a provincial senior high school in East China participated in the study. Their ages ranged from 15 to 17 years old. All of them were native Chinese speakers with English as their foreign language. One class $( N = 4 0 )$ was assigned to be the experimental group receiving English writing instruction using the TBLT approach, while a control group with students $\left( N = 4 0 \right)$ from another class maintained their traditional product approach to writing instruction. Prior to the experiment, the English proficiency levels of the two groups were deemed to be comparable $( t \left( 7 8 \right) = 0 . 2 4 0$ $\begin{array} { r } { p = 0 . 8 1 1 } \end{array}$ Both groups received writing instruction from the same English teacher over the course of the study.

# 3.3. Instruction

# 3.3.1. TBLT for the experimental group

A TBLT writing session was assigned to the experimental group to foster students pragmatic competence. According to Willis (1996) TBT framework, the teaching procedure includes three stages: pre-task, task cycle, and language focus I is important to note that the focus of each stage may overlap or ocur simultaneously and may vary depending on specific tass and learners neds.

The pre-task stage prepares students for subsequent task-based activities. The instructor initiates a free talk about students' own experiences to familiarize them with the writing theme and arouse their learning interests. Then, the intructor introduces the task by creating a realifecommunicative scenario and presenting reading materials with simple comprehension questions to help students recall useful words and expressions. In this stage, rlevant content is provided for students to apply in further task activities The authentic situation inspires students to notice pragmatic elements such as politenes and formality, enhancing their understanding of the task requirements. Overal, the pre-task phase activates students' prior knowledge, exposes them to linguistic input, and orients them to the pragmatic and discoursal demands of the upcoming task, thereby preparing them for the task-based learning proces.

Table 1 A Teaching Sample of TBLT.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Content</td><td>Write a letter of advice on parent-child relationships</td></tr><tr><td>Stage 1: Pre-task</td><td>Step 1: Topic introduction T leads a free talk: &quot;Have you ever had conflicts with your parents? How did you deal with them in the end?&#x27; Step 2: Task introduction</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T sets up a real-life context and gives the writing assignment: &quot;Cynthia i the host of the Teen Time radio program. Many teenagers write to Cynthia about ther concerns regarding parent-child conflicts Today, Cntha reied  ltr from imon aut his probles wth his parts f you we ythia, write rly to ofer aice n how to handle his parent-child relationship.&quot;. Step 3: Expression activation Ss read Simon&#x27;s letter and complete the three mini-tasks: (1) List Simon&#x27;s problems and mark the linking words that connect different aspects of problems. (2) Summarize the basic structure of a letter according to the sample letter. (3) Think: Which tone and style should be used in your reply? Serious or relaxed? Formal or informal? (4) Brainstorm sentence patterns of providing suggestions.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step 4: Tasks (1) Role-play Ss play a conversation between Simon and Cynthia in pairs, aiming to seek and offer advice respectively. During the role-play, both characters have their own tasks.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Cynthia&#x27;s tasks: @ give useful suggestions with explanations;  reduce Simon&#x27;s anxiety about his situation;</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Simon&#x27;s tasks:  clarify his problems;  consult more about the manipulation of the suggestions given.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ss should record useful points during their interaction and work out a general outline after the role play.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(2) First draft writing</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ss write their own draft indeendently in line with the outline at a certain time. While witing, T reminds s to:@keep their ideas clea and</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>precise;express their ideas with politeness;follow the ltter structure mentioned in Stage 1 and organize their ideas ogically using appropriate cohesive devices..</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step 5: Planning Ss have a discussion in a group of four. They exchange opinions and make comparisons among their compositions in terms of pragmatic</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>behavior in addition to linguistic characteristics. Afer that, Ss revise their compositions and plan for a group report. T walks around and provides help if needed in this stage..</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step 6: Report and feedback (1) Report</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Each group elects one representative to make a report of their discussion process and their revised product in front of the cass.2) Peer</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>feedback Each composition wil receive comments from Ss in other groups. When giving feedback, Ss could refer to these aspects on the screen.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&quot;When you (Simon) read this ltter:@Can these suggestions solve your problems? What else would you like to know more about?@How do</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>you feel when you read thi eter? Is it olite or absolute?Do you have dificult in understanding the leter?@is the iscourse coherent and cohesive?&quot;</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(3) Teacher feedback</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T summarizes Ss&#x27; feedback and makes a brief comment on their performance in their task completion and writing.</td></tr><tr><td>Stage 3:</td><td>Step 7: Analysis</td></tr><tr><td>Language</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T shows a model esay and makes an analysis by summarizing writing techniques from the pragmatic and linguistic features.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Focus</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step 8: Practice</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>After class s polish up her articles ccoring to the edack they reeived and he samplesy. The reie ompostion ill be handed</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>in next class.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

The task cycle stage provides students with opportunities to develop their pragmatic skill through authentic writing tasks, such as role-play, group negotiatio, reports, and per feedback. These activitie featuring interpersonal cooperation and meaning negotiation facilitate the meaningful application of leaned content, promoting functional adequacy. irst rle-play benefits the improvement of both content and task requirements dimensions of functional adequacy. By simulating dialogues in daily life situations, students become familiar with specified identitis and roles, enabling them to select adequate and realistic content for their writing. Role-play also necessitates using proper expressions during communication to demonstrate politeness and consideration, which isespecially beneficial for the task requirements dimension. Additionall, aftr role-play, studentsatempt to convert their interaction outcomes into written language to produce initial draft. This require attention to gnre characteristics and coherent, cohesive organization of ideas. Additionall, group cooperation is an integral component of TBLT, playing a vital rol in enhancing functional adequacy across multiple dimensions It broadens students thinking and enriches content. Students also focus more on the comprehensibilit of teir compositions for peer audience t varying proficiency level. Moreover, when reporting, students present their iscussion process and modified compositions, necesstating clear coherent language to effectively convey achievements. inall, per and instructor feed back provide pragmatic knowledge through exposure to others' work. Taking the perspective of the target reader rather than an external evaluator also cultivates audience awareness to improve functional adequacy. In summary, the task cycle activities in TBLT facilitate the comprehensive development of learners' functional adequacy.

During the language focus stage, the instructor presents a model esay and guides students in analyzing its pragmatic and inguistic features. Following the analysis students rewrite their own compositions to deepen their pragmatic awareness and enhance their writing skills to tackle real-life issues. One sample lesson of TBLT is shown in Table 1.

# 3.3.2. Traditional product writing approach for the control group

In the control group, the previous traditional product writing approach was carried out as usual, which is instructor-centered and examination-oriented, without interpersonal cooperation and meaning negotiation between peers. Students acquire writing techniques passvely, deal with their composition separately, and hand in their writing within a limited time. The teaching sample for traditional writing teaching is shown in Table 2.

# 3.4. Instruments

Two writing tests were administered before and after the instructional intervention to asses students written functional adequacy in the study. Both tests were formatted as email writing tasks with a word limit of approximately 80 words and a time limit of $3 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ In the pre-intervention tet, students asumed the role of a character named Li Hua. They were tasked with writing an advice letter to a friend, Peter, who had inquired about effctive methods of learning Chinese. The letter was to include key instructional points with appropriate details. This test served to asess whether the experimental and control groups were homogeneous in their baseline functional adequacy performance prior to the intervention. Afte four weeks of respective writing instruction, a post-intervention test was conducted. In this test, students continued in the role of Li Hua, but this time as the student in charge of the schoo's English Club. They were required to write a letter to a friend named Gina, requesting her help in planning activities for an upcoming English

Table 2 A Teaching Sample of the Traditional Product Writing Approach.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Content</td><td>Write a letter of advice on parent-child relationships</td></tr><tr><td>Stage 1:</td><td>Step 1: Presentation</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Pre-writing</td><td>(1) T lists the rules of writing a letter.</td></tr><tr><td>(2) T shows the basic structure of a letter and some sentence patterns frequently used in letters of advice on the screen. asic structure: salutation, body, complimentary cloe, and signatureentence pterns: sggest that yo.I ould be hlpful if yu...</td></tr><tr><td>Have you considered.../ ....</td></tr><tr><td>(3) T shows several sample esays and analyses them from language points and pragmatic fature from four dimensions of functional adequacy.</td></tr><tr><td>Step 2: Task Introduction T assigns the writing topic: a letter from Cynthia to Simon to give advice on parent-child relationship problems.</td></tr><tr><td>Stage 2: While-</td><td>Step 3: Individual writing</td></tr><tr><td>writing</td><td>Ss are asked to complete attr individually within a limited time. They can imtate the form, stle, pattens, and ther aspcts of the given model materials.</td></tr><tr><td>Stage 3:</td><td>Step 4: Teacher assessment</td></tr><tr><td>Post-writinge</td><td>After Ss fish thr first drat  choe for coitions rdly oow on the cr. povi feack onths eers hghlighting</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>areas of improvement and providing suggestions for future writing. Step 5: Homework</td></tr></table></body></html>

Carnival. The leter was t pecify the purpose, request, and expetations for the ent. This alowed for an assesment of the students progress ollowing the intervention. The ontent of these writing tass was closely related to senior high school students daily life and academic experiences. They were selected from the practical writing section of two periodical examinations in the experimental school, so stdnts atachd grat mportanceo the tets (s Aendix I for the writing tass and pend I for the witing sampes.

After the writing samples were collected, two English instructors were invited to rate the students' functional adequacy using the six-point Likert scale developed by Kuiken and Veder (2017) (see Appendix II). Kuiken and Vedder's(2017) functional adequacy rating scale separates functional adequacy into four distinct components, distinguishing these from linguistic descriptors such as accuracy, fluency and complexity. These components are content task requirements, comprehensibility, and coherence/cohesion. The content component scrutinizes the sufficiency and consistency of ideas in the writing task and the extent to which the writer provides information pertinent to the task's objectives. This dimension contemplates whether the amount of information is adequate and Whether their potential themes are elaborated into primary and secondary content elements. The component of task requirements assese the fulfllment of the writing task's stipulations, which encompas gere, speech act, and register. This dimension measures how well the writers message aligns with the specific genre, speech acts, and reister, as well as the explicit intructions and re quirements of the task. The comprehensibility component i concened with how understandable the text information is and whethr it is esential for the intended reader to understand the text's purpose and ideas. Coherence/cohesion examines the writer's information for the presence of coherent relationships and cohesive ties. Examples include discourse markers, connectors, inking words and the other cohesive devices. Given the widespread use of Kuiken and Vedder's (2017) functional adequacy rating scale in many studies (e. g., Herraiz-Martinez & Alcon-Soler, 2019; Nuzzo & Bove, 2020, 2022), the scale's rliabilit and validit have been wellestalished. To maximize reliabilit and objectivit, the raters underent traning on scale usage and interrater rliabilit was calulated afer thir scoring (Cohen's Kappa $k = 0 . 8 2$

# 3.5.Procedures

The entire experiment was conducted in the second semester of the academic year 2022-2023, lasting around three weeks with assesment and instruction sessions. At the beginning of the irst week, students signed a consent form to ensure the anonymity and confidentiality of their participation. Afterward, they completed a pretest and began the treatment esion until th fourth day of the fourth week. The posttest was administered directl after the treatment sesion at the end of week four. Both writing tsts were in the same genre of practical lettr writig to minimize genre difference efects. None of the students withdrew during the proces. Each of them was given an extra credit bonus after completing the entire experimental procedure Table 3.

# 3.6. Data collection and analysis

Quantitative data on written functional adequacy were colected through the pre- and post-writing test. Two raters used the same rating scale to grade students functional adequacy. The four dimensions of functional adequacy were scored from 1 to 6 respectively. The overall score for functional adequacy was the sum of the four dimensions with the maximum score of 24. The initial English proficiency level, operationalized as the scores from students final examination in last semester, was employed as the covariate. As an anonymous reviewer rightly noted, other individual difference factors in writing ability (e.g., language aptitude, working memory capacity) play a significant rle in modulating the effect of TBLT on functional adequacy. However, due to the limited schedule for the classroom-based experiment, these factors were not considered in this study. Future research is encouraged to incorporate these in. dividual diffrence factors in writing ability as control variables. Statisical analysis was conducted using sPss 26.0. A two-way repeated measures AncOVA was performed to compare postest functional adequacy scores between the experimental and control groups and the pretest-to-posttest gains in functional adequacy for the experimental group simultaneously so as to reduce the risk of type 1 error. The independent variables in ths study included a within-group variable (Phase: pretest vs. posttest), a between-group variable (Group: experimental vs. control), and a covariate (itial English proficiency). The dependent variable was the gains in L2 functional adequacy both as a whole and on each dimension. The significance level was set at $p < 0 . 0 5$ The effect sizes were calculated using $\eta ^ { 2 }$ and interpreted as small $( \eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 1 )$ , medium $( \eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 6 )$ , and large $( \eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 1 3 8 )$ based on Pallant (2013).

# 4. Results

The study examined the extent to which TBLT contrbuted to Chinese senior high students' functional adequacy in their Englisl   
Table 3 Research Procedures.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Groups</td><td>The experimental group (n = 40)</td><td>The control group (n = 40)</td></tr><tr><td>Week 1 Day 1</td><td>Pretest</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Week 1 Day 2</td><td>TBLT instruction</td><td>Traditional product approach in writing instruction</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Week 4 Day 4</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Week 4 Day 5</td><td>Posttest</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

writing. Descriptive statistics are presented first in Table 4.

Table 4 reports the two groups' average performance $( M )$ , variation in average performance $( S D )$ , and the sample size $( N )$ for the global and each part of functional adequacy in the pretest and postest sessions. On average, the experimental group averagely outperformed the control group as a whole $( M = 1 7 . 0 0 0$ $S D = 1 . 6 4 1 ) $ , and also in terms of content $( M = 4 . 4 1 3$ $S D = 0 . 7 1 5$ , task requirements $( M = 4 . 6 2 5$ $S D = 0 . 5 4 0 \mathrm { \Omega }$ , and comprehensibility $( M = 4 . 3 5 0$ $S D = 0 . 6 0 1 \mathrm { \Omega }$ . However, with respect to coherence and cohesion, the average performance of the experimental group $M = 3 . 6 1 3$ $S D = 0 . 6 8 4 \mathrm { \AA }$ was slightly less than that of the control group $( M = 3 . 8 0 0$ $S D = 0 . 8 0 7 \mathrm { \Omega }$

A two-way repeated measures ANcoVA was run to examine whether the average performance of functional adequacy as a whole and its four dmesions sttisticall sigicanly differe from ch ther. Hlisticall, a sttistically snificant intractionffect of Phase by Group was observed $( F ( d f = 1 ) = 4 5 . 9 5 1$ $p < 0 . 0 0 1$ $\eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 3 7 4 )$ . The simple effect analysis results indicated distinct effects of Phase $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 7 . 6 6 2$ $p = 0 . 0 0 7$ $\eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 9 0 )$ and of Group $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 8 1 . 0 3 8$ $p < 0 . 0 0 1$ $\eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 5 1 3 )$ . However, there was no statistically significant interaction effect of Phase by Proficiency $( F ( d f = 1 ) = 0 . 0 8 9 , p = 0 . 7 6 6 )$ or main effect of Proficiency $( F ( d f = 1 )$ $= 2 . 0 5 6$ $p = 0 . 1 5 6 )$ . These results suggest that TBLT contributed to functional adequacy in L2 writing and the development of functional adequacy was independent of that of English proficiency.

In terms of content, a statistically significant interaction effect of Phase by Group emerged $( F ( d f = 1 ) = 1 4 . 0 0 1$ $p < 0 . 0 0 1$ $\eta ^ { 2 } =$ 0.154). The simple effect analysis revealed noticeable effects of both Phase $( F ( d f = 1 ) = 4 . 5 0 1 , p = 0 . 0 3 7 , \eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 5 5 )$ and Group $( F ( d f$ $= 1 ) = 3 4 . 0 0 5$ A $p < 0 . 0 0 1$ 3 $\eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 3 0 6 )$ , indicating that TBLT appeared to drive senior one students to write more appropriately with adequate and relevant writen information in terms of content. The students provided with TBLT instruction outperformed those with the traditional writing teaching model. No significant interaction effect of Phase by Proficiency $( F ( d f = 1 ) = 2 . 0 4 3$ $\begin{array} { r } { p = 0 . 1 5 7 . } \end{array}$ ) or main effect of Proficiency $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 0 . 4 8 9$ $\begin{array} { r } { p = 0 . 4 8 6 \mathrm { ) } } \end{array}$ were found.

With respect to task requirements, a statisticaly salient interaction effect of Phase by Group was observed afer the intructional intervention $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 4 6 . 3 8 3$ $p < 0 . 0 0 1$ $\eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 3 7 6 )$ . Distinct effects of Phase $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 1 9 . 6 8 7$ $p < 0 . 0 0 1$ $\eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 2 0 4 )$ and Group $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 5 9 . 0 1 5$ $p < 0 . 0 0 1$ $\eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 4 3 4 )$ were identified in the simple effect analysis. Therefore, it can be concluded that senior one students in the TBLT group fulflled the requirements of the writen task (e.g, genre, register, and text acts) more successully than those in the traditional product approach of writing instruction. In other words, TBLT plays a positie role in elevating students' functional adequacy in terms of task requirements. However, neither the interaction effect of Phase by Proficiency $( F ( d f = 1 )$ $= 0 . 9 7 0$ $\begin{array} { r } { p = 0 . 3 2 8 , } \end{array}$ nor the main effect of Proficiency $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 0 . 0 0 2$ $\pmb { p } = 0 . 9 6 7 )$ reached statistical significance.

In terms of comprehensibility, there was a prominent interaction effect of Phase by Group $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 1 5 . 6 7 2$ $p < 0 . 0 0 1$ $\eta ^ { 2 } =$ 0.169). The simple effect analysis indicated significant effects for Phase $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 6 . 2 1 3 , p = 0 . 0 1 5$ $\eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 7 5 )$ and Group $( F ( d f =$ $1 ) = 2 6 . 8 2 3$ $p < 0 . 0 0 1$ $\eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 2 5 8 )$ . Both results demonstrate that TBLT exerted a significant impact on the functional dimension of comprehensibility. In comparison to writing with the raditional model, writing with TBLT instruction enabled students to write more comprehensible and highly fluent texts with clearly tated ideas and purposes. However, the interaction effect of Group by Proficiency $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 0 . 4 2 8$ $p = 0 . 5 1 5$ ) and the main effect of Proficiency $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 0 . 1 8 3$ $p = 0 . 6 7 0 \AA$ were not statistically significant.

However, for the functional dimension of coherence and cohesion, the two-way repeated measure ANcoVA result showed that there was no statistically significant interaction effect of Phase by Group $( F ( d f = 1 ) = 0 . 0 0 0 , p = 0 . 9 8 3 )$ nor main effects of Phase $( F ( d f$ $= 1 ) = 0 . 6 0 5$ $\begin{array} { r } { p = 0 . 4 3 9 ) } \end{array}$ or Group $( F \left( d f = 1 \right) = 1 . 4 7 4$ $p = 0 . 2 2 8 )$ . That is to say, students' coherence and cohesion performance remained basicall unchanged in both groups. It apeared that providing students with TBLT instruction did not have a significant impact on their text coherence/cohesion and their use of coherent and cohesive strategies. Although no salient interaction effect of Group by Proficiency $( F ( d f = 1 ) = 0 . 6 4 7$ A $\pmb { p = 0 . 4 2 4 } )$ was found, the main effect of Proficiency was statistically significant $( F ( d f = 1 ) =$

Table 4 Descriptive Statistics for the Two Groups.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Dimension</td><td>Group</td><td> Session</td><td>N</td><td>m</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Global Functional Adequacy</td><td>Experimental</td><td>Pretest</td><td>40</td><td>15.450</td><td>1.640</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>40</td><td>17.000</td><td>1.641</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Control</td><td>Pretest</td><td>40</td><td>16.063</td><td>1.626</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>40</td><td>15.963</td><td>1.777</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>Experimental</td><td>Pretest</td><td>40</td><td>3.900</td><td>0.601</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>40</td><td>4.413</td><td>0.715</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Control</td><td>Pretest</td><td>40</td><td>4.050</td><td>0.541</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>40</td><td>4.100</td><td>0.622</td></tr><tr><td>Task Requirements</td><td>Experimental</td><td>Pretest</td><td>40</td><td>4.088</td><td>0.619</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>40</td><td>4.625</td><td>0.540</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Control</td><td>Pretest</td><td>40</td><td>4.188</td><td>0.574</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>40</td><td>4.050</td><td>0.608</td></tr><tr><td>Comprehensibility</td><td>Experimental</td><td>Pretest</td><td>40</td><td>3.875</td><td>0.638</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>40</td><td>4.350</td><td>0.601</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Control</td><td>Pretest</td><td>40</td><td>4.050</td><td>0.687</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>40</td><td>4.013</td><td>0.615</td></tr><tr><td>Coherence/Cohesion</td><td>Experimental</td><td>Pretest</td><td>40</td><td>3.588</td><td>0.669</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>40</td><td>3.613</td><td>0.684</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Control</td><td>Pretest</td><td>40</td><td>3.775</td><td>0.725</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Posttest</td><td>40</td><td>3.800</td><td>0.807</td></tr></table></body></html>

5.950, $p = 0 . 0 1 7$ $\eta ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 7 2 )$ , which indicated that students' English language proficiency correlated with their use of coherence/ cohesion strategies in L2 writing.

# 5. Discussion

The study investigated the impacts of TBLT on functional adequacy in L2 writing. Research results showed that (1) TBLT contributed to global functional adequacy and thre functional dimensions of L2 writing in terms of content task requirements, and comprehensibility; but (2)it failed to benefit functional adequacy from the perspective of coherence and cohesion in L2 writing. The findings will be discussed as follows.

The research findings underscored the efficacy of TBLT in enhancing the global functional adequacy of L2 writing. This improvement i functional gains of L2 writing aligns with previous research on the teachability of pragmatic knowledge (Taguchi & Kim, 2016; Kim et al., 2018) and the efectiveness of TBLT on pragmatic larning outcomes (Alcon-Soler, 2018; Kim et al., 2023). The facilitative roleofTBL in this context might beattributed to several factors. On one hand, the authentic scenarios provided in the tasks in TBLT could enhance students' engagement with and reliance on their prior pragmatic knowledge gained from real lives. On the other hand, TBLT incorporated a wide range of context information into the tasks. This diversity exposed students to various communicative functions, broadening their understanding and usage f the functional adequacy. These factors challenged students to apply thir existing knowledge and kils, promoting problem-solving and criticl thinking abilites efeciely and approriately. TBLT also encouraged students to take more control over their learning process. This learner autonomy could foster motivation and engagement, crucial for their functional development in L2 writig. Interaction and collaboration were also involved in TBLT, which might enhance pragmatic awareness by providing opportunities for negotiation of meaning and fedback. Overall TBLT offered a comprehensive and practical approach to L2 writing instruction, effectively improving the functional adequacy of L2 writing by providing authentic, diverse, and engaging learning experiences.

The results also showed that TBLT improved the functional dimensions of content, task requirements, and comprehensibility in L2 writing. When it comes to the changes of content i compositions, it was found that the most obvious improvements lie in two aspects. On the one hand, students can enrich their content by constructing highly relevant information that focuses on the writing topic within limited words. On the other hand, students are able to remove unnecessary and meaningless details in their compositions, ensuring moderate and approriate content. The significant changes can be atribute to two primary factors. First, authentic language is used in TBLT classrooms. The authenticity principle of TBLT emphasizes the use of real-world tasks, such as writing an email to a friend, making a travel plan, or applying for a job. Through the use of authentic, goal-oriented, and meaningful tasks, L2 students can be provided with opportunities to apply L2 pragmatics in meaningful contexts that often mimic real-world language use (Kim et al., 2018). By engaging in authentic contexts, students are encouraged to search for ideas from the reality of their own live. This helps them decide whether the content conveyed is reall important and useful to achieve the communicatie goal, dealing with the question of "what to express" Second, as a key component of TBLT, collaborative leaning can also help students improve the content of thir writing, which supports the benefit of collaboratie tass in promoting ragmatic exchanges (Kim et al., 2018; Taguchi & Kim, 2016). Collaboration, which can be embodied in several tas such as group discussion and peer asessment, provides a supportive environment for learners to share ideas, negotiate meaning, and co-construct knowledge, contributing to a more thorough exploration of the topic and a deeper understanding of the content. For instance, when carrying out peer asessment students are exposed to different ideas and make revisions to their own writig ater receiving constructive suggestions, which also gives them new inspiration for their writing content.

The results suggest a potentially beneficial role for TBLT in enhancing the fulfilment of task requirements, which is to some degree consistent with Alcon-Soler's (2018) finding that task-supported language teaching is effctive for learning how to mitigate high-imposition email rquests. The role of students in TBLT classrooms might help explain the findings. TBLT puts students in the central plae, which guarantees for students sfficient oportunitie to interact and comunicate with other leners, especially in the task-cycle stage. Different from traditional writing teaching where students rceive knowledge from the instructor passively, students need to acquire useful information through completing tasks by themselves. In the teaching experiment, students were asked to role-play the conversation between an advicegiver and an advice receiver to find effective ways to deal with a real-life problem. Through learner-learner interaction, students were able to think more concretely by taking on certain social roles within a predetermined scenario and "geting in touch" with who they were exactly writing for. As a result, students are more likely to consider functional aspects such as formality, tone, politeness enre, spch acts, register, etc. insted of simply following a fixed format and memorizing mechanized expressions. Ultimately, students know not only what to express, but also how to express their ideas appropriately.

The results also revealed that writing teaching under the guidance of the TBLT framework has positive effects on increasing the comprehensibility of students compositions. First, TBLT places a strong emphasis on meaning-focused communication, which en. courages students to prioritize meaning over form. When students complete various tass using the trget language in clas with ittle interference from the instructor, they focus n conveying their intended meage rather than solely paying atntion to inguistc forms such as grammar or vocabulary. They tend to use clear and concise language, which can make their expression more comprehensible. Additionall, the step of group reports in TBL claes also functions as a motivator for comprehesibility. When students present their reports to the whole class they often atempt to make their sharing easier to understand for al students with different levels of L2 proficiency, which willbring them more favorable reiews in the following per asssment. To achie this, students illavoid overly complex or unnecessrily diverse vocabulary which might obscure their message, and this wl in turn lead to better comprehesibility performance in their writing.

It was found that TBLT might not have asignificant impact on the coherence and cohesion of writing production. The combination of two distinct indicators \*oherence" and cohesion" in the same subscale might inluence the rating result. As many reearchers using the scale have acknowledged, the two aspects are not always as closely linked as the scale descriptors would suggest. It i possiblethat a text is totally coherent without the use of any connectives or anaphoric devices, and some sentences are connected with several discourse markers but are not coherent (Herraiz-Martinez & Alcon-Soler, 2019; Kuiken & Vedder, 2018; Nuzzo & Bove, 2020). Another possible reason is the inluence f negative languag transfer. Cohesive devices in English are not exactly the same as those in Chinese, therefore students may be influenced negatively by their native language when using cohesive devices (Alcon-Soler, 2018). Because of the different language systems, the sentence structure of Chinese and English has a great difference. Sentences in English are often connected through relatives, connectives, and prepositions. Chinese sentences, however, are connected mainly by inherent logical meanings. When leaners transfer their 1 sociocultural norms to L2 practice, they may end up with pragmatic filure, which leadsto a lack of textual coherence and cohesion. Additionall, the text lengthis another potential factor probably leading to the nul efec of TBLT in the coherence/cohesion of writing production. Since participants were required to write a practical ltter with arelatively short text of aproximately 80 words, the lack f suficient room for the useof coherence and cohesive devices might also lead to lower instances of coherence/cohesion being scored and few observable differences between the pretest and the posttest.

It is noteworthy to mention the positive correlation between language proficiency and the functional dimension of coherence/ cohesion in L2 writing. Coherence and cohesion are integral aspects of writing that contribute to the logical and meaningful unity of ideas, failitated by the use of cohesive devices such as linking words, connectors, and discourse markers. The evaluation of language proficiency, particularly in the context of L2 writing, necesstates an understanding of the logic inherent in discourse structure and the connections between ideas. This involves assessing the writr's ability to efectivel use cohesive devices to link sentences and par agraphs, thereby creating a coherent piece of writing. The functional dimension of coherence and cohesion in L2 writing and language proficiency share a common focus on the logical organization and connection of ideas. This shared focus underscores the positive correlation between them. The ability to construct coherent and cohesive tex i a clear indicator of a writer's language proficiency, as it demonstrates their understanding of how to logically connect and express ideas in the target language.

# 6. Conclusion

The study investigated how TBLT influenced senior high school students' written functional adequacy and drew some major findings. After a four-week teaching intervention, t was found that TBLT played a very important role in improving students' func. tional adequacy in English writing. Among the four dimensions of functional adequacy, TBLT brought positie effects on content, task requirements, and comprehensibility performance, but did not show apparent advantages in increasing students' coherence and cohesion in thir writing. The functional dimension of coherence and cohesion in L2 writing was closely related to students' language proficiency. OVverall the findings suggest that BLT has certain advantages over a traditional product approach in the development of written functional adequacy in a classroom context.

Through the application of TBLT in senior high school writing clases, this study has demonstrated the benefis of this approach in functional adequacy development. Several pedagogical implications about writing teaching can be drawn. First, instructors should design tass that are close to students' lives. Language can only be used appropriately if the language and the situation are real. Authentic contexts help students engage in real communicative activities through specific tasks to complete life practice so that students can make functional progress in English writing. Moreover, students ought tobe the main participants in the learning proces. Instructors should alter their rolefrom one of authority to being students' guides and helpers in class creating more opportunities to engage in classactivities. TBLT features student-oriented interpersonal cooperation and meaning negotiation. It can provide students more opportunities o interact with their clasmates in the processof completing the task, so as to develop their pragmatic competence. Additionall, instructors can consider paying attention to peer feedback when evaluating students' compositions. In the peer assesment course, learners ecome the center of learning, and instructors are no longer the controller. In addition, correcting others mistakes through group discussion may be easier for students to accept to some extent, so as to help them improve their written functional adequacy.

Although the experiment has achieved certain results, some limitations of this research should be acknowledged. First, the number of research subjects is limited (80 students in total. The mall size is oo small to rflect gnerally significant results, so the findings may lack representation. What is more, the duration of this experiment was arguably too short. longer instructional treatment should be planned to observe students functional adequacy development in the long term. Aditionally, only two raters participated in the evaluation of the compositions. Although the raters were experienced English instructors and were trained to use the rating scale before the assessment, there is always risk of subjectivity and deviations afecting the findings. Future reearch should consider this aspect by inviting more raters and providing more rigorous training.

We conclude with some suggestions for future research: on one hand, since other communicative-oriented methods such as the production-oriented approach resemble TBLT in the way of offering learners' tasks for them to actively engage in interpersonal communication and meaning negotiation, some comparative studies could be conducted to investigate their effct on L2 learners functional adequacy in both oral and written production. On the other hand, for writing materils, the cope of text genres could also be expanded, such as narrative writing, argumentative writing, and expository writing.

# Funding

This work was supported by Jiangsu Province Education Sciences Planning Project (Grant No. C/2023/01/24))

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Xiaoyan Zhao: Investigation. Ran Wei: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

# Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could b construed as a potential conflict of interest.

# Data Availability

Data will be made available on request.

# Appendix A. Supporting information

Supplementary data asociated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.asw.2024.100838.

# References

AMhame . 2013). k- a g  io   sh a tg n   ho mtiv State University.   
Aed R .016). ff  k-   n ki       dsis, 3) 207-218. https://doi.org/10.4236/ojml.2016.63022 based Aproachs to Teching and Asssng Pragmatics (p. 56-81). John Benjamins Publishing Company. htp://doi.org/10.1075/tlt.10.03alc.   
Bachman, LF, & Pamer, A. (1996) Language Teting in Prctce: Designing and Developing Usefu Language Tests. Oxford: xford University Pres.   
Bui   t   nd and Foreign Language Education, 7, 40. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40862-022-00160-7   
East, M. (2021). Foundational Principles of Task-based Language Teaching. Routledge.   
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based Language Learning and Teaching. Oxford University Press.   
Ellis . (209. -d  tg   th nn. ti  of pdusti, 9(3) 21-246./i.g 10.1111/j.1473-4192.2009.00231.x   
Gozal-et, n, .2015). i hf k- h p    19 5-549. /g 10.1177/1362168814541745   
Graham s. (2019. Changing how writig is taught. Review of Rrch in Edcatio, 43(1), 77-303. htp://doi.org/10.3102/009173218821125   
Han   .018ft f  a nr w t T it. niy Journal of Science, 54(5), 91-97. https://doi.org/10.22144/ctu.jen.2018.031   
Harri  n 2 PPP. Journal of Second Language Studies, 5, 114-143. https://doi.org/10.1075/jsls.20014.har   
Heriz-018til c f sh-tio, ishcy, a . Doctoral dissertation, Universitat Jaume I. Castellon de la Plana.   
Herrai-Mi  -r,  019. mtc o in the s- inti nx:  e  int  intio. led Pragmatics, 1(1), 68-91. https://doi.org/10.1075/ap.00004.her   
Huse   00x, , d     sic 04), 61-73/.0.1093 applin/amp048   
d        ti speakin oma ie nive er si  .), ns  e d Pici mxiy, Accuracy and Fluency in SLA (pp. 121-142). John Benjamins Publishing Company. https:/doi.org/10.1075/llt.32.   
Ki    018n f  t i       . h, Y. J. Kim (ds.), Tk-d Apches to Asng Pratics (p. 28-54). John Bins ulishing mpay. tps:/oi.g/10.1075/lt10.02kim.   
m   h 3.  il  k-    g outcomes. 0(0) Language Teaching Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688231195876.   
Kuiken, F., & Vedder . (2014). Rating witn performance: What do raters o and why? Language eting 31(3), 329-348. htps://doi.org/10.1177 0265532214526174   
Kuiken, F., dr . (2017). tiol aduac in 2 witing was a rtin cl. Lg ting 34(3), 321-336. h//o.g/0.1177 0265532216663991   
uiken   018tl  k h  . c Assessing Pragmatics (pp. 265-286). John Benjamins Publishing Company. https://doi.org/10.1075/tblt.10.11kui.   
uie             i () 32. https://doi.org/10.1075/task.00013.kui   
Kuiken, F, Vder, I, & Gabert, R 2010). nctive dquac and instic omplexity n 2 wig. In I Brng, Martin,  I Vdder ds.) Communicative Princy d ingustic vement Inections btwe LA ad Lnguage eting Rrch (pp. 81-100). Eron Seond anguae Association.   
Lowen,. 202).ic, -  g    i.  1) 137-14. . org/10.1075/task.21007.loe   
Luo, X,   . 01).  c f n s   y d Ptic , 1(3) 83286. /g0.4304/ tpls.1.3.283-286   
caara e,  h, 10ti  o in qult. 71) 7-86i./.1177 0741088309351547   
Mirisa . 019 if k   g    w .     , (2) 121-126. doi: 10.24853/elif.1.2.121-126.   
Moses  d 09. C f ts ancwi ki i  eiion 1013) 3385-3391. https://doi.org/10.4236/ce.2019.1013260   
Nunan, D. (1999). Second Language Teaching and Learning. Heinle and Heinle.   
guen,  Jrt21) g k-  n ani ni  tr  nietn ITL - International Journal of Applied Linguistics. 172(1), 121-151. doi: 10.1075/itl.16022.ngu.   
u   ie Linguistics and Languages, 7(2), 9-27. https:/doi.org/10.21283/2376905X.12.175   
uz,  e  202). n the   th t   ti  wn tio  21) 115-136. /. org/10.1075/task.21011.nuz   
Pallant, J. (2013). SPss Survival Manual (5th ed.). Open University Press.   
Pallti, . (009. A: in, reinng ddifntiting ontts. lied Linstcs, 30(4), 590-601. h/oi.org/0.1093/i/mp045   
Phong, H V rd Vn St  u 015).T mpc f P an  Vme stts wi mane d el. regulatory writing strategies. ITL - Intrnational Jounal of Applied Linguistics, 166, 37-93. htps:/doi.org/10.1075/itl.166.1.02yen   
Prabhu, N.S. (1987). Second Language Pedagogy. Oxford University Press.   
Plonsky   016k ie p 33-7.. org/10.1017/S0267190516000015   
Resz,  kt, 016 f t y,   ie   k plid Linguistics, 37 pp. 828-848). doi: 10.1093/applin/amu069.   
Shen, Q. Y. (2013). The contributing factors of pragmati failure in China's ELT classrooms. English Language Teaching, 6(6), 132-136.   
Strob,  a  win  rn   s d  sti anti  TAK, 2(1), 60-84. https://doi.org/10.1075/task.21010.str   
gchi,  16)ie  . Pca  an    t-g led Linguistics, 37(3), 416-437. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amu039   
illi, J. 9l rrk or k- n  llis .is .,  e n 22 aln Heinemann.   
Wu J .    . 0n i      t.h   , () 130-144. doi: 10.13724/j.cnki.ctiw.2019.01.013.   
iao  t   . Chinese Teaching in the World, 35(2), 248-262. https://doi.org/10.13724/j.cnki.ctiw.2021.02.009