# Peer tutoring: old method, new developments / Tutoría entre iguales: método antiguo, nuevos avances

Keith Topping

To cite this article: Keith Topping (2015) Peer tutoring: old method, new developments / Tutoría entre iguales: método antiguo, nuevos avances, Infancia y Aprendizaje, 38:1, 1-29, DOI: 10.1080/02103702.2014.996407

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/02103702.2014.996407

# Peer tutoring: old method, new developments / Tutoría entre iguales: método antiguo, nuevos avances

Keith Topping

University of Dundee

(Received 17 June 2014; accepted 29 September 2014)

Abstract: This paper describes the method of peer tutoring, which has exciting new developments even though it has been around for a long time. A definition is followed by discussion of different types of peer tutoring. Key organizational variables in implementing tutoring are given, followed by a brief review of the effects for both tutees and tutors. A theory of peer learning is offered, followed by a description of recent new developments and the accompanying research. Finally, information technology applications are discussed. The paper concludes with an exploration of issues of sustaining gains through embedding peer tutoring.

Keywords: peer tutoring; types; effects; organization; theory; information technology; embedding

Resumen: Este artículo describe el método de tutoría entre iguales, que presenta nuevos avances interesantes, aunque se ha estado utilizando desde hace ya mucho tiempo. Tras la definición se presentan los diferentes tipos de tutoría entre iguales y se destacan las variables organizativas clave para su ejecución, así como un breve análisis de sus efectos, tanto en el tutor como en el tutorado. A continuación se presenta una teoría de la tutoría entre iguales, seguida por una descripción de las innovaciones más recientes y la investigación más relevante. El artículo concluye con la exploración de algunas cuestiones relativas a la obtención de beneficios sostenibles a través de la integración de la tutoría entre iguales.

Palabras clave: tutoría entre iguales; tipos; efectos; organización; teoría; tecnología de la información; integración

Peer learning can be defined as the acquisition of knowledge and skill through active helping and supporting among status equals or matched companions, where both tutees and tutors benefit from the transaction (Topping & Ehly, 1998). It involves people from similar social groupings who are not professional teachers helping each other to learn and learning themselves by so doing.

Peer tutoring has a long history. It can be traced back over centuries in the written record. So what can have changed significantly in recent years? In fact, quite a lot. Old perceptions of peer tutoring considered the peer helper as a surrogate teacher, in a linear model of the transmission of knowledge, from teacher to peer helper to learner. There was an assumption that peer tutors should be among the ‘best students’ (i.e., those who were most like the professional teachers). However, the differential in levels of ability and interest in such a situation could prove understimulating for the tutor, who was unlikely to gain cognitively from the interactions. More recently, it was realized that the peer tutoring interaction is qualitatively different from that between a professional teacher and a child or young person, and involves different advantages and disadvantages.

Most recently, there has been a great deal more interest in deploying helpers whose capabilities are nearer to those of the helped, so that both members of the pair find some cognitive challenge in their joint activities. The helper is intended to be ‘learning by teaching’ and also to be a more proximate and credible model.

# Types of peer tutoring

Peer tutoring (PT) has been researched in schools and universities, but less so in the workplace. It is characterized by specific role-taking as tutor or tutee, with high focus on curriculum content and usually also on clear procedures for interaction, in which participants receive generic and/or specific training. Some peer-tutoring methods scaffold the interaction with structured materials, while others prescribe structured interactive behaviours that can be effectively applied to any materials of interest.

Confusion between ‘tutoring’ and ‘mentoring’ is evident in the literature. Mentoring can be separately defined as an encouraging and supportive one-toone relationship with a more experienced worker (who is not a line manager) in a joint area of interest. It is characterized by positive role modelling, promotion of raised aspirations, positive reinforcement, open-ended counselling and joint problem solving. It is often cross-age, always fixed-role, quite often cross-institution, and often targeted on disadvantaged groups (Topping & Ehly, 1998).

Many schools might think they are implementing peer tutoring, when all they are really doing is putting children together and hoping for the best. This often results in children sitting in groups but not interacting or working as groups. Spontaneous (untrained) tutoring behaviours can tend to be primitive, often characterized by questioning limited both in frequency and level of cognitive demand, coupled with infrequent correction of errors and the giving of positive feedback when not appropriate.

# Organizational variables

Methods for peer tutoring can vary on at least 13 organizational dimensions (Topping & Ehly, 2001):

(1) Curriculum content — the knowledge or skills or combination to be covered. The scope of PT is very wide and projects are reported in the literature in virtually every imaginable subject.

(2) Contact constellation — some projects operate with one helper working with a group of peers, but the size of the group can vary from two to 30 or more. Sometimes two or more helpers take a group together. PT in pairs (dyads) is more intensive — there is less opportunity to drift into token participation in a pair.

(3) Within or between institutions — while most PT takes place within the same institution, it can also take place between different institutions, as when young people from a high school tutor in their neighbourhood elementary (primary) school, or university students help in regular schools. (4) Year of study — helpers and helped may be from the same or different years of study, and/or be the same or different ages.   
(5) Ability — while many projects operate on a cross-ability basis (even if they are same-age/-year), there is increasing interest in same-ability PT. In this the helper might have superior mastery of only a very small portion of the curriculum, or all might be of equal ability but working towards a shared, deeper and hopefully correct understanding. Failures in ‘meta-ignorance’ can be a problem — the helper doesn’t know that they don’t know the correct facts.   
(6) Role continuity — roles need not be permanent, especially in sameability projects. Structured switching of roles at strategic moments (reciprocal PT) can have the advantage of involving greater novelty and a wider boost to self-esteem, in that all participants get to be helpers. (7) Time — PT might be scheduled in regular class contact time, outside of this, or in a combination of both, depending on the extent to which it is substitutional or supplementary for regular teaching.   
(8) Place — correspondingly, PT can vary enormously in location of operation. (9) Helper characteristics — if helpers are those who are merely average (or even less) all partners should find some challenge in their joint activities. Although the gain of the helped might not be so great, the aggregate gain of both combined may be greater.   
(10) Characteristics of the helped — projects may be for all or for a targeted subgroup, such as the especially able or gifted, those with disabilities, those considered at risk of under-achievement, failure or dropout, or those from ethnic, religious, linguistic and other minorities.   
(11) Objectives — projects may target intellectual (cognitive) gains, formal academic achievement, affective and attitudinal gains, social and emotional gains, self-image and self-concept gains, or any combination. Organizational objectives might include reducing dropout, increasing access, etc.

(12) Voluntary or compulsory — some projects require participation, while in others helpers self-select. This can have marked effects on the quality of what ensues.

(13) Reinforcement — some projects involve extrinsic reinforcement for the helpers (and sometimes also the helped), while others rely on intrinsic motivation. Beyond simple social praise, extrinsic reward can take the form of certification, course credit, or more tangible reinforcement such as money. Extrinsic reward is much more common in North America than elsewhere, and this has led to some debate about possible excess in this regard. The availability of extrinsic reinforcement can have effects on recruitment in voluntary projects, which might be good or bad.

Recent years have seen much more emphasis upon equal-opportunity involvement in peer learning, engaging all members of the educational community without exception. Interest in reciprocal tutoring has also greatly expanded (e.g., Menesses & Gresham, 2009), since this enables all involved to function as both helper and helped, avoiding any social divisiveness according to perceived ability and status, and offering a richer apprenticeship for future involvement.

# Effects

When peer tutoring is implemented with thoughtfulness about what form of organization best fits the target purpose, context and population, and with reasonably high implementation integrity, results are typically very good (BowmanPerrott et al., 2013; Okilwa & Shelby, 2010; Topping, 2001a; Topping & Ehly, 1998). The research evidence is clear that peer tutoring can yield significant gains in academic achievement in the targeted curriculum area. Further, both tutees and tutors can gain — if the organization is appropriate. This latter finding helps dispel concerns that engagement in peer tutoring might be a ‘waste of time’ for more able tutors — but with the caveat about organization.

Additionally, PT can simultaneously yield gains in transferable social and communication skills and in affective functioning (e.g., improvements in selfesteem, liking for partner or subject area) (see Miller, Topping, & Thurston, 2010; Xu, Gelfer, Sileo, Filler, & Perkins, 2008). Although these are more elusive to measure and are not found as reliably as academic gains, they represent considerable added value for no more input.

Peer learning has also been noted to be among the most cost-effective of learning strategies (e.g., Levine, Glass, & Meister, 1987). Some studies certainly demonstrate high effect size at low delivery cost. However, even in the research literature there are occasional reports of peer learning programmes which did not show significant effects. Additionally, the average effect size across many studies is generally modest, again emphasizing the importance of appropriate selection of method for purpose and context, and the need to quality-assure implementation.

# Theories of peer learning

So, peer learning works. At least, it does if you organize and implement it well. But how does it work? This is not merely a matter of obscure academic interest, since a deeper understanding of how peer learning obtains its positive effects should enable both researchers and practitioners to design ever more adaptive and effective forms of peer learning. For many years, peer learning was undertheorized, supported by old sayings such as ‘to teach is to learn twice’.

In the last 25 years, a number of researchers have conducted work with strong implications for building theory in peer learning (e.g., Chi, Siler, Jeong, Yamauchi, & Hausmann, 2001; King, 1998). Topping and Ehly (2001) synthesized existing research into a single theoretical model. This emphasizes the role of five initial sub-processes incorporating organizational or structural features of the learning interaction (e.g., the need and press inherent in PT toward increased time on task, the need for both helper and helped to elaborate goals and plans, the individualization of learning and immediacy of feedback possible within the small group or one-on-one situation, and the sheer excitement and variety of a novel kind of learning interaction.

Cognitively, PT involves conflict and challenge (reflecting Piagetian schools of thought, and necessary to loosen blockages formed from old myths and false beliefs). It also involves support and scaffolding from a more competent other, necessitating management of activities to be within the zone of proximal development of both parties (reflecting Vygotskian schools of thought, and necessary to balance any damaging excess of challenge; Vygotsky, 1978).

The helper seeks to manage and modulate the information processing demands upon the learner to maximize the rate of progress — neither too much nor too little. The helper also provides a cognitive model of competent performance. However, the cognitive demands upon the helper in terms of monitoring learner performance and detecting, diagnosing, correcting and otherwise managing misconceptions and errors are even greater — and herein lies much of the cognitive exercise and benefit for the helper.

PT also makes heavy demands upon the communication skills of both helper and helped, and in so doing develops those skills. A participant might never have truly grasped a concept until having to explain it to another, embodying and crystallizing thought into language — another Vygotskian idea, of course. Listening, explaining, questioning, summarizing, speculating and hypothesizing are all valuable skills which should be transferable.

The affective component of PT might also prove very powerful. A trusting relationship with a peer who holds no position of authority might facilitate selfdisclosure of ignorance and misconception, enabling subsequent diagnosis and correction. The helper’s modelling of enthusiasm, competence, and the possibility of success can influence the self-confidence of the helped, while a sense of loyalty and accountability to each other might help to keep the pair motivated and ontask.

These five categories or sub-processes feed into a larger onward process of the helper and helped extending each other’s declarative knowledge, procedural skill and conditional and selective application of knowledge and skills by adding to and extending current capabilities (accretion), modifying current capabilities(retuning) and (in areas of completely new learning or cases of gross misconception or error) rebuilding new understanding (restructuring). These are somewhat similar to the Piagetian concepts of assimilation and accommodation.

This leads to the joint construction of a shared understanding between helper and helped — which is firmly situated within the current authentic context of application, and adapted to the idiosyncrasies in their perceptions (i.e., is intersubjective), so might not represent absolute truth, but forms a foundation for further progress.

Subsequently, PT enables and facilitates a greater volume of engaged and successful practice, leading to consolidation, fluency and automaticity of core skills. Much of this might occur implicitly — without the helper or helped being fully aware of what is happening. Simultaneously or subsequently, PT can lead to generalization from the specific situated example through which a concept is learned, extending the ability to apply that concept and its developmental variants to an ever-widening range of alternative and varied contexts in multiple communities of practice.

As this occurs, both helper and helped give feedback to each other, implicitly and/or explicitly. Indeed, implicit feedback is likely to have already occurred spontaneously in the earlier stages. PT increases the quantity and immediacy of feedback to the learner very substantially. Explicit reinforcement might stem from within the partnership or beyond it, by way of verbal and/or non-verbal praise, social acknowledgement and status, official accreditation, or even more tangible reward. However, reinforcement which is indiscriminate or predominantly for effort risks over-weighting the significance of the reinforced concept in the network of understandings of the learner. As the learning relationship develops, both helper and helped should become more consciously aware of what is happening in their learning interaction, and more able to monitor and regulate the effectiveness of their own learning strategies in different contexts.

This development into fully conscious explicit and strategic metacognition not only promotes more effective onward learning, it should make helper and helped more confident that they can achieve even more, and that their success is the result of their own efforts. These affective and cognitive outcomes feed back into the originating five sub-processes — a continuous iterative process and a virtuous circle. As the PT relationship develops, the model should continue to apply as the learning moves from the surface level to the strategic and on to the deep level, and from the declarative into the procedural and conditional.

Simplistic forms of peer tutoring, focusing on drill and practice, seem likely to utilize only a few of the possible channels or sub-processes (typically only organization, perhaps some communication, scaffolding and error management, practice and reinforcement — fewer than half of the total possibilities). More elaborate and cognitively demanding forms of peer tutoring, such as peer tutoring in thinking skills (e.g., Topping, 2001b) aim to utilize all the channels, with both tutor and tutee operating and benefiting in every channel. This might be enhanced and assured by role reciprocation. The greater the differential in ability or experience between helper and helped, the less cognitive conflict and the more scaffolding might be expected. Too great a differential might result in minimal cognitive engagement (let alone conflict) for the helper, and unthinking but encapsulated acceptance (with no re-tuning or co-construction) by the helped. Of course, if the helper is older, more experienced, and therefore more credible, but actually has no greater correct knowledge or ability than the helped, then a mismatch and faulty learning might occur in a different way.

Teachers are likely to need to be particularly attentive to the channels in the lower and later parts of the chart: the development of generalization, self-regulation, metacognition and enhanced self-esteem and motivation; the progression from implicit to explicit, and from dependency on support to increasing independence; the shift from simple thinking to higher-order and more abstract thinking, moving from the surface level to the strategic and on to the deep level, and from declarative knowledge into the procedural and conditional; and the completion of the loop, the joining of the circle, the acceleration of the dynamic spiral, for both helper and helped.

Of course, other theories will be useful, too. For example, Roscoe and Chi (2007) explored the actual behaviour of tutors in terms of explaining and questioning. While these variables certainly had positive effects, the authors noted a pervasive ‘knowledge-telling bias’ — the tutors tended to be pre-occupied with delivering knowledge rather than developing it. This has marked implications for tutoring — without training that emphasizes knowledge development, much tutoring may under-perform.

# New developments: applications

Peer tutoring was initially deployed specifically for practice and consolidation purposes, and this sometimes resulted in narrow ‘drill and skill’ approaches (especially in the United States). However, teachers became more confident and trusting in children, and slowly moved to use peer learning in a less mechanistic way and in more challenging subject areas. In schools, peer tutoring extended from reading to spelling and writing, maths and science. But then it extended to virtually every subject in the school curriculum, and indeed to some which were just being introduced into the school curriculum, such as thinking skills (an area in which some teachers feel under-confident). These developments were paralleled in colleges and universities — there is virtually no subject in which peer tutoring cannot be used.

In schools PT is increasingly used with ever more improbable learner groups. For example, PT has been found effective with kindergarten or first grade students (e.g., Vavreck & Esposito, 2012). It might be thought that regular students would have difficulty delivering tutoring to peers with learning disabilities, developmental delay or other exceptional needs. However, Okilwa and Shelby (2010) found 12 studies within a decade, all of which indicated PT was effective for special education students in both general education and special education settings across a wide range of subject areas (e.g., language arts, maths, science and social studies). Stenhoff and Lignugaris/Kraft (2007) reviewed 20 studies of PT in secondary schools and found it effective with students with mild disabilities. Bowman-Perrott et al. (2013) reviewed 26 studies and found that PT was effective irrespective of whether students had disabilities or not (and irrespective of dosage amount of tutoring — and grade level). The literature also demonstrates that learners who themselves have educational challenges can act effectively as tutors to other learners. Van Norman and Wood (2008) deployed kindergarten students themselves at risk for reading disability as reading tutors, with positive results. The gains for the tutors themselves have been increasingly emphasized.

Peer learning has increasingly also been used in other contexts, some more challenging because of longer-standing learning failure in those to be helped (as in peer learning with adults of restricted literacy in domestic or community contexts), some because of greater transience and fluidity (voluntary organizations, after-school clubs, libraries, churches), some because learning is not the primary goal of the organization (as in workplace learning), and some because the population involved as helpers and helped have their own considerable intrapersonal challenges (as in peer tutoring in prisons).

# New developments: recent research

There has been a plethora of small-scale studies on PT over many years. Here we will focus not on these, but on studies which have more chance of meeting the high (and sometimes ridiculously high) standards for evidence-based practice.

The first of these is the What Works Clearinghouse (WWC) Intervention Report (2012) on the PALS programme in the US associated with the names of Lyn and Doug Fuchs at Vanderbilt University. Students in PALS classrooms work in pairs on reading activities intended to improve reading accuracy, fluency and comprehension. Students in the pairs — who alternately take on the role of tutor and tutee — read aloud, listen to their partner read and provide feedback during various structured activities. Teachers train students to use the following learning strategies: passage reading with partners, paragraph ‘shrinking’ (or describing the main idea) and prediction relay (predicting what is likely to happen next in the passage). PALS includes separate versions for kindergarten and grade 1.

Forty-five studies of K-1 PALS were reviewed by the WWC. Two studies (McMaster, Fuchs, Fuchs, & Compton, 2005; Stein, Berends, Fuchs, McMaster, Saenz, Yen, Fuchs, & Compton, 2008) were randomized controlled trials that met WWC evidence standards. One study (Mathes & Babyak, 2001) was a randomized controlled trial that met WWC evidence standards with reservations. These three studies are summarized in the report. The remaining 42 studies did not meet WWC eligibility screens or evidence standards. The three studies included 3,130 beginning readers in kindergarten and grade 1 in four states. The WWC considered the extent of evidence for PALS on beginning readers to be medium to large for the alphabetics domain and small for the fluency and comprehension domains.

There were positive effects on alphabetics, no discernible effects on fluency, and mixed effects on comprehension.

Here we see a typical result of this kind of scrutiny — the standards for acceptability are so high that only three of 45 studies are accepted as valid. Consequently the findings are based on a tiny proportion of the research evidence. This completely misrepresents the evidence. And bear in mind that many researchers would not have any studies that met these standards. Consequently the amount of acceptable ‘evidence’ is minute and the findings are often completely vacuous.

Another study of some substance is the Fife Peer Learning project in Scotland. This was a randomized controlled trial which included 128 elementary (primary) schools — almost all of the primary schools within one school district (local authority) — Fife Council. The schools were of very various sizes and very different in socio-economic status. They all agreed to participate and be allocated a condition of peer tutoring determined by randomization rather than self-selection. The aim was to see if three conditions affected the impact of peer tutoring:

(1) Subject of application — reading, maths or reading and maths. (2) Intensity of use — intensive (three times per week) or light (one time per week). (3) Type of tutoring — same-age tutoring vs. cross-age tutoring.

Schools were allocated to a condition combining an aspect of each of these three factors.

Tutoring occurred for 30 minutes per session, three times a week for the intensive condition and once per week for the light condition. Reading tutoring used the Paired Reading technique (Topping, 2001a). Maths tutoring used the Duolog Math technique (Topping, Campbell, Douglas, & Smith, 2003). Same-age tutoring used tutors and tutees from the same class, while cross-age tutoring deployed all of an older class as tutors with all of a class two years younger as tutees. Classes were allocated reading or maths or a combination of reading and maths (the latter being very hard work for the teacher if they were also in the intensive condition).

The initial training for teachers was relatively light, as the intention was to create an intervention which was sustainable. Thus teachers received one full day of training, which covered reading and mathematics, together with a pack which detailed all the necessary operations. At the end of the first year they came together for half a day to give feedback. This was repeated for the new teachers in the second year.

The intention was to operate the project for six months within each of two successive school years. In the second year many of the children would move to another higher class, but they would continue the project, being somewhat expert in its operation, which would greatly ease the burden of application for the new teacher in the second year.

The results were somewhat various according to the method of measurement. Long-term measurement was done the year before the project and the year after the project. This showed an effect size of .2 for cross-age tutoring (for both tutors and tutees) but nothing for same-age tutoring (Tymms, Merrell, Andor, Topping, & Thurston, 2011). Reading and maths both showed the same gain in achievement, but the combination of reading and maths showed slightly higher gains despite the difference in the tutoring techniques — suggesting an additive effect from two types of tutoring. Curiously, the light condition proved just as effective as the intensive condition. Since the effects were clearly not a result of the amount of practice time, we conjectured that the impact of tutoring on the self-esteem of both tutor and tutee was a key factor — and indeed we found good evidence to support this (Miller et al., 2010).

However, evaluation using different tests within each project year showed somewhat different results — that same-age and cross-age tutoring had similar effects. Again, both reading and maths showed an effect, but the maths effect was larger than the reading effect (Topping et al., 2011; Topping, Thurston, McGavock, & Conlin, 2012). Generally implementation integrity was fairly good, with teachers implementing procedures which resulted in most of the behaviours required in the children being evident. Teacher opinions were very positive (but this is a common finding in intervention studies).

# Information technology and peer learning

The permeation of pedagogy by information technology has continued apace in recent years, although this is more common in secondary than primary schools, and is more common in universities than secondary schools.

Dioso-Henson (2012) used structured online materials to scaffold tutoring in college physics, supporting the tutoring with online mentoring. Reciprocal peer tutoring (RPT) was compared to non-reciprocal and control conditions. RPT proved slightly more effective than non-RPT tutoring, with both being considerably more successful than the control group. Somewhat similarly, Tsuei (2012) used reciprocal online peer tutoring in mathematics for elementary students, finding gains over a year for the experimental vs. the control group. There was also evidence of significant impact on students’ self-concept and attitudes toward mathematics learning. In this case there was a positive relationship with time on task.

Attempts were made to design online adaptive support systems for reciprocal peer tutoring by Walker, Rummel, and Koedinger (2011). These needed to diagnose the nature of the faulty interaction and provide support which was attuned to the fault, otherwise even more confusion was likely to result. The authors found their system improved the conceptual content of help and the use of interface features as compared to traditional support. Peer tutors responded best to assistance that made them feel accountable for help they gave. Topping, Dehkinet, Blanch, Corcelles, and Duran (2013) reported an online reciprocal peer tutoring project for improving language competence in Spanish and English. Students aged

9–12 years from Scotland and Catalonia acted as tutors in their own language and as tutees in a modern foreign language. When more support was given, the tutor had more learning opportunities, but then there were fewer opportunities for the tutee, and vice versa. This paradox could be resolved by adjusting the scaffolding support given by tutors.

Perhaps most innovatively, Wang, Young, and Jang (2013) extended the concept of learning companions from the virtual world to the real physical environment and developed tangible learning robots equipped with speech recognition facilities. The context was bi-directional language learning in the English class settings in Taiwan, with 63 fifth-grade students participating. The students regarded the robots as ever-patient instructors to help with practising English conversation. There were positive effects on learning motivation, confidence and engagement — especially for the lower-achievement learners. Students and teacher agreed that the robots had improved the classroom atmosphere.

As well as the impact on pedagogy, software has been developed intended to help manage peer learning, providing a management information system for the coordinator or facilitator of a programme. This is particularly necessary in crossage or cross-institution peer learning in complex distributed environments. Koole and Parchoma (2012) describe such a system. Although learners retain choice and personal agency, even the most neutral-seeming technological environment may encourage some ways of interacting whilst discouraging others. Through relational dialogue, learners shape their identities by sharing information about the world and how they see themselves in it. As learners interact, they receive feedback from both the environment and other learners which, in turn, helps them assess and adjust their self-presentations. The authors discuss the effects of anonymity and pseudonymity on trust and social capital in online environments, in particular in relation to two social networking systems, ‘iHelp’ and ‘The Landing’. Their underlying architectures may affect discourse and identity management. The authors recommend careful consideration of the effects of systems architecture on both the individual and the community — balancing the needs of the individual with those of the learning community.

Third, formative computer-aided assessment has been linked to tutoring systems, so that both helpers and helped receive regular, frequent and timely feedback on the effectiveness of their learning together. An example is the paper on automatic summary assessment for intelligent tutoring systems by He, Hui, and Quan (2009). Human grading of student writings is a very time-consuming task, so computer-assisted assessment has been explored. Techniques such as latent semantic analysis (LSA), n-gram co-occurrence and BLEU have been proposed. However, their performance is not satisfactory. To improve the performance, this paper proposes an ensemble approach that integrates LSA and n-gram co-occurrence. This results in substantial improvements in accuracy and improved performance.

Koedinger, McLaughlin, and Heffernan (2010) integrated on-line formative assessment with a tutoring system. ASSISTments is a web-based maths tutor providing instruction and timely assessment, thereby avoiding lost instruction time that typically occurs when students are waiting for teacher feedback. Data were collected from 1,240 seventh graders in three intervention middle schools and one comparison school. Post-test results (adjusted for pre-test) indicated that intervention students significantly outperformed comparison students and the difference was largest for special education students. A time-on-task effect was found. Increased teacher use was associated with greater learning among students with little or no use, suggesting that those students may have benefited from teachers adapting their whole-class instruction based on what they learned from ASSISTments.

Finally, systems have been devised for tutoring by artificial intelligences, but these have some way to go before approaching the skill levels and adaptability of human tutors. Intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) offer immediate feedback (El Saadawi et al., 2010). Immediate rather than delayed feedback is likely to enhance metacognitive performance. This study also explored whether metacognitive scaffolds would support metacognitive gains when immediate feedback was faded. Results showed that immediate feedback in an intelligent tutoring system had a statistically significant positive effect on learning gains and discrimination. Removal of immediate feedback was associated with decreasing metacognitive performance, and this decline was not prevented when students were provided with other metacognitive scaffolds.

Aleven, Roll, McLaren, and Koedinger (2010) sought to evaluate students’ self-regulated learning (SRL) in the context of an intelligent tutoring system — a tricky proposition. An automated method for context-sensitive assessment of specific SRL strategies (e.g., help seeking) has been developed. It was validated by showing that it converged with other measures of help seeking. Automated feedback on help seeking driven by this method led to a lasting improvement in students’ help-seeking behaviour.

# Embedding: systemic approaches

At this point let us consider a completely different kind of study — that by Jostad, Miltenberger, Kelso, and Knudson (2008). They noted that hundreds of accidental injuries and deaths to children occurred annually in the United States as a result of firearm play. Behavioural skills training (BST) and in situ training had been found effective in teaching children skills to use if they found a firearm. However, this training required substantial time and effort. Consequently peers were deployed as tutors to teach safety skills to youngsters. The peer tutors then conducted BST and in situ training with other children. Tutees taught by the peer trainers acquired the safety skills and demonstrated them in naturalistic situations in which the skills were needed. Furthermore, all of the peer tutors maintained the skills. This study shows the way forward — taking peer tutoring out of the school and university into naturalistic settings wherever children may be — and applying peer tutoring to matters which may present issues of life and death, not mere academic achievement.

Peer learning has thus moved enormously from a method perceived as being only for a few selected learners, to a method used on a class-wide equal-opportunity and inclusive basis, and then going beyond that into the community. Some schools have developed whole-school approaches to the deployment of various forms of peer learning, but peer tutoring should not be seen as just a ‘school thing’. However, even in schools, greater critical mass does not ensure sustainability. Where the main driver and/or organizer is one person, their departure can lead to the collapse of the initiative.

It is important that several colleagues are engaged in a PT programme, and that embedding the programme across and beyond the learning organization and succession planning are carefully considered well in advance. Arguably, there is no better apprenticeship for being a helper than being helped. Many schools with cross-year class-wide peer tutor programmes actively promote the equal-opportunity and apprenticeship advantages of this model. Every student who is helped in a lower grade fully expects from the outset to become a helper when in a higher grade. As students are helped in preparation for becoming helpers, any ambivalence about receiving help decreases. The symmetry between helper and helped is reduced, and the stigma sometimes otherwise associated with receiving help disappears. All the students have the chance to participate and the opportunity to help, which makes them all feel equally valuable and worthwhile. Sometimes students who are helped in one subject are simultaneously helpers to students in a lower grade in the same subject. Those who are helped in one subject might be helpers to their own age peers in another subject. Even the most able student in any grade can be presented with problems that require the help of an even more capable student from a higher grade, and thereby can learn that no one is as smart as all of us.

Over time a critical mass of teachers who support peer learning can develop in the school. PT builds on individuals’ strengths and mobilizes them as active participants in the learning process — this is true for teachers as well as students. Not only do helpers learn the subject better and deeper, but they also learn transferable skills in helping, cooperation, listening and communication. PT encourages personal and social development. All of this influences the school ethos, developing a cultural norm of helping and caring. PT can contribute to a sense of cohesive community.

# Tutoría entre iguales: método antiguo, nuevos avances

El aprendizaje entre iguales puede definirse como la adquisición de conocimientos y habilidades a través del apoyo y la colaboración activa de compañeros y personas de igual estatus, donde tanto el tutor como el tutorado se benefician de la transacción (Topping y Ehly, 1998). Los participantes son personas de grupos sociales similares que no son docentes profesionales y que se ayudan mutuamente para aprender, aprendiendo ambos durante el proceso.

La tutoría entre iguales tiene una larga historia cuyos orígenes se remontan siglos atrás en la bibliografía. Pero, ¿qué ha cambiado sustancialmente en los últimos años? A decir verdad, muchas cosas. El concepto tradicional de tutoría entre iguales consideraba al compañero que ejercía de tutor como un sustituto del profesor, en un modelo linear de transmisión del conocimiento, de profesor a compañero tutor y a pupilo. Se daba por supuesto que los alumnos tutores debían buscarse entre los ‘mejores estudiantes’ (es decir, entre los que más se asemejaban a los docentes profesionales). Sin embargo, las diferencias en el nivel de capacidad y de interés estas situaciones podría resultar desalentador para el tutor, que probablemente no se beneficiara intelectualmente de la interacción. Más adelante se comprobó que la interacción en la tutoría entre iguales es cualitativamente diferente de la que se da entre un docente profesional y un niño o un joven, y que presenta diferentes ventajas e inconvenientes.

En los últimos tiempos el interés se ha centrado en la colaboración de tutores cuyas capacidades sean más cercanas a las de la persona que requieren apoyo, de modo que ambos encuentren suficiente estímulo intelectual en las actividades que comparten. Se trata de que el tutor ‘aprenda enseñando’, además de ofrecer al tutorado un modelo más próximo y creíble.

# Tipos de tutoría entre iguales

La tutoría entre iguales (TP) ha sido ampliamente estudiada en colegios y universidades, pero no tanto en mundo laboral. El método se caracteriza por asumir el papel específico de tutor o pupilo, con especial atención al contenido del currículum y, por lo general, también por unos procedimientos claros para la interacción entre ellos, durante la que los participantes reciben enseñanzas genéricas o especializadas. Algunos métodos de tutoría entre iguales estructuran la interacción a base de contenidos organizados, mientras que otros formulan ciertos comportamientos interactivos que pueden aplicarse con eficacia a cualquier materia que interese.

La confusión entre ‘tutoría’ y ‘mentoría’ en la bibliografía es evidente. La mentoría puede definirse como una relación individual de apoyo y aliento por parte de un trabajador más experto (que no es un superior directo) en un campo de interés común. Se caracteriza por ofrecer un modelo positivo, fomentar mayores aspiraciones, hacer uso del refuerzo positivo, de una orientación abierta y de la resolución conjunta de problemas. Por lo general, se da entre edades dispares, siempre con roles predeterminados, casi siempre entre distintas instituciones y a menudo dirigido a grupos desfavorecidos (Topping y Ehly, 1998).

Muchos centros escolares creen que están llevando a cabo tutorías entre iguales, cuando lo que están haciendo en realidad es agrupar a los jóvenes y esperar a que suceda algo. A menudo el resultado es que los escolares se encuentran en un grupo pero no interactúan ni trabajan como tal. Los comportamientos espontáneos (y no formados) de tutoría pueden ser primitivos y suelen caracterizarse por un cuestionamiento reducido tanto en frecuencia como en nivel cognitivo, acompañado de una escasa corrección de errores y el uso inapropiado del refuerzo positivo.

# Variables organizativas

Los métodos utilizados en la tutoría entre iguales pueden diferenciarse en al menos 13 aspectos organizativos (Topping y Ehly, 2001):

(1) Contenido curricular: los conocimientos o destrezas que han de adquirirse o una combinación de ambos. El ámbito de la TP es muy amplio y en la bibliografía se describen proyectos en prácticamente todas las materias.   
(2) Patrones de contacto: algunos proyectos operan con un tutor que trabaja con un grupo de compañeros tutorados, pero el tamaño del grupo puede variar de dos personas a 30 o más. En ocasiones, dos o más tutores trabajan juntos con un grupo. La TP en parejas (díadas) es más intensiva; en una pareja hay menos oportunidad de deriva hacia la participación simbólica.   
(3) Intra- o inter-institucional: mientras que la mayoría de TP tienen lugar dentro de una misma institución, también puede darse entre instituciones como, por ejemplo, un grupo de jóvenes de un instituto que actúan de tutores en la escuela primaria de su barrio, o estudiantes universitarios que lo hacen en centros de enseñanza secundaria.   
(4) Nivel de estudios: tutores y tutorados pueden ser del mismo curso o de diferentes cursos, así como de edades iguales o diferentes.   
(5) Capacidad: mientras que gran parte de los proyectos operan en base a la diferencia de capacidad (incluso si se realizan en una misma clase y con las mismas edades), existe un interés creciente en las TP con capacidades similares. En este caso, el tutor puede tener un dominio mayor de una pequeña parte del currículum, o bien ambos tienen las mismas capacidades, pero trabajan en pro de un conocimiento compartido, más profundo y es de esperar que correcto. Los fallos de la ‘meta-ignorancia’ pueden ser un problema cuando el tutor no sabe que no posee los conocimientos correctos. (6) Continuidad de roles: los papeles que desempeñan los participantes no tienen por qué ser permanentes, especialmente en proyectos con las mismas capacidades. El cambio estructurado de roles en momentos estratégicos (TP recíproca) puede tener la ventaja de una mayor innovación y de producir mayor autoestima general en tanto en cuanto todos los participantes actúan de tutores. (7) Tiempo: la TP puede planificarse para las horas normales de clase o fuera de ellas, o en una combinación de ambas, dependiendo del grado en que el programa sea sustitutorio o suplementario respecto a estas.   
(8) Lugar: asimismo, el lugar de ejecución de la TP puede variar enormemente.   
(9) Características del tutor: si los tutores son el tipo de estudiante medio, todos los participantes encontrarán estímulos suficientes en las actividades conjuntas. Si bien el beneficio que obtenga el tutorado puede no ser tan grande, el beneficio agregado de ambos sí será mayor.   
(10) Características del tutorado: los proyectos pueden estar dirigidos a todos o a un subgrupo particular, como los alumnos mejor dotados o más capacitados, o alumnos con discapacidades, o aquellos que se consideran de bajo rendimiento o en riesgo de fracaso o abandono escolar, o bien alumnos de minorías étnicas, religiosas, lingüísticas o de cualquier otro tipo.   
(11) Objetivos: el proyecto puede tener como objetivo un beneficio intelectual (cognitivo), el éxito académico, beneficios afectivos y de comportamiento, o sociales y emocionales, o la mejora del auto-concepto, o cualquier combinación de ellos. Los objetivos organizativos pueden incluir la disminución del abandono escolar, la mejora del acceso escolar, etc.   
(12) Voluntario u obligatorio: algunos proyectos requieren participación obligada, mientras que en otros los tutores se auto-eligen, lo que puede tener un efecto importante en la calidad de los resultados.   
(13) Incentivo: algunos proyectos ofrecen un incentivo extrínseco para los tutores (y, en algunas ocasiones, también para los tutorados), mientras que otros dependen de la motivación intrínseca. Más allá del simple reconocimiento social, la recompensa extrínseca puede adoptar la forma de un certificado, créditos de asignaturas o un incentivo material, como la retribución pecuniaria. La recompensa o el premio extrínseco es mucho más habitual en Norte América que en otros lugares, y este hecho ha creado cierta polémica sobre posibles abusos. La disponibilidad de un incentivo extrínseco puede tener un impacto en la captación de voluntarios, que puede ser beneficioso o perjudicial.

En los últimos años se ha puesto un mayor énfasis en la integración de la igualdad de oportunidades en el aprendizaje entre iguales, involucrando a todos los miembros de la comunidad educativa sin excepción. También ha crecido mucho el interés por las tutorías recíprocas (e.g., Menesses & Gresham, 2009), puesto que permiten que todos los participantes actúen como tutor y como tutorado, lo que evita divisiones sociales causadas por la capacidad o el estatus percibidos, y ofrecen una formación más rica de cara a participaciones futuras.

# Efectos

Cuando las tutorías se llevan a cabo con la debida consideración sobre la forma de organización más adecuada según los objetivos planteados, el contexto, la población, y con una ejecución razonablemente íntegra, los resultados suelen ser muy buenos (Bowman-Perrott et al., 2013; Okilwa & Shelby, 2010; Topping, 2001a; Topping & Ehly 1998). Los resultados de dichas investigaciones muestran claramente que la tutoría entre iguales puede rendir importantes beneficios en términos de logros académicos en el área del currículum de que se trate. Es más, tanto tutores como tutorados pueden beneficiarse, si la organización es la apropiada. Este último descubrimiento contribuye a dispersar los temores sobre la posible ‘pérdida de tiempo’ que pudiera suponer la tutoría entre iguales para los tutores más capacitados, siempre con la organización adecuada.

Asimismo, la TP puede ayudar a mejorar las competencias transferibles, tanto sociales como en comunicación, así como el funcionamiento afectivo (e.g., mejoras en la autoestima, en la aceptación del compañero o de la materia curricular), (véase Miller, Topping, & Thurston, 2010; Xu, Gelfer, Sileo, Filler, & Perkins, 2008). Si bien estos aspectos son más difíciles de cuantificar y no se observan con tanta frecuencia como los beneficios académicos, representan no obstante un valor añadido considerable sin ninguna carga adicional.

El aprendizaje entre iguales ha sido también señalado como una de las estrategias de aprendizaje más efectivas en relación con su coste (Levine, Glass, & Meister, 1987). Algunos estudios demuestran claramente su elevada eficacia con unos costes de ejecución muy bajos. Sin embargo, incluso en la bibliografía hay informes esporádicos de programas de tutoría entre iguales que no han tenido efectos significativos. Además, el nivel medio de efectividad de un gran número de estudios es por lo general modesto, lo que pone de relieve una vez más la importancia de una selección apropiada del método apropiado para cada objetivo y contexto, así como la necesidad de realizar un control de calidad.

# Teorías de aprendizaje entre iguales

Así pues, el aprendizaje entre iguales funciona. Cuando menos, funciona si se organiza y se lleva a cabo correctamente. Pero, ¿cómo funciona? No se trata de un mero y extraño interés académico, puesto que un conocimiento más profundo de cómo el aprendizaje entre iguales produce esos efectos positivos debería permitir a investigadores y docentes diseñar programas cada vez más flexibles y más efectivos de aprendizaje entre iguales. Durante muchos años, el aprendizaje entre iguales adolecía de una estrecha teoría sobre el tema, una carencia fomentada por viejos refranes como ‘enseñar es aprender dos veces’.

En los últimos 25 años, numerosos investigadores han realizado trabajos con importantes implicaciones para la construcción de una teoría del aprendizaje entre iguales (e.g., Chi, Siler, Jeong, Yamauchi, & Hausmann, 2001; King, 1998). Topping (2001a) sintetizaron la investigación realizada hasta el momento en un único modelo teórico. Este modelo resalta el papel de cinco sub-procesos iniciales que incorporan aspectos organizativos y estructurales de la interacción educativa, e.g., las necesidades y presiones inherentes a la TP en relación con un mayor tiempo dedicado a la tarea, la necesidad tanto del tutor como del tutorado de elaborar planes y objetivos, la individualización del aprendizaje y la inmediatez de la respuesta que los grupos reducidos o la relación de uno a uno hacen posible, así como el puro entusiasmo y la variedad de una forma novedosa de interacción didáctica.

Cognitivamente, la TP implica conflictos y desafíos (reflejando la corriente de pensamiento de Piaget, factores necesarios para eliminar los bloqueos formados a partir de viejos mitos y falsas creencias). También implica seguridad y apoyo por parte de un otro más competente, haciendo necesario que la gestión de las actividades quede dentro de la zona de desarrollo próximo de ambas partes (reflejando las corrientes de pensamiento de Vygotski, factores necesarios para equilibrar cualquier exceso perjudicial de estímulo; Vygotsky, 1978).

El tutor trata de gestionar y modular la demanda de procesamiento de información a la medida del tutorado para maximizar el ritmo de progreso; ni en exceso ni demasiado poco. El tutor también representa un modelo cognitivo de rendimiento competente. Sin embargo, las demandas intelectuales que se ejercen sobre él en cuanto a la supervisión del rendimiento del tutorado y la detección, diagnosis, corrección y demás gestiones de errores y confusiones son aún mayores; y precisamente en ello yace gran parte del ejercicio intelectual y consecuente beneficio para el tutor.

La TP también plantea grandes exigencias sobre las habilidades comunicativas tanto del tutor como del tutorado, y por tanto, las desarrolla. Un participante puede no haber entendido nunca de verdad un concepto hasta que tiene que explicárselo a otro, al convertir y cristalizar el pensamiento en lenguaje; otra idea de Vygotski, por supuesto. Saber escuchar, explicar, preguntar, resumir, especular y plantear hipótesis son capacidades de gran valor que deberían ser transferibles.

El componente afectivo de la TP también puede ser un efecto importante. La relación de confianza con un compañero que no mantiene una posición de autoridad puede facilitar la admisión de ignorancia y confusión, permitiendo el consiguiente diagnóstico y la corrección. El modelo que el tutor ofrece en cuanto a entusiasmo, competencia y posibilidad de éxito puede influir en la autoconfianza del tutorado, mientras que el sentimiento de lealtad y responsabilidad mutuas puede ayudar a mantener ambas partes motivadas y centradas en la tarea.

Estas cinco categorías o subprocesos se enmarcan en un proceso dinámico más amplio en el que tutor y tutorado amplían sus respectivos conocimientos declarativos, sus capacidades de procedimiento y la aplicación selectiva y condicional del conocimiento y de sus habilidades, contribuyendo y ampliando sus capacidades actuales (crecimiento), modificándolas (reajuste) y (en áreas de aprendizaje totalmente nuevo o en casos de gran confusión o error) reconstruyendo un nuevo conocimiento (reestructuración). Estos conceptos son similares a los de asimilación y acomodación de Piaget.

Todo ello conduce a la construcción conjunta de un conocimiento compartido entre el tutor y el tutorado que está firmemente anclado en el contexto de aplicación real y actual, y está adaptado a las idiosincrasias de sus percepciones (es decir, es intersubjetivo), por lo que puede no representar la verdad absoluta pero sí que forma una base sólida para nuevos avances.

Por lo tanto, la TP permite y fomenta un mayor volumen de actividad participativa y productiva que conduce a la consolidación, fluidez y automatización de las competencias básicas. Gran parte de ello podría ocurrir implícitamente, sin que ni el tutor ni el tutorado fueran del todo conscientes de lo que ocurre. Al mismo tiempo, o inmediatamente después, la TP puede dar lugar a la generalización, partiendo del ejemplo específico en el que se aprende un concepto y ampliando la capacidad de aplicar ese concepto y sus variantes de desarrollo a un amplio abanico de contextos alternativos y diferentes en múltiples comunidades de aprendizaje.

Cuando esto ocurre, tanto el tutor como el tutorado se ofrecen opiniones y comentarios mutuamente, de un modo explícito o implícito. De hecho, la opinión implícita puede haberse dado espontáneamente en estadios anteriores. La TP aumenta sustancialmente la cantidad e inmediatez de respuesta al tutorado. El refuerzo explícito puede surgir de la propia cooperación o de fuera de ella, a través del elogio verbal o no verbal, del reconocimiento y el estatus social, de una acreditación oficial o de un premio material. Sin embargo, el refuerzo que es indiscriminado o que prima el esfuerzo corre el riesgo de conceder demasiada importancia al concepto reforzado en la red de conocimientos del tutorado. A medida que la relación de aprendizaje evoluciona, tanto el tutor como el tutorado deben ser más conscientes de lo que está ocurriendo en su interacción didáctica y deben ser más capaces de supervisar u regular la efectividad de sus propias estrategias de aprendizaje en diversos contextos.

Esta evolución hacia una metacognición más explícita y estratégica no solo fomenta un aprendizaje continuo más efectivo sino que debería darles la seguridad, tanto al tutor como al tutorado, de que pueden seguir avanzando y de que su éxito es el resultado de sus propios esfuerzos. Estos resultados afectivos y cognitivos revierten a los cinco subprocesos originales en un proceso iterativo y continuo y en un círculo virtuoso. A medida que la relación de TP evoluciona, el modelo se sigue aplicando al tiempo que el aprendizaje se desplaza del nivel superficial al estratégico y a un nivel profundo, y del conocimiento declarativo al de procedimiento y al condicional.

Las formas más simples de tutoría entre iguales, centradas en la repetición y la práctica, parecen más proclives a utilizar solo algunos de los canales o subprocesos posibles (por lo general solo la organización, quizás algo de comunicación, apoyo o andamiaje y gestión de errores, práctica y refuerzo; menos de la mitad de las opciones posibles). Otras formas más elaboradas y cognitivamente más exigentes de la tutoría entre iguales, como la tutoría entre iguales en la capacidad de razonamiento (e.g., Topping, 2001b) tratan de utilizar todos los canales con ambas partes operando y beneficiándose de todos ellos. La reciprocidad de roles puede fomentar y garantizar que esto ocurra. Cuanto mayor es la diferencia de capacidades o de experiencia entre el tutor y el tutorado, la expectativa de conflicto cognitivo será menor y mayor el andamiaje. Demasiadas diferencias pueden resultar en una participación cognitiva mínima (por no hablar de conflicto) para el tutor, y en una aceptación irreflexiva y encapsulada (sin ajuste ni reconstrucción) por parte del tutorado. Por supuesto, si el tutor es mayor, más experto y por tanto, con mayor credibilidad, pero no tiene mayor conocimiento real o mayor capacidad que el tutorado, entonces el desajuste y un aprendizaje erróneo pueden darse de otros modos.

Los docentes habrían de prestar especial atención a los canales en las partes más bajas y más postreras del gráfico: la evolución de la generalización, la autoregulación, la metacognición, la autoestima y la motivación; la progresión de implícito a explícito y de la dependencia en el apoyo a una creciente independencia; el cambio de un pensamiento simple a uno más abstracto y de mayor orden, pasando del nivel superficial al estratégico y al nivel profundo, y del conocimiento declarativo al de procedimiento y al condicional; y la conclusión del círculo, la aceleración de la espiral dinámica, tanto para el tutor como para el tutorado.

Por supuesto, otras teorías también resultan de utilidad. Por ejemplo, Roscoe y Chi (2007) exploran el comportamiento real de los tutores en términos de explicaciones y preguntas. Mientras que estas variables ciertamente tienen efectos positivos, los autores observan una tendencia a la ‘transmisión de conocimientos’; los tutores tienden a centrarse en la transmisión del conocimiento en lugar de en su desarrollo. Esto tiene importantes implicaciones para el tutelaje: sin una formación que ponga el acento en el desarrollo del conocimiento, es posible que un gran número de tutorías no produzcan el rendimiento esperado.

# Nuevos avances: aplicaciones

La tutoría entre iguales fue desarrollada inicialmente con la finalidad específica de fomentar la práctica y la consolidación, lo que resultó en muchos casos en enfoques limitados al drill and skill (ejercicios repetitivos y de memorización), especialmente en Estados Unidos. Sin embargo, los docentes fueron cobrando confianza en sí mismos y en sus estudiantes y poco a poco fueron utilizando la tutoría entre iguales de un modo menos mecánico y con asignaturas más exigentes. En las escuelas, la TP se extendió de la lectura a la escritura y a la ortografía, las matemáticas y las ciencias. Poco después se extendió prácticamente a todas las asignaturas del currículum escolar, incluso a la capacidad de razonamiento (un área en la que algunos docentes se sienten inseguros). Estos avances fueron aplicados a su vez en institutos y universidades, donde no queda prácticamente ninguna asignatura en la que no se pueda realizar la tutoría entre iguales.

En las escuelas, la TP se está utilizando con grupos cada vez más inverosímiles. Por ejemplo, se ha encontrado particularmente efectiva con alumnos de preescolar o en el primer curso de primaria (Vavreck & Esposito, 2012). Podría pensarse que un estudiante corriente pueda tener dificultades en tutelar a un compañero con problemas de aprendizaje, o con retrasos en el desarrollo u otras necesidades especiales. Sin embargo, Okilwa y Shelby (2010) descubrieron que en 12 estudios de una misma década se indicaba que la TP resultaba eficaz para alumnos de educación especial, tanto en entornos de educación general como especial, en una gran gama de materias (p.ej. lengua, arte, matemáticas, ciencias naturales y ciencias sociales). Stenhoff y Lignugaris/Kraft (2007) analizaron 20 estudios de TP en escuelas secundarias y observaron que resultaba eficaz con estudiantes que sufrían discapacidades leves. Bowman-Perrott et al. (2013) analizaron 26 estudios y encontraron que la TP era eficaz tanto si el estudiante sufría alguna discapacidad como si no (cualquiera que fuera la exposición —cantidad de tutorías— o el nivel del curso). La bibliografía demuestra también que los estudiantes que tienen algún tipo de problema o discapacidad educativa pueden desempeñar el papel de tutor de otros estudiantes con eficacia. Van Norman y Wood (2008) obtuvieron resultados positivos utilizando a alumnos de preescolar con problemas de lectura como tutores de lectura. Cada vez se está poniendo más énfasis en los beneficios que obtienen los propios tutores.

También se está utilizando cada vez más el aprendizaje entre iguales en otros contextos más complicados, algunos debido a un largo historial de fracaso escolar en los alumnos tutorados (como, por ejemplo, en el aprendizaje entre iguales con adultos de escasa alfabetización en contextos domésticos o comunitarios), otros por su transitoriedad y variabilidad (organizaciones voluntarias, clubs extra-escolares, bibliotecas o iglesias), algunos porque el aprendizaje no es el objetivo principal de la organización (como la formación en el puesto de trabajo) y otros porque la población que participa, tanto tutores como tutorados, tienen sus propios y considerables problemas personales (como en las tutorías entre iguales en las prisiones, por ejemplo).

# Nuevos avances: investigaciones recientes

Durante muchos años se han realizado innumerables estudios a pequeña escala sobre la tutoría entre iguales. En este artículo no nos centramos en estos, sino en estudios que ofrecen más posibilidades de cumplir con los elevados estándares (en ocasiones ridículamente elevados) que se exigen a la enseñanza basada en la evidencia.

El primero de ellos es el informe de la iniciativa gubernamental estadounidense What Works Clearinghouse (WWC, 2012) sobre el programa de aprendizaje entre iguales PALS (Peer Assisted Learning Strategies) y asociado a los nombres de Lyn y Doug Fuchs de la Universidad de Vanderbilt. Los estudiantes de las clases PALS trabajan en pares realizando actividades de lectura que tienen por objeto mejorar la corrección, fluidez y comprensión lectora. Los dos estudiantes —que alternan los papeles de tutor y tutorado— leen en voz alta, escuchan la lectura del compañero y dan su opinión a través de diversas actividades estructuradas. Los profesores forman a los estudiantes para que estos utilicen estrategias de aprendizaje tales como: lectura de pasajes con compañeros, resumen de párrafos (describir las idea principal) o aventurar predicciones (adivinar lo que va a pasar a continuación en el pasaje). El programa PALS ofrece versiones diferentes para preescolar y primer grado de primaria.

El centro WWC analizó 45 estudios de primer curso de primaria. Dos de ellos (McMaster, Fuchs, Fuchs, & Compton, 2005; Stein, Berends, Fuchs, McMaster, Saenz, Yen, Fuchs, & Compton, 2008) consistían en ensayos controlados aleatorios que cumplían con los requisitos de evidencia del WWC. Un tercer estudio (Mathes & Babyak, 2001) consistía en un ensayo controlado aleatorio que cumplía con los requisitos del WWC, pero con ciertas reservas. Los tres estudios están resumidos en el informe. Los otros 42 estudios no cumplían con los requisitos del centro, tanto en términos de elegibilidad como en estándares de evidencia. Los tres estudios mencionados suman un total de 3,130 lectores principiantes de preescolar y de primer curso de primaria en cuatro estados diferentes. El WWC consideró que la evidencia sobre el programa PALS en los estudiantes era entre media y grande para el área de alfabetización y pequeña para los campos de fluidez y comprensión. Si bien se observaban efectos positivos en la alfabetización, no se distinguían efectos en la fluidez y se observaban efectos mixtos en la comprensión.

Podemos ver en este caso el resultado típico de este tipo de escrutinio; el estándar de lo aceptable es tan alto que solo tres de los 45 estudios se consideran válidos. En consecuencia, los resultados están basados en una proporción mínima de la investigación realizada. Esta situación tergiversa totalmente la evidencia disponible. Hay que tener en cuenta, además, que muchos investigadores no dispondrían de ningún estudio que cumpliera con esos estándares. Por lo tanto, la cantidad de ‘evidencia’ aceptable es minúscula y a menudo los resultados carecen totalmente de significado.

Otro estudio de peso es el proyecto escocés Fife Peer Learning, un programa de aprendizaje entre iguales realizado en la localidad de Fife que consistía en un ensayo controlado y aleatorio llevado a cabo en 128 escuelas primarias, casi la totalidad de las escuelas primarias del distrito, en la municipalidad de Fife. Las escuelas eran de tamaños muy variados y contextos socioeconómicos muy diferentes. Todas aceptaron participar en el programa y que se les adjudicara una variable aleatoria en lugar de seleccionarla ellos mismos. El objetivo era comprobar si las tres variables siguientes tenían algún impacto en la efectividad de las tutorías entre iguales:

(1) Materia de aplicación: lectura, matemáticas o lectura y matemáticas. (2) Intensidad de participación: intensivo (tres veces por semana) o ligero (una vez por semana). (3) Tipo de tutoría: con las mismas edades o con mezcla de edades.

A cada escuela se le adjudicó una variable que combinaba un aspecto de cada uno de los tres factores anteriores.

Las tutorías duraban 30 minutos por sesión, tres veces por semana para las intensivas y una vez por semana para las ligeras. Las tutorías de lectura utilizaban la técnica de lectura por parejas (Topping, 2001a) y las de matemáticas utilizaban la técnica matemática de Duolog (Topping, Campbell, Douglas, & Smith, 2003). Las tutorías de edades iguales utilizaban tutores y tutorados de la misma clase, mientras que las de edades mezcladas utilizaban toda una clase como tutores para otra clase dos años menor como tutorados. Las materias adjudicadas a las clases eran de lectura o de matemáticas o una combinación de ambas (esta última suponía mucho trabajo para el docente, sobre todo si coincidía con la categoría intensiva).

La formación inicial del profesorado era relativamente liviana, puesto que la intención era crear una intervención que fuera sostenible. Así pues, los docentes recibían un día completo de formación, que cubría lectura y matemáticas, junto a una carpeta que detallaba todas las operaciones necesarias. Al final del primer año se reunían todos de nuevo durante medio día para informar sobre el programa. El proceso se repetía al año siguiente con los nuevos docentes.

La intención era llevar a cabo el proyecto durante seis meses durante cada uno de los dos cursos escolares consecutivos. En el segundo año, muchos de los alumnos pasaban a un curso superior, pero continuaban con el proyecto, ya expertos en su funcionamiento, por lo que el esfuerzo de gestionarlo durante el segundo año sería mucho menor para el nuevo profesor.

Los resultados variaban según el método de medición utilizado. Las mediciones a largo plazo se realizaron el año anterior al proyecto y el año posterior. Estas mostraban un efecto de 0,2 para las tutorías entre edades distintas (tanto para tutores como para tutorados), pero no se observaba efecto alguno para las tutorías de la misma edad (Tymms, Merrell, Andor, Topping, & Thurston, 2011). Tanto la tutoría de lectura como la de matemáticas mostraban la misma mejoría en los resultados, pero la tutoría combinada de lectura y matemáticas mostraba un beneficio algo mayor, a pesar de la diferencia en las técnicas de tutoría utilizadas, lo que sugiere un efecto acumulativo de los dos tipos de tutoría. Curiosamente, la variable ligera resultó tan eficaz como la intensiva. Puesto que era obvio que los efectos observados no respondían a la cantidad de tiempo invertido, se creyó que el impacto de las tutorías en la autoestima de tutores y tutorados era un factor clave y, en efecto, se encontró evidencia suficiente que corroboraba esta conjetura (Miller et al., 2010).

Sin embargo, evaluaciones realizadas con diferentes métodos en cada proyecto arrojó unos resultados algo diferentes: tanto las tutorías con edades diferentes y con las mismas edades tenían efectos muy similares. De nuevo, tanto las tutorías de lectura como las de matemáticas mostraban efectos, pero el efecto de las de matemáticas era mayor a las de lectura (Topping et al., 2011; Topping, Thurston, McGavock, & Conlin, 2012). Por lo general, la integridad de su ejecución era bastante buena; los docentes ponían en marcha procedimientos que producían los comportamientos requeridos de los alumnos en la mayoría de los casos. Las opiniones de los docentes eran muy positivas (pero esto es un rasgo común de los estudios de intervención).

# Tecnologías de la información y la tutoría entre iguales

La integración de las tecnologías de la información en la educación se ha intensificado rápidamente en los últimos años, aunque sigue siendo más habitual en la escuela secundaria que en la primaria, y más habitual todavía en la universidad que en la escuela secundaria.

Dioso-Henson (2012) utilizaba materiales estructurados online para sus tutorías de física en la secundaria, apoyando las tutorías con mentoría también online. Se realizó una comparación entre las tutorías entre iguales recíprocas (TPR) y las no recíprocas y los grupos de control. Las TPR resultaron ligeramente más eficaces que las no recíprocas, y ambas considerablemente más efectivas que el grupo de control. Del mismo modo, Tsuei (2012) utilizó tutorías recíprocas online en matemáticas con alumnos de primaria y observó beneficios durante un año para el grupo experimental respecto de grupo de control. También se halló evidencia de un impacto significativo en la percepción de sí mismos de los estudiantes, así como en su actitud respecto del aprendizaje de las matemáticas. En este caso, se observó una relación positiva con el tiempo invertido.

Walker et al. (2011) trataron de diseñar un sistema flexible de apoyo online para tutorías recíprocas. Se pretendía con ello diagnosticar la naturaleza de la relación fallida y ofrecer un apoyo que estuviera ajustado al problema, para evitar confusiones mayores. Los autores descubrieron que su sistema mejoraba el contenido conceptual de la ayuda y el uso de las funcionalidades de la interfaz, en comparación con el apoyo tradicional. Los tutores respondieron mejor a la ayuda que los hacía responsables de la ayuda que ellos ofrecían a su vez. Topping, Dehkinet, Blanch, Corcelles, y Duran (2013) informaron de un proyecto de tutoría recíproca online para mejorar la competencia lingüística en inglés y en español. Alumnos de entre nueve y 12 años de Escocia y Cataluña actuaban de tutores en su propio idioma y eran tutorados en una lengua extranjera. Cuando se ofrecía más apoyo, el tutor tenía más oportunidades de aprendizaje, pero entonces había menos oportunidades para el tutorado, y viceversa. Esta paradoja puede resolverse ajustando el apoyo ofrecido por los tutores.

Quizás el proyecto más innovador fue el realizado por Wang, Young, y Jang (2013), en el que se amplía el concepto de compañeros de aprendizaje del mundo virtual a un entorno físico real, desarrollando robots educativos tangibles con capacidades de reconocimiento de voz. El contexto era el del aprendizaje bidireccional de idiomas en una clase de inglés en Taiwán en la que participaban 63 alumnos de quinto de primaria. Los estudiantes consideraban a los robots como una suerte de instructores que, con infinita paciencia, les ayudaban a practicar la conversación en inglés. Se observaron efectos positivos en motivación, autoconfianza y participación, en particular entre los alumnos menos aventajados. Tanto estudiantes como profesores se mostraron de acuerdo en que los robots habían mejorado el ambiente en la clase.

Además de su impacto pedagógico, se ha desarrollado software con el que se pretende gestionar el aprendizaje entre iguales, ofreciendo al coordinador o facilitador del programa un sistema de gestión de la información. Esto es particularmente necesario en el aprendizaje entre iguales con edades diferentes, o interinstitucionales, en entornos distribuidos complejos. Koole y Parchoma (2012) describen un sistema de este tipo. Si bien los alumnos mantienen el poder elegir así como la participación voluntaria, incluso el más neutral de los entornos tecnológicos puede fomentar alguna forma de interacción mientras que disuade de otras. A través de un diálogo relacional, los alumnos moldean su identidad intercambiando información sobre el mundo y sobre cómo se perciben a sí mismos en él. A medida que los estudiantes interactúan, van recibiendo respuestas, tanto del entorno como de otros estudiantes que, a su vez, les ayudan a evaluar y ajustar el modo en que se presentan a sí mismos. Los autores debaten los efectos que la anonimidad y del uso de seudónimos tienen en la confianza y el capital social en los entornos virtuales, en particular en lo que respecta a dos sistemas de redes sociales, ‘iHelp’ y ‘The Landing’. Las arquitecturas que subyacen a estos sistemas pueden afectar a la gestión del discurso y de la identidad. Los autores recomiendan que se sopesen cuidadosamente los efectos de las arquitecturas de los sistemas en el individuo y en la comunidad, equilibrando las necesidades del individuo con las de la comunidad de aprendizaje.

En tercer lugar, la evaluación formativa asistida por ordenador se ha aliado a los sistemas de tutorías de modo que tanto tutores como tutorados reciben información regular, frecuente y en el tiempo justo sobre la eficacia del aprendizaje conjunto. Se describe un ejemplo de esta combinación en el artículo de He, Hui, y Quan (2009) sobre la evaluación automática de resúmenes para sistemas de tutorías inteligentes. La calificación humana de los escritos de los estudiantes es una tarea que requiere mucho tiempo y por ese motivo se ha investigado el uso de la evaluación asistida por ordenador. Se han propuesto técnicas como el análisis semántico latente (ASL), la co-ocurrencia de n-gramas y el método BLEU. Sin embargo, su funcionamiento todavía no es satisfactorio. Para mejorar su rendimiento, ese artículo propone un enfoque conjunto que integra la co-ocurrencia de n-gramas y el ASL. Esta combinación resulta en una mejora sustancial de su precisión y un mejor rendimiento global.

Koedinger, McLaughlin, y Heffernan (2010) integraron la evaluación formativa online en un sistema de tutorías. ASSISTment es un tutor de matemáticas online que ofrece formación y evaluación pertinente y oportuna, evitando así la pérdida de aprendizaje que típicamente ocurre cuando los estudiantes están a la espera de los comentarios del profesor. Se recogieron datos de 1,240 estudiantes del primer curso de secundaria en tres centros en los que se desarrollaba la intervención y en un cuarto centro de control. Los resultados de las pruebas posteriores al estudio (ajustados con los resultados anteriores) indicaban que los estudiantes que habían participado en el programa obtuvieron todos mejores resultados que los del grupo de control, y la mayor diferencia se daba en los estudiantes de educación especial. Se observó también el efecto del tiempo invertido en las tutorías. Se asoció el mayor uso del programa por parte del profesor a un mayor aprendizaje entre estudiantes con poca o ninguna participación, lo que sugiere que estos estudiantes podrían haberse beneficiado de la adaptación que el profesor realizó en su docencia general en base a lo aprendido en el programa ASSISTments.

Por último, se han desarrollado sistemas de tutorías con inteligencia artificial, pero todavía hay mucho camino por recorrer hasta que alcancen los niveles de habilidad y adaptabilidad de los tutores humanos. Los sistemas de tutoría inteligente (STI) ofrecen una respuesta inmediata (El Saadawi et al., 2010). Es posible que la respuesta inmediata mejore el rendimiento metacognitivo. En ese estudio se investigó también si el andamiaje metacognitivo produciría beneficios metacognitivos si se suprimía la respuesta inmediata. Los resultados mostraron que la respuesta inmediata en un sistema de tutoría inteligente tiene un efecto positivo estadísticamente significativo en el beneficio educativo y en el discernimiento de los estudiantes. La retirada de la respuesta inmediata se relacionó con un rendimiento metacognitivo decreciente, y este declive no se corregía con la introducción de otros apoyos metacognitivos.

Aleven, Roll, McLaren, y Koedinger (2010) trataron de evaluar el aprendizaje auto-regulado (SRL por su nombre en inglés, self-regulated learning) de los estudiantes en el contexto de un sistema de tutoría inteligente; una propuesta complicada. Se ha desarrollado un método automático de evaluación flexible y adaptada al contexto, de estrategias específicas de aprendizaje auto-regulado (por ejemplo, la búsqueda de apoyo). El método fue validado demostrando que convergía con otros métodos de búsqueda de apoyo. La respuesta automatizada respecto a la búsqueda de apoyo realizada a través de este método produjo beneficios prolongados en el tiempo en el comportamiento de los estudiantes relacionado con la búsqueda de apoyo.

# Integración: enfoques sistémicos

Llegados a este punto, consideremos un tipo de estudio totalmente diferente, como el de Jostad, Miltenberger, Kelso, y Knudson (2008). Los autores observaron que en Estados Unidos cada año se dan cientos de lesiones y muertes accidentales de niños causadas por el juego con armas. Se ha demostrado que la formación en habilidades conductuales (BST por su nombre en inglés, behavioural skills training) y la formación in situ son eficaces en la enseñanza de habilidades o destrezas a las que los niños pueden recurrir en el caso de que entren en contacto con un arma. Sin embargo, este tipo de educación requiere un tiempo y un esfuerzo considerables. En consecuencia, se utilizaron tutores para enseñar técnicas de seguridad personal a estudiantes jóvenes. Los tutores realizaron entonces formación conductual y formación in situ para otros jóvenes. Los alumnos tutorados adquirieron las habilidades y destrezas necesarias y las mostraron en situaciones muy similares a aquellas en las que podrían necesitarlas. Además, todos los tutores conservaron esas destrezas y habilidades en el tiempo. Ese estudio muestra el camino a seguir: sacar las tutorías entre iguales fuera de las escuelas y universidades y llevarlas a aquellos entornos naturales en los que los alumnos se encuentran, así como aplicar la tutoría entre iguales a materias que pueden traducirse en cuestiones de vida y muerte, y no solo en logros académicos.

El aprendizaje entre iguales ha evolucionado mucho, desde aquel método que se percibía exclusivo para algunos alumnos aventajados, a un método que es utilizado de un modo igualitario e inclusivo, tanto en lo social como en cuestión de igualdad de oportunidades, en incluso más allá, en la comunidad. Algunos centros han desarrollado enfoques globales en el desarrollo de varios tipos de aprendizaje entre iguales, pero la tutoría entre iguales no debería verse simplemente como ‘una cosa de escuelas’. Sin embargo, incluso en las escuelas, una masa crítica mayor no garantiza la sostenibilidad. En los casos en que el principal organizador o impulsor del programa es una persona, su marcha puede desembocar en el colapso de la iniciativa.

Es importante que en un programa de TP participen varios docentes y que se estudie con antelación la integración del programa en la institución y fuera de ella, así como los planes de relevo sucesivos. Podría decirse que no hay mejor aprendizaje para ayudar que el ser ayudado. Muchas escuelas con programas de tutorías entre iguales de cursos diferentes en los que participan toda la clase promueven activamente beneficios en el aprendizaje y en los aspectos de igualdad de oportunidades de este modelo. Todos los estudiantes que han recibido apoyo en una clase inferior esperan con toda seguridad y desde el principio ser tutores cuando lleguen a un curso superior. A medida que los estudiantes reciben ayuda y, por tanto, se preparan para ser tutores, cualquier indecisión respecto a recibir ese apoyo disminuye. La asimetría entre tutor y tutorado disminuye, y el estigma que en ocasiones se asocia a recibir apoyo desaparece. Todos los estudiantes tienen la oportunidad de participar y de ayudar, lo que les hace sentir valorados y meritorios en igual medida. En ocasiones, los estudiantes que han sido tutorados en una materia, son a la vez tutores de la misma materia de alumnos en un curso inferior. Alumnos que son tutorados en una materia pueden ser tutores de compañeros de su misma edad en otra asignatura. Incluso los estudiantes más capacitados de cualquier curso pueden enfrentarse a problemas que requieren la ayuda de otro estudiante aún más capacitado de un grado superior, y pueden así aprender que nadie es tan listo como todos juntos.

Con el tiempo, el centro puede desarrollar una masa crítica de profesores que apoyan el aprendizaje entre iguales. La TP fomenta los puntos fuertes del individuo y lo moviliza como participante activo en el proceso de aprendizaje; y esto es aplicable tanto a alumnos como a profesores. Los tutores no solo aprenden la asignatura mejor y con mayor profundidad, sino que también aprenden competencias transferibles como cooperación, comunicación, saber escuchar y prestar ayuda. La TP fomenta el desarrollo social y personal. Todo ello influye en los valores de la escuela, contribuyendo a desarrollar una norma cultural de apoyo y solidaridad. La TP puede contribuir a crear un sentimiento de unión en la comunidad.

# References / Referencias

Aleven, V., Roll, I., McLaren, B. M., & Koedinger, K. R. (2010). Automated, unobtrusive, action-by-action assessment of self-regulation during learning with an intelligent tutoring system. Educational Psychologist, 45, 224–233. doi:10.1080/00461520.2010.517740   
Bowman-Perrott, L., Davis, H., Vannest, K., Williams, L., Greenwood, C., & Parker, R. (2013). Academic benefits of peer tutoring: A meta-analytic review of single-case research, School Psychology Review, 42(1), 39–55. Learningfrom human tutoring. Cognitive Science, 25, 471–533. doi:10.1207/ s15516709cog2504_1   
Dioso-Henson, L. (2012). The effect of reciprocal peer tutoring and non-reciprocal peer tutoring on the performance of students in college physics. Research in Education, 87 (1), 34–49. doi:10.7227/RIE.87.1.3   
El Saadawi, G. M., Azevedo, R., Castine, M., Payne, V., Medvedeva, O., Tseytlin, E. … Crowley, R. S. (2010). Factors affecting feeling-of-knowing in a medical intelligent tutoring system: The role of immediate feedback as a metacognitive scaffold. Advances in Health Sciences Education, 15(1), 9–30. doi:10.1007/s10459-009-9162-6   
He, Y., Hui, S. C., & Quan, T. T. (2009). Automatic summary assessment for intelligent tutoring systems. Computers & Education, 53(3), 890–899. doi:10.1016/j. compedu.2009.05.008   
Jostad, C. M., Miltenberger, R. G., Kelso, P., & Knudson, P. (2008). Peer tutoring to prevent firearm play: Acquisition, generalization, and long-term maintenance of safety skills. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 41(1), 117–123. doi:10.1901/ jaba.2008.41-117   
King, A. (1998). Transactive peer tutoring: Distributing cognition and metacognition. Educational Psychology Review, 10, 57–74. doi:10.1023/A:1022858115001   
Koedinger, K. R., McLaughlin, E. A., & Heffernan, N. T. (2010). A quasi-experimental evaluation of an on-line formative assessment and tutoring system. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 43(4), 489–510. doi:10.2190/EC.43.4.d   
Koole, M., & Parchoma, G. (2012). The ethical and practical implications of systems architecture on identity in networked learning: A constructionist perspective. Interactive Learning Environments, 20(3), 203–215. doi:10.1080/10494820.2011.593526   
Levine, H. M., Glass, G. V., & Meister, G. R. (1987). Cost-effectiveness of computerassisted instruction. Evaluation Review, 11, 50–72. doi:10.1177/0193841X8701100103   
Mathes, P. G., & Babyak, A. E. (2001). The effects of Peer-Assisted Literacy Strategies for first-grade readers with and without additional mini-skills lessons. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 16(1), 28–44.   
McMaster, K. L., Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L. S., & Compton, D. L. (2005). Responding to nonresponders: An experimental field trial of identification and intervention methods. Exceptional Children, 71(4), 445–463.   
Menesses, K. F., & Gresham, F. M. (2009). Relative efficacy of reciprocal and nonreciprocal peer tutoring for students at-risk for academic failure. School Psychology Quarterly, 24(4), 266–275. doi:10.1037/a0018174   
Miller, D., Topping, K., & Thurston, A. (2010). Peer tutoring in reading: The effects of role and organization on two dimensions of self-esteem. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 80(3), 417–433. doi:10.1348/000709909X481652   
Okilwa, N. S. A., & Shelby, L. (2010). The effects of peer tutoring on academic performance of students with disabilities in grades 6 through 12: A synthesis of the literature. Remedial and Special Education, 31(6), 450–463. doi:10.1177/0741932509355991   
Roscoe, R. D., & Chi, M. T. H. (2007). Understanding tutor learning: Knowledgebuilding and knowledge-telling in peer tutors’ explanations and questions. Review of Educational Research, 77(4), 534–574. doi:10.3102/0034654307309920   
Stein, M. L., Berends, M., Fuchs, D., McMaster, K., Saenz, L., Yen, L., Fuchs, L. S., & Compton, D. (2008). Scaling up a best-evidence practice: Examining technical assistance, teachers’ fidelity of treatment implementation, and kindergartners’ reading performance in a randomized control trial across three sites and two years. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 30, 368–388.   
Stenhoff, D. M., & Lignugaris/Kraft, B. (2007). A review of the effects of peer tutoring on students with mild disabilities in secondary settings. Exceptional Children, 74(1), 8– 30. doi:10.1177/001440290707400101   
Topping, K. J. (2001a). Peer assisted learning: A practical guide for teachers. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books.   
Topping, K. J. (2001b). Thinking reading writing: A practical guide to paired learning with peers,parents and volunteers. New York, NY: Continuum International.   
Topping, K. J., Campbell, J., Douglas, W., & Smith, A. J. (2003). Cross-age peer tutoring in mathematics with 7 & 11 year olds: Influence on mathematical vocabulary, strategic dialogue and self-concept. Educational Research, 45(3), 287–308. doi:10.1080/ 0013188032000137274   
Topping, K. J., Dehkinet, R., Blanch, S., Corcelles, M., & Duran, D. (2013). Paradoxical effects of feedback in international online reciprocal peer tutoring. Computers & Education, 61, 225–231. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.10.002   
Topping, K. J., & Ehly, S. (Eds.). (1998). Peer-assisted learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Topping, K. J., & Ehly, S. W. (2001). Peer assisted learning: A framework for consultation. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 12, 113–132. doi:10.1207/S1532768XJEPC1202_03   
Topping, K. J., Miller, D., Murray, P., Henderson, S., Fortuna, C., & Conlin, N. (2011). Outcomes in a randomised controlled trial of mathematics tutoring. Educational Research, 53, 51–63. doi:10.1080/00131881.2011.552239.   
Topping, K. J., Thurston, A., McGavock, K., & Conlin, N. (2012). Outcomes and process in reading tutoring. Educational Research, 54, 239–258. doi:10.1080/ 00131881.2012.710086.   
Tsuei, M. (2012). Using synchronous peer tutoring system to promote elementary students’ learning in mathematics. Computers & Education, 58, 1171–1182. doi:10.1016/ j.compedu.2011.11.025   
Tymms, P., Merrell, C., Andor, J., Topping, K. J., & Thurston, A. (2011). Improving attainment across a whole district: Peer tutoring in a randomised controlled trial. School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 22, 265–289. doi:10.1080/ 09243453.2011.589859   
Van Norman, R. K., & Wood, C. L. (2008). Effects of prerecorded sight words on the accuracy of tutor feedback. Remedial and Special Education, 29(2), 96–107. doi:10.1177/0741932507311634   
Vavreck, S., & Esposito, J. (2012). Peer tutoring with child-centered play therapy language, Journal of School Counseling, 10(25), 1–29.   
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes (M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman Eds.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Walker, E., Rummel, N., & Koedinger, K. R. (2011). Designing automated adaptive support to improve student helping behaviors in a peer tutoring activity. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6, 279–306. doi:10.1007/s11412-011-9111-2   
Wang, Y. H., Young, S. S.-C., & Jang, J. R. (2013). Using tangible companions for enhancing learning English conversation, Educational Technology & Society, 16(2), 296–309.   
What Works Clearinghouse (2012). Peer-Assisted Learning/Literacy Strategies: Beginning Reading. What Works Clearinghouse Intervention Report. US Department of Education. Education Resources Information Center number ED531596.   
Xu, Y., Gelfer, J. I., Sileo, N., Filler, J., & Perkins, P. G. (2008). Effects of peer tutoring on young children’s social interactions. Early Child Development and Care, 178, 617– 635. doi:10.1080/03004430600857485