# Language Teacher Identity and the Domestication of Dissent: An Exploratory Account

BRIAN MORGAN Glendon College/York University Toronto, Ontario, Canada

In this article, the notion of dissent refers to a more critical, ideological orientation to advocacy for and by TESOL professionals. The notion of domestication refers to identity-forming practices in the knowledge base of language teacher education (LTE) and in professional certification processes that potentially displace this critical orientation. After a discussion of field-internal examples (e.g., epistemic dependencies, Kumaravadivelu, 2012; linguistics applied, Widdowson, 1980; language objectification, Reagan, 2004), the article takes up a specific context of domestication: TESL Ontario’s accreditation processes and requirements for the certification of adult instructors of ESL (English as a second language). Examining organizational documents and membership survey data, the article suggests that the framing of advocacy is inadequate for the conditions of underemployment and overqualification in this jurisdiction. The article then suggests an alternative for fostering critical advocacy skills in preservice programming: an Issues Analysis Project, in which teachers identify a “gap” in the field (i.e., pedagogical, ideological) and design a blueprint for action (e.g., advocacy letter, policy statement, workshop, curricular innovation) that potentially offers a resolution. The conclusions take up the broader implications of the study for language teacher identity negotiation as well as the TESOL organization’s efforts in promoting advocacy amongst its membership.

doi: 10.1002/tesq.316

tle that risks alienating some readers in spite of its possible alliterative appeal. Yet the timeliness and context—a special issue on language teacher identity (LTI) in the preeminent journal of English language teaching (ELT)—perhaps justifies this risk. With field interest in LTI at a high point, it seems prudent to reflect on both the insights and blind spots that may arise from this line of inquiry. This duality of outcomes can be related to the title and the notion of dissent, which specifically refers to advocacy, both for and by TESOL professionals, and in support of improved working conditions and locally responsive curricula that address the social justice needs of their students. Many researchers have raised the need to advance professional advocacy in TESOL (e.g., Crookes, 2013, ch. 7; Elson, 1997; Linville, 2015; Brian Morgan, 2015a; Sun, 2010; Tellez & Varghese, 2013; Valeo & Faez, 2013). This article extends this work by examining the types of responses that have emerged in the field, and in one TESOL affiliate in particular. I will argue that the advocacy initiatives and related accreditation procedures that have emerged in this jurisdiction are inadequate for the challenges we face and the types of LTI work required in the field, in general.

One key challenge I refer to is the broader politics in which teachers’ work and professional identities are negotiated. In a compelling account of current conditions, Chantal Mouffe (2013) describes our democratic political environment as fundamentally hegemonic and antagonistic, marked by intensified partisanship and often irreconcilable social struggles—an environment that contributes to the scapegoating of teachers for complex societal problems far beyond the classroom (Ball, 2003; Biesta, 2009; Jord\~ao, 2016). For some, Mouffe’s conflictual politics merely restates a timeless reality, but such a perspective should be considered in light of prevailing ELT citizenship curricula that foreground the nation-state’s commonality and exceptionalism through materials extolling the hard work and sacrifice of newcomers, while ignoring the systemic inequalities that make such sacrifice permanent conditions (Gulliver, 2010; Ramanathan, 2013; Song, 2013). Similar biases can be identified in a curricular emphasis on second language (L2) deliberative practices (e.g., classroom debates, letter writing to politicians), which presume reasonable and equitable outcomes in local and global decision making (e.g., Andreotti & Pashby, 2013; Brian Morgan & Fleming, 2009).

Mouffe’s (2013) account suggests a hostile environment for all teachers and one requiring forms of advocacy that are necessarily politicized and nonconsensual (cf. dissensus, Ranciere, in Clarke & Phelan, 2015). In respect to bilingual education in the United States, Tellez & Varghese (2013, p. 129) concur, arguing, “bilingual education teachers must possess a critical perspective because they are often working against dominant political and social forces that seek to disempower, or at least not help to empower, marginalized communities”

(p. 129). Drawing on Mouffe’s (2013) agonistic politics,1 Clarke and Phelan (2015) explicate a similar, politicized notion of advocacy for teacher education:

The education of teachers as political adversaries, in Mouffe’s (2013) terms, involves a recognition of teacher education as a form of critical educational practice that keeps agonism alive, fomenting dissensus and bringing to the fore alternatives repressed by the hegemony. The preparation of teachers as teacher citizens . . . , capable and legitimate participants in public discussion about education and policy, involves revitalizing an understanding of the political, the difference between moral and political disputes, and power as constitutive of society, educational purpose and teacher identities. (p. 264)

For many TESOLers, the notion of advocacy described above might appear “overly political” for language teaching and learning. Moreover, its relevance might seem marginal to the priorities that have emerged in LTI and our particular interest in the “inner world” of the teacher. Yet TESOL is a large and diverse organization, and I would invite readers to consider and reflect upon their own professional jurisdictions, including their conditions of work and the relative power/lessness of those who share these spaces. A more critical approach to advocacy might indeed be required, yet inadvertently constrained or subdued by the field-internal priorities and curricular options that we promote, which leads to the notion of domestication in this article and its relationship to advocacy in LTE.

The domestication of dissent, I propose here, emphasizes production and routinization rather than suppression, whereby small “gestures” or “facsimiles” of dissent (i.e., advocacy) are permitted, and perhaps even superficially encouraged (i.e., fostering an appearance of agency/freedom), in the service of neoliberal agendas and the creation of a relatively obedient workforce, ill-equipped to advocate for social justice and fair working conditions for themselves and their students (e.g., Block, Gray, & Holborow, 2012; Chun, 2015; Corson, 2002; Hawkins, 2011; Kubota, 2011, Zacchi, 2016).

Domestication, in this latter sense, invokes Foucault’s (2008) notion of governmentality, [which] “entails at its heart a productive/destructive relationship with freedom. Liberalism must produce freedom, but this very act entails the establishment of limitations, controls, forms of coercion, and obligations relying on threats, etcetera” (p. 64, emphasis added). How might this productive/destructive relationship be related to language teacher education (LTE) and the negotiation of LTI? As I will propose in several sections below, Foucault’s account can be applied to the “production” of curricular choices (i.e., a critical advocacy orientation) within an economic and disciplinary environment in which they are unlikely to be acted upon—hence the “destruction” of their transformative potential. In this respect, the “freedom” to choose curricular options is curtailed by pressures to act “responsibly” and “efficiently” within a broader context of teacher deprofessionalization (cf. the certification of “good enough teachers,” Zeichner, 2011), in which purported “foundations” and “core” elements demarcate the boundaries of reduced career expectations, and in which the formal appearance or gesture of curricular “options” (e.g., advocacy and social justice concerns) dissipate their urgency and necessity in a time of intense job insecurities.

Following Foucault’s notion of governmentality, the intention of this article is not to identify agenda-driven “elites” acting in a cohesive or self-organized way. Power relations are not simply restrictive and imposed through laws and the police. They are also productive, distributed through systems of knowledge (cf. Power/Knowledge, Foucault, 1980) that constitute disciplinary fields and the identities of those (i.e., language teachers) who occupy them. Much of what I will critique in the sections below reflects important and necessary work by well-intentioned colleagues. Indeed, I see myself as equally culpable in maintaining professional blind spots through my past and current work in preservice LTE and my ongoing and problematic conformity to mandated certification processes. Instead, the aspiration for this article is more in line with Pennycook’s (2001) call for problematizing givens in the micropractices of our teaching, the LTI options we foster through such interactions, and in the larger priorities we collectively promote through our professional ELT organizations. In later sections below, I will provide concrete examples of the types of micropractices to which I refer. One example will be a micropractice of my own—a critical analysis of TESL Ontario’s accreditation practices and their framing/positioning of advocacy (i.e., the domestication of dissent) for LTE providers. Another example shall discuss a specific curricular and pedagogical (counter) response in the form of an advocacy apprenticeship (i.e., an Issues Analysis Project) through which a more critical orientation to advocacy might be realized in TESOL.

# “DOMESTICATING” EXAMPLES IN ELT AND LTI

In this section, I will argue that ELT/LTE theory and curricula are central to the formation of LTI. Course readings, preferred theories and methods, assignments, assessment tools, and so on collectively shape the limits and possibilities language teachers come to see as part of their professional responsibilities. In short, curricular knowledge is never neutral and is always implicated in power relations and LTI negotiation. To support my claim, I will provide several examples for consideration: epistemic dependencies and (self) marginalization (Kumaravadivelu, 2012), linguistics applied (Widdowson, 1980), the recontextualization of communicative competence (Leung, 2005), language objectification (Reagan, 2004; Volosinov, 1973), and coverage of disciplinary content as control (Benesch, 1999).

The first example comes from Kumaravadivelu’s (2012) chapter, “Individual Identity, Cultural Globalization and Teaching English as an International Language: The Case for an Epistemic Break,” in which he challenges the TESOL profession to redress the centre-based hegemony of knowledge production and dissemination in the field. Drawing on Foucault, he outlines enduring epistemic dependencies2 (e.g., native-speakerism, methods, concepts of culture, textbooks) that contribute to the “marginalization” of local ELT knowledge and the “selfmarginalization” of language teachers and language teacher educators in the global periphery. Though the global periphery constitutes Kumaravadivelu’s primary audience in his chapter, the need for “an epistemic break” is equally relevant for centre-based, preservice TESOL programs, given the continuing preference in hiring native-speaking English teachers (NESTs) for most of the world’s programs in English as an international language (EIL) and English as a foreign language (EFL) and the concomitant privileging of certification and degrees from Western-based institutions, which legitimize the theories and practices that make up this lucrative hegemony (Mahboob, 2010). With its etymological link to the philosophical notion of epistemology —the origins, possibilities, and limitations of knowledge—Kumaravadivelu’s notion of epistemic dependencies foregrounds the discursive and ideological formation of LTI through the knowledge base of the discipline.

Other critiques address epistemic dependencies that are foundational to ELT. Widdowson’s (1980) discussion of linguistics applied is an important example. Whereas applied linguistics selects and applies its theories and pedagogies based on local needs and interests, linguistics applied works in reverse, projecting its scientifically derived theories onto worldly contexts in an a priori manner. By claiming the “truth-bearing” mantle of science (i.e., objectivity, impartiality, and universality), linguistics applied presumes that its theories and recommendations precede and inform all other domains of language work. In this model, the predominant identity option for language teachers is that of technician, faithful implementer of the expertise of others (see, e.g., Kumaravadivelu, 2003, ch. 2).3 Linguistics applied not only diminishes the status of teachers’ own research and theorizing, but it also places an ideological straightjacket on curricula and pedagogy, treating language as an end in itself—measured by code proficiencies and grammatical accuracy—rather than as a social practice deeply implicated in the life chances of students and their communities.

Leung’s (2005) discussion of the recontextualization of communicative competence—a dominant and enduring notion in ELT—offers similar evidence of sociality contained and domesticated via the curricularization of Hymes’s original, ethnographic corrective to Chomsky. Leung’s article details the transposition of Hymes’s local and dynamic conceptualization into a static and homogenous model—“a controlled, pedagogical ‘device’ in simulated classroom tasks”:

The objectification and reification of curriculum knowledge largely based on native-speaker idealizations and the reduction of the social to mean classroom interaction have effectively insulated the concept of communicative competence from the developments and the myriad ways in which it is now understood and used in different contexts. Theoretically as well as pedagogically, there is every reason to reconnect with the social world if the concept of communicative competence is to mean anything more than a textbook simulacrum of Englishes in the world. (Leung, 2005, p. 139, emphasis added)

Cook (2014) raises similar concerns, calling communication and communicative “effectively meaningless” terms that “stifle . . . language teaching and diminish . . . the many benefits that second language learning brings to the individual and the community” (p. 24). As he notes, “treating language as nothing but information exchange cuts out from the classroom most of what makes second language learning relevant and meaningful” (p. 24). Given the lasting global prominence of “communicative” approaches in ELT, both Leung’s and Cook’s perspectives raise significant concerns for LTI formation, in particular the need for LTE curricula that “reconnect with the social world” in ways that support advocacy and agency, not to mention the development of intrinsically motivating and socially relevant lesson plans for students.

Leung’s cautionary stance toward “objectification and reification of curriculum knowledge” also implicates the particular ways in which we come to know a language in LTE and the influence of this knowledge on LTI formation. Several authors (Clarke & Morgan, 2011; Miller, 2014; Bob Morgan, 1987; Reagan, 2004) have explored the identity positionings and pedagogical alignments that arise from language objectification (cf. Volosinov, 1973; see also empiricist/idealist conceptions, Olssen, Codd, & O’Neill, 2004; telementational and computational metaphors, van Lier, 2004, ch. 2). As Bob Morgan (1987) warned, by understanding and/or teaching language as objective tool and as innocent medium, “the agency of the speaker is drastically curtailed, reduced to selecting the correct expression from the pregiven alternatives offered” (p. 450). In contrast, constructivist and ecological metaphors position language teachers and learners as active meaning makers, contributing to the social and linguistic knowledge that is acquired and potentially transformed through classroom practices—a key dimension/capacity in fostering agency and social justice initiatives in LTI work4 (Clarke & Morgan, 2011; Reagan, 2004; van Lier, 2004).

Of further note, curricular knowledge based on processes of objectification and reification presupposes a particular kind of identity—a rational, humanist, self-knowing subject, persuasively critiqued by Norton’s (2013) feminist, poststructural theory. It is this humanistic assumption that inhibits teachers and teacher educators from exploring the person-formative nature of texts (Brian Morgan & Ramanathan, 2005) and the complex ways in which knowledge acquires and manages the student (cf. Foucault), rather than the reverse. Though research on the emotional and psycholanalytic dimensions of language learning and teaching has increased (e.g., Benesch, 2012; Granger, 2004; Motha & Lin, 2014), a rational, stable, and self-knowing subject may continue to be the default identity on offer through ELT curricula, an identity that perhaps underpins the popularity of learnercenteredness, learner autonomy, and learner motivation in ELT and their presumed universality and ideological neutrality across diverse sites of practice.5

The last “domesticating” example that I propose in this section comes from Benesch’s innovative work on critical English for academic purposes (EAP) (2001) and her discussion of needs and rights analyses, whereby conventional EAP concerns and the power relations that shape them are treated as interdependent aspects of pedagogy. Based on her experiences of teaching an EAP course linked to an undergraduate psychology course, Benesch (1999) details how coverage of disciplinary content (i.e., psychology) served to marginalize her EAP students, limiting their opportunities to practice academic language and critically engage with its content. It is an intriguing case study, in which the psychology lecturer, Professor Bell, acknowledges the learning value of student questioning and discussion, yet limits/regulates the same because of his concern over covering the standardized material seen as core or foundational for the discipline (i.e., an objectified and reified curriculum; cf. Leung, 2005). Benesch also raises specific power relations and identity effects—how Bell’s teaching strategies contributed to students’ own self-surveillance (cf. Foucault, 1980, 2008) and self-marginalization over the length of the course. As Benesch (1999) observes, coverage is a form of control:

If, in each of their courses, students must memorize large amounts of information, there is no chance for them to challenge the status quo. They are so busy listening to lectures, taking notes, reading textbooks, memorizing material and taking tests, they will have no time to occupy themselves with larger social issues or questions about the relationship between their daily lives and their education. (p. 321)

To reiterate the focus of this section, I would invite readers to consider Benesch’s discussion of coverage as relevant to the domestication of advocacy and agency as it relates to the negotiation of LTI. Though preferred methods in preservice LTE programs may differ from those experienced by Benesch’s EAP students (i.e., lecturing, memorization), the pressure on instructors to cover standardized content remains the same, resulting in limited opportunities to challenge the status quo and to (re)imagine forms of LTI capable of doing so. With the proliferation of short-term, “foundation-based” certification options in TESOL (e.g., TESOL Core Certificate Program: www.tesol.org/tccp)— co-occurring in a time of precarious employment—curricular emphases on pragmatism and instrumentality are likely to squeeze out any opportunities for LTE students to explore “larger social issues or questions about the relationship between their daily lives and their education” (Benesch, 1999, p. 321). Below, I will explore this latter claim (i.e., coverage as control) in greater detail, relating it to the analysis of a required curricular document for LTE and my broader discussion of the domestication of dissent in LTE.

To reiterate, this section has presented examples of LTE knowledge (i.e., epistemic dependencies, language objectification, and so on) implicated in the negotiation of LTI and the possibilities for agency and advocacy that such disciplinary knowledge forms offer to teachers. In proposing this argument, I do not presume that identity effects of domestication or passivity are inevitable and uniform in outcome. It is important to remember that the processes that shape LTI are complex. As language teachers, we don’t learn a new identity—or develop self-understanding—in the same immediate and instrumental way that we might learn a discrete item of lexico-grammar or a pedagogical strategy for it presentation. The processes of LTI negotiation involve nonlinear, recursive forms of learning, in which participants actively engage in constructing narratives of coherence and self-understanding (cf. patterns that connect, Bateson, 1972) across a wide range of spatiotemporal scales and experiences (Blommaert, 2013; Guerrettaz & Johnston, 2014; Larsen-Freeman, 2012; Brian Morgan & Martin, 2014; van Lier, 2011).6 Still, as Angel Lin (2008) reminds us, LTI negotiation always involves power relations: of “symbolic struggle . . . (the war of position—the struggles around positionalities, in Gramsci’s sense), which also have serious material (socioeconomic and sociopolitical) consequences” (p. 2, emphasis in original).

As I hope to demonstrate in later sections, the symbolic struggle for alternative/transgressive positionalities cannot occur solely on theoretical terms; that is, in order to advance an alternative approach in LTI work, we must also ground our efforts in context-specific policies and pedagogies through which coherent counter-narratives in support of advocacy are potentially realized. The following sections take up a specific organizational example in TESOL. The discussion links prior theoretical issues of domestication to organizational policies and curricular content involved in the professional certification of preservice adult instructors of English as a second language (ESL).

# POLICY AND CERTIFICATION TRANSITIONS AT TESL ONTARIO

It is significant that TESL Ontario, a TESOL affiliate and local host for its 2015 Annual Convention in Toronto, once had a committee called the TESL Ontario ESL/D (English as a Second Language/Dialect) Action Committee, informally referred to as the Political Action Committee (PAC) by members—this latter name reflecting the kinds of advocacy work (e.g., unfair employment conditions for teachers; ESL policy and practices in K–12 schools) that characterized the committee’s activities (Nick Elson, personal communication). While specific details of this committee’s eventual dissolution in the mid-1980s are not readily available, it did not come about as a result of a reduction in the scope of TESL Ontario’s overall administrative functions (see Burnaby, 2002; Fleming, 2007; Brian Morgan, 2015a; Valeo & Faez, 2013). Indeed, the organization has expanded its role considerably, particularly from 1994 to 2001, in a multiphase, governmentfunded certification process that culminated in the development and implementation of certification standards for non-credit ESL instructors in Ontario (Tilson, 2005). The phases of the certification process indicate broad-based consultation, including the following:

Examination [of] academic, professional, legal, financial, social and political issues associated with the development of standards and a protocol for certifying teachers of adult non-credit ESL . . . [and the] consider[ation of] ESL certification standards and protocols implemented in other Canadian provinces, in other countries, and models for professional certification adopted by other professions in Ontario. (Tilson, 2005, n.p.)

The resulting certification standards demonstrate a significant level of professionalization (TESL Ontario, 2015b), including the completion of a bachelor’s degree, proof of English-language proficiency for nonnative English-speaking teachers, and a certificate from recognized TESL training programs, whose own accreditation processes reflect high levels of professionalization and rigorous documentation of instructor qualifications and academic content. The academic requirements for program delivery are equally comprehensive (e.g., TESL Ontario, n.d.), including 250 hours of training in TESL theory and methodology and a 50-hour practicum. In sum, the resulting level of professionalization reflects standards equivalent to an MA-TESOL graduate degree, which is a remarkable level of overqualification given the poor working conditions and job insecurity in government-funded ESL programs for which TESL Ontario certification is required (e.g., Burnaby, 2002; Haque & Cray, 1997; Brian Morgan, 2015a; Valeo,

2013; Valeo & Faez, 2013). Nonetheless, TESL Ontario membership and accreditation are prerequisites in order to apply for such teaching positions.7 A first time accreditation fee is $\$ 100$ . A standard membership fee along with an annual accredited membership renewal costs teachers $\$ 168$ . Surprisingly, particularly once you consider the level of professionalization and complexity of accreditation for teachers and teacher training programs, these substantial fees do not guarantee a teaching position for applicants/members. Nor do they mark an end point in the organization’s regulation of teachers, as they are required to fulfill a minimum of 10 hours of recognized professional development (PD) per year to have their accreditation renewed.

# From Political Action to Reified Curricular Content

In terms of LTI formation, TESL Ontario plays a crucial gatekeeping role in two interrelated ways: (1) in regulating access to government-funded adult ESL teaching positions through its official accreditation and membership, and (2) in the types of LTI options promoted through official curricula, particularly in respect to the framing of teacher advocacy through program accreditation content and through its own organizational behaviour. Considering the latter, it’s important to reiterate the historical transitions that mark a shift in organizational priorities, as noted above, the prior existence of a political action committee, doing the work of advocacy and self-named in terms that articulate an agonistic orientation (Clarke & Phelan, 2015; Jord\~ao, 2016; Mouffe, 2013) on behalf of its membership (i.e., advocacy as “political action”).

The current organization, now deeply involved in the gatekeeping functions of professionalization and accreditation, has not lost sight of the need for advocacy, but its scope and framing are notably more subdued and decidedly nonadversarial. For example, in TESL Ontario’s current 3-year plan (2015–2018) (TESL Ontario, 2015c), the document notes the existence of an “Advocacy & Alliance Development task force,” whose implementational task is to promote the “recognition of TESL Ontario accreditation as instructor standard in Ontario through Languages Canada.” The strategic goal for this implementation is to “promote the value of TESL Ontario accreditation to English language educators, learners, employers, funders and the general public.” Analysis of these document elements suggests that, from an organizational perspective, the strategic and implementational scope of advocacy is mostly self-interested, focused on expanding the value of its accreditation model, and developing alliances that extend its regulatory authority.

Data from a recent TESL Ontario members survey (Valeo, 2013) suggest that a more politicized and adversarial notion of advocacy— specifically in respect to employment conditions—might be equally welcome in the 2015–2018 strategic plan. In its survey of $^ { 1 , 3 2 7 }$ respondents $3 0 \%$ of the membership), data show only $3 7 \%$ of the membership with full-time ESL teaching work, $3 1 \%$ with part-time employment, and $2 1 \%$ not employed at the time of the survey. These levels of underemployment are especially disappointing when measured by the fact that $4 0 \%$ of the respondents “have completed education beyond the minimum required for professional accreditation” (p. 56).

A follow-up study by Valeo and Faez (2013) includes interview data that give voice to experiences of job insecurity and attrition. As one respondent noted, “It’s very difficult to stay, to first get the position, and then to stay in that position for a long time because of all this uncertain budget and funding” (Valeo & Faez, 2013, p. 13). Other respondents spoke of the need to have “two or more part-time jobs on a daily basis to survive” and the “stress of working in short three-week assignments at various places” (p. 13). Significantly, many of the respondents complained that their preservice TESL programs had not adequately prepared them in finding their first jobs, nor in adequately warning them of the employment precarity that awaited them upon program completion. Considering the high levels of professionalization required (i.e., certification on par with an MA-TESOL degree) and the significant tuition and membership fees already described, such complaints are not surprising, and they draw attention to what Valeo and Faez (2013) identify as “the fragmented nature of the field in which funders, employers, schools, and teachers appear to work in isolation” (p. 13).

In part, this fragmentation reflects conflicting interests and contradictions in the field—on the one hand, stakeholder responsibility to inform students/members of the dire realities of job insecurity (as reflected in the data provided by Valeo, 2013; Valeo & Faez, 2013); on the other, the institutional/financial need to attract sufficient numbers of preservice students/members to sustain the TESL Ontario organization and the various training programs involved in accreditation. In such a conflicted environment, a so-called political action committee might appear too adversarial and hence not welcome by all stakeholders. The notion of conflict/contradiction might also be extended to specific curricular strategies and the forms of LTI they support: on the one hand, and again in response to the survey data above, the inclusion of teacher advocacy as a requirement of accreditation would be welcome—indeed, expected—but on the other, its curricular placement and framing might position advocacy in (self) marginalizing ways, hence making it a symbolic or gestural inclusion, that is, an item for curricular domestication on terms described above.

# Examining “TESL Training Topics”: Advocacy Domesticated?

As previously noted, the document for TESL Training Topics for Programs Accredited by TESL Ontario is indicative of the high level of professionalization required and expected from TESL Ontario accreditation. The document calls for “250 hours of training in TESL theory and methodology and a 50-hour practicum [a 300 hour-minimum, in total].” The program delivery chart includes 117 training topics, of which 76 topics are defined as essential and 41 topics are rated as optional.

Table 1 provides a more detailed breakdown of essential topics and training hour requirements in the TESL training topics document. Of note, the 2.3 hour average that I have assigned for advocacy does not necessarily reflect the relative distribution of curricular time and topic importance as determined by a specific program or instructor; that is, instructors could decide to assign as little as 15 minutes to an “essential” topic by allotting more time to other “essential” topics within sections. Conversely, there is nothing officially or explicitly preventing a teacher educator from infusing a critical advocacy approach or perspective across an entire program, but in the spirit of domestication that informs this article we might consider how other elements of the document might condition and contain such transformative possibilities in curricular decision making.

TABLE 1 TESL Training Topics for Programs Accredited by TESL Ontario   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Sections</td><td>Essential Topics</td><td>Minimum Training Hours per Essential Topics</td><td>Average Minimum Training Hours per Essential Topic</td></tr><tr><td>1. Theory</td><td>22</td><td></td><td>3.9 hr</td></tr><tr><td>2. Methodology</td><td>49</td><td>120 combined hours</td><td>2.3 hr (for 52</td></tr><tr><td>3. Professionalism</td><td>3 (including advocacy)</td><td>for methodology and professionalism</td><td>essential topics)</td></tr><tr><td>4. Practicum</td><td>2</td><td>Observation: 20 Practice teaching: 30</td><td>N/A (30 hr minimum for practice teaching required)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. The document notes that a minimum of 190 hours must be devoted to essential topics with the remaining 60 hours allotted to either optional topics or added to the coverage of essential topics in program curricula.

In the document, for example, advocacy is not a stand-alone construct. Instead, it is framed and conflated in the following way in Section 3 on professionalism: “TESL/TESOL Organization (advocacy and professional development)” (emphasis mine). Certainly in respect to TESL Ontario’s 3-year plan, as noted above, this framing would seem to limit/position advocacy work along the lines of the “Advocacy $\&$ Alliance Development task force” and its self-interested promotion of TESL Ontario accreditation standards. The conflation of advocacy and professional development might also be self-interested in another key respect: Section 3 on professionalism offers programs the following option: “These topics might be covered in a workshop or as an independent project,” an option not suggested for any other section of the document, and one in which the direct topic engagement of the instructor can be reduced (cf. the issue of coverage, Benesch, 1999). From an organizational perspective, the LTE instructor would be seen as acting “responsibly”—that is, early fulfilment of TESL Ontario’s PD certification requirements—if $\mathbf { s } / \mathrm { h e }$ assigned preservice candidates to take one of the numerous workshops and PD opportunities officially endorsed and/or provided by TESL Ontario (TESL Ontario, 2015a). A brief perusal of the PD site shows a substantial list of conference opportunities and volunteering, as well as workshops and webinars taught by experienced professionals.

Yet, for TESL Ontario, or any other TESOL organization, there is something profoundly ideological and deeply troubling when advocacy is conflated with professional development. In terms of LTI, advocacy takes on neoliberal overtones, as subjects are required to become increasingly entrepreneurial and inward-looking, driven to identify and compensate for “gaps” in their own skill set, ever mindful of the terrors of performativity (Ball, 2003; Clarke, 2013) they must negotiate in times of intensified job precarity (Valeo & Faez, 2013). Considering the emotional and material investments required, it is an irrational, anxiety-ridden notion of advocacy on offer, one potentially characterized as cruel optimism (Berlant, 2011), “the fantasy of meritocracy, a fantasy of being deserving . . . about so many bad jobs contingently available to so many contingent workers and never enough money, never enough love, and barely any rest, yet with ruthless fantasy abounding” (p. 167). For LTI, it is indeed quite different from an advocacy orientation informed by “political action” or in which collective, class-based explanations are explored to address the professional marginalization of adult ESL teachers (e.g., Vandrick, 2014).

In sum, I would argue that TESL Training Topics for Programs Accredited by TESL Ontario is a document that promotes the domestication of dissent in two key ways. First, by positioning advocacy as one of 76 essential topics, issues of curricular objectification (cf. Leung, 2005) and coverage (cf. Benesch, 1999) come into play, where TESL instructors—similar to Professor Bell in Benesch’s (1999) study—acknowledge the value of advocacy in the syllabus but choose to prioritize other “foundations” and “core” topics given the constraints of time. Also, the potential outsourcing of this topic—via workshops—may further reduce the instructor’s engagement with advocacy within an extensive, itemized curricular document.

Second, by conflating advocacy with professional development, the document individualizes and depoliticizes advocacy in significant ways that echo neoliberal practices (cf. the terrors of performativity, Ball, 2003; Clarke, 2013). This conflation can suggest that the sole responsibility for decent employment and a professional identity lies “within” rather than “without”—an example of Berlant’s (2011) “cruel optimism” where no amount of professional development seems to bring about the desired outcome. Arguably, matters are made worse, in large part through the (self) marginalization (cf. Kumaravadivelu, 2012) of knowledge, actions, and identities that could otherwise be mobilized toward effective, collective change (hence a “productive/destructive” relationship to “freedom” in curricular decision making; Foucault, 2008, p. 64).

# Exploring “TESL Training Topics”: Critical Opportunities?

Of course, language policies and curricular documents should not be judged solely in isolation from their intertextual and contextual factors, including the identity roles and forms of agency that teachers, teacher educators, and program administrators adopt during localized processes of interpretation and implementation (Farrell, 2011; Maciel, 2011; Ramanathan & Morgan, 2007). When analyzing the TESL Training Topics document, a key issue/question comes to mind: in spite of the “preferred” readings and positionings on offer (e.g., Chun, 2015; Janks, 2010), how might individual teachers mediate and/or implement a more politicized notion of advocacy in their classrooms? Though I have argued that the document promotes the domestication of dissent, I would also argue that it does not determine the same; that is, it is a document with significant constraints but also “small spaces” to imagine and implement a critical orientation to advocacy in preservice LTE programs. As mentioned above, the document section on professionalism (Section 3), in which advocacy is named, allows for both its “essential” and “optional” topics to “be covered in a workshop or an independent project.” The following section explores how this opportunity (i.e., an independent project) in the TESL Training document might be interpreted and implemented in a critical way.

# The Issues Analysis Project (IAP): LTI and “Advocacy Apprenticeships”

Drawing on experiential, constructivist, and community of practice theories (e.g., Beckett & Miller, 2006), project-based learning is informed by performative and activity/practice-based conceptualizations of LTI negotiation (e.g., Golombek, 2015; Kanno & Stuart, 2011; Trent, 2013; Varghese, Morgan, Johnston, & Johnson, 2005). The project briefly described here was specifically designed as a major assignment for a 3-credit university course, which is part of a preservice TESOL certificate program accredited by TESL Ontario (Clarke & Morgan, 2011; Brian Morgan, 2009). Originally conceived by my colleague, Nick Elson, the assignment is called an Issues Analysis Project (IAP), and requires preservice students to identify a “gap” in the field (i.e., pedagogical, ideological) and design a blueprint for action (e.g., advocacy letter, policy statement, workshop, curricular innovation) that potentially offers a resolution. The IAP assignment is a group project for two to four students and requires a length of about 1,500–2,000 words (project rationale, blueprint) plus appendices and bibliography of relevant sources. The description and objectives for the assignment are included in the course outline as follows:

The premise of this assignment is that the effective teacher is aware of the sociopolitical context within which she or he works. It also assumes that the instructor has a professional responsibility to attempt to deal with the issues that impact negatively on the teaching–learning process and the situation of second language learners and teachers. The objective of this assignment is to select an issue and structure a response that will at least in some way work toward resolving the issue. In other words, you will produce a blueprint for action that is responsive to the issue identified and could, at least in theory, be carried out as proposed. Your response might be in the form of a new policy, advocacy initiative, curriculum innovation, specialized materials, or an in-service/preservice workshop for teachers and/or program administrators.

Table 2 provides a summary of selected IAPs that exemplify advocacy apprenticeships and indicate the variety of blueprints for action utilized. For a more detailed discussion of individual IAPs included in the table, I refer readers to Brian Morgan (2009) for IAP Nos. 1 and 4; Clarke and Morgan (2011) for IAP Nos. 2 and 3; Brian Morgan (2015b) for IAP No. 5.

In common, the IAPs in Table 2 demonstrate the centrality of LTI negotiation—of experiential and emotional engagement—in and through the development of project topics and blueprint designs. Equally important and interconnected to LTI, all of these IAPs explore the notion of language as a social practice deeply implicated in power relations and the shaping of life chances and constraints.

The co-authors in Project 1, for example, were university employees nearing retirement with future aspirations of travel and teaching. Their project arose from the employment barriers they were beginning to discover and what they saw as an under-addressed advocacy issue in need of attention, particularly on the part of international organizations such as TESOL. Employment concerns/barriers were also central to the development of Project 3 as the co-authors researched a broad range of TESOL certificate programs, recognizing the relative advantage that a masters designation would likely provide in the increasing competition for overseas ELT positions. In the development of Project 4, identity issues were especially prominent, because the project author drew upon discrimination she had encountered in Canada as a speaker of Caribbean English, underpinning the need for an Afro-centric high school with policies and curricula more relevant to African Canadian experiences. In Project 5, one of the co-authors, a Pakistani Canadian student, saw the workshop project as addressing the diversity and complexity of Pakistan not covered in the mainstream media, as well as an opportunity to introduce content-based ELT practices around the topic of peace education.

Language as a social practice is foregrounded in the development of Project 2, the listings of valuable resources (LVR) guide for adult ESL instructors. By expanding the knowledge base and range of responsibilities for TESOL instructors of immigrants and refugees, the co-authors of this project draw attention to the displacement and domestication of social issues (e.g., employment rights, landlord/tenant rights) that can arise in the positioning of “essential/optional” curricular items (see TESL Training Topics above) and the production of a disciplinary “core/ non-core” in certification programs (see, e.g., TESOL’s Core Certificate Program: www. tesol.org/tccp). Through such positioning, meaningful social content can be silenced or trivialized in the “inadvertent” rush to cover compulsory language units, tasks, and form-focused items mandated in official ELT curricula (e.g., Anwaruddin, 2016; Benesch, 1999).

TABLE 2 Selected IAPs/Blueprints for Action   

<html><body><table><tr><td>No.</td><td>Title</td><td>No. of Students</td><td>Blueprint for Action</td><td>Description/Comments</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Age Discrimination for Overseas Teaching</td><td>2</td><td>An advocacy letter to the president of TESOL</td><td>Recommendation for official policy related to age discrimination for overseas teaching. Effective use of UN and EU policy documents and Internet ads regarding topic.</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>LVR (Listings of Valuable Resources) for Immigrants&#x27; Access to Rights in Canada: An Introductory Resource Guide</td><td></td><td>Reference guide for teachers in community- based adult ESL programs</td><td>The LVR features information on the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom, Ontario Human Rights Act, Employment Standards Act, Landlord and Tenant Rights, and a comprehensive list of</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Creation of a MA- TESOL Program to Replace an Existing Undergraduate TESOL Certificate</td><td>4</td><td>An advocacy letter to the president of the university</td><td>agencies. Based on research of several MA-TESOL programs in the United States, this IAP group found no substantial difference in content; yet they noted the employment advantages for MA graduates in a competitive/ saturated employment market.</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Recommendations for Teaching Culture in an ESL/EAP Classroom of an Afrocentric High School</td><td>1</td><td>Language-in- education policy recommendations and curricular examples A four-part/1-day</td><td>A critical approach to policy and content, including validation of Caribbean English, for an Afrocentric High School created by the Toronto District School Board. This workshop utilized a</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Peace Education Through Transformative Learning</td><td>2</td><td>workshop for Pakistani EFL/EIL teachers</td><td>transformative learning approach (cf. Sifakis, 2007) to present integrated content and language learning activities</td></tr></table></body></html>

A final point regarding Project 2 is the issue of diverse academic identities and how they might influence the development of IAPs. Students enrolled in short-term TESOL certificate programs often come from academic backgrounds and worldviews informed by the humanities, social sciences, and fine arts, for example. In the process of conceptualizing and organizing an IAP, dialogue amongst co-authors can foreground the extralinguistic dimensions of a topic in ways less apparent to student teachers too closely or narrowly immersed in formal linguistics and second language acquisition. Increasingly, I’ve come to appreciate and encourage these types of interdisciplinary conversations in the development of the social and ideological dimensions of the IAP.

# The IAP: A Work in Progress

The IAP continues to be a work in progress with a number of conceptual and related pedagogical issues for consideration. Calling the IAP an apprenticeship in advocacy, for example, invokes the notion of situated learning (cf. community of practice [CoP]—Swain et al., 2015; Wenger, 1998), the specific programmatic, intertextual, and interpersonal environment in which the projects are created. In a preservice context, concurrent enrolment and participation in a practicum enhances IAP blueprints that are pedagogical or curriculum-based. In addition, course readings and thematic units that present case studies of teacher agency and advocacy help students imagine the same in their IAP designs, a key element in fostering a critical LTI. Apprenticeship also extends to how these case studies are taken up in class—that is, in the variety of meaning-making perspectives that inform reading prompts (e.g., literacy phases, Cummins, 2000, pp. 274–275), and in the conceptual linkages made between case studies and research inquiry paradigms, some of which underpin and support teacher agency (see, e.g., naturalistic inquiry, Lynch, 1996; participatory inquiry, Heron & Reason, 1997). These types of micro–macro linkages in class are crucial. Without an articulated pedagogy—of case studies linked to theory—criticality risks sounding rote and inch-deep, and, more significantly, is too easily ignored or marginalized in the organization of LTE programs and curricula (see, e.g., a critical philosophy of teaching, Crookes, 2015).

The notion of apprenticeship also draws attention to the “foundational duality” (cf. Wenger, 1998, pp. 65–66) of collaborative practice; that is, the IAP is both conforming and transforming in respect to the constitution of a discourse community or CoP (e.g., a professional TESOL organization) and the identities of its participants. Simply put, what types of texts need to be mastered or controlled in order to have one’s voice heard and respected by TESOL peers, mentors, and/or gatekeepers? As I describe elsewhere (Brian Morgan, 2009), considerable time in class is devoted to the IAP “blueprints” as genres (Tardy, 2016), field-internal texts whose reproduction or control serves as an object of apprenticeship and a condition of community membership— a conforming process, through which transforming opportunities are made available as result of the demonstrated competence and enhanced status of the presenters. In the creation of the IAP, groups might investigate the key organizational features of a preservice/in-service workshop on employment issues in TESOL, for example, or the key rhetorical moves/features of a two-page letter to a politician or administrator in support of a language policy or funding initiative.

The collective interpersonal feature of the IAP process is sometimes the most difficult (i.e., coordinating schedules and participation) yet possibly the most important aspect of apprenticeship and LTI negotiation in the project; that is, for any kind of advocacy initiative to be adopted, individuals need to develop leadership capacities and build coalitions in order to effectively challenge or transform existing arrangements. Toward this outcome, as Hyland (2006) observes, one of the weaknesses of the apprenticeship metaphor is that it “suggests a clear route to a well defined goal, achieving membership, which confers privileges and responsibilities” (p. 21). In reality, the privileges of membership are often unevenly distributed and for some unattainable, irrespective of the expertise demonstrated—a critique more broadly applied in respect to CoP as a guiding metaphor in LTI work (e.g., Varghese et al., 2005). The notion of community presumes consensus and often masks the hierarchies, power relations, and domesticating practices that impede changes essential to the continuing relevance and long-term survival of organizations.

# CONCLUSIONS

With the active involvement of professional bodies, teachers have consented to what amounts to impoverishments in practice, such as the elevation of the pseudo-scientificity of standards at the expense of subsequently devalued factors such as affect and intuition, as the price for purportedly accruing greater regard from politicians, policymakers, the media and society in terms of perceived improvements in standing and status. In this sense, increased teacher professionalization has been something of a Faustian pact, with teacher professionalism harnessed to government education reform agendas. (Clarke & Phelan, 2015, p. 260)

The story of Faust is a provocative metaphor for consideration in these neoliberal times of soul-wrenching hyper-regulation (we are talking about a deal with the devil) in relation to LTI and ELT workplaces (cf. terrors of performativity, Ball, 2003; Clarke, 2013). In many jurisdictions the devil seems to be getting the best of the bargain, provided with a steady supply of overqualified teachers with which to maintain high professional standards at low, unprofessional costs. This article has no simple or short-term solutions to offer in respect to LTI formation; it is an exploratory account and suggests that a mix of reflection and action over the long term may be the best way forward. Regarding the former, critical reflection and reflexivity encourage us to recognize and address self-marginalizing barriers; for example, that in furthering a critical and agentive approach to LTI work, our field/profession might be prone to linguacentric analyses and solutions, which are perhaps the residue of linguistics applied (Widdowson, 1980) in the foundations of our knowledge base. Following Leung (2005), the need “to reconnect with the social world” (p. 139) is of relevance not only for communicative competence but also professional competence. In terms of action, this article has called for a more politicized and nonconsensual approach to advocacy on behalf of TESOL, starting with the academic and professional development of new language teachers, who are in the field for the longer run—hopefully—and who inherit/negotiate a deeply divided political world (cf. agonistic politics, Mouffe, 2013) in which teachers’ expertise is often treated with suspicion and disrespect (Tellez & Varghese, 2013).

The primary focus of this article has been on one specific professional body, TESL Ontario, in large part because of my familiarity with the organization as a past member and as a former coordinator of a preservice training program accredited by the organization. To be fair, I recognize that my critique of the organization’s certification practices—and the framing of advocacy, in particular—is an unbalanced view that fails to acknowledge TESL Ontario’s invaluable contributions to adult ESL instructors and their students. Moreover, it would be unwise to assume that the domestication of dissent, in the negotiation/formation of LTI, is something specific to any one organization. In this regard, we should remember that the protocols and standards for certification adopted by TESL Ontario involved broad consultation with various stakeholders, including national and international ELT organizations. In short, the Faustian pact suggested by Clarke and Phelan may be much more widespread and systemic than the scope of this article suggests.

As global organizations such as TESOL expand into the lucrative professional development market (see www.tesol.org/learn), we should be mindful of the ethical challenges involved, especially the kinds of professional identity options we support through the privileged forms of knowledge on offer. In our short-term TESOL certificate programs, for example, to what extent are the proposed foundations and core elements universal? To what extent, and in which settings, do we need to counter the epistemic dependencies and forms of (self) marginalization (cf. Kumaravadivelu, 2012) that such programs may inadvertently promote? For example, are the “good enough” teachers (cf. Zeichner, 2011) we certify also introduced to issues of employment precarity and forms of discrimination based on race, age, sexuality, and native-speakerism? Or do coverage concerns (cf. Benesch, 1999) serve to depoliticize and displace these “non-core” items? Perhaps an even greater Faustian pact may arise from our growing international research “footprint”—the various TESOL publications, conferences, workshops, webinars, and other knowledge-based products, all of which enhance the status and influence of the organization. As TESOL expands its global influence, we should also be mindful of domesticating practices that conflate advocacy with professional development, in which organizational consensus is presumed and the scope of advocacy confined to promoting organizational expertise. In this regard, the fostering of critical, transformative teacher identities is a crucial resource for diversifying the voices and options heard in TESOL.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author wishes to thank the anonymous reviewers and editors for their insightful comments and recommendations for the development of this article.

# THE AUTHOR

Brian Morgan is an associate professor in the English Department of Glendon College, York University, in Toronto, where he teaches courses in content-based EAP, language teacher education, and graduate courses in applied linguistics. His primary research area is in critical theories and their potential implementation across English language teaching contexts.

# REFERENCES

Andreotti, V., & Pashby, K. (2013). Digital democracy and global citizenship education: Mutually compatible or mutually complicit? Educational Forum, 77, 422–437. doi:10.1080/00131725.2013.822043   
Anwaruddin, S. M. (2016). Contesting the violence of Tylerism: Toward a cosmopolitan approach to the curriculum of second language teacher education. Teaching in Higher Education, 21, 429–441. doi:10.1080/ 13562517.2016.1155550   
Atkinson, D. (2014). Language learning in mindbodyworld: A sociocognitive approach to second language acquisition. Language Teaching, 47, 467–483. doi:10.1017/S0261444813000153   
Ball, S. J. (2003). The teacher’s soul and the terrors of performativity. Journal of Education Policy, 18, 215–228. doi:10.1080/0268093022000043065   
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of mind. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.   
Beckett, G. H., & Miller, P. C. (Eds.). (2006). Project-based second and foreign language education: Past, present, and future. Greenwich, CT: Information Age.   
Benesch, S. (1999). Rights analyses: Studying power relations in an academic setting. English for Specific Purposes, 18, 313–327. doi:10.1016/S0889-4906(98)00011- 8   
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Benesch, S. (2012). Considering emotions in critical English language teaching: Theory and praxis. New York, NY: Routledge.   
Berlant, L. (2011). Cruel optimism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.   
Biesta, G. (2009). Good education in an age of measurement: On the need to reconnect with the question of purpose in education. Educational Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 21, 33–46. doi:10.1007/s11092-008-9064-9   
Block, D., Gray, J., & Holborow, M. (2012). Neoliberalism and applied linguistics. New York, NY: Routledge.   
Blommaert, J. (2013). Ethnography, superdiversity and linguistic landscapes: Chronicles of complexity. Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Burnaby, B. (2002). Reflections on language policies in Canada: Three examples. In J. W. Tollefson (Ed.), Language policies in education (pp. 65–86). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Chun, C. (2015). Engaging with the everyday: Power and meaning making in an EAP classroom. Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Clarke, M. (2013). Terror/enjoyment: Performativity, resistance and the teacher’s psyche. London Review of Education, 11, 229–238. doi:10.1080/ 14748460.2013.840983   
Clarke, M., & Morgan, B. (2011). Education and social justice in neoliberal times: Historical and pedagogical perspectives from two postcolonial contexts. In M. R. Hawkins (Ed.), Social justice language teacher education (pp. 63–85). Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Clarke, M., & Phelan, A. (2015). The power of negative thinking in and for teacher education. Power and Education, 7, 257–271. doi:10.1177/1757743815607025   
Cook, V. (2014, August). Communication is a worn-out word. Contact English Language Learning Magazine, pp. 23–24. ISSN: 0227-2938.   
Corson, D. (2002). Teaching and learning for market-place utility. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 1, 1–13. doi:10.1080/13603120110057118   
Crookes, G. (2013). Critical ELT in action: Foundations, promises, praxis. New York, NY: Routledge.   
Crookes, G. V. (2015). Redrawing the boundaries on theory, research, and practice concerning language teachers’ philosophies and language teacher cognition: Toward a critical perspective. Modern Language Journal, 99, 485–499. doi:10.1111/modl.12237   
Cummins, J. (2000). Language, power and pedagogy: Bilingual children in the crossfire. Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Elson, N. (1997). Power, politics—and persuasion: ESL in changing times. TESL Canada Journal, 14(2), 55–67. doi:10.18806/tesl.v14i2.685   
Farrell, T. S. C. (2011). Exploring the professional role identities of experienced ESL teachers through reflective practice. System, 39, 54–62. doi:10.1177/ 1362168814541722   
Fleming, D. (2007). Adult immigrant ESL programs in Canada: Emerging trends in the contexts of history, economics and identity. In J. Cummins & C. Davison (Eds.), The international handbook of English language teaching (pp. 185–198). New York. NY: Springer.   
Foucault, M. (1980). Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings 1972–1977. Brighton, England: Harvester.   
Foucault, M. (2008). The birth of biopolitics: Lectures at the College de France  (trans. G. Burchell). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Golombek, P. (2015). Redrawing the boundaries of language teacher cognition: Language teacher educators’ emotion, cognition and activity. Modern Language Journal, 99, 470–484. doi:10.1111/modl.12236   
Granger, C. A. (2004). Silence in second language learning: A psychoanalytic reading. Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Guerrettaz, A. M., & Johnston, B. (2014). Materials in the classroom ecology. Modern Language Journal, 97, 779–795. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4781.2013.12027.x   
Gulliver, T. (2010). Immigrant success stories in ESL textbooks. TESOL Quarterly, 44, 725–745. doi:10.5054/tq.2010.235994   
Hall, J. K., Vitanova, G., & Marchenkova, L. (Eds.). (2005). Dialogue with Bakhtin on second and foreign language learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Haque, E., & Cray, E. (2007). Constraining teachers: Adult ESL settlement language training policy and implementation. TESOL Quarterly, 41, 634–642. doi:10.1002/j.1545-7249.2007.tb00096.x   
Harklau, L. (2003). Representational practices and multi-modal communication in US high schools: Implications for adolescent immigrants. In R. Bayley & S. R. Schecter (Eds.), Language socialization in bilingual and multilingual societies (pp. 83–97). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Hawkins, M. R. (Ed.). (2011). Social justice language teacher education. Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Heron, J., & Reason, P. (1997). A participatory inquiry paradigm. Qualitative Inquiry, 3, 274–294. doi:10.1177/107780049700300302   
Hyland, K. (2006). English for academic purposes: An advanced resource book. New York, NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis.   
Janks, H. (2010). Literacy and power. New York, NY: Routledge.   
Jord\~ao, C. M. (2016). EFL as hydra: Rescuing Brazilian teacher educators from privilege. In P. Bunce, V. Rapatahana, R. Phillipson, & T. R. F. Tupas (Eds.), Why English? Confronting the hydra (pp. 255–266). Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Kanno, Y., & Stuart, C. (2011). Learning to become a second language teacher: Identities-in-practice. Modern Language Journal, 95, 236–252. doi:10.1111/j.1540- 4781.2011.01178.x   
Kubota, R. (2011). Questioning linguistic instrumentalism: English, neoliberalism, and language tests in Japan. Linguistics and Education, 22, 248–260. doi:10.1016/j.linged.2011.02.002   
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2003). Beyond methods: Macro-strategies for language teaching. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.   
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2012). Individual identity, cultural globalization and teaching English as an international language: The case for an epistemic break. In L. Alsagoff, S. McKay, G. Hu, & W. Renandya (Eds.), Teaching English as an international language: Principles and practices (pp. 9–27). New York, NY: Routledge.   
Lantolf, J. L., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language development. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.   
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2012). Complexity theory. In S. Gass & A. Mackey (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 73–87). London, England: Routledge.   
Leung, C. (2005). Convivial communication: Recontextualizing communicative competence. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 15, 199–144. doi:10.1111/j.1473-4192.2005.00084.x   
Lin, A. M. Y. (2008). The identity game and discursive struggles of everyday life: An introduction. In A. M. Y. Lin (Ed.), Problematizing identity: Everyday struggles in language, culture, and education (pp. 1–10). New York, NY: Routledge.   
Linville, H. A. (2015). ESOL teachers as advocates: An important role? TESOL Journal, 7(1), 98–131. doi:10.1002/tesj.193   
Lynch, B. K. (1996). Language programme evaluation: Theory and practice. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Maciel, R. F. (2011). From innovation to language policy: Towards a locus of research in applied linguistics. In R. F. Maciel & V. A. Araujo (Eds.), Formacao\~ de professores de lınguas (pp. 217–254). Vianelo-Jundiaı-SP, Brazil: Paco Editorial.   
Mahboob, A. (Ed.). (2010). The NNEST lens: Non-native English speakers in TESOL. Newcastle upon Tyne, England: Cambridge Scholars Press.   
Makoni, S., & Pennycook, A. (2007). Disinventing and reconstituting languages. In S. Makoni & A. Pennycook (Eds.), Disinventing and reconstituting languages (pp. 1–41). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Miller, E. R. (2014). The language of adult immigrants: Agency in the making. Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Morgan, Bob. (1987). Three dreams of language; or, no longer immured in the Bastille of the humanist word. College English, 49, 449–458. doi:10.2307/ 377861   
Morgan, Brian. (2004). Modals and memories: A grammar lesson on the Quebec referendum on sovereignty. In B. Norton & K. Toohey (Eds.), Critical pedagogies and language learning (pp. 158–178). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Morgan, Brian. (2009). Fostering transformative practitioners for critical EAP: Possibilities and challenges. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 8, 86–99. doi:10.1016/j.jeap.2008.09.001   
Morgan, Brian. (2015a). Teaching for market-place utility: Language teacher identity and the certification of adult ESL teachers in Ontario. In Y. L. Cheung, S. B. Said, & K. Park (Eds.), Advances and current trends in language teacher identity research (pp. 235–249). New York, NY: Routledge.   
Morgan, Brian. (2015b). Language teacher education and the developing world: Exploring “horizons of possibility” for identity and agency. Linguistics and the Human Sciences, 11, 89–106.   
Morgan, Brian, & Fleming, D. (2009). Critical citizenship practices in ESP and ESL programs: Canadian and global perspectives. In D. Belcher (Ed.), English for specific purposes in theory and practice (pp. 264–288). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Morgan, Brian, & Martin, I. (2014). Towards a research agenda for classroom-asecosystem. Modern Language Journal, 98, 667–670. doi:10.1111/modl.12098   
Morgan, Brian, & Ramanathan, V. (2005). Critical literacies and language education: Global and local perspectives. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 25, 151–169. doi:10.1017/S0267190505000085   
Motha, S., & Lin, A. (2014). “Non-coercive rearrangements”: Theorizing desire in TESOL. TESOL Quarterly, 48, 331–359. doi:10.1002/tesq.126   
Mouffe, C. (2013). Agonistics: Thinking the world politically. London, England: Verso.   
Norton, B. (2013). Identity and language learning: Extending the conversation (2nd ed.). Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Olssen, M., Codd, J., & O’Neill, A. M. (2004). Education policy: Globalization, citizenship and democracy. London, England: Sage.   
Pennycook, A. (2001). Critical applied linguistics: A critical introduction. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Ramanathan, V. (2002). The politics of TESOL education: Writing, knowledge, critical pedagogy. New York, NY: RoutledgeFalmer.   
Ramanathan, V. (Ed.). (2013). Language policies and (dis) citizenship: Rights, access, pedagogies. Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Ramanathan, V., & Morgan, B. (2007). TESOL and policy enactments: Perspectives from practice. TESOL Quarterly, 41, 447–463. doi:10.1002/j.1545- 7249.2007.tb00080.x   
Reagan, T. (2004). Objectification, positivism and language studies: A reconsideration. Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 1(1), 41–60. doi:10.1207/s15427595cils0101_3   
Sifakis, N. (2007). The education of teachers of English as a lingua franca: A transformative perspective. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 17, 354–375. doi:10.1111/j.1473-4192.2007.00174.x   
Song, H. (2013). Deconstruction of cultural dominance in Korean EFL textbooks. Intercultural Education, 24, 382–390. doi:10.1080/14675986.2013.809248   
Sun, Y. (2010). Standards, equity, and advocacy: Employment conditions of ESOL teachers in adult basic education and literacy systems. TESOL Journal, 1, 1–17. doi:10.5054/tj.2010.215135   
Swain, M., Kinnear, P., & Steinman, L. (2015). Sociocultural theory in second language education (2nd ed.). Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters.   
Tardy, C. M. (2016). Beyond convention: Genre innovation in academic writing. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Tellez, K., & Varghese, M. (2013). Teachers as intellectuals and advocates: Professional development for bilingual education teachers. Theory Into Practice, 52, 128–135. doi:10.1080/00405841.2013.770330   
TESL Ontario (n.d.). TESL training topics for programs accredited by TESL Ontario. Retrieved from http://www.teslontario.net/uploads/accreditation/Institutions/ Topics.pdf   
TESL Ontario. (2015a). Activities recognized as PD. Retrieved from http://www. teslontario.net/activities-recognized-pd   
TESL Ontario. (2015b). Institutional accreditation. Retrieved from http://www. teslontario.net/accreditation/institutional   
TESL Ontario. (2015c). Strategic objectives 2015–18. Retrieved from http://www. teslontario.net/uploads/aboutus/StrategicObjectives2015-2018.pdf   
Tilson, R. (2005, March 10). A short history about TESL Ontario certification. Retrieved from http://www.teslontario.net/accreditation/shorthistoryofcertification   
Trent, J. (2013). Becoming a teacher educator: The multiple boundary-crossing experiences of beginning teacher educators. Journal of Teacher Education, 64, 262–275. doi:10.1177/0022487112471998   
Valeo, A. (2013). TESL Ontario membership survey: A brief report. Contact Magazine, Spring, pp. 54–57.   
Valeo, A., & Faez, F. (2013). Career development and professional attrition of novice ESL teachers of adults. TESL Canada Journal, 31(1), 1–19. Online ISSN: 1925-8917   
Vandrick, S. (2014). The role of social class in English language education. Journal of Language, Identity and Education, 13, 85–91. doi:10.1080/ 15348458.2014.901819   
van Lier, L. (2004). The ecology and semiotics of language learning: A sociocultural perspective. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer.   
van Lier, L. (2011). Language learning: An ecological-semiotic approach. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of research in second language teaching and learning (Vol. 2, pp. 383–394). New York, NY: Routledge.   
Varghese, M., Morgan, B., Johnston, B., & Johnson, K. (2005). Theorizing language teacher identity: Three perspectives and beyond. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 4, 21–44. doi:10.1207/s15327701jlie0401_2   
Volosinov, V. N. (1973). Marxism and the philosophy of language (L. Matejka & I. R. Titunik, trans.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.   
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Widdowson, H. G. (1980). Models and fictions. Applied Linguistics, 1, 165–170. doi:10.1093/applin/I.2.165   
Zacchi, V. (2016). Neoliberalism, applied linguistics and the PNLD. Ilha do Desterro, 69(1), 161–172. doi:10.5007/2175-8026.2016v69n1p161   
Zeichner, K. (2011). Teacher education for social justice. In M. R. Hawkins (Ed.), Social justice language teacher education (pp. 7–22). Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters.