# Bilingual returnee scholars' identity in academic writing

Albert W. Li\*,1

University of California, Irvine, USA

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords: Academic writing Bilingual writers Scholarly identity Writing instruction Intercultural rhetoric

Academic writing is a dynamic process that in some senses reveals a writer's scholarly identity. To illuminate how this identity-forming process occurs, in the present study, three Anglosphereeducated writing scholars in China were interviewed to uncover their English-Chinese bilingual scholarly identities focusing on their perspectives of academic writing in two languages. The findings reveal they were conscious of their bilingual scholarly identities as English and Chinese academic writers, and attributed their academic writing skill development to their education at universities overseas, despite holding different views about the rhetorical styles of English and Chinese academic writing. Although the three returnee scholars faced challenges with writing and publishing papers in Chinese journals, they consciously applied different approaches in practicing and promoting both an English writing style and evidence-based argumentation when writing and teaching academic writing to Chinese students. The present study unpacks the complex nature of the Chinese returnee scholars' bilingual scholarly identity construction in academic writing while highlighting their contribution to the Anglo-centric globalization of academic writing and rhetorical development. Implications for graduate research training programs and research on academic writing identity are discussed.

# 1. Introduction

Nearly five decades have passed since China implemented its open-door policy resulting in millions of Chinese students pursuing studies and conducting scientific reearch at overseas universtie i the core countriesof the Anglosphere, including the USA, the UK, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. While there is asubstantial body of research on the teaching of writing and research experiences of domestc and expatriat scolars in higher eucation., Curry illis, 2004; Li Flowerdw, 2020; ilis & urry, 2006, 2010; Shi, 2017), only a few studies have focused specifically on the academic writing experiences of Anglosphere-educated scholars upon their return to their home countrie (see Kong, 2017; in & Shi, 2024; Shi, 2003). Although studies have shown that one'sacademic writing can reveal one's scholarly identit (Ivanic, 1998; Shi, 2003) and that this identity transforms when scholars venture abroad (Casanave, 2002; Lia0, 2015; Shi, 2002), ittl is known about how early-carr bilingual scholars who have retuned from overseas navigate the intricacies of academic written discourse whil teaching and publishing academic writing in their home contexts (Shi 2002, 2003). To address this gap, in the present study, three Anglosphere-educated scholars currently teaching and conducting ac. ademic writing research at Chinese universities were interviewed to beter understand their bilingual (English and Chinese) scholarly identities in academic writing and explore how they construct ther blingual scholarly identities in writing, teaching, and publishing in

China.

# 1.1. Scholarly identity in academic writing

Writing serves as a means of constructing and expresing one's identity (Belcher et al., 2011; Flowerdew & Wang, 2015; Ivanic 1998; Ivanic & Camps, 2001). Through linguistic and discourse choice, the written communication processis not just about conveying content but also about writers shaping their sense of elf and aligning themselves with specific interests, values, beliefs, and social hierarchies (Ivanic, 1998, 2004). Aademic writing, in particular, can be viewed as a processof constructing a cholarly identity, hich refers to scholars identifying themselves as members of certain academic communities that share the same use of language and ways of thinking by drawing on certain discourse and rhetorical conventions" (Shi, 2003, p. 370). However, academic writers may encounter conflicts between their value systems and the expectations of their readers. To navigate this tension, studies have revealed that academic writers ften engage in a complex negotiation of self-representation in thir writing (Casanave, 2002; Ivanic & Camps, 2001; Shi, 2003). Thus, they need to balance between "ethos" or the \*real elf and \*personas" or the "fictional sef (Cherr, 1988, p. 252) the \*social self and the \*ersonal self (Prior, 2001, p. 56); and three interconnected aspects of self-reresentation: the self as author, which reflect the writer's authority and position; theautobiographical elf, rlating tothe witer's ife history and sense f roos; and the "discoursal self, developed through the discourse characteristics of the texts (Clark & Ivanic, 1997, p. 137). The interplay of multiple writing identities indicates that the writers self-representation in academic written practices is a multi-faceted process shaped by power dynamics among various factors (e.g., writers, readers, academic publishers, educational institutions, and Other stakeholders).

The reader and the institutional context play important roles in academic writing practices. As Shi (2003) observed, an academic writer's scholarly identity is "socilly constructed and culturally shaped' (p. 371) as academic writers learn and access writing discourse conventions through their educational institutions (Cumming, 2006). Ivanic (1998) also clamed tht \*institutional interests, values, and practices shape discourse conventions, and they construct the identities of the actual writers who draw on these discourse conventions" (p. 256). In this way, academic writers who receive academic training in different cultures or institutions (e.g, by pursuing higher education or visitig scholarships overseas) may develop multiple scholarly identities, such as the bilingual scholarly identities exposed in the current study, which develop as they make moment-by-moment discourse and rhetorical choices. Thus, scholars with the capacit to work across two or multiple national languages may identify themselves as members of academic writing communities that share the same use of the language and ways of thinking. Due to the dominance and prestige associated with certain discourse types, studies have revealed that academic writers with bilingual scholarl identitiesoften face pressure to make specific choices when writing, publishing, and teaching academic writing (see Fairclough, 1992; Lin & Shi, 2024). This dynamic and inter active connection between writers' scholarly identities and their academic writing practices explains why some bilingual scholars encounter writing-related challenges when entering the English academic discourse community (Curry & Lills, 2024; Flowerdew & Li 2009; Shi, 2003).

Similarly, scholars who have established their bilingual scholarly identities outside their own countries and then return home may have difficulties with academic writing and publishing (Shi, 2003). As studies have shown, some academic writer consciously or unconsciously adopt or reject certain identities by embracing one discursive practice over another (Casanave, 1998; Connor, 2011), while others draw on their backgrounds as a resource to navigate between their various or conflicting scholarly identities (Canagarajah, 2002). As academic writing has long been viewed as an ideological practice, academic writers shape and reshape the meanings derived from thir experience of the world from various positions within power relations (Farclough, 1992; Shi et al., 2005). This ideological practice of privileging certain written discourse types has triggered my inteest in how Chinese cholars conform to English academic writing conventions when studying abroad and also how they navigate and construct their bilingual scholarly identities in academic writing after they begin their academic careers back home.

# 1.2. Bilingual scholars' identity in academic writing

Writers with bilingual scholarly identities have been found to have difficulty engaging with English academic written communi. cation in higher education (Casanave, 2002; Shi, 2002, 2004). For instance, second language (L2) English writers, who primaril rely on translation or focus on lower-order language aspects of Englis (e., grammar, mechanics, and spelling), are ill-prepared for the demands of academic writing, which not only involves adhering to a specific cademic publication style but also entails acknowledging source texts (Becher et al., 2011). To have their students meet the requirements of non-language, content-oriented courses and acquire proficiency in academic written communication, researchers have investigated and encouraged their L2 students to employ various writing strategies. These strategies include practicing the knowledge construction process through the analysis of other authors perspectives (Swales & Feak, 2012), applying (meta) cognitive and self-regulated learning strategies (Li & Hebert, 2024; Negreti, 2012), incorporating the feedack from peers and technologies into their written product (Li, 2023; Stapleton, 2010; hang, 2024), and extensively citing source texts (Shi, 2004). By practicing academic writing conventions, such as paraphrasing, synthesizing, summarizing, and citing sources to appropriately integrate new knowledge into existing academic scholarship, students gradually become experienced members of the academic discourse community.

By following the practices of the academic discourse community in the Anglosphere, L2 writers construct thir new scholarly identitiesthrough disciplinary enculturation. Apprenticing in English academic writing involves developing one's own writing voice (Tardy & Matsuda, 2009). Some L2 writers have ben found to navigate between their first language (L1) voice and their freshly developed L2 voice (Hirvela & Belcher, 2001; Shi, 2003), while others set aside the practices and beliefs embedded in their 1 written discourse and adopt the target language (i.e., English) style wholeheartedly (Connor, 2011). In other words, L2 writers adopt the values and logic-focused style that are used and practiced in Western academia, even when these are sometimes absent or contra dictory to their home cultures. For instance, some L2 scholars from China have reported consciously redefining their "humble elf? rooted in Chinese collctivist ideology into aglorious nglish elf from Westn individualism idology, whil other Chinese students have mentioned giving up the focus on harmony, central to Chinese rhetoric, to take a more critical stance (Shi, 2003, p. 372) Moreover, considering the tradition of knowledge preservation and transmission in schools in many non-Western contexts, where words and ideas are communal, many L2 students studying at universities in the Anglosphere grapple with finding their voice and navigating the boundaries between plagiarism and legitimate imitation in their academic writing (Shi, 2004). As these L2 writers learn to appreciate, practice, and reearch Western scholarship in English when studying overseas, a new scholarly identity emerges. Some L2 scholars use \*bilingual or \*dual language' to describe themselves (Lin, 2017; hi, 2003) while others even regard English as ther "native scholarly language" when writing academic papers after years of study and research at universities in the Anglosphere (Flowerdew, 200, p.146). Upon returning to their home countries to teach and writeas universty academic taff or lecturers, these scholars often find themselves navigating two sets of expectations and values associatd with thir ilingual scholarl identitie ia, 2015; Lin, 2017; Shi, 2003) in their writing, publishing, and teaching of writing practices.

Few studies have investigated the relationship between writing teaching and scholarly identity construction, especially for bilingual academics. Research has iluminated the writing challenges faced by bilingual scholars who, whil studying in the West, aspire to be recognized as intenational scholars (Shi, 2003). These individuals often adopt English as their primary medium when writing and publishing. However, despite the critical role that language plays in shaping scholarly identity, only a few studies have been conducted on how bilingual academics perceive themselves as writers and how such perceptions affct their teaching (upon returning home). After a thorough search, I found only 10 studies that investigated the process of scholarly identity construction for bilingual scholars who returned to their home countries to teach L2 English-related courses. These studies focus on scholars educated in the Anglosphere who returned toteach English in Bangladesh (Chowdhury & Phan, 2008) the Chinese Mainland and Taiwan (Kong, 2017; Lia0, 2015; Lin, 2017; Lin & Shi, 2024; Shi, 2003), Saudi Arabia (Le Ha & Barnawi, 2015), and Vietnam (Kong, 2017). They are important for understanding how their experiences as writers in a non-native language inform and transform their pedagogical identities, which influence ther teaching roles and practices. Gnerally, these studies reveled that the scholars tnded to appreciate and apply the knowledge and skill acquired from their intenational academic training. However, only one study conducted two decades ago exploring bilingual returnee scholars writing experiences and perceptions of scholarly identit attributed English academic writing skill development to international training and educational experiences (Shi, 2003). The Chinese returnee scholars in Shi's study took pride in being Anglosphere-educated bilingual scholars and chose to follow what is typicaly associated with Western rhetorical conventions not only in writing academic papers but also in teaching and supervising their students. However, there has not been any study that shifts th fous specifically to the bilingual scholarly idnty construction of early-carer rturnee cholars across writing-related fields (eg., English, lingustics, and education). Scholars in these disciplines study writing theory and pedagogy from different perspectives and often teach writig-related courses at Chinese universities; thus, they may have a more nuanced view of the stylistic differences between English and Chinese academic writing than scholars in other disciplines.

# 1.3. The present study

Drawing on the belief that academic writing is an act of a writer's scholarly identity construction (Shi, 2003), which is institu. tionally and culturally haped (Ivanic, 998; Ivanic & Camps, 201) involving power dynamics between the reader and writer (Belcher et al., 2011; Prior, 2001), in the present study, I investigate the perceptions of three early-career writig scholars at Chinese uni. versities regarding how thir overseas education inluencd their writing, teaching, and publishing in two languages upon returning to China. Two research questions (RQ) are proposed to guide the investigation:

RQ1. : How do three Chinese returnee scholars perceive their bilingual scholarly identity in academic writing?

RQ2. : How do their bilingual cholarly identities influence the way they write, publish, and teach academic writing in the Chinese context?

# 2. Method

# 2.1. Participants

As an Anglosphere-educated scholar originall from China who has conducted writing research in Canadian and American universities since the late 2010s, I have personally witnessed the diverse paths taken by my Chinese colleagues and friends after completing their graduate degrees in writing-related fields. Although I decided to continue my carer in reearching writing theory and pedagogy at an American university, many of my Chinese peers chose to return to China and work at universities and schools there. Motivated by the desire to understand the experiences of Anglosphere-educated early-career scholars in writing, publishing, and teaching academic writing, I selected scholars whom I had personally met at international conferences prior to the coronavirus pandemic and who satisfied certain criteria, i., receiving K-12 education in China, obtaining their doctoral degrees at universties in the Anglosphere and currently holding writing-related faculty positions at Chinese universities.

The first scholar I contacted via email in January 2023 was Mike (ll names are pseudonyms), whom I became acquainted with during the 2019 Conference on Colle Composition and Communication (cccc) in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Mike, who received his B.

A., M.A., and Ph.D. degrees in English rhetoric and composition studies from three American universities, has been conducting research in rhetorical genre theory and met-discourse in first-year college writing as tenure-track Asstant Professor of Teaching at a southern Chinese university since September 2021. Lisa, another cholar in this study, made an impression on me during the 2019 American Association of Applied Linguistics (AAAL) Annual Conference in Atlanta, Georgia. Lisa obtained her Ph.D. in L2 writing pedagogy and asessment in 2021 after five years of study at an American universit. She currently holds a tenure-track Assistant Professor position at a university in eastern China. I established contact with Lisafollowing our initial meeting at the AAAL 2019 annual conference in early February 2023. Lastly, I reached out to Alan in February 2023 and included him as a participant in this study. I encountered Alan in person during the 2019 American Educational Research Association (AERA) Annual Meeting held in Toronto, Ontario. Alan completed his Ph.D. and conducted post-doctoral research in writing and learning disabilities at an American university and secured a tenure-track faculty position as an Asstant Professor at a northern Chinese universty in 2021. The basic information of the three writing scholars is presented in Table 1.

During the initial phase of my research, I considered a broader range of potential scholars. However, fter preliminary discussions and a review of their backgrounds, I concluded that the thre selected individuals provided the best potential for contributing to the research objectives. This deliberate choice stems from my objective to explore the profound and multifaceted experiences of writing researchers operating within this cross-disciplinary nexus. The thre scholars were carefully chosen based on their representative diversty and the richnes of experience they bring to their respective feds. This election was aimed at achieving a depth of insight rather than breadth. The intensive focus on each individual provided a nuanced understanding of the challenges and experiences unique to bilingual scholarly identity in academic writing.

# 2.2. Individual and focus group interviews

The objective of the semi-structured individual interviews with the three Chinese scholars was to explore their experiences and perspectives on writing and teaching academic writing afer their return to China. In March 2023, I developed seven interview questions (Table 2), which encompassed topics such as their bilingual scholarly idntity and past writing experiences in two languages, their perceptions of rhetoric styles and discourse practices in English/Chinese academic writing, and their publication and teaching experiences in China.

Between April and June 2023, I conducted online individual interviews with each scholar via Zoom. Each interview was conducted in Mandarin Chinese and lasted approximately two hours. Throughout the interviews, the scholars were encouraged to reflect on and share their experiences of writing, publishing, and teaching academic writing in China, providing specific examples and anecdotes. Based on my previous contact with them, I was able to establish a comfortable rapport with them. They perceived me not only as an insider who could understand their writing and teaching experiences, but also as an outsider with whom they could freely expressthir challenges and perspectives on writing, publishing, and teaching academic writing in China. My dual identity enabled me to elicit valuable insights during the interviews, examining the identified isues from both tic and emic erspectives Hammersley & Atkinson, 2007). In addition to the individual interviews, the scholars also completed a short survey collcting basic information about their educational backgrounds, writing-related research interests, writing course teaching at Chinese universtie, and publication records (i.e., numbers and types) in Chinese and English (Table 1).

Table 1 Participant's information.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Name</td><td> Research area</td><td>Position</td><td>Degrees</td><td>Age</td><td>Years of studying in the Anglosphere</td><td>Courses taught in China</td><td>Publications in English (n/%)</td><td>Publications in Chinese (n/%)</td></tr><tr><td>Mike</td><td>English (Rhetoric and Composition)</td><td>Assistant Professor of (Tenure- Track) Teaching</td><td>B.A. (USA) M.A. (USA) Ph.D.</td><td>Early 30 s</td><td>12</td><td>1. English Composition I/ II (Lecture) 2. Academic Thesis Writing (Lecture) 3. Teaching English for Academic Purposes</td><td>Original Research 6 / 67 % Book Chapter 2 / 22 % Book Review</td><td>0/0%</td></tr><tr><td>Lisa</td><td>Linguistics (L2 Writing Pedagogy and Assessment)</td><td>Assistant Professor (Tenure- Track)</td><td>B.A. (China) M.Ed. (China) M.A. (UK) Ph.D. (USA)</td><td>Early 30 s</td><td>7</td><td>(Seminar) 1. Research Methodology and Academic Writing in Applied Linguistics (Lecture) 2. Teaching and Researching Second- Language Writing (Seminar)</td><td>1/11 % Original Research 7 / 78 %</td><td>Original Research 2 / 22 %</td></tr><tr><td>Alan</td><td>Education (Writing and Learning</td><td>Assistant Professor (Tenure-</td><td>B.A. (China) M.A. (Canada) Ph.D.</td><td>Late 30 s</td><td>9</td><td>Testing and Assessment (Seminar) 1. Quantitative Research Methodology in Education (Lecture) 2. Academic Writing for Graduate Students</td><td>Original Research 9 / 60 %</td><td>Original Research 4 / 27 %</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Guidelines for two types of interviews.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Interview</td><td>Topic</td><td>Questions</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Individual interviews</td><td>Bilingual scholarly identity in</td><td>1. How, when, and where did you begin engaging in academic writing in English and Chinese? 2. Do you consider your identity as a bilingual academic writer in English and Chinese? And why?</td></tr><tr><td>academic writing</td><td>3. Do you feel you are more proficient in English or Chinese academic writing? And why?</td></tr><tr><td>Rhetorical styles and discursive</td><td>4. Do you believe academic writing in English and Chinese differs or shares similarities in terms of style or rhetorical patterns? And why?</td></tr><tr><td>practices in academic writing</td><td>5. Can you share your experiences of academic writing after returning to China? For example, what are your discursive practices in English and Chinese academic writing?</td></tr><tr><td>Publishing academic writing in China</td><td>6. Can you share your experiences of publishing academic writing after returning to China? For example, what is your story about publishing papers in local and international journals? 7. Can you share your experiences of teaching academic writing after returning to China? For</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Focus group interview</td><td>Teaching academic writing to Chinese students Publishing academic writing in China</td><td>example, what teaching methods or approaches have you applied to teach academic writing? 1. Can you specifically share your publication experience in local journals?</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2. (for Alan) What is your opinions about the challenges faced by Mike and Lisa in journal</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">(one hour)</td><td rowspan="2"></td><td>publication after returning to China? 3. (for Mike and Lisa) What are your opinions about Alan&#x27;s success in journal publication after</td></tr><tr><td>returning to China? 4. Did you implement any specific strategies for publishing your papers after returning to China? If yes, could you elaborate on them?</td></tr></table></body></html>

Because Mike and Lisa articulated negative experiences about their Chinese-medium publication process while Alan narrated successfu stories about publishing in ocal journals during the individual interviews, I inited the three scholars to join an online focus group interview with four open-ended questions (Table 2) in August 2023. The interactive format of the focus group interview was designed to foster camaraderie among the three scholars, a setig that Krueger and Casey (2015) suggest is particularly effctive for encouraging open and honest communication among peers with similar professional backgrounds and challenges. This follow-up interview was conducted in Mandarin Chinese and lasted approximately one hour and aimed to encourage them to share their publishing successes, failures, and specific strategies as bilingual returnee scholars in China.

# 2.3. Data analysis

The individual and focus group interviews were conducted via Zoom and video-recorded with the permission of the threescholars. Following the interviews, transcribed and translated the recorded interview data and retuned th transcripts to the thre scholars for their review and comments. One scholar made modifications to the individual interview content which was incorporated into the final version of the interview data. I then coded all the interview data to develop themes related to the RQs.

Specificall, I meticulously read and re-read the transcripts, sorting and re-sorting the transcripts to identify recurring themes and patterns. I created new themes when the unit did not fit into any of the existing coding catorie. For example, lan mentioned that he felt proud to be abilingual scholar who studied overseas which helped him become a good academic writer in two languages; this was coded as "Bilingual scholarly identity in academic writing." In another remark, Mike noted that Chinese writing is neither logical nor clear; this theme was coded as "Rhetorical styles and discursive practices in academic writing. The coding process ended when all interview data were assigned to one of the coding categories. The tentative coding scheme was also given to a research asstant as a reference to independently code the transcripts. omparing the coding revealed a high level of inter-rater reliabilit, as indicated by strong Cohens Kappa ) statisti acros al coding categories. Table 3 preents the final coding scheme. Then, an erlier version of the present manuscript was drafted and shared with the scholars for their feedback.

# 3. Findings

# .1. Mike: a proficient English academic writer with bilingual aspirations

Mike went to the USA to pursue tertiary education as an English major when he was 18. He claimed that his education in the USA had a great impact on his English writing skil development and said that he felt competent and confident in writing academic papers in English":

I've acquired a good understanding of English writing and rhetorical theories afer 12 years of study in the USA so I consider myself a good English writer in terms of general and academic writing because I can use the academic writing style to report findings, convey arguments, and cite published research. So far, I have single-authored and co-authored four English papers with my supervisor. I'm very proud of that.2

Table 3 Coding scheme for interview data with coding reliability Kappas in parentheses.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Theme</td><td>Sub-theme and description</td><td>Examples</td></tr><tr><td>Bilingual scholarly identity. in academic writing</td><td>(x = 0.92) Scholars&#x27; perceptions of their scholarly identity and writing skills in English/Chinese academic writing</td><td>Being a bilingual writer, I can write in Chinese but I&#x27;m not good at writing academic papers in Chinese as I have focused only on academic English. (Mike) I see myself as a lifelong bilingual learner of academic writing and I</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Rhetorical styles and discursive practices in academic writing</td><td>(x = 0.93) Scholars&#x27; views of the differences and similarities of rhetorical styles in English/Chinese academic writing</td><td>(Lisa) I found some Chinese writing lacked logical coherence and Chinese. scholars prefer to make some overstatements or understatements which are often inconsistent with facts. (Lisa) Sometimes I think the English writing style is more logical and I follow it to present a clear central argument at the beginning, but I. have also read some digressive grant proposals written in English, a</td></tr><tr><td>( = 0.91) Scholars&#x27; discursive practices in English/ Chinese academic writing</td><td>type of academic genre; I didn&#x27;t understand what research gap the author wanted to highlight. (Alan) I appreciate the English writing style and use evidence-based argumentation when writing academic papers in the two languages. For example, I always present a clear thesis statement, list several pieces of evidence like previous studies&#x27; findings to support/oppose my argument, and apply &#x27;first, second, third&#x27; to show textual enumerations and cohesive devices like however, furthermore, moreover&#x27; to achieve textuality. (Mike)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Publishing English/Chinese academic writing in China</td><td>(x = 0.92) Scholars&#x27; experience of publishing academic papers in local and international journals</td><td>provide concrete evidence to support my arguments instead of discussing the topic in circles. (Lisa) The editor pointed out that my writing was &quot;English-ish&#x27; and lacked fluidity and that my claims were expressed in a rather direct manner. (Mike) As I actively explore how to join the Chinese scholarly research</td></tr><tr><td>(x = 0.90) Scholars&#x27; strategy applied to success academic publishing in the Chinese contexts</td><td>with me in 2022 and they also shared their Chinese writing experience. (Alan) I started to apply AI technologies such as ChatGPT in 2023 to get automated feedback acting like journal reviewers for my papers and it helped me improve my academic writing across the two languages. (Mike)</td></tr><tr><td>Teaching academic writing. to Chinese students</td><td>(k = 0.94) Scholars&#x27; approaches and methods used in teaching academic writing to undergraduate or graduate-level Chinese students</td><td>than me so I usually seek feedback from or co-author with them. (Alan) In my class, I teach English academic writing theories only using American textbooks, syllabi, and materials that I am familiar with. (Mike) I design in-class tasks asking students to share their perspectives on</td></tr></table></body></html>

When commenting on his bilingual scholarly identity and responding to the question about whether his writing proficiency is better in English or Chinese during the individual interview, Mike gave details about his Chinese academic writig skils, perceptions of the rhetorical style of English and Chinese writing, and the reasons why he considered himself not good at academic writing in Chinese:

In fact, I'm more confident in writing academic papers in English because I haven't received any formal Chinese writing training for academic purposes. Being a bilingual writer, I can write in Chinese but I'm not good at writing academic papers in Chinese as I have focused only on academic English. I didn't often read Chinese papers during my studies in the USA. I stil remember Ifelt lost when reading Chinese papers across different academic genres such as the abstracts, journal papers, and book chapters when I was working on my doctoral disertation. I just didn't understand what the author really wanted to express after reading it three times. Can we say such writing i academic enough if your native readers in the same research field don't understand the content after careful reading?

Mike also reflected on his own discursive practices that give shape to his perceptions about rhetorical styles of academic writing and

strategies applied to improve his writing across two languages.

I appreciate the English writing style and use evidence-based argumentation when writing academic papers in the two lan. guages. For example, I always present a clear thesis statement, list several pieces of evidence like previous studies' findings to support/oppose my argument, and apply first, second, third' to show textual enumerations and cohesive devices like however, furthermore, moreover' to achieve textuality. I think this is a very clear and logical way of writing and thinking. I started to apply AI technologies such as ChatGPT in 2023 to get automated feedback acting like journal reviewers for my papers and it helped me improve my academic writing across the two languages.

Being areturnee early-career writing researcher with a bilingual scholarly identity, Mike also shared his experiences and challenges of writing and publishing academic papers in China during the individual and focus group interviews. Specificall, after obtaining his Ph.D. in English rhetoric and composition studies in May 2021, Mike joined a southern Chinese university in September of the same year. Some senior colleagues in his department advised him to not publish only in English as he did in the USA but alsoto write Chinese papers for local journals during his tenure-track period to "contribute to local Chinese scholarship development. Mike then said he started exploring how to engage in Chinese academic research and wrote a paper based on some chapters of his doctoral dissertation. However, his manuscript was continually rejected. Mike's spirit droped when he explained the reasons for his failure and his views on writing and publishing his papers in Chinese:

I hesitated when I started to convert one chapter of my doctoral disertation into a Chinese paper. I consciously, and sometimes unconsciously, used the English way of thinking and developing my paper when working on the paper. My Chinese academic writing semed to be somewhat English-ish," so I didn't think I belonged to the Chinese discourse community. Many academic terms in the rhetorical genre theory of writing are really hard to translate into Chinese. Some translated Chinese words don't convey the meaning that I wanted to express accurately. I was even under the delusion that I am an L2 academic writer in Chinese.

While commenting on his Chinese academic writing practices after returning to China, Mike also shared his publication experience with a local Chinese journal which deeply discouraged him from continuing to write academic papers in Chinese:

Unfortunately, when I wrote a paper in Chinese and submitted it to reputable Chinese journal,I did not rceive any decision or reviewers comments after waiting for seven months. I contacted the editor who informed me that I can submit it elsewhere if no decision is received within three months after submission. It was then that I realized Chinese journals may not always provide decision letters for rejected papers. The editor pointed out that my writing was English-ish" and lacked fluidity and that my claims were expressed in a rather direct manner.

The feedback left Mike feeling disappointed as he had invested significant time and efort and had hoped for more constructive comments. During the focus group interview, Mike also claimed that his failure was related to both institutional and cultural dif. ferences regarding publishing papers in Chinese. Lisa and Alan agreed with Mike's opinion as illusrated in the following exchange:

<html><body><table><tr><td>Mike:</td><td>Im    t  tt e   c</td></tr><tr><td>Lisa:</td><td>suissi  iin ri eliw aetonh th theu  thr rs. en they accept these submissions without sending them out for peer review. I age wth you, ik.  a  this from y hie e. Bese ree schrs from the Wet ae mia wt th l aadema</td></tr><tr><td>Alan:</td><td>and publication cutre th do f some jouals may fen reect our papers or many sons. W ned to build god conctions with th cal witing re ont and eo tial udng to ur r te d then our r will be onied or publicton n reutable Chinese journals. I age t is. hats the ron wh I co-athor papers wth my oal per scholars cause they belong to the ocalscourse comunty and have oectio wth al chrs ad or. The kow he d f h jols and he rule to play th me eter thn u. suest ou</td></tr></table></body></html>

Unlike the challenges he faced in Chinese academic writing and publishing, Mike's English writing and publishing endeavors flourished afer returning to China. As anative Chinese teacher, Mike developed a strong reearch interest in L2 academic writing with several of his papers published i international journals. Mike explained why he was very motivated to continue writing and publishing about academic writing in English.

I'm familiar with the English publication process and my publication experience has been efficient and smooth even after I returned to China. The reviewers provided content-level helpful comments and I'm good at addressing and rebutting the reviewers' comments in English. The editors of most international journals that I submit to are always eficient when handling my submissions. I also used the knowledge I acquired in the USA to investigate my students' writing in English. Because I'm a bilingual writer, my students are comfortable using Chinese after class to talk about their challenges in English writing. I also found that several international multidisciplinary writing-research journals such as Writen Communication, the Journal of Second Language Writing, and Assessing Writing, welcome writing studies from various learning contexts.

Without suficient experience and practice in Chinese academic writing, Mike claimed that when he teaches academic writing in China, therei "no Chinese language in my writing class" and he follows the approach that he learned in the USA to use only English, ncluding mostly English-only teaching materials when teaching English academic writing. The juxtaposition between the Chinese and the English ways of teaching academic writing was evident in one of his comments:

In my class, Iteach English academic writing theories only using American textbooks, syllabi, and materials that I am familiar with. I want my students to use authentic materials to learn how to write and publish good English papers. If I notice the author of an academic writing textbook is a Chinese scholar whom I don't think is prolific in English writing, I do not use their book in my first-year general writing and academic writing classes. I think Chinese scholars who were not educated in English-speaking countries are not qualified to teach English. I asked my past American supervisorsto make comments on my teaching of English writing in China and they are always supportive and responsive.

When communicating with his students about academic writing, Mike recommended that they \*read only about five Chinese papers, believing these papers were exceptionally well-written. When his students wanted to enhance their hinese academic writing skills, Mike encouraged them to take courses with Chinese teachers in other departments at his university.

# 3.2. Lisa: a lifelong learner of academic writing in two languages

After completing a master's degree in applied lingustics in China, Lisa pursued a second one in language education in the UK when she was 25 and spent five years at an American university before graduating with a Ph.D. in the feld of L2 writing pedagogy and assesment. Unlike Mike, who atributed English academic writing development only to his higher education in the USA, Lisa believed that "academic language is everyone's second language" and she said her undergraduate and graduate studies at Chinese and Western universities had helped her become a lifelong bilingual learner of academic writing:

I see myself as a lifelong learner of academic writing in both English and Chinese and I fel a sense of belonging to two academic discourse communities. I specialize in L2 writing research, acrowded field with many bilingual researchers. As one of them, I can use academic language to report findings in Chinese on topics related to Chinese scholarship on L2 writing; likewise, I can also write literature reviews in English related to Western researchers' studies on L2 writing. I now have publications in both languages.

When Lisa compared her experience in writing Chinese and English academic papers, she considered both Chinese and English as her second language in academic writing and shared her view that \*some Chinese writing lacs logical coherence and Chinese scholars [sometimes] make overstatements or understatements which are often inconsistent with facts." She then described her writing style and discursive practices in academic writing in the two languages:

In my English and Chinese academic writing, I try to avoid using big words or overstating ideas at the beginning of my paper. I try to provide concrete evidence to support my arguments instead of discussing the topic in circes.I also sense that the English writing style and way of thinking are too direct and concise which may not be applicable for publications in China. There is no right or wrong; there are just different cultural values attached to writing in the two languages.

In the following excerpt, Lisa explains why she views herslf as a lifelong learner of writing in the two languages, and how she nakes links and transfers writing expertize between the two writing systems.

Chinese and English academic writing are mutually related and share some similarities, especially in aspects like structure and in-text citations. But I've also noticed some differences; for example, Chinese papers have brief introduction and literature review sections and writers use more words to report quantitative findings. My writing experience in one language helped me write in another language. I think my academic writing in one language is neither better nor worse than the other.

Being a bilingual writing researcher, similar to Mike, Lisa wrote a Chinese academic paper based on a side project during her Ph.D. studies but had an unpleasant publishing journey in a local journal afer returning to China. Lisa hesitated for a moment and said. Academic publishing in Chinese is really difficult." She added:

I read my newly written Chinese paper many times and felt that it was wellwritten and had my own writing style. I then submitted it to a local journal and I felt very angry afer reading the feedback from two reviewers as their comments were completely different from the type of comments I usually receive from international journals on my English papers. Reviewer 1 (R1) used complicated Chinese writing logic without providing any useful suggestions. In the end, R1 believed that my paper lacked content related to reviewing and discussing the current L2 writing teaching approach with Chinese characteristics i., Marxist theory-guided language education in China). My colleagues told me that all Chinese higher education institutions have started to implement the Ideologies and Political Theory Teaching in All Courses" policy. I am not a scholar specializing in Marxist theory and socialism, and I don't know how to integrate political theories into my English writing teaching and assessment. I felt confused and angry and started doubting my academic career and my future in writing and publishing in Chinese.

Lisa became pessimistic about academic publishing in China when she read the comments of a second reviewer of her paper (R2)

who \*used convoluted language in Chinese to praise her study" but suggested Lisa balance the numbers of Chinese and English ref. erences cited in the paper by adding some Chinese papers written by R2. The editor aso advised Lisa tocite more language education research with Chinese characteristics and Chinese papers written by R2 because R2 isa well-known scholar in China." Lisa observed that the publication proces of this particular Chinese journal appeared to exhibit alesstringent approach to rigor and anonymity, diverging from the double-blinded peer-review standards she had come to expect in her academic field Lisa further complained:

What surprised me was my Chinese colleagues' attitude when I asked them if I should follow the two reviewers comments to revise. They said I should feel grateful and expres my appreciation when writing my response because f I rebut their comments or do not follow their comments then my submission may be rejected.

Without accepting the \*ridiculous advice" from her colleagues, together with her revised submission, Lisa \*wrote a long response letter to decline R1's suggestion about including political theories in the literature review and discussion sections; she also told the editor that she "would only cite papers written and recommended by R2 if they were closely relate to her paper." Although her paper was finally published, Lisa decided she would not submit her papers to Chinee journals in the foreseeable future if the status quo did not change.

I encouraged Lisa to share her tortuous publication experience with Mike and Alan and asked them to respond to Lisa during the focus group interview. They understood Lisa's negative experience of writing and publishing under the demands of infusing political theories and the les-than-rigorous peer review proces. Remarkably, Mike said that his feeings about English writing and bilingual scholarly identity had changed through encountering the Chinese publication culture.

<html><body><table><tr><td>Mike:</td><td>Im o  t      t   f . I complly  t e  h s t  tr anis ti.  the eaouthe Marxist thoryded ag tio in China se  am miia t h tr as el t  hi olle ourad m t . just nt k    wti t h . s win r, w d wtig s  al process but aademi writin practice and rerh should not be guided b rain political dologe. now reall vale Englis witing and the</td></tr><tr><td>Alan:</td><td>international publication process more. Thanks ik r s r st.  cl th in ig hg  t irs thigo thrd p th  l  ar nh had  to  iill crrcty mnng thiltil hry t the eing f mwiting  f  hd it wlef th thy. heor my chk th liti dictio o wtig irt and h look at your content thin t is ry common that ten-dcate erchers in China may experiene and be asked to follo the ule fr reearch publications.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Contrary to her experience with publishing research in some Chinese jounals Lisa said, I'm very satisfied with my English writing and publication experience before and afer I returned to China. She enthusiastically shared why she preferred writing and publishing in English as Mike did:

I usuall receive very clear, specific, and helpful feedack from international journal reviewers. The reviewers directly pointed out issues in my papers using subheadings to indicate which section and page needed major or minor revisions. They create a space for me to communicate my research by asking me some critical content-oriented questions and providing me with a chance to share my perspective. I sense that these anonymous reviewers are genuinely invested in helping me improve the quality of my English academic writing. I also followed their detailed way of providing comments when I was invited to review for international journals..

In contrast to Mike, who only uses English to teach academic writing, Lisa, who views herself as a bilingual writer and writing researcher, applies a balanced and English-oriented approach to teaching academic writing to graduate (M.A. and Ph.D.) students in applied linguistics in her classes. In this excerpt, Lisa explains her writing teaching beliefs and practices:

I carefully select three types of academic writing papers as teaching materials and balance the number of these materials: a) English papers written by native English scholars,b) English papers written by non-native English scholars, and c) Chinese papers written by Chinese scholars. I design in-clas tass asking students to share their perspectives on academic writing in the two languages and encourage them to respect both Chinese and English traditions of academic writing.

When there is limited time for Lisa to discuss academic writing style in the two languages with her students, she said she would highlight and prioritize English papers written by native English scholars" and ask her students to read Chinese papers ater class given that her department requires students to write their M.A. and Ph.D. theses in English. Additionall, students had to write her course assignments (iterature reviews and methodology sections of their research) in English. She sometimes consciously lets her students use the English way of thinking and the English approach' to develop their academic writing even when they wrote in Chinese. In doing so, she belieed her students would avoid getting lost or veering off topic which she felt was more likely if they wrote in Chinese.

# 3.3. Alan: a strategic and collaborative bilingual academic writer.

Alan pursued his postgraduate tudies in Canada and the USA after receiving his B.A. in literacy education at a \*normal" university (i.e., a teacher-training institution) in China. Also proud of his blingual scholarly identity in academic writing, Alan commented that

he felt very lucky to be a bilingual academic writer.

I was supported by my family to conduct research in North America. Some of my Chinese friends do not have such a valuable opportunity. After studying overseas for about nine years, I believe I am quite good at academic writing as a bilingual scholar and I'm able t co-author papers with Chinese and Westen scholars. I am fre to express my research findings and join scholarly discussions in the written language without any restrctions. Ialso have good single and co-authored journal publications in two languages.

Having a similar postgraduate educational experience to Lisa, Alan also noted his past experience and discursive practices in linking ind transferring academic writing expertize between the \*interdependent" writing systems and acknowledged that \*bilingualism is a gift that we should appreciate and make use of."'

I think there are two independent but interconnected systems in my brain. Yes, they are interdependent. A good writer can correctly use English rhetorical styles when writing English papers, and Chinese as well. Sometimes I think the English writing style is more logical and I fllow it topresent a clear central argument at the beginning, but I have also read some digressive grant proposals written in English, a type of academic genre; I didn't understand what research gap the authors wanted to highlight. Sometimes I think the Chinese writing style is more clearly and closely linked with the topic and is more logical than English writing because I usually write a concluding sentence in my literature review to summarize the paragraph and echo the beginning sentence. In fact, I think my learning of English academic writing helped me reflect on and improve my Chinese writing. And when I was writing Chinese papers, it trigered some ideas to consider for writing well in English. So, I enjoy this process of learning how to write, and I am better than both English-only and Chinese-only scholars.

As a bilingual writing researcher, unlike Mike and Lisa, Alan claimed that he did not experience any unexpected setbacks in his publishing journey with either international or local journals afer returning to China because he wrote academic papers in both languages "with attention to the audience."

I did not have any Chinese publications before I returned to China. I wrote my first Chinese paper afer I conducted an experimental writing study at a Chinese high school and it was published in a local Chinese journal after one round of major revisions.I think the two reviewers comments were quite easy to addres and I undersood what the reviewers expected to read because I am also a Chinese scholar. I always try to get inside my readers' minds when writing academic papers. You know, that is called \*audience awareness. If I writ in Chinese, then my readers will be mostly Chinese scholars. This forces me to take the Chinese way of thinking and use Chinese words which reflect Chinese cultural values. If I write in English, I wil use English rhetorical style, logic, structure, and evidence-based argumentation to write for my English-speaking readers, whether they are native or L2 English scholars, and address their comments and suggestions accordingly.

In contrast to Mike who recently started to use ChatGPT to improve his Chinese writing, and Lisa who did not mention any writing strategies for improving her writing, Alan said that he used peer support as a social earning strategy to improve his academic writing and publishing by inviting China-educated researchers to co-author Chinese and English papers with him. Mike and Lisa were also invited to discuss with Alan on his success:

<html><body><table><tr><td>Mike:</td><td>Thanks, la or shg y inng try.  thnk e h ma hdif  wth ai ulishig in hn seu aademic rt and wtin rh  re qut dift righ t eciat yr nt at sing he from l chers as a quick way for us to understand Chinese academia. Hopefully, I can become a strong bilingual academic writer in my area.</td></tr><tr><td>Lisa:</td><td>Cogration  yorh ublitions, n  ee th u e y  r c   blish in hnee jounal.  s quetion and hikng ut ing y hd witr idt aer wth h joal.  hantrie oe but I agee that seeking writing expertise from Chinese scholars and co-authoring with them can be a good strategy for academic suces. You are not alne i. f we dide  onte our schlarship  hina, w hould ot wit he llcronty athogh this identty</td></tr><tr><td>Alan:</td><td>construction procesis toous and time-onsuming. y monoligal clleague are bter at publishing Che papers than me so I usuall seek feak frr t t  of theix mdd ei   ie a it thei ok, e   .        were later acd re. e ca ly con or rch as is chols  eekig per uport can hl s ep thr lf of our identity as Chinese scholars in academic writing.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Much like Mike and Lisa's experience in international journal publications, Alan commented that as areturnee scholar, his English publication record was successful.

I specialize in secondary students' writing difficulties and, being a bilingual writer myself, I can also seek peer support to improve my writing, right? Some of my Chinese-educated colleagues in my department have good Chinese publication records and eagerly hope to publish their studies internationally. Those Chinese writers are quite familiar with academic writing and publishing processes as well as the academic network in China. As I actively explore how to join the Chinese scholarl research community, it eems that we can build a strong research team if we collaborate with each other, so I invited some scholars to co. author with me in 2022 and they also shared their Chinese writing experience. So far, we have co-authored two Chinese papers and one English paper that are currently being reviewed. I am very proud of being a bilingual writing researcher.

Unlike Mike who only uses English in his academic writing class, and Lisa who applied an English-orientated" approach to teaching academic writing, Alan constructed his blingual scholarly identity in teaching academic writing to M.A. and Ph.D. literacy education students by applying abalanced and bilingual approach; he also provided proofreading support for their English writing Alan shared his teaching approach:

I try to convince my students that they can become bilingual writer although I know some of them will study overseas and only publish in English. use model papers written in both languages to help my students understand academic writing isues and ask my students to work in pairs to identify the similarities and differences between the two languages. I want my students to be aware that English academic texts can be well written by Chinese scholars and Chinese academic writing can be poorly written by Chinese scholars as well.

To support his students' academic writing, Alan prepared a list of required and recommended readings about academic writing both in English and Chinese. Alan also provided proofreading support because most of his students co-author English papers with ther research supervisors. He hoped that he could \*use their English publications as good writing samples to educate the next generation of academic writers in China."

# 4. Discussion

Unlike studies that have focused on the construction of the academic writing identities of domestic and international students who have assimilated into Anglosphere academia (Hirvela & Belcher, 2001; Li & Flowerdew, 2020; Shi, 2017) and studies that have investigated well-etalished scholars development of academic writig identitie i their home contexts (Lin & Shi, 2024; Shi, 2003), the present study reveals how bilingual cholarly identity was constructed in three early-arer rturne scholars writing, publishing, and teaching processes as it relates to academic writing.

# 4.1. Bilingual returnee scholars' identity in academic writing

The three scholars unanimously atributed their English academic writing kills to their education at universities in the Anglo. sphere. Mike observed that undertaking his university education at universities in the USA profoundly influenced his Englishacademic writing. Lisa and Alan also acknowledged the positive influence of their postgraduate overseas studies in the USA, the UK, and Canada which helped them become competent and confident bilingual academic writers. Echoing Lin & Shi's(2024), and Shi's(2003) finding that the education received at overseas institutions can lead returnee scholars to have a deep appreciation of English academic discourse and rhetorical style, which distinguishes them from their monolingual counterparts, Mike observed a distinct divide between "we'" as Anglosphere-educated bilingual writers and they' as local (Chinese) writers. Mike's choice to write academic papers in English also supports Casanave's (1998) and Shi's (2002, 2003) contention that returnee cholars value and prefer to write academic papers in English.

Further, the cholars perspectives on academic writing skils highlight the complex and multifaeted nature of academic writing proficiency in the two languages (see Curry & Lills, 2004; Flowerdew & Wang, 2015; ilis & Curry, 2006, 2010 Lin, 2017). A common view put forward by the three scholars was that academic writing skils concern reviewing and citing previously published research, reporting findings, communicating ideas, and persuading with evidence. Alan also suggested that academic writing competence involves the skill to expres deas and join scholarly discussons without barrers Interestingly, as Lisa and Alan noted, bilingual academic writers can consciously and unconsciously transfer their academic writing expertize across two interdependent writing systems. Their positive experience of transferring thir writing knowledge from their L1 to their 2 not only supports the belief that first-language skill are the foundation of L2skills development (Canagarajah, 2002; Cumming, 2006; Shi, 2003) but als reveals that L2 writing education can influence first-language academic writing.

4.2. Bilingual returnee scholars' perceptions of rhetorical styles and discursive practices in academic writing

The scholars different perceptions and atitudes toward English and Chinese rhetorical style reflected their personal biases toward both cultural isues and intercultural hetoric se Olinger, 2016; Shi, 2003). The thre scholars perceived logicalit or digresiveness of the rhetorical style of both Chinese and English texs varied according to their individual viewpoints. None of them was entirely committed to the idea that English writing and Chinese writing have particular monolithic stylistic traits. Although Mike and Lisa subscribed to the broad consensus view that English writing embodies specificity and directness, while Chinese writing leans towards a general and indirect approach, Alan claimed that academic papers in English can also be \*illogical' and \*digressive," and that the Chinese way is more clearly and closely linked with the topic. The contrasting views of the thre scholars' perceptions of what counts as logic or digression in two languages thus indicate the complexity of understanding the construction of a bilingual cholarly identity in academic writing through difrent languages (see Belcher, 2012; Flowerdew & Wang, 2015; Ivanic, 1998).

All threescholars appeared to align themselves with the value system or writing conventions associated with the English language and used evidence-based argumentation in their daily discursive practices when writing papers in both Chinese and English. However, the influence of their education at universties in the Anglosphere semed to vary among the scholars. Mike and Alan appeared to have fully embraced Western academic norms and English rhetorical styles, effctively becoming proficient English writer, while Lisa maintained an ongoing learner's perspective toward English academic writing, highlighting a lifelong commitment to honing her skills. Fllowing previous research on multifceted self-representation of academic writers (Belcher, 2012; Flowerdew & Li, 2009; Ivanic, 1998 Ivanic & Camps, 2001; Lin & Shi, 2024; Prior, 2001), the findings show that scholarly identities in academic writig associated with particular languages probably exist among many bilingual writers who, like early-career writing scholars Mike, Lisa and Alan, share similar languages and cultural backgrounds and have a nuanced take on stylistic differences between academic writing in each language.

# 4.3. Bilingual returnee scholars' publishing of academic writing in China

When writing and publishing academic papers in China, Mike tended to write his Chinese academic papers in a Western way which was criticized by a journal editor. This type of experience dovetails with Shi's (2002) finding that returnee scholars may receive occasional criticism from local editors of education/English/linguistics journals when they use English rhetorical styles in their Chinese writing. Both Mike Lisa, and their Chinese colleagues also observed that well-established scholars continue to be able to publish ther studies without rigorous peer review, as revealed by Shi (2002) two decades ago. Unfortunately, in this es-than-rigorous journal publication process (Shi et al., 2005) reviewers sometimes also request that their own papers be cited by authors in their resubmissions as Lisa experienced. As a result, both local and retrnee early-career scholars in the fields of education/English/linguistics may face a trade-off between writing in Chinese or English and publishing in local or intenational journals (Curry & Lilis 2024; Flowerdew & Li, 2009. This chllenging decision regarding language choice and publication avenues underscores the complex landscape of bilingual scholarly identity in academic writing as these returnee scholars navigate the dynamics of local academic networks and publication expectations to construct their scholarly identities in China.

Infusing ideologies and political theories into classroom instruction and their research papers may not be surprising for Chinese scholars beause this trdtion hs ong history among hine journal edos; i. they reiew all submissions to sure the olitical direction of each paper is "correct to avoid the journal being banned by the government (Shi t al., 2005). In this way, reviewers for Chinese journals, like the ones Lisa encountered, may request the writer t follow the national political direction to improve the paper. Unlike her Chinese collagues, however, when Lisa received social-political comments from a local journal, as a Western-educated bilingual scholar, she refused to infuse ideologies and political theory into her revised paper and resisted the government policy noting that ffairs of the state are irrelevant to her research topic and can even be considered medding. Such demands clerly gave the scholars a negative perception of publishing in Chinese academia and seemed to make Mike and Lisa value publishing internationall, which they perceived as fair and transparent. These demands for politcal infusion also probably ifluenced their stil-developing and ever-shifting scholarly identity after returning to China.

# 4.4. Bilingual returnee scholars' teaching of academic writing in China

Regarding the thre scholars' experience of teaching writing to Chinese students, Mike decided to entirely use English, while Lisa applied an "English-orientated" approach, and Alan applied a bilingual one, i., mixed Western and Chines. Their choices may indicate that Anglosphere-educated scholars in writing-related fields have more comprehensive and thorough training in English academic writing than they do in Chinese (Kong, 2017). This preference for the language and rhetorical styles of English appears to reflect a\*power struggle" (Fairclough, 992) between the two writing systems. Some Anglosphere-educated Chinese scholars like Mike promote thedirect and logical English approach when teaching their students to write in the two languages which has left them open to occasional criticism of their Chinese papers from local journal editors and reviewers (Shi, 2002; Shi et al. 2005). These scholars teaching preference also reveals the dominant status of English writing and rhetorical style in academic written communication and how, in the past five decades, returnee Chinese scholars with bilingual scholarly identities write and teach academic writing in a way that contributes to the Anglo-centric globalization of an English writing style.

# 5. Implications, limitations, and future research

The current study employs the concept of bilingual scholarly identity as a lens to explore how three Anglosphere-educated early. career scholars in writing-related fields write teach, and publish while interacting with their teaching and research contexts after returning to China from abroad. The findings reveal that the research-based academic programs (e.g., M.A., Ph.D., and post-doc fellowship) at universities in the Anglosphere may need to better attend to the complexity of international students' bilingual scholarly identity construction. Specificall, the supervisors of international students should be aware that their supervision and feedback on their students' writing shape not only their students' written language development but also their bilingual scholarly identity construction as early-career scholars. It may be beneficial for students and their supervisors to have discussions about how to understand rhetrical styles and the diversity of academic written discourse among diffrent languages as wellas basic concepts in intercultural rhetoric. In doing so, early-carer bilingual scholars can be informed about the differing nuances between the English discourse community and their local one when they are teaching in their home contexts. Educators are thus encouraged to explore how research students can be bettr supported in constructing and negotiating their bilingual scholarly identities while studying overseas and how the writing, teaching, and publishing cultures can influence the development of a bilingual scholarly identity among returnee early-career scholars in writing-related fields and beyond.

Despite the insights gleaned from the three bilingual returnee cholars, relying solely on their elf-reported responses may not fully capture how they write up their studies and teach academic writing. Additionally, the findings regarding the returnee scholars experiences of publishing in Chinese journals and their percetions of academic writing stle are probably confined to disciplines in the humanities and social sciences and may not apply to the natural sciences. Another notable limitation is the limited number of scholars involved in the study. The insights gathered are based on a smal, select group, which cannot flly represent the diverse experiences and perspectives of returnee scholars as a whole. To address these limitations, future research should broaden is scope. Future research in the area should involve returnee scholars in multiple disciplines using multiple sources of data including the scholars writings, classroom observations of their teaching, and interviews with their colleagues and students, which may provide insights about their scholarly identity construction.

# Funding

The author received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Albert w. Li: Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation Conceptualization.

# Declaration of Competing Interest

The author declared no potential conficts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

# Data availability

The author cautions that the raw data supporting the findings of this article are not publicly available, as they could compromise the privacy of research participants. However, an anonymized dataset is available upon reasonable request, exclusively for scientific purposes, from the author until August 2025.

# Acknowledgments

This article is dedicated to Dr. Ling Shi, who has been the author's mentor, friend, and unfailing source of inspiration. With three decades dedicated to research in second-language writing and academic writing, Dr. Ling Shi's scholarly contributions continue to significantly impact the field. Her legacy endures as she embraces her retirement as Professr Emerita at the University of British Columbia, Canada.

The author extends special thanks to the handling editor, Dr. Mimi Li, whose critical insights significantly shaped this article. Additional gratitude goes to Drs. Ling Shi, Paul Stapleton, Susan Ballinger, and the three anonymous reviewers, whose detailed and constructive feedback on earlier drafts proved immensely valuable.

# References

Beher, .012   n   . .,     . 66) Foreign Language Teaching and Research Press.   
Becher, D. Jns, A, & Palidge, . 2011). Ne dictions in Eglish fo pecific puse rearch. An Abr, MI: Unersty f Michigan Pres.   
Canagaraa, . 2002in wierdthe ac cot s acitica ionh. Jo of ish for ic e, 1, 294.   
asanave, C..202) wiing ga: Muli-cl c studs f admic lite pcties in higher tioMwah, : Lr rlbaum.   
Casanave, C. P. (1998). Transitions: The balancing act of bilingual academics. Journal of Second Language Writing, 7, 175-203.   
Cherry, R. D. (1988). Ethos versus persona: Self-representation in written discourse. Written Communication, 5(3), 251-276.   
hr P  08) i   .ic ou of Education, 28(3), 305-316.   
Clark, R., & Ivanic, R. (1997). The politics of writing. London, UK: Routledge.   
Connor, U. (2011). Interculural rhetoric in the writing classroom. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press.   
Cumming, A. (2006). Goals for academic writing: ESL students and their instructors. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Curr, M. J. Lilis,T. 2024). Mulingalim in acadmic witing for publicaion: Putting English in its place anguage Techng 571), 87-100.   
Cry,  J 0 c i   , l, 3, 663-688.   
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.   
Flowerdw, J. (200 ot, mt pal cition, ad h ntiveglish-k chr.  Qrrl, 34 27-150   
owed  , 9. is  r b    ih i   l sciences. Journal of Second Language Writing, 1, 1-16.   
Flowerdew, J., & Wang, S. H. (2015). Identity in academic discourse. Annual Review of Aplied Linguistics, 35, 81-99.   
Hammersley, M., & Atkinson, P. (2007). Ethnography: Principles and practice. London, UK: Routledge.   
Hrela r, 001). g k e he mie vd i  min wir. J  n 10 83-106.   
Ivanic, R. (2004). Discourses of writing and learning to write. Language and Education, 18(3), 220-245.   
Ivanic, R. (1998). Writing and identity: The discoursal construction of identity in academic writig. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Ivanic, R., & Camps, D. (2001). I am how I sound: Voice as self-representation in L2 writing. Journal of Scond Language Writing, 10, 3-33.   
Kong, M. L. F.(2017). On teaching methods: The personal experiences of teachers of English. RELC Journal, 48(2), 197-209.   
Kruger,   015 ,r  .)o p pi 506-534). John Wiley & Sons.   
Le Ha, P.  Bw,  2015). e gish, i dire an toizatione alie akicking hgr io in d Aa ay. Language and Education, 29(6), 545-565.   
Li, A. W. (2023). Using Peceptiv to support I-based online writing asesment across the disciplines Asssing Writing 57, Article 100746.   
Li, et2 t  37 1545-1573.

Purposes, 59, 29-41. Lio, 15 it Washington. Lillis, T, & Curry, M. J. (2010). Academic writing in a global context: The politics and practices of publishing in English. Routledge. Written Communication, 23(1), 3-35. Ln, .. 017e  r ch   g    che i n hg   ng [Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation]. University of British Columbia. Lin,  hi  24).inty a so f i in n in .  of Identity and Education, 23(1), 126-140. eeti    i ie  t ei k  n and evaluation of performance. Written Communication, 29(2), 142-179. Olinger, A. R. (2016). A sociocultural approach to style. Rhetoric Review, 35(2), 121-134. Prior, P.201). V in txt, ind, and st: isric conts f ore aqsition and us. l f Sond ng ing 10 55-81. Shi  01   i   a 73, 1-23. Shi, L. (2004). Textual borrowing in second language writing. Written Communication, 21(2), 171-200. Shi, L. (2003). Writing in two cultures: Chinese professrs return from the West. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 59, 369-391. Shi, L. (2002). How western-trained Chinese TES0L professionals publish in their home environment. TES0L Quarterl, 36, 625-634. Shi, L., Wang, W., & Xu, J. (205). Publication culture of foreign language education joumals in China. TEs01 Quarterly, 39, 765-776. Stapleton, P. (2010). Writing in an electronic age: A case study of 2 composing proceses. Jodl of Englis fo cademic Purpose, 9(4), 295-307. Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2012). Academic writing for graduate students. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press. Tardy, C. M., & Matsuda, P. K. (2009). The construction of author voice by editoria board members. Writen Communication, 26(1,32-52. Zhang, Y. (2024). The gift of feedback. Science, 383(6683), 674.