# Effectiveness of student academic presentations: What do we learn from presentation guidebooks?

Alla Zareva

046 Batten Arts and Letters, Department of English, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, 23529, United Stat

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Handling editor: Guangwei Hu

Keywords:   
Student academic presentation   
Effective presentation   
Presentation guidelines   
Presentation manual   
Successful presentation   
Survey

This research is based on a survey of recently published presentation guidebooks designed for both general academic readership as well as scientific and technical communities. The primary objectives were 1) to examine how Anglophone academic culture views effectiveness of academic presentations and, respectively, determine the shared core principles which contribute to it; 2) to identify additional explicitly stated aspects of effective presentations, both general and/or areaspecific; 3) to get a better sense of the generalizability of the language recommendations in the guidebooks by looking into whether they were derived from large language data sources or were based primarily on the authors' subjective language observations.

Overall, the survey revealed that Anglophone academic culture has a consistent view of several core principles on which effective and successful academic presentations should be built. The guidebooks also offered a shared set of additional characteristics, associated with both the preparation and delivery stage of effective presentations. However, the majority of the surveyed guidebooks lacked in the depth and breadth of their treatment of the language use in presentations. The findings of the survey can be beneficial to instructors and novice presenters alike.

# 1. Introduction

Compared to academic writing, student academic presentations are lessfrequently addressed and used as a learning opportunit at all levels of higher education (Author, 2012; Bankowski, 2010). However, in the last couple of decades, the interest in academicpresentations as a genre and academic sub-register has noticeably increased, perhaps, because both students and instructors have come to realize that preentations not only bring learning beefit, but they also equip students with skill that are incrasingly valued professionall (Author, 2009, 2012, 2020; Chivers & Shoolbred, 2007; Dannels, 2003; Jiang and Qiu, 2022; Van Emden & Becker, 2004). As Van Emden and Becker (2004) put it succinctly:

The ability to present acase clearly, cogently and confidently is enormously valuable at every stage of students' lives, whatever the subjects they study; it willbring them success in academic work, job interviews and their future working lif - it's the most transferable of all their skills, and a critical part of their professional development." (p. vii)

However, even though the efectivenessof academic presentations is often at the center of research arguments about the value of presentations, it is stll somewhat unclear what specifically it is asociated with. Thus, the impression that there is some common understanding of qualities like "efective," "successful," "dazzling," or "perfect' describing presentations in many presentation guidebooks sems more like a promotional marketing strategy than a clear or shared notion. In realit, the vagueness of those otherwise desirable qualities of presentations is the norm rather than the exception.

This state of affairs sems to prompt the question of what makes presentations effctve from an Anglophone academic culture point of view since effectivenessis amore nuanced rather than a straightforward ntion. lso, given that aademic presentations are a speech event designed for an audience and delivered to an audience it is logical to expect that language contributes to thir ffectiveness to a large extent. In that sense, it would be useful to know what the sources of the language recommendations are in the presentation guideboos and whether they are data-based or mostly limited to the authors' personal experiences with the language used in this context. By surveying a mix of general and area-specific recently published guidebooks on academic presentations, my hope is not only to provide some content of the notion of ffective and sucesul presentations as perceived by Anglophone academic culture but also to synthesize some of the desirable characteristics which contribute to it. To my knowledge, such surveys are carce, which leaves most instructors in different discilinary ares or English for academic purpose (EAP) and English for specific academic purpose (ESAP) to rely primarily on their personal experience with presentations or their familiarity with presentation recommendations (Author, 2020; Bankowski, 2010). Thus, one of the intended purposes of the currnt survey is to help instructors target explicitly the qualities commonly associated with the notion of efectie presentations in Anglophone academic culture when teaching presentation competencies to both English native-speaking (L1) and second language (L2) users.

The rest of the paper discusses the findings from the survey with a focus on three main aspects: 1) the core principles of ffctive academic presentations,2) shared additional charactristics contributing to the effctivenessof presentations, and 3) the source/s of language recommendations ffered in the guidebooks. The survey was carried out from a listener accommodation perspective, which means that aspects of academic presentations that are primarily speaker-oriented (e.g., topic selection, public peaking skils, vocal projection, the use of relaxation techniques) are left out of this discussin. I should also add a caveat here that the survey is, by no means, comprehensive. Rather, the intention i to provide an initial overview of how recently published guidebooks treat the notion of succesul or efetive student academic presentations in Anglophone academic culture with resect to the three areas of interes noted above.

# 2. Description of the presentation guidebooks included in the survey

Guidebooks on developing the skill for designing and delivering efective or successul presentations are plenty on the market. While all of them target novice or inexperienced presenters, some are designed for professional readerships (i.e, people who need to give presentations on the job) and others target primarily students who may need to develop presentation competences or hone their presentation kils while completig their college degre t is important to recognize this difference because, when the promised ideal presentations are qualified as effective or successu, the understanding of those qualities depends on the reading audience the guidebooks are targeting. For example, presentation guideboos designed for readers who are already working in various professional settings (eg., business, ales, management, engineering, technology) regard a scesful presentation to be one that makes people act on the information they have been presented with or one that changes the world r at least your lttle i of it (Raybould, 2015, ix). In academia, on the other hand, student preentations are primarily utilized as an effctive leaning task, and one of their main purposes is to encourage students to learn and use the communication conventions of their discipline so that they sound professinal and discipline-appropriate when giving a presentation (Author, 2020; Dannels, 2003). Thus, the complexities and the expectations for students' presentations (undergraduate and graduate alike) are diffrent compared to professional presentations given on the job. Respectively, the notion of effectiveness is different in many ways in those two contexts.

The current survey focuses only on the characteristic features that Anglophone academic culture recommends as desirable in academic presentations. Five main criteria were applied to the selection of the sources included in the survey: 1) the presentation sources had tobe written and originally published in English; 2) they had to be published between 200 and present day;3) their targeted reading audience had to be primarily university students in Anglophone academic culture (among other potential readers); 4) their focus needed to be on giving academic presentations rather than on public speaking in general; 5) the sources had to be designed for developing students' presentation skills in several broad academic areas (e.g., humanities, social sciences, technology, engineering).

Thus, the presentation guidebooks included in the survey $( N = 1 5$ ) were all published in English between 2002 and 2021. To identify them, I searched all library databases to which the university has access, including WorldCat by using search terms like "academic presentation," "student academic presentation," "student presentation, "scientific presentation'" and "science presenta tion. The books identified as relevant for the survey slightl varie in their targeted reading audiences, but they were all designed primarily for student presenters (among other potentially interested readers). About half of them $( n = 8 )$ were designed for a general academic audience (i.e., Chivers & Shoolbred, 2007; Engleberg & Daly, 2005; Levin & Topping, 2006; McCarthy & Hatcher, 2002; Reinhart, 2002; Raybould, 2015; Schwabish, 2017; Van Emden & Becker, 2004). The rest of the guidebooks $( n = 7$ were designed mainly for areaspecific scientific and techical communities (i.e., Anholt, 2006; Carter, 2021; Davis et al., 2012; Krantz, 2017, Patience et al., 2015; Platow, 2002; Silyn-Roberts, 2002).

Per the authors descriptions, the majority of the surveyed guidebooks were primaril written for university students whose native language is English and who study in Anglophone academic contexts. However, most authors mentioned that students for whom English is a second/subsequent language (ESL) would also benefit from the advice and recommendations they had provided. Rein hart's (2002) guidebook was the only one specifically written for advanced ESL students, preparing tostudy in English-based higher education institutions. Krantz (2017) also partly targeted international student readers who are in technical fields. Both authors, though, commented that their guidebooks could be successfully used with L1 and ESL readers alike.

Finally, four of the surveyed guidebooks (Carter, 2021; Davis et al., 2012; Patience et al., 2015; Silyn-Roberts, 2002) had a focus both on technical writing and academic speech, including presentations. Those sources were included in the survey because the relationship between academic writing and speaking is undeniable, especially from the point of view of what Swales (2004) has alled "genre chains (p. 22-23)i.., a logical sequences of genres which usually build upon each other. For example, if we take a technical field of study, some research into atechnical issue may leadto the writing of atechnical report; the technical report may result in a presentation about possible technical solutions; the presentation may lead to the writing of agrant proposal or businessplan to secure funding for the prosed technical solutions, etc. Thus, combining the discussion about disciplinary writing with academic presentations highlights a logical connection between oral and writen academic prose, which may go unnoticed in guidebooks focusing singularly on writing or academic speech. At the same time, the combined focus of the included sources also allows to emphasize important differences between academic writing and speech which may not be obvious or intuitive to novice presenters.

# 3. Method

To accomplish the three main objectives of the survey,I read and manually annotated the selected presentation guideboos. I had acces to the sources in three formats: hardcopies, electronic acess, or hybrid aces (ie, in both formats). The patterns of what characteristics were considered to make presentationseffective and/or sucesful were determined based on the explicit statement f those ualie i te rr is ters  ftive fftiel , s in  those qualities ether in the local or the lager context of the characteristic they described. In the rare occasion, when an author used those keywords very sparingly in their guidebook, synonyms like compeling, convincing, essential, oustanding, powerful,strong were considered. ddtionall, the athr d to offer an eplanation aout how the charteristic contribtd o the fftiveness of a presentation. The example below, which comes from Carter's guidebook (2021, p. 9), isannotated to illstrate how the two iden. tification criteria were applied:

In fact, many of the most memorable, effective presentations (explicit reference) are also the most focused (a characteristic feature that contributes to the effectiveness of a presentation). They resonate with audiences, sometimes long after they are presented, because everything in them is important and impactful (explanation about how the characteristic contributes to the effectiveness of the presentation).

Recommendations that were not explicitly marked by the authors of the guidebooks as contributing to the efectiveness and/or succes of presentations were considered to be more like secondary rather than primary contributorstotheir efectiveness Hence, they were not accnd for in te sation tes. o, inste f ve e f effctive efftivel essl, suesl in the guideboos (i.e., uses without a prior or subsequent explanation of what, for example, effctiverfers to were not included in the analysis ., Experienced speakers probably only need a good outline to prepare andgive n effectie presentation (Krantz, 2017, p. 10).

Once all sources were analyzed, the observed patterns were categorized along two categories -., 1) core principle (if all f the reviewed sources identifid and noted them as fundamentalsof effctive presentations and 2) additional aspects of effective presentations if the characteristics were brought up in some sources (at minimum, two guidebooks) but not in others.

# 4. Core principles of effective academic presentations

Even though the surveyed sources targeted either a general academic readership or readers from a number of different disciplinary areas, there were several commonalities that they all addressed as core principles of effective and sucesful presentations. Those commonalities sugested that the presentation as a genre in the Anglophone academic culture is conventionalized to a large extent, hence, the core principles can be considered fundamental to the development of ffective presentations regardlessof disciplinary rientation. In what fllows, I wil briefl discuss the common core principle of effective presentations found in the surveyed sources.

First,al of the reviewed sources referred to two connected, yet distinct, stages in the development of academic presentations-the stage of preparation and the stage of delivery. However, they were not unanimous on whether one stage is more important than the ther, though most agreed that sccessul presentations hvil depend on the prearation stage. Perhaps, this is because, at this stage, all speaker- and listener-oriented decisions are made to ensure that a presentation is structured, wellorganized, and appropriately aligned with the targeted audience and the purposes of the discourse. The delivery stage brings the preparation stage to ife and, even though it has its own challenges, those challenges are mostly performance-related (Author, 2020).

Second, al surveyed guidebooks pointed out the central role of the content of a presentation as a major guiding principle. In fact, no other recommendation can work if a presenter does not have something meaningful to say (Carter, 2021; Platow, 2002). As Carter (2021) put it: \*The goal of designing a great presentation is not to take bad scientifi content and disguise it as great. The goal is to communicate great content in a clear, succinct, and inspiring way ., to value and respect your content by presenting i i the best possible light." (p. 5).

At the same time, the diffrent situational characteristics of a presentation setting (e.g., audience, discipline- or non-discipline. specific topic, specific communicative purpose) inevitably influence the organization of a presentation's content. For example, the content of a technical research report presented to an audience of engineers willbe likely influenced by the technical nature of the reseach and the extnt to which the audiencis familiar wit the topic itelf hus, such a prentation will e expected to have all the ingredients of a research report g., rcognition of a problem clearly formed research questions, description of the experimentation, data analysis, presentation of the results, conclusions and recommendations) in adition to technical details, formulas, calulations, graphs and ther pertinent technical information. f, however, a similar report i to be preented before n audience of, say, invetrs, then, it will probably retain some f it structure, but the technical detis wllikely be toneddown not only to aommodat the more varied technical familiarity of the audience, but also to acknowledge that an audience of investors will most likely be looking for answers to different sets of questions compared to an audience of engineers. Equall importantl, the different audiences will also, most probably, have their own expectations about the ganization of the presentation's content so that it s aligned with their schema.

Third, all surveyed sources noted the importance of keeping the audience in mind in different ways. However, dependent on Whether the authors considered the preparation or the delivery stage of a presentation to be most important, they emphasized different aspects of what counted as an effetive audience orientation of apresentation. By and large, the authors of the general guideboos put most of their emphases on recommendations related to the performance part of a presentation to address audience accommodation. They tended to emphasize the efects of voice and volume, breathing, speech rate, enunciation, variation in speech, body language, eye-contact, facial expresson, posture, movement, etc. with ittle to no mention of audience analysis (i.e., who the audience is) and audience needs analysis (i., what an audience needs to know tocomprehend a preentation). I other words, those guideboos tended to be more speaker-than listener-oriented which is probably because they were designed for a readership with no specific disciplinary affiliation.

On the other hand, guideboos targeting more advanced students in various disciplinary areas tended to underscore the important role of audence analysis in efetive preentations, which is usuly carried ut during the praration tage and, rectively, trigers performance adjustments later on (Carter, 2021). They tended to be more listener-oriented and emphasized the importance of analyzing and keeping in mind the general expertise f the audience, its composition, values, level of topic familiarity, the language it is acustomed to, its prefrences t fata nfomation dislay, its expttions of (disclinay) aproriatenes in the use f different kinds of visuals (e.g., table, figures, graphs, photographs), points that will be expected to be addressed in a presentation, possible questions that may be raised, and others. Thus, the discipline-specific guideboos tended to highlight that doing audience analysis and keeping the audience in mind is a complex task, which requires students to think both as disciplinary insider (as presenters) as well as disciplinary non-specialists (as listeners) when designing their presentations.

Fourth, academic presentations are necessarily highly structured because they have to be delivered within a time limit. These two characteristics of presentations always put aditional pressures both on presenters as well as on listeners. So, structuring the content and organizing the discourse in disciplinary recognizale ways should e sn as opportunities to lit some of those cognitive pressures from the spakers and listeners alike. Pt derenly, presenters neo organze and structure ther complex content so that it can fit a specified time limit which, in turn, requires them to decide and plan ahed of time what tosay, how much detail to include, and what to leave out (Carter, 2021; Engleberg & Daly, 2005; Platow, 2002; Raybould, 2015; Schwabish, 2017). Importantly, an esential part of the sequencing of the informational content is to present the most powerful arguments frst because they are most likely to have the greatest impact on the overallpeception of the rest of the content due to the so-called primacy effect (i.e, the efect of information presented earlier compared to the effect of information presented later) (Raybould, 2015).

From a lister's perspective, i is easier to follow, understand, and recollect  well-organized preentation beause the story line" starts to flow smoothly when complex ideas are sequenced thoughfully (Carter, 2021, Raybould, 2015, Van Emden & Becker, 2004) Additionall, several of the surveyed sources (Engleberg & Daly, 2005; Silyn-Roberts, 2002) noted the thre-step organization principle Tell'em what you're gonna tell them; tell'em; then tell'em what you told'em.' f ourse, there is more than the "ellem" strategy to a good rganization of a presentation, but the important point here is that this principle of content recycling underscores the benefits of repetition and restatement of the main ideas of a presentation as an organization principle It encourages listeners to stay focused, inres their sense of familirity with the content, facilittes ther making connections across the main idas, and helps them remember them better (Raybould, 2015).

Fifth, another shared guiding principle of efectve presentations across the surveyed sources was the rehearsed nature of academic presentations. All sources emphasized the importance of rehearsing a presentation thoroughly and in full including with the use of technology and supporting prompts if used (e.g., cue cards or flashcards). Generally, rehearsals are commonly thought to benefit primarily presenters, for instance, by helping them overcome nervousness, practice peaking skils, internalize the flow of the pre sentation, synchronize the operation of technology with the speech delivery, boost presenters confidence, etc. However, most guidebooks pointed out that rehearsals benefit listeners as well For example rehearsals help eliminate redundancies in speech and increase resenters precision of expression which, in tun, i likel to mak it easir for listeners to bettr comprehend the content of the presentation. Rhearsals help with the idntification f content that may need to be emphasized to draw theattention of listeners to it, for example, through tone and intonation, body language, or side design. Rehearsals also help set up an appropriate speech rate which, among other benefits, facilitates the online procesing needs of listeners. Thus, iven that even seasoned presenters rehearse, practicing a presentation is more than a general recommendation for novice presenters. Iti thesential link between planing and performance, which also allows for final touches before the delivery of the presentation itsef to the intended audience.

Sixth, communication with the audience is central to the efectivenes of presentations even though a presentation is a monologic discourse (Anholt, 26; Author, 2009; Engleberg & Daly, 2005; Raybould, 2015). In regard to ths principle, some of the guidebooks pointed out the distinction between presentations which are primarily performance-oriented and others which are more message-oriented (Levin & Topping, 2006; McCarthy & Hatcher, 2002). In performance-oriented presentations, the audience is assumed to be there primarily to evaluate the entertainment value of a presentation while, in the message-oriented ones, the audience is assumed to be there primaril for the message. Thus, from a listener point of view, the sucess of presentations is evaluated in different ways. That is, in the performance-oriented ones, it is evaluated by the level of entertainment and, in the message-oriented presentations -by the extent to which the listeners comprehend, value, and retain the message (Carter, 2021; McCarthy & Hatcher, 2002; Raybould, 2015; Silyn-Roberts, 2002).

The final shared core principle which contributes to the effectiveness of academic presentations concerned the use of technologies in ways that help enhance their comprehensibility and impact rther than overpower them. In other words, the use of technologies should facilitate the communication of a presentation's most important points and their unambiguous understanding rather than dominate it. Thus, i effective presentations, presenter should aim at a good balance between speech, text, and images on slides/visuals because listeners processinformation presented in different modalities differentl, with novices to a subject area being more susceptible to modality effects than disciplinary experts (Raybould, 2015).

# . Additional aspects of effective and successful academic presentation:

Besides the general core principles on which effective and successul presentations were recommended to be designed by llof the reviewed sources, the notion of ffectivenes tended o include some aditional characteristics, which were brought up in some sources but not in others. It should be noted here that few of the sources had dedicated specific writing space (e.g., paragraph/s or a section, or a chapter to what makes a presentatio effective.f the fifeen surveyed guidebooks, only wo addressed the notion f ffectiveness in more specific termsi.., Chivers and Shoolbred (2007) dedicated a chapter to the essential principles of efective presentations (chapter in their book), and Levin and Topping (2006) included a section on the Ingredients of a successful presentation (p. 6-7) The remaining sources had spread out references to what makes a presentation sucesful or effctive throughout their discussions. Nonetheles, even though the notion f ffetiveness remained somewhat vague and undefined in most of the urveyed sources, they all seemed to agre that, on the one hand, ffectivenessrquires a concious efrt and, on the thert is cumulative outcome resulting from conscious work on each stage of the presentation.

The additional features of effective presentations, which will be dicussed below, were identified the same way the core principles ere identified. The only diffence was that they wre explicitly stated as contributing to the efectivenes or suces of prentations either, at least, in acouple or most of the surveyed sources but not in all of them as was the case with the core principles. Those characterisics will be viewed from the point of view of the two-stage process of presentation development-the preparation and delivery stage.

# 5.1. Additional aspects of effectiveness related to the preparation stage of presentations

From a preparation point of view, some of the additional recommendations linked explicitl to the success and effectiveness of 'esentations were the following.

1) A successul and efective presentation is coherent, unfolds like a story, and holds listeners' attention by creating connections between their own experiences and the content, thus, engaging them in the logical flow of ideas (Anholt, 2006; Carter, 2021; Platow, 2002; Raybould, 2015; Van Emden & Becker, 2004). \*A story has perspective, a context, a plot, and a climatic conclusion' (Anholt, 2006, p. 37). However, the elements that go into the "story" are discipline-specific. For example, some of the science-oriented presentation guidebooks (e.g., Carter, 2021; Krantz, 2017) highlighted that an effective science presentation is framed by the scientific method of inquiry, meaning that \*there should always be a sense of the background knowledge, hypothesis/goal, methods, and discussion to frame results in a larger scientific context (Carter, 2021, p. 202). In that sense, it looks like that, in science-oriented presentations, the recommended story line resembles very closely the main sections one can find in published quantitative studies.   
2) Scientific presentations should also have scientific value by being based on evidence and its acurate interpretation (Anholt   
2006; Carter, 2021; Engleberg & Daly, 2005; Levin & Topping, 2006; McCarthy & Hatcher, 2002; Patience et al., 2015; Platow,   
2002; Schwabish, 2017). Krantz (2017) further pointed out that the most important part of a technical presentation, for example, is the discussion of the results and the conclusions stemming from their interpretation. Thus, these two sections should be considered the highlight of a technical presentation.   
3) Several guideboos highlighted the importance of ethics in relation to the efectivenessof presentations. The ethical aspect of effectie presentations isassociated primarily with the preparation stage when important decisions are made about, for instance, the choice of credible sources as evidence, the depth and truthfulness of the analyses, the accurate interpretation of the work of Others, the proper acknowledgements of all contributors to aclaim or research, the proper cition of sources (Davis et al., 2012; Engleberg & Daly, 2005; McCarthy & Hatcher; 2002; Raybould, 2015). Importantly, the ethical concerns a presenter has kept in mind during the preparation stage should be conveyed to the audience during the delivery stage to establish the credibility of the information.   
4) Thoughtful choice of examples during the preparation stage helps provoke interest and, more importantly, helps improve the understanding of the content of a presentation (Chivers & Shoolbred, 2007; Engleberg & Daly, 2005; Raybould, 2015). As Raybould (2015) pointed out, examples provide \*hooks" for the audience which help listeners connect details from the informational content of a presentation to their own experiences so that they can better interpret the message.   
5) A thoughtful design of supporting materials such as PowerPoint slides or other visuals and handouts as well as the inclusion of links to additional resources is useful during and after a presentation for both presenters and their audience (Carter, 2021; Krantz, 2017; Raybould, 2015). The important point is to design those materials around ideas and make them \*idea-centric" rather than "slide-centric' (Carter, 2021. p. 187; Raybould, 2015).   
6) Appropriate choice of images and visualization helps communicate information more clearly, improves understanding, increases interest, heightens the overall impact of apresentation, and saves time. For scientific and technical presentations, the use of visuals such as diagrams, tables, graphs, and charts is an essential and expected visual display of information (Carter, 2021; Krantz, 2017; Silyn-Roberts, 2002), especially when it is more expeditious to communicate a point with such visuals rather than explain it in speech. This strategy is particularly appropriate when conveying a big picture" concept or when sorting out data into different categories (Carter, 2021). Importantly, those visual representations need to be large enough, simple, clean, and clear rather than artistic and \*noisy" (Carter, 2021; Krantz, 2017; Raybould, 2015; Silyn-Roberts, 2002).   
7) One of the hallmarks of an effective presentation is to make the complex as simple as possible, especiall in science (Carter, 2021; Krantz, 2017; Raybould, 2015). So, finding ways to filter out complexities i a challenge that is worth embracing during the preparation stage of a presentation. As Carter (2021) put it: \*Sometimes the genius of a good science presentation is what you choose to leave out rather than what you choose to include" (p. 15).   
8) Careful use of specialized language includes predicting the terminology with which the audience is likely to be familiar while avoiding or explaining specialist acronyms and jargon with which it may not be familiar. In instances of novel terms and vocabulary, explanations and/or novel interpretations should be added unambiguously (Anholt, 2006; Carter, 2021; Chivers & Shoolbred, 2007; Davis et al., 2012; Engleberg & Daly, 2005; Levin & Topping, 2006; Patience et al., 2015; Raybould, 2015; Reinhart, 2002).   
9) Clarity should be evident both at the level of preparation as well as delivery: a) Clarity of structure helps facilitate listeners' comprehension of the content of a presentation on many levels (Carter, 2021; Chivers & Shoolbred, 2007; Davis et al., 2012; Engleberg & Daly, 2005; Krantz, 2017; Patience et al., 2015; Schwabish, 2017; Silyn-Roberts, 2002). b) Clarity of visual display is achieved through the use of uncluttered visuals, which helps communicate complex informational content to listeners in a more explicit way (Anholt, 2006; Carter, 2021; Raybould, 2015; Schwabish, 2017; Silyn-Roberts, 2002). c) Clarity of speech is primarily achieved through rehearsal of a presentation. It is not only an expected quality of an effective presentation, but it is also central to attending well to listeners' processing needs (Engleberg & Daly, 2005; McCarthy & Hatcher, 2002), especially when presenters' speech is accented (Raybould, 2015).

10) Commitment to consistency (e.g., consistent use of color, font, font size,visual organization of the information, bullet points, figures, graphs, tables, the use of verb tenses, punctuation) is a strategy that helps optimize the clarity and legibility of the text on visuals. It makes a presentation visually more attractive (Carter, 2021; Krantz, 2017). It also creates a sense of visual familiarity that acts as a backdrop against which novelty can stand out (Raybould, 2015).

5.2. Additional aspects of effectiveness related to the delivery stage of presentations

From a delivery point of view, the number of characteristics linked to the notion of effective and sucesful presentations was more varied. Both some of the general and the area-specific guidebooks noted a number of select characteristics linked to efectivenes, including the following recommendations.

1) Deliver the message persuasively to engage the audience with the presenter's viewpoints and stances (Anholt, 2006; Carter, 2021; Chivers & Shoolbred, 2007; Davis et al., 2012; Krantz, 2017; Levin & Topping, 2006; McCarthy & Hatcher, 2002; Platow, 2002; Raybould, 2015; Schwabish, 2017; Silyn-Roberts, 2002).   
2) Deliver the message eloquently to show variability in language choices but aim for language that conveys simplicity and precision (Carter, 2021; Raybould, 2015).   
3) Deliver the presentation enthusiasticall and energetically to make the audience connect to the presenter's involvement withthe content, their excitement, confidence, and persistence (Krantz, 2017; Raybould, 2015).   
4) Deliver the presentation without reading too much from the slides on the scren to show mastery of the presentation's content (Carter, 2021) and confidence (Raybould, 2015) while keeping the audience engaged.   
5) Speak naturally and, ideally, at a controlled speech rate--e.g., some guidebooks recommended a speech rate of about 140-150 words per minute (Patience et al., 2015). Others recommended practicing to keep even a slower speaking rate to allow the audience to adjust to a presenter's accent regardless of whether they are L1 or L2 speakers of English (Krantz, 2017; Reinhart, 2002) Generally, complex content coupled with a fast delivery pace can potentially overwhelm listeners (Patience et al., 2015).   
6) Use appropriate non-verbal communication, usually associated with presenters' physical appearance, facial expressions, eye contact, use of body language, volume, vocal emphasis, etc., since non-verbal communication greatly contributes to the intended interpretation of a message and carres meaning beyond language use alone. Non-verbal communication also conveys a wealth of information about the presenters themselves. Interestingly, though, while some of the general guidebooks recommended to always smile at the audience and think of it as "friends (e., Raybould, 2015; Van Emden & Becker, 2004) or smile tocombat nervousness (Krantz, 2017), some of the guidebooks designed for the technical fields advised against smiling (Silyn-Roberts, 2002). This implies that different disciplinary areas may have diffring preferences for non-verbal communication, and novice presenters would need to become aware of those preferences ither by observing seasoned presenters in their disciplines or by inquiring about what is considered acceptable in their field of study.   
7) Maintain strong audience orientationfor example, Levin and Topping (2006) underscored that \*a successul presentation is not only given to the audience, it is given for the audience. It certainly isn't just a speech launched in the general direction of the audience with a take it or leave it attitude' (p. 4). In sucesful presentations, presenter transport ther audience to a shared understanding of the main ideas of a presentation. In other words, to maintain good audience orientation, "speakers must structure

their presentations in such a way that lsteners are clearly led from word to image, image to idea, idea to concept" (McCarthy & Hatcher, 2002, p. 70). Importantly, the content of the presentation should be carefully matched not only to a presenter's purpose but also to the listeners charactristics, values, exptations, and neds, ecially if a presentation is given in a culturally diverse context (Engleberg & Daly, 2005; Krantz, 2017; McCarthy & Hatcher, 2002; Raybould, 2015; Van Emden & Becker, 2004.

8) Consider thoughtully therelationship between slides and oral delivery, at least, in two ways: First, during a slide presentation listeners receive information simultaneously from two sources--the presenter's speech and the slides; thus, the narration and visuals should always complement each other (Carter, 2021; Krantz, 2017). Second, it is acceptable to orally discussinformation without rpresenting it on a slide while, in contrast, everything visually displayed on a slide should be discussed in delivery, which suggests that slides should be free of visual redundancies (Carter, 2021; Krantz, 2017; Raybould, 2015).

As it can be en, the lis of addionl recommndations tht make acadmic presenttion effective and sucesful is quite xtensive, and the recommendations are assciated with both the preparation and delivery stage of presentations. The list provides  summary of the key ways efectvenes can be achieved, which can help instructors address each stage separately and heighten novice presenters awarenes of how work on each of the stages would benefit both presenters and listeners. Needes to say, disciplinary specificities should also be addressed in presentation guidelines because, as the survey revealed, there were some subtle area-specific differences which would be useful to highlight i discussions about presentations. This could be done either by non-disciplinary instructors in consultation with disciplinary specialists or by encouraging novice presentersto observe and/or tlk to disciplinary specialists about presentation pecificities related to their areas of study. After all the more students are consciously aware of the qualities that impact the effectiveness of their presentations, the more educated they will be as iteners of the presentations of others (Author, 2020).

# 6. Language data sources behind the language recommendations of the surveyed guidebooks

The last aspect of interest the survey addressed was the extent to which the language recommendations the authors suggested in their guidebooks were based on lage data source/s of naturall produced language like corpora or primarily on the authors personal observations on language used in presentations. By and large, al of the surveyed sources touched upon some aspects of language use to a certain extent-some provided more elaborate discussions, others did so in pasing. For instance, Reinhart's (2002) guidebook offered strong emphases on language use for various presentation purposes such as opening and closing a speech, description of objects and procees, relevant language for presenter-listener interaction, discussion of fillrs, etc. It also inroduced presenters to the discourse utility of some rhetorical and grammatical structures like the use of modal verbs, linking adverbials, tense, voice, different types of sentences, etc. McCarthy and Hatcher (2002) dedicated a chapter to language use in their guidebook (chapter 6) where they elaborated on the positive efects of a number of language features, ranging from the choice of precise vocabulary to using rhetoric strategicall in presentations. Engleberg and Daly (2005) devoted a chapter with language recommendations (chapter 12) mostly about engaging the audience with the purpose of the presentation. Several of the other guideboos had, at best, a section dedicated to specific language recommendations about making a presentation audience-friendly (.g., Levin & Topping, 2006) or discussed briefly a comparison between formal and speech style language use (e.g., Silyn-Robert, 2002). However, the majority of the surveyed guidebooks addressed only occasionally language features typicall found in academic presentations, perhaps, because the authors assumed that their targeted readers are full inguisticlly aware of the language accommodations they ned to make for presentation purposes.

In my experience, this i  slippery assumption when it comes to novice presenters regardes of whether they are 1 or L2 users of English. In most cases, students who are presentation neophytes may be aware of certain general language recommendations at a sentence level, such as to divide long and complex sentences into shorter ones, to avoid sentence fragments and use complete sentences instead, to use diffrent types of sentences for interest and emphasis, to use figurative language sparingly, etc. However, their theoretical and/or implicit awareness does not necessrily result in consistent application of this kind of knowledge to their language choices unlesstudents are guided and prompted to do so. Same is true of the general vocabulary recommendations. Overall the authors who offered vocabulary advice urged the presenters to explain specialized terminology and acronyms, to avoid jargon, to choose their vocabulary with precision and in favor of more common words than \*pretentious or pompous' vocabulary, etc. While these are llrelevant recommendations, they stil remain largely vague unles students know what exactly they stand for so that they can act on the advice. In that sense, I believe that a focus on language use for presentation purposes wil not only make novice pre senters more lingustically educated about how specific language choices contribute to the efectivenes of presentations but will also encourage them to start using certain language features to that effect intentionally rather than intuitively.

As far as whether the language recommendations in the surveyed guidebooks were based on generalizable data sources or not, only Reinhart's (2002) guidebook was based on corpus data of oralacademic discourse, and the language example came from the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICAsE) (Simpson et al., 2002). In my view, this corpus-based approach to offering language advice not only give credibility to the recommendations but also ensures that students from different disciplinary ares can put hir trust in that the recommended language is not subjective or biased in any way. The rest of the surveyed guideboos included language examples mosly as sentnc frame  to ince  renter, to ask for caiction, t ruest questions fromthe adece at the end of a presentation) which, in the absence of any references to a specific language source, can be safely assumed to be based on the authors' personal language observations and experiences. Needless to say, those observations are a valuable source of information. However, when language recommendations are exclusively based on personal experiences, it limits their value to the author's subjective authority on language matters. Perhaps, areasonable approach to language recommendations in both general and area-specific presentation guidebooks would be to provide a healthy mix of corpus-based and research-based language advice alongside personal observations. Such an approach will highlight the fact that the language of academic presentations contains commonalities, which necessarily need to be complemented by area-specific language choices to bring both presenters and listeners to a common space of mutual understanding.

# 7. Concluding remarks

By surveying guidebooks designed for a general academic readership and ones designed primarily for specific scientific and technical communities, one of the objectives of this survey was to examine how Anglophone academic culture views the notion of effectiveness of academic presentations and, consequentl, determine shared core principles which contribute to it. It was also of inteest  identif adtional expliciy statd aspcts of ffective and sucesful pentations, some of whch are more comonly shared across the surveyed sources and others which may be more area-specific. Finally, to get abeter sense of the generalizability of the language recommendations the presentation guidebooks suggested, the survey looked into whether they were derived from large language data sources like corpora or whether they were based primarily on the authors' personal experiences.

Several findings emerged from the survey. The first one was that Anglophone academic culture has a consistent view of several core principles on which effective and sucesul academic presentations should be built despite differences in the targeted readership. In ther wors all f the suryd soures explicitly asociatd the effectivenessof preenttions wth a umber of core principles uiding their development anddelivery. This implies that the notion of efectivenes s fairl well-defined in Anglophone academic culture and, in that, it ffers a workable framework for both instructors and students, L1 or L2 users of English alike. Notably, though, few of the sources have dedicated a specific spaceo what makes academic preentations efective, hich mostly leaves it to the reader to put the puzzle together and figure out the order of priority in all of the proposed recommendations.

Along with the recommended core principles for developing effective and sucesful presentations, there were also some additional characteristics which were les consistently noted in the surveyed sources. Nonetheless there was a unanimous agreement that those additional characteristics are associated with both the preparation and delivery stage in the development of a presentations, thus, its succes cannot be atributed to any one of the stages alone. It should also be noted that, depending on whether the surveyed guidebooks were designed for general or area-specific audiences, there was a slight variation among them in the list of additional desirable characteristics they proposed.In that sense, when non-disciplinary specialists are teaching presentation kills it would be important to encourage novice presenters to observe and/or talk to disciplinary specialists about presentation specificities in their area of specialization so that they get a well-rounded view of what makes a presentation effective in their area-specific context.

Finall, the investigation into the language recommendations in the surveyed sources revealed that, firty, all of the surveyed sources touched upon aspects of language use to some extent. However, most of them addressed language features typical of academic presentations sporadically, perhaps, because the authors assumed that their targeted readership is linguisticlly educated-an assumption which seems unfounded on many levels. Secondly, in terms of whether or not the language recommendations the authors proposed were based on large data source/s of naturallyproduced language, the survey revealed that, with the exception of one guidebook, the rest of the surveyed source offeed primaril the authors subjective views on language. As valuable as those views can be, a more useful approach would be to incorporate into the language recommendations research findings on the language of academic presentations, corpus-based recommendations as well as personal language observations, especially in area-specific contexts. Such an approach will put into use all relevant sources of language advice for presentation purposes instead of relying on subjecive obser vations and personal experiences alone. Thirdly, th treatment of the language of academic presentations noticeably lacked sufficient depth and breadth in most of the guidebooks, which suggested that language use was designated a somewhat secondary role when it comes t its contribution to theffetivenessof presentations.  believe that a focus on language use for presentation purposes willnot only make novice presenters more linguistically educated about how specific language choices contribute to the sucess of their presentations, but will also encourage them to plan on using certain language features to that effect intentionally and purposefull.

On a final note, by surveying a mix of general and area-specific guideboos on academic presentations, my hope was not only to uncover the content ehind he ntion f eective and sucesful preentations s erceived y Anlophone cadmic cuture, ut also to identify the most desirable characteristics contributing to it. Ideally,all these aspects can be of practical value to instructors in higher education (EAP, ESAP and area specialis alike) to give helpful guidelines and design appropriate grading rubrics and/or checklis for their presentation assinments. They should also be beneficial to students in guiding them in all the right directions as presenters.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Alla Zareva: Writing - original draft.

# References

List of Surveyed Academic Presentation Guidebooks

Anholt, R. R. H. (2006). Dazzle 'em with style: The art of oral scientific presentation (2nd ed.). London: Elsevier.   
arter, M. (2021). Di ciece retions:  visl gude to fie, prs slides, ser,  more. London, K: ir/Adm Pres.   
Chivers, B., & Shoolbred, M. (2007). A student's guide to presentations: Making your presentation count. London: Sage Publications.   
Davis, M., Davis, K. J., & Dunagan, M. M. (2012). Scientific papers and presentations (3rd ed.). London: Elsevier.   
Engleberg, I., & Daly, J. (2005). Presentations i everyday life Stategies fr efective speaking. Boston, MA: Houghton Miflin Compan.   
Kra Academic Press.   
Levin, P., & Topping, G. (2006). Perfect presentations! Student-friendly guides. New York: Open University Press.   
McCarthy, P., & Hatcher, C. (2002). Presentation skills: The essential guide for students. London: Sage.   
Pat    5   i Elsevier.   
Platw,   t York: Psychology Press.   
Raybould, S. (2015). Presentation genius 40 insights from the science of presenting. London: Hodder and Stoughton.   
Reinhart, S. (2002). Giving academic presentations. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.   
Schwabish, J. (2017). Bettr presentations: A guide for scholars, researchers, and wonks. New York: Columbia University Press.   
Silyn-Roberts, H. (2002). Writing for science and engineering: Papers, presentations, and reports. Butterworth-Heinemann.   
Van Emden, J., & Becker, L. (2004). Presentation skills for students. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.

# References

Banki1kl tiei     187-19.   
Danels, D.P. (2003). ig d ng dpetion i gining dctions b c and wkectit s Jo Business and Technical Communication, 17(2), 139-169.   
Jing ,   ). ini    in 3 p  s  h iztf sci. Discourse Studies, 24(1), 115-134.   
Simpson, ., B, .  s, ., wal, J.. (202). hn s of adi o gish. hp/q.i.ch/c/os/corpus? c=micase;page=simple.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge University Press.   
Zareva, A. (2009). Student academic presentations: The processing side of interactiveness English Text Construction, 2(2), 265-288.   
Zareva, A. (2012). Expression of stance and persuasion in student academic presentations. Applied psycholinguisics 2, 316-323.   
Zareva, A. (2020). Speech accommodation in student presentations. Springer.