# Syllabus design for general EAP writing courses: A cognitive approach

Ian Bruce\*

The Department of General and Applied Linguistics, The University of Waikato, Private Bag 3105, Hamilton, New Zealand

# Abstract

Non-native speakers of English seeking to undertake university study frequently take English for Academic Purposes courses in order to prepare to meet the language requirements for such study. Of necessity, such courses usually include a strong focus on the development of the writing skill. This paper proposes two conceptual elements as necessary to the design of a general EAP writing syllabus and its subsequent realisation as a course. The first is Widdowson’s [Widdowson, H. G. (1983). Learning purpose and language use. Oxford: Oxford University Press.] idea of capacity in relation to the development of a discourse competence in written English. The second element is Widdowson’s [Widdowson, H. G. (1990). Aspects of language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.] approach to Wilkins’ [Wilkins, D. (1976). Notional syllabuses: A taxonomy and its relevance to foreign language curriculum development. London: Oxford University Press.] analytic syllabus as the pedagogic vehicle by means of which such capacity may be developed. The paper then presents the non-discipline specific discourse unit of the cognitive genre as the most suitable organisational unit for an analytic syllabus for a general EAP writing course. This is then illustrated by examining a unit of an analytic syllabus based around a cognitive genre.

$©$ 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Writing syllabus design; Rhetorical type; Gestalt; Discourse pattern; Semantic relation; English for Academic Purposes

# 1. Communicative capacity and the analytic syllabus

Widdowson (1983) categorises so-called English for Specific Purposes (hereafter ESP) courses on a continuum between narrow angle and wide angle courses depending on the degree of specificity of the aims of the course: “By aims I mean the purposes to which learning will be put after the end of the course” (Widdowson, 1983, p. 7). Narrow angle courses essentially “provide learners with a restricted competence to enable them to cope with clearly defined tasks” (Widdowson, 1983, p. 6). In such cases, the specific instances of language required to fulfil the task become the aims of the course. On the other hand, wide angle courses are closer to general purpose English courses, which “seek to provide learners with a general capacity to enable them to cope with undefined eventualities in the future” (Widdowson, 1983, p. 6). In relating Widdowson’s approach to classifying (specific purposes) courses to that proposed by Dudley-Evans and St John (1998, p. 14), one could say that the more specific the learner’s objectives, the more narrow angle the course.

In describing the underlying types of knowledge and skills that are the focus of narrow and wide angle ESP courses, Widdowson (1983, p. 7) also makes a distinction between what he calls competence and capacity. He defines competence as “the speaker’s knowledge of the language system.[and] his [/her] knowledge also of social rules which determine the appropriate use of linguistic forms.” Capacity, on the other hand, is defined as “the ability to create meanings by exploiting the potential inherent in the language for continual modification in response to change” (Widdowson, 1983, p. 8).

In relation to competence and capacity, Widdowson (1983, p. 10) proposes that syllabus objectives for wide and narrow angle courses will vary considerably. If a course is narrow angle and concerned mainly with competence, objectives will relate to the linguistic system, as well as the social rules for its appropriate use. Wide angle courses concerned with the development of capacity, on the other hand, require objectives that will lead to the development of the procedural knowledge required to exploit the competence elements (of language and its use) effectively in a constantly varying range of contexts calibrated to constantly changing communicative purposes and uses:

With wide angle course design, the need to account for the procedural aspect of learning and use is more self-evident. Here, the intention is obviously not to get students to internalize the topical realizations, but to use them for learning. It is the process of relating these particular realizations to more general schematic structure [italics added] which is the central concern and the process must.involve procedural activity. (Widdowson, 1983, p. 90)

This concern with the ‘more general schematic structure’ and the need for ‘procedural activity’ lead to another central issue that confronts designers of a general EAP writing syllabus—the level or unit of language around which the syllabus is to be constructed. For example, many language syllabuses are organised around grammatical items, “based on the premise that learners acquire one grammatical item at a time and that they should demonstrate their mastery of one thing before moving on to the next” (Nunan, 1998, p. 101). Wilkins terms this kind of syllabus as a synthetic syllabus, where “the different parts of the language are taught separately and step-by-step so that acquisition is a process of gradual accumulation of the parts until the wholes structure of the language has been built up” (1976, p. 2). In modifying Wilkins’ (1976) definition of synthetic syllabuses,

Widdowson points out that the synthetic approach not only characterises “the nature of the content” (1990, p. 134) of syllabuses and courses that focus on teaching the structures of a language in a linear fashion, but also syllabuses concerned with “the realizations of meaning which are usually claimed to characterize the notional/functional syllabuses” (1990, p. 136). Therefore, the synthetic syllabus, be it structural or notional/functional, would appear to assume that language learning is a systematic and cumulative process. However, as Nunan points out:

[Learners] do not learn one thing perfectly, one item at a time,.the rate of growth is determined by a complex interplay of factors related to speech processing constraints (Pienemann and Johnston, 1987), pedagogical interventions (Pica, 1985), acquisitional processes (Johnson, 1987) and the influence of the discoursal environment in which the items occur. (Nunan, 1998, p. 102)

A further problem with the synthetic syllabus approach is also the actual complexity of language itself, complexity in terms of the multiplicity of inter-related systems that are engaged in any situation of authentic language use. Among others, these systems may include elements that are described in terms of pragmatics, semantics, phonology or orthography, morphology, and syntax. Underlining this idea of language as a complex and multi-faceted whole, Widdowson says:

To identify something as a component is to recognize the operational complex as a whole in which it functions as a part. If analysis isolates elements from this complex, then it must deny them the functional features which alone can give them their component status. (1983, p. 84)

In order to overcome the atomistic nature and artificiality of the synthetic syllabus, Widdowson (1990) turns to Wilkins’ (1976, p. 2) proposal for another type of syllabus termed an analytic syllabus, which Widdowson says “presents language as synthesised units to be analysed in the process of learning” (1990, p. 134). Thus:

An analytic syllabus, on the other hand, would not be bottom-up but top-down. That is to say, it would present language in the form of larger textual units and set tasks of different kinds which would direct the learners’ attention to specific features, formal or functions, of the language they were exposed to. Analysis would then be induced by means of controlled procedural work. (Widdowson, 1990, p. 136)

Rather than follow the linear, synthetic approach to language course design, Widdowson proposes that designers “look for ways of defining the aims of our students in communicative terms by devising a means of analysis which preserves the essential discourse [italics added] features of language use” (Widdowson, 1983, p. 90), this being essential to the development of syllabus and course materials that aim to develop the discourse competence of students in relation to academic writing. This need to retain language components as functioning features of a larger discoursal system, and to avoid atomistic approaches to language teaching has been the rationale for the various genre-based approaches to language course design and teaching (see Paltridge, 2001, 2002). As Paltridge observes:

[A] genre-based approach to language program development aims to incorporate discourse and contextual aspects of language use that are often underattended to in programs based only on the lower-level organizational units of language, such as structures, functions, or vocabulary. (2001, p. 6)

However, the crucial issue (and one that gives rise to much confusion) is the discourse entity that should provide the basic unit of a genre-based, analytic syllabus, such as one designed for an academic writing course. In order to clarify this issue, this paper draws on Bruce’s (2003) classifications of social genre and cognitive genre.

Social genres are similar in type to the category of text genre proposed by Pilegaard and Frandsen (1996), referring to socially recognised constructs according to which whole texts are classified in terms of their overall social purpose. Thus, for example, personal letters, novels and academic articles are examples of different social genres created to fulfil different types of socially recognised and understood purpose. Although a specific example of a particular social genre may exhibit features of a single cognitive genre (see below), it is more common for examples of social genres to exhibit features of more than one cognitive genre. Certain social genres have been analysed for pedagogic purposes by describing the conventionalised staging of their textual content in terms of either a schematic structure (Eggins, 1994; Hasan, 1985/1989; Ventola, 1987) or rhetorical moves (Bhatia, 1993; Connor & Mauranen, 1999; Crookes, 1986; Dudley-Evans, 1986, 1989, 1994; Hopkins and Dudley-Evans, 1988; Swales, 1981, 1990).

The term cognitive genre is used to refer to what Pilegaard and Frandsen (1996) label as text type. As examples, they cite: “narrative, expository, descriptive, argumentative or instructional text types” (Pilegaard & Frandsen, 1996, p. 3). Cognitive genres can, therefore, be aligned with macrofunctions as described by the Council of Europe in the Common Framework of Reference. Macrofunctions are “categories for the functional use of spoken discourse or written text consisting of a (sometimes extended) sequence of sentences, e.g., description, narration, commentary, exposition, exegesis, explanation, demonstration, instruction, argumentation, persuasion” (Council of Europe, 2001, p. 126).

The term cognitive genre is used here to refer to the overall cognitive orientation of a piece of writing in terms of its realisation of a particular rhetorical purpose, something that is reflected in the way in which information is internally organised and related. Fundamental to this is the role played by various types of relationship between propositions. Different types of rhetorical purpose (such as, to recount sequenced events, to explain a process, to argue a point of view) instantiate different cognitive genres. A particular example of a social genre (e.g., an academic article) may draw upon a range of different cognitive genres in relation to the different rhetorical purposes (e.g., presenting an argument, providing an explanation) that may characterise different sections of the overall message.

# 2. Cognitive genre and an analytic syllabus

For the development of a syllabus which is to provide the basis for a general English for Academic Purposes (EAP) writing course, the question remains whether it is a cognitive or social genre construct that should form the basic syllabus unit. While adopting an analytic, top-down approach to syllabus design based on social genres may ensure that certain contextual and discoursal elements of language are included, such as in Burns and Joyce (1997) and Feez’ (1998) text-based approach to syllabus design, it is possible that the outcome may still be narrow angle competence-building (in terms of language used for situation-specific purposes and outcomes). For example, Burns and Joyce (1997, pp. 77–79), in approaching the issue of social genre based syllabus design for courses involving speaking skills, use a top-down approach that may be implemented without overtly incorporating a procedural, capacity-building element. If such a syllabus or course is a narrow angle one, such as where the learner has specifically identifiable objectives (Dudley-Evans & St John, 1998, p. 14), this type of approach to course design may be entirely appropriate. However, if the course seeks to develop a more general capacity (i.e., one that is not situation-specific or discipline-specific), as would be required by a general EAP writing course, a wide-angle approach which includes a cognitive capacity-building element would be more appropriate.

A further argument against the organisation of an academic writing course around social genres emerges from Biber’s (1988, 1989) corpus-based study. He suggests that realisations of social genre are not stable entities in terms of the types of discourse that they employ: “genres are defined and distinguished on the basis of systematic nonlinguistic criteria, and they are valid in those terms” (Biber, 1989, p. 39). To support this, an investigation of texts belonging to a single social genre carried out by Paltridge (1993) found no systematic relationship between social purpose and lexico-grammatical characteristics of his genre corpus.

Thus, in a wide angle academic writing course the focus is on the development of communicative capacity in relation to discourse competence. This suggests the need for such a course to be constructed around actual, whole units of written discourse. However, if such a course is discourse-based, constructed around textual units, it needs to focus on a genre (text classification) construct that is neither a socially recognised nor disciplinespecific entity, but one that has stable, possibly prototypic, organisational features. Widdowson, while reflecting on the wide angle, capacity-developing nature of EAP courses, says:

[T]he challenge for a wide angle approach to ESP, then is to ensure that topics that have no direct bearing on aims are selected and presented in such a way that, despite their lack of specificity, they will activate the capacity for language use and learning. (1983, p. 91)

All of this suggests the need for a discourse-focused approach to general EAP syllabus and course design that:

† relates to cognitive genres; † is not discipline-specific; and

uses a top-down approach in order to develop capacity as well as competence (enabling learners to reapply discourse knowledge in varying situations and forms).

# 3. A proposal for cognitive genres in Academic English prose

On the basis of a model (see Appendix B) established from a corpus-based study and a survey and analysis of native- and non-native speaker writing outputs (responses to a series of tasks), Bruce (2003) proposes four prototypical realisations of cognitive genres in the context of English academic discourse, termed Rhetorical Types. The cognitive discourse model for the four Rhetorical Types that are identified takes into account:

† the need to identify discourse categories as a basis for instruction in extended academic writing;   
† the need to identify discourse categories that are not discipline-specific (cognitive rather than social genres) for use in the instruction of groups of students preparing for studies in a variety of disciplines;   
† the need to accommodate the notion that human categorisation (including categorisation of discourse) is based on prototypes or family resemblances, with more and less typical members of categories (Rosch, 1973, 1975, 1978; Rosch & Mervis, 1975; Wittgenstein, 1953); the need to accommodate the notion that categorisation generally relates to intention (Barsalou, 1983; Murphy & Medin, 1985) and purpose—different types of ‘rhetorical problem need’ (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987; Hinkel, 2002); historical approaches to cognitive genre categorisation (Bain, 1871/1996; Campbell, 1776/1963); more recent pedagogic taxonomies of cognitive genres, taxonomies that are motivated by different types of rhetorical or communicative purposes (Derewianka, 1990; Knapp & Watkins, 1994; Longacre, 1976; Macken, Kalantzis, Kress, Martin, Cope & Rothery, 1989; [especially] Quinn, 1993); and   
the need to accommodate corpus-based studies of text types, which identify those text types most frequently associated with academic prose (Biber, 1988; Bruce, 2003).

Biber (1989, p. 39) identifies four text types (as distinct from socially recognised genres) as being typical of Academic English prose. Although the same four are the focus of attention here, there is a fundamental difference between the approach adopted by Biber and the approach adopted here. While Biber makes reference to linguistic and stylistic features in describing what he refers to as text-types, there is here no reference to stylistic features. Furthermore, only those linguistic features that can be directly related to cognitive orientation (arising out of rhetorical purpose) are considered here. Thus, although the engagement of particular cognitive genres (realised in terms of prototypical Rhetorical Types) is considered here to have implications for linguistic realisations, these implications are not seen as extending to all aspects of the language of texts. Other aspects of linguistic choice are more appropriately dealt with in the context of a consideration of social genres.

Thus, four Rhetorical Types, argued to be the most commonly occurring cognitive genres in academic discourse in English, are the focus of attention. These draw on the text type classifications of Biber (1989) and Quinn (1993) (see Appendix A). Each of these is described in terms of a model (see Table 1 for a summary and Appendix B for the complete model) of which the main components are:

rhetorical focus;   
gestalt structure (Johnson, 1987);   
discourse patterning (Hoey, 1983; 2001); and   
principal internal discourse patterning (for inter-propositional relations, see Crombie, 1985).

A summary outline of each Rhetorical Type is shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Summary of the rhetorical type model   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Report rhetorical type: static descriptive presentation.</td></tr><tr><td>Rhetorical focus Gestalt structure</td><td>Presentation of data or information that is essentially non-sequential. WHOLE PART structure, of which the PART has an UP DOWN</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>structure</td></tr><tr><td>Overall discourse patterning Principal internal discourse patterning</td><td>Preview-details Amplification; reason-result, grounds-conclusion; simple contrast, comparative similarity, concession-contraexpectation, condition-.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>consequence</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Explanation rhetorical type: means-focused presentation.</td></tr><tr><td>Rhetorical focus Gestalt structure</td><td>The presentation of information with the orientation on means SOURCE PATH GOAL schema; LINK schema</td></tr><tr><td>Overall discourse patterning</td><td>Preview---details</td></tr><tr><td>Principal internal discourse</td><td>Means-purpose, means-result, amplification, concession-</td></tr><tr><td>patterning Discussion rhetorical type: choice/outcome-focused presentation</td><td>contraexpectation</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Rhetorical focus</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Focus on the organisation of data in relation to (possible) outcomes/ conclusions/choices</td></tr><tr><td>Gestalt structure</td><td>CONTAINER schemata (more than one)</td></tr><tr><td>Overall discourse patterning Principal internal discourse</td><td>Generalisation- examples and matching</td></tr><tr><td>patterning</td><td>Grounds-conclusion, reason-result, means-purpose, means-result, concession-contraexpectation</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Recount rhetorical type: sequential presentation</td></tr><tr><td>Rhetorical focus</td><td>Presentation of data or information that is essentially sequential. or chronological</td></tr><tr><td>Gestalt structure</td><td>SOURCE PATH GOAL schema</td></tr><tr><td>Predominant internal discourse patterning</td><td>General-particular</td></tr><tr><td>Principal internal discourse patterning</td><td>Means-purpose, means-result, amplification. Chronological sequence,. grounds-conclusion, reason-result</td></tr></table></body></html>

Bruce (2003, p. 14).

# 4. Analysis of a text segment in terms of report rhetorical type

In this section, a text segment will be analysed in terms of the organisational features of the Report Rhetorical Type model with explanations of the types of analysis employed. This will be followed in Section 5 by a brief discussion of how this type of analysed textual unit could be used as a basis for a syllabus/course unit that focuses on the development of the procedural knowledge that relates to this particular Rhetorical Type.

# 4.1. Gestalt structure

The example text in Table 2 is a fairly prototypical example of Report Rhetorical Type. The text is concerned with presenting data that is non-sequential from an accompanying table, and largely mirrors the gestalt structure, discourse pattern and semantic relations of the model.

In terms of the overall organisation of ideas (pre-writing), the Report Rhetorical Type model proposes that non-sequential data will be structured by a WHOLE PART gestalt structure. This draws on the image schema (gestalt) concept of Johnson (1987) as a highlevel organiser of knowledge. The conceptual idea of the WHOLE PART gestalt is—the parts of something properly configured can make a whole (based on Lakoff, 1987, p. 273). In the case of the sample text in Table 2, the WHOLE section of the gestalt structure is a description of the survey, its purpose and its parameters. The PART section involves describing, in detail, the various findings from the survey.

In examining a corpus of parts of academic texts that used the Report Rhetorical Type, it was found (Bruce, 2003, p. 223) that where the content data of the PART section is quantifiable (as is the case of the data of the sample text in Table 2), an UP DOWN gestalt is also used to organise hierarchically the data of the PART section (UP DOWN indicates a progression from big to small, more significant to less significant). For example, in the sample text of Table 2, the PART consists of:

† the largest group of graduates—those up to the age of 29; † the next largest group—graduates over the age of 30; and † a smaller group—international students who are graduates.

# 4.2. Discourse pattern

The WHOLE PART gestalt relates to the overall organisation of the conceptual content of the Report Rhetorical Type. When actually realised as written discourse, this gives rise to what Hoey (1983) refers to as a General Particular discourse pattern, and in particular the Preview Details variation of General Particular in which

[t]he detail member of the relation supplies information about the Preview member that would otherwise typically be placed as postmodification to the appropriate noun or as adjunct to the clause. (Hoey, 1983, p. 138)

This refers to the linguistic encoding of the relationship between the overall information of the introduction and more specific, detailed information in the body of the text. If the overall idea of the opening paragraph and the principal idea of any one of the details paragraphs were to be summarised in one sentence, the detail information would be likely to be encoded in terms of a paratactic or hypotactic structure, for example:

Table 2 Report rhetorical type-sample text   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Gestalt Structure</td><td>Discourse Pattern</td><td></td><td>Semantic Relationsd</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Whole Part Up</td><td rowspan="3">Preview Details</td><td>The average age of New Zealand universty graduates is increasingindicating that greater numbers of older students are enrolling while their younger counterparts may be taking longer to complete their degrees. This is one of a umber of signficant dvelopments revald in th tt urvey f university grdat etintions caried out</td><td rowspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>by the New ZealandVice-ChancellorCommite.All 23,821 individuals 13,007 females10,814 males who became eligible to gadat frmhis couns seenivetis drg1998were snt th surey questiai and1014942.6% responded.The survey findings are contained in a report-UniversityGraduate Destinations 199which was published in</td><td>-Amplification -Amplification</td></tr><tr><td>Deember.An xetive summar o the reort states that the avrage age of resondents is 29 an incrse of a yearonthe</td><td>Amplification</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Down</td><td rowspan="5">contt tha mn end rort mor thn one deinatonforiart-mempment ad arme ud.Thos who report seeking fulltime mployment are not necearily nmployed as such.They could be working full-time in an interim position while seeking a position more appropriate to their qualification. New Zealand universities.</td><td>previous survey. Further,theaverage age fespondents with BachlBacher wth Honours degrees is 26as opposed to25 for the preious urey.Thi s r if sh tgre grupnt68.6%fttry linh viwhat</td><td>Simple Contrast Roason Result (inverted)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>universit rada probetking ongrompl the frst dre is suggstd by aror able which shows that 65.1% of Bachelor/Bachelor with Honours graduates are in the 18 to 24-year age group a decline on the previous survey wherethequialent proportion was 73.0%Ther is a corresponding inrese in the proportion of these graduates in the 25 to 29 age band, which at 18.3% represents a 5.9% increase on the previous survey.</td><td>Amplification</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Grounds Conclusion (inverted)</td><td>Simple Contrast</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Amplification</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Amplification</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5"></td><td rowspan="5"></td><td>The trend to life-ong leaming shows up in the report in the number of graduates who are aged 40 years or older.In the previous survey this group constitted 11.7%of all graduates but that proportion has now increased to 13.8%.The report employmet 199858.2%whil29.3% are undakingurther fulltime study 199826.6%)t is mrant to not inths</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>details that graduates aged between 30 and 40 make up 16.6%ofthe population for the most recent survey whereas the equivalent proportion from the previous survey was 15.1%.Of all respondents to the survey55.8% are in ful-tme</td><td>Amplification</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Simple Contrast</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Simple Contrast</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Simple Contrast Amplification</td><td>Simple Contrast</td></tr></table></body></html>

In 1999, the New Zealand universities Vice-Chancellors committee carried out a survey of graduates that year which showed: (This showed:)

† $65 \%$ of Bachelors or Bachelors with Honours graduates are † the percentage of all graduate over $40 \%$ increased to. † the number of international students graduating was.

# 4.3. Semantic relations

At the level of semantic relations between smaller sections of written text, interpropositional, relational analysis is employed to describe this type of structuring (Beekman and Callow, 1974; Crombie, 1985; Winter, 1977). According to Crombie, a proposition involves at least one (intra-propositional) semantic relation, for example, agent-action. Propositions can be encoded within a phrase (involving nominalisation), clause, sentence or larger piece of discourse (see the examples below):

1. Her intervention (proposition as a nominalisation) caused his defeat. 2. She intervened (proposition as a clause) which resulted in his defeat. 3. She intervened in the dispute (proposition as a sentence) He was defeated. (Summarised from Crombie, 1985, p. viii)

Coherence can be both intra-propositional (case relations) or inter-propositional (semantico-pragmatic relations). Crombie (1985) posits a taxonomy of interpropositional relations as a means of describing such relations within discourse. According to her approach, these relations account for inter-propositional coherence: “[accounting] for the relations that hold between one proposition (or group of propositions) and another” (Crombie, 1985, p. i). Crombie’s taxonomy of interpropositional relations is based on a framework of binary values, for example, Condition-Consequence or Reason-Result. She proposes that such binary values, taken together, can operate as functions or unitary values. For example, one of the binary, inter-propositional relations from Crombie’s taxonomy is ConditionConsequence which can be used to perform the function of warning or threatening (see the example below):

4. If you do that again, I will call the police. Condition Consequence The general semantic relations of Crombie’s taxonomy are listed in Appendix C.

The text segment analysed in Table 1 is typical of the Report Rhetorical Type to the extent that it includes examples of Amplification, Simple Contrast, Reason

Result, and Grounds Conclusion, which, it can be seen from the Rhetorical Type Model are the semantic relations that tend to occur commonly in Report Rhetorical Type.

# 5. Relating rhetorical type knowledge to syllabus design

The constituent elements of the Rhetorical Type model provide a framework for the construction of a discourse-centred syllabus around textual units. The different constituent levels of knowledge of the model enable a top-down approach to be employed in the presentation of discourse information. By using this approach, Widdowson’s idea (1983, p. 84) of considering language elements as parts of a functioning whole is not violated, and the general approach also accords with Skehan’s (1996) idea of cycles of synthesis and analysis within a modified task-based syllabus.

In relation to operational processes involved in acquiring and using procedural knowledge (to create academic discourse), the Rhetorical Types can be considered in terms of the dual-processing model proposed by Widdowson (1989) which sees language use in terms of using lexical chunks (see Pawley & Syder, 1983) and rules of grammar to fit lexical chunks into certain contexts. The dual-processing approach is supported by Skehan (1996) who, in reviewing a range of cognitive approaches to language learning, notes that there appears to be accumulating evidence (see a review in Carr & Curren, 1994) that explicit learning of structured material is generally superior to implicit learning, suggesting that awareness of the learning itself and of what is to be learned confers advantages. In reviewing the issue of how second language learners actually learn language, Skehan (1996) draws attention to research that indicates that this involves both the induction of underlying abstract rules and the learning of exemplars, citing the studies of Matthews, Buss, Stanley, Blachard-Field, Cho and Druhan (1989), and Carr and Curren (1994), which point to both structured learning and exemplar-based learning operating synergistically. On this basis, using the Rhetorical Type model to provide a framework which can be employed in pedagogic contexts is consistent with the dual processing model of language acquisition and use.

Furthermore, Devine (1993), in considering the role of metacognition in the area of second language writing, suggests that there is a need to “[expand the knowledge base to] provide explicit information about the role of metacognition in second language writing (Devine, 1993, p. 118). The Rhetorical Type model proposed here, provides the type of metacognitive knowledge that Devine refers to as procedural, and defines as knowledge about how strategies can be employed” (p. 106).

The outline of a possible syllabus unit based on Report Rhetorical Type is shown in Table 3.

The Rhetorical Type model first provides the basis for the selection of authentic texts that have a common core of features that are not centred around any disciplinary topic, features that can be deconstructed and analysed. Such deconstruction and analysis of the discourse features can initially be modelled to learner-writers. Following that, given the procedural knowledge, learner writers then perform their own discourse analysis on existing texts and undertake new textwriting tasks.

Table 3 Sample general EAP syllabus unit   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Aims</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Students will be able to write a 200-word data commentary describing non-sequential data from a line graph, bar graph, pie graph or table</td></tr><tr><td>Schematic</td><td>The students will use a WHOLE PART schematic structure for whole reports and an UP DOwN schema for the body section of information reports</td></tr><tr><td>Discoursal</td><td>Students will incorporate a Preview Details discourse pattern in writing an information report Students will have practice in writing topic sentences and developing paragraphs appropriate to this text type and the type of content data involved</td></tr><tr><td>Semantic</td><td>Amplification:</td></tr><tr><td>relations</td><td>Students will have practice in using: 1. Restrictive relative clauses (adjectival)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2. Object noun clauses</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Simple contrast:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Students will have practice in using syntactic and lexical markers of contrast</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical</td><td>Students will review vocabulary related to statistics and data commentary</td></tr></table></body></html>

At the pre-writing level, once the rhetorical aim and the type of target information of the text has been identified, awareness of the gestalt structure provides a learner-writer with an heuristic in terms of a general framework, within which to plan the ideas structure of a text. In conformity with the idea of not internalising topic-specific realisations but applying them to learning (Widdowson, 1983, p. 90), the learner, after being introduced to the gestalt patterning, then practices content-planning of similar data commentaries in relation to other graphs, tables or pictographs that are used to convey information. Once the ideas organisation has been identified, this is related to a textual plan based on the Preview-Details discourse pattern. These plans are then employed at a later text construction stage.

At the lower levels of textual organisation, the semantic relations of the Rhetorical Type model provide the syllabus designer with focus areas for examining the internal cohesion (and, thereby, coherence) of the text. A range of language elements that realise the salient semantic relations are isolated and practised in relation to the sample unit of discourse, and in preparation for the writing of language texts. Table 4 provides a description of the salient semantic relations that occur in the Report Rhetorical Type sample text in Table 2 above.

Examples of each of the structures that relate to the salient semantic relations will be identified within the model text, analysed and practised.

Because Report Rhetorical Type draws on a range of semantic relations, it is possible to sequence more than one unit constructed around Report Rhetorical Type, with each unit focusing on one particular semantic relation and a range of syntactical and lexical realisations of the particular relation.

Table 4 Examples of semantic relations from the sample text   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Semantic relationa</td><td>Descriptiona</td><td>Examples/language features from the sample text (Table 2).</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Amplification: Term</td></tr><tr><td> specification</td><td>One member of the relation amplifies the information in the other by providing a specific term as a substitute for a general one</td><td>This is one of a number of significant developments revealed in the latest survey of university graduate destinations (restrictive and reduced relative clauses) The report details that graduates aged</td></tr><tr><td>Predicate specification</td><td>One member of the relation amplifies the other by specifying the content of the semantic predicate. Direct or indirect reporting may be involved</td><td>between 30 and 40 make up 16.6% of the population for the most recent survey (noun clauses as the object of a sentence, reporting verbs and other types of reporting structures)</td></tr><tr><td>Simple contrast</td><td>This is a relation involving the comparison of two things, events or abstraction in terms of some particular in respect of which they are difference</td><td>Further, the average age of the respondents with Bachelor/Bachelor with Honours degrees is 26, as opposed to 25 for the previous survey (grammatical and lexical markers of contrast)</td></tr><tr><td>Reason result</td><td>Here, the reason member (which very often follows the result member in English) gives a reason why a particular effect came or will come about</td><td>This is particularly significant, as this first- degree group constitutes 68.9% of the total survey population (markers of reason)</td></tr><tr><td>Grounds conclusion</td><td>Here, a deduction is drawn on the basis of some observation</td><td>The view that university graduates appear to be taking longer to complete their first degree is suggested by a report which shows that 65.1% of Bachelor/Bachelor with Honours graduates are in the 18-24 age group (verbs signalling reasons or</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Crombie (1985, pp. 21 and 26).

Once the exemplar text of the particular Rhetorical Type has been deconstructed, analysed and its constituent parts practised, the final phase of the syllabus unit involves the creation of new examples of the same Rhetorical Type, using the procedural knowledge of the model that has been practised. Initially, this could involve guided, joint constructions of new texts with a degree of assistance from the teacher leading to independent, individual text constructions that provide further opportunities for employing the procedural and linguistic knowledge that has been the particular focus of the syllabus unit.

# 6. Conclusion

A writing syllabus that is based on the Rhetorical Type model meets many of the requirements of wide angle, general EAP courses. It is top-down, not discipline-specific and focuses on the realisations of common types of rhetorical purpose and the related organisational structures of written discourse in order to provide the foundations for the future development of the learner’s discourse competence in discipline-specific literacies (see Lea & Street, 1998). The top-down character of the model provides for cycles of synthesis and analysis in terms of a mediated task-based approach in which the schematic and linguistic elements of discourse are identified by analysis, practised and reconstituted. In relation to the selection of language for such courses, this type of syllabus provides a basis for a selection of authentic model texts and targeted linguistic selection in terms of a lexis, grammar and syntax that are realisations of the local semantic relations. The syllabus is not linguistically driven, but provides a framework for detailed linguistic analysis and practice within a discoursal setting.

# Appendix A

Comparison of Biber’s and Quinn’s text types for academic prose

<html><body><table><tr><td>Biber&#x27;s text types (academic prose)</td><td>Quinn&#x27;s text types</td></tr><tr><td>Type 3. Learned scientific exposition: focus on highly abstract and technical information...they are, therefore, concerned with entities being acted on (the patients) [rather] than any active agents. They further depend on the frequent use of conjuncts to specify the logical relations among propositions (Biber, 1989, p. 29)</td><td>Explanation: Descriptions of a process, cause and effect (when? where? why?), historical and hypothetical cause and effect (Quinn, 1993, p. 34)</td></tr><tr><td>Type 4. Learned exposition: Type 4 texts tend to be less technical in content...show a preference for a more active style (Biber, 1989, p. 29)</td><td>Report: Describing a scientific or technical classi- fication, a graph, table of numbers proposal or proposition (ideas reports, or action reports in the past and future e.g. describing political or business strategy) (Quinn, 1993, p. 34)</td></tr><tr><td>Type 6. General narrative exposition: They are primarily informational and expository but often use narration to convey information...the narrative portions in these texts are not imaginary or for entertainment; they are rather an integral part of the expository information being conveyed (Biber, 1989, p. 31)</td><td>Recounts: Personal and academic recounts with human participants, formal academic recounts (Quinn, 1993, p. 35)</td></tr><tr><td>Type 8. Involved persuasion: the texts in Type 8 are primarily distinguished by their persuasive and argumentative emphases...this orientation is typi- cally combined with an involved, often interactive, style, which aids the persuasive force of the text by developing a sense of solidarity with the listener or reader. In other cases though, these texts can be overtly persuasive while having a marked infor- mational focus (Biber, 1989, p. 38)</td><td>Discussion: compare and contrast objects, propo- sals, propositions, hypotheses and historical causa- tion and effect (Quinn, 1993, p. 35)</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Appendix B

Summary of the rhetorical type model

<html><body><table><tr><td>Rhetorical type</td><td>Rhetorical purpose</td><td>Image schema</td><td>Discourse pattern</td><td>Cognitive processes (calculations include bonding [Coupling])</td><td>Semantic Relationsa (bonding [Coupling] removed): only relations with 10% or more included</td></tr><tr><td>Report</td><td>Presentation of information that is essen- tially non- sequential</td><td>WHOLE PART, UP DOWN</td><td>General-par- ticular (pre- view-details)</td><td>Tempero- contigual (59%) associative (26%) logico- deductive (15%)</td><td>Amplification (approx. 18%); reason-result and grounds-conclusion combined (approx. 17%); simple contrast and comparative simi- larity combined (approx. 15%); conces- sion-contraexpectation (approx. 10%); con- dition-consequence</td></tr><tr><td>Explan- ation</td><td>Presentation of information with a focus on means by which some- thing is achieved</td><td>SOURCE PATH GOAL, LINK</td><td>General-par- ticular (pre- view-details)</td><td>Tempero- contigual (60%); associative and logico- deductive</td><td>(approx. 10%) Means-purpose and means-result combined (approx. 29%); amplifi- cation (approx. 17%); concession-contraex- pectation (approx. 12. 5%)</td></tr><tr><td>Discus- sion</td><td>Focus on the organisation of data in relation to possible outcomes, conclusions or choices</td><td>CON- TAINER</td><td>General-par- ticular (gener- alisation- examples), matching relations</td><td>(20% each) Tempero- contigual (46%); associative (27%); Logico- deductive</td><td>Grounds-conclusion and reason-result com- bined (26%); means- purpose and means- result combined (approx. 22%); conces- sion-contraexpectation</td></tr><tr><td>Recount</td><td>Presentation of data that is essentially chronological.</td><td>SOURCE, PATH GOAL</td><td>Problem- solution</td><td>(26%) Tempero- contigual (60%); associative and logico- deductive (20% each)</td><td>(approx. 19%) Means-purpose and means-result combined (approx. 19%); amplifi- cation (approx. 17%); chronological sequence (approx. 15.5%); grounds-conclusion and reason-result combined (approx.</td></tr></table></body></html>

The percentages of cognitive processes and semantic relations relate to the occurrences of these elements of the model in a corpus of texts from academic journal articles (Bruce, 2003, pp. 212–262). a Because of the high occurrence of bonding in all rhetorical types, and because of the fact that there is a roughly equivalent percentage of this relation in all cases, the percentage calculations for the other relations was done after the effect of this relation was removed. In other words, the percentage occurrence of each relation recorded here is a percentage for the total occurrences of all relations other than bonding.

Appendix C Crombie’s inter-propositional relations   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Process</td><td>Relation</td><td>Definition</td></tr><tr><td>Associative</td><td>Simple contrast</td><td>Involves the comparison of two things, events or abstractions in terms of some particular in respect of</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Comparative similarity (simple comparison)</td><td>which they differ Involves the comparison of two things, events or abstractions in terms of some particular in respect of</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Statement-affirmation</td><td>which they are similar The truth of a statement is affirmed Involves a statement and an exception to that statement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Statement-exception Statement-exemplification</td><td>The first member provides a general statement and the</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>second adds a proposition which is presented as an exemplification of the general statement in the first member</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Statement-denial</td><td>Involves the denial of the truth of a statement or validity of a proposition</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Denial-correction</td><td>Involves a corrective non-antonymic substitute for a</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Concession-contraexpectation</td><td>denial Involves direct or indirect denial of the truth of an</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Supplementary alternation</td><td>inference Involves two or more non-antithetical choices</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Contrastive alternation Paraphrase</td><td>Involves a choice between antitheses Involves the same proposition expressed in different</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Amplification</td><td>ways Involves implicit or explicit repetition of the prop- ositional content of one member of the relation in the</td></tr><tr><td>Logico- deductive</td><td>Condition-consequence</td><td>other, together with a non-contrastive addition to that propositional content Involves a consequence which depends upon a realizable</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>or unrealisable condition or hypothetical contingency Involves an action that is/was/will be undertaken with</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Means-purpose</td><td>the intention of achieving a particular result Involves the provision of a reason why a particular effect</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Reason-result</td><td>came about or will come aboutn.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Means-result</td><td>Involves a statement of how a particular result is/was/ will be achieved.</td></tr><tr><td>Tempero-</td><td>Grounds-conclusion</td><td>Involves a deduction drawn on the basis of an observation</td></tr><tr><td>contigual</td><td>Chronological sequence</td><td>Provides the semantic link between event propositions one of which follows the other in time</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Temporal overlap</td><td>The relation of Temporal Overlap links two events which overlap, either wholly or partly, in time</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Bonding</td><td>This is a non-elective, non-sequential relation between two conjoined or juxtaposed propositions. The second member adds at least one new proposition to the first and.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Based on Crombie (1985, pp. 18–28; 1987, p. 102).

# References

Bain, A. (1871/1996). English composition and rhetoric. New York: Scholars’ Facsimiles and Reprints Delmar.   
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory and Cognition, 11, 211–227.   
Beekman, J., & Callow, J. (1974). Translating the word of God. Grand Rapids Michigan: Zondervan.   
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analysing genre: Language use in professional settings. London: Longman.   
Biber, D. (1988). Variation across speech and writing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Biber, D. (1989). A typology of English text. Linguistics, 27, 3–43.   
Bruce, I. J. (2003). Cognitive genre prototype modelling and its implications for the teaching of academic writing to learners of English as a second language Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Hamilton, New Zealand: University of Waikato.   
Burns, A., & Joyce, H. (1997). Focus on speaking. Sydney: National Centre for English Language Teaching and Research.   
Campbell, G. (1963). The philosophy of rhetoric. In L. F. Bitzer (Ed.), Landmarks in rhetoric and public address. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press (Original work published in 1776).   
Carr, T., & Curren, T. (1994). Cognitive factors in learning about structured sequences: Applications to syntax. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 16, 205–230.   
Connor, U., & Mauranen, A. (1999). Linguistic analysis of grant proposals: European Union Research Grants. English for Specific Purposes, 18, 47–62.   
Council of Europe (2001). Common European framework of reference for languages: Learning, teaching, assessment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Crombie, W. (1985). Process and relation in discourse and language learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Crombie, W. (1987). Free verse and prose style: An operational definition and description. London: Routledge, Kegan and Paul.   
Crookes, G. (1986). Towards a validated analysis of scientific text structure. Applied Linguistics, 7, 57–70.   
Derewianka, B. (1990). Exploring how texts work. Sydney, Australia: Primary English Teaching Association.   
Devine, J. (1993). The role of metacognition in second language reading and writing. In J. G. Carson, & I. Leki (Eds.), Reading in the composition classroom: Second language perspectives (pp. 105–127). Boston: Heinle and Heinle, 105–127.   
Dudley-Evans, T. (1986). Genre analysis: An investigation of the introductions and discourse sections of MSc dissertations. In M. Coulthard (Ed.), Talking about text: Discourse analysis monographs No. 13 English language research (pp. 128–145). Birmingham: University of Birmingham, 128–145.   
Dudley-Evans, T. (1989). An outline of the value of genre analysis in LSP work. In C. Laure´n, & M. Nordman (Eds.), Special language: From humans thinking to thinking machines (pp. 72–79). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 72–79.   
Dudley-Evans, T. (1994). Genre analysis: An approach to text analysis for ESP. In M. Coultard (Ed.), Advances in written text analysis (pp. 219–228). London: Routledge, 219–228.   
Dudley-Evans, T., & John, M. J. (1998). Developments in English for specific purposes: A multi-disciplinary approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Eggins, S. (1994). An introduction to systemic functional linguistics. London: Pinter.   
Feez, S. (1998). Text-based syllabus design. Sydney: National Centre for English Language Teaching and Research, Macquarie University.   
Hasan, R. (1989). The identity of a text. In M. A. K. Halliday, & R. Hasan (Eds.), Language, text and context (pp. 97–118). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 97–118 (Original work published in 1985).   
Hinkel, E. (2002). Second language writers’ text: Linguistic and rhetorical features. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Hoey, M. (1983). On the surface of discourse. London: George Allen & Unwin.   
Hoey, M. (2001). Textual interaction: An introduction to written discourse analysis. London: Routledge.   
Hopkins, A., & Dudley-Evans, T. (1988). A genre-based investigation of the discussion section in articles and dissertations. English for Specific Purposes, 7, 113–122.   
Johnson, M. (1987). The body in the mind: The bodily basis of meaning, imagination, and reason. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.   
Knapp, P., & Watkins, M. (1994). Context—text—grammar: Teaching the genres and grammar of school writing in infants and primary classrooms. Broadway, NSW: Text Productions.   
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire and dangerous things: What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.   
Lea, M. R., & Street, B. (1998). Student writing in higher education: An academic literacies approach. Studies in Higher Education, 23, 157–172.   
Longacre, R. (1976). An anatomy of speech notions. Lisse: De Ridder.   
Macken, M., Kalantzis, M., Kress, G., Martin, J. R., Cope, W., & Rothery, J. (1989). A genre-based approach to teaching writing, years 3–6, book 4 The theory and practice of genre-based writing. Sydney, Australia: Directorate of Studies, NSW Department of Education in association with the Literacy and Education Research Network.   
Matthews, R. C., Buss, R. R., Stanley, W. B., Blachard-Fields, F., Cho, J. R., & Druhan, B. (1989). Role of implicit and explicit processes in learning from examples: A synergistic effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 15, 1083–1100.   
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories of conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289–316.   
Nunan, D. (1998). Discourse analysis. London: Penguin.   
Paltridge, B. (1993). A challenge to the current concept of genre: Writing up research Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Hamilton, New Zealand: University of Waikato.   
Paltridge, B. (2001). Genre and the language learning classroom. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.   
Paltridge, B. (2002). Genre, text type, and the English for Academic Purposes (EAP) Classroom. In A. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom: Multiple perspectives (pp. 73–90). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 73–90.   
Pawley, A., & Syder, F. H. (1983). Two puzzles for linguistic theory: Native-like selection and native-like fluency. In J. C. Richards, & R. W. Schmidt (Eds.), Language and communication (pp. 191–226). New York: Longman, 191–226.   
Pilegaard, M., & Frandsen, F. (1996). Text type. In J. Verschueren, J.-O. Ostaman, J. Blommaert, & C. C. Bulcaen (Eds.), Handbook of pragmatics 1996 (pp. 1–13). Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1–13.   
Quinn, J. (1993). A taxonomy of text types for use in curriculum design. EA Journal, 11(2), 33–46.   
Rosch, E. (1973). Natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 328–350.   
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 104, 192–233.   
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorisation. In E. Rosch, & B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and categorization (pp. 27–47). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 27–47.   
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. (1975). Family resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573–605.   
Skehan, P. (1996). A framework for the implementation of task-based instruction. Applied Linguistics, 17, 38–62.   
Swales, J. (1981). Aspects of article introductions. (Aston ESP Research Rep. No. 1.). Birmingham: Language Studies Unit, The University of Aston, England.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Ventola, E. (1987). The structure of social interaction: A systemic approach to the semiotics of service encounter interaction. London: Pinter.   
Widdowson, H. G. (1983). Learning purpose and language use. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Widdowson, H. G. (1989). Knowledge of language and ability for use. Applied Linguistics, 10(2), 128–137.   
Widdowson, H. G. (1990). Aspects of language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Wilkins, D. (1976). Notional syllabuses: A taxonomy and its relevance to foreign language curriculum development. London: Oxford University Press.   
Winter, E. O. (1977). A clause-relational approach to English texts: A study of some predictive lexical items in written discourse. Instructional Science, 6, 1.   
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.