# Text-structuring metadiscourse, intonation and the signalling of organisation in academic lectures

Susan Elizabeth Thompson\*

Applied English Language Studies Unit, Department of English Language and Literature, University of Liverpool, PO Box 147, Liverpool L69 7ZR, UK

# Abstract

EAP teaching materials frequently emphasise the importance of text-structuring metadiscourse (sometimes referred to as ‘signposting’ language) to signal hierarchical organisation in lectures, and EAP teaching materials are often rich in samples of this type of metadiscourse. This raises two key questions: how important this type of metadiscourse is as a means of indicating to an audience the organisation of a lecture, and what other resources are available to the lecturer. This article focuses on the roles of text-structuring metadiscourse and intonation in signalling the larger-scale organisation of academic talks. The occurrence of metadiscoursal and intonational signals of organisation is compared in authentic undergraduate lectures and in talks appearing in EAP listening skills materials. It is argued that both metadiscourse and intonation are used by academic speakers to help an audience form a coherent ‘mental map’ of the overall talk and how its parts are interconnected. However, it appears that the models of organisation in lecture discourse provided by some EAP materials may be misleading. The article ends by considering the implications of the findings for EAP listening skills courses.

$©$ 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

# 1. Introduction

It is widely recognised that listening to lectures can place a considerable processing burden on students, particularly L2 students, who face the task of interpreting in real time a monologue which is both linguistically and cognitively demanding. A number of studies (e.g. Flowerdew & Tauroza, 1995; Strodt-Lopez, 1991; Thompson, 1994;

Young, 1994) have examined ways in which lecturers can help their audience to process the information in their talks efficiently and make a ‘mental map’ of the overall organisation of the text. However, the picture which has emerged from these studies is far from simple. For example, some studies (e.g. Chaudron & Richards, 1986; De Carrico & Nattinger, 1988) have emphasised the importance of discourse structuring markers to signal the overall organisation of the talk and the relationships between propositions. Others (e.g. Dunkel & Davies, 1994) have found that this is not a key factor in successful interpretation of the meaning of a lecture. What seems to be clear is that the organisation of a lecture is a complex and multi-faceted phenomenon. For EAP practitioners, a key issue is how to provide as accurate as possible a model of lecture organisation and help their learners to develop the skills to interpret organising signals. However, there are concerns about the accuracy of models of lecture discourse presented in some EAP teaching materials. For example, Flowerdew and Miller (1997) conclude that published EAP materials can present a misleading and idealised view of lecture monologue, including the overuse of metadiscoursal signalling to show the structure of academic talks.

With these concerns in mind, this article reports on a comparative study of text organisation in six authentic undergraduate lectures and 10 talks selected from EAP materials published over the past 25 years. The aim of the study is to investigate how organisation is signalled in the authentic lectures and EAP monologues, focusing in particular on two ways of signalling organisation: text-structuring metadiscourse and phonological paragraphing.

# 2. Signalling organisation in lectures

Listening to lectures naturally shares many of features of ‘normal’ listening. Listeners need to perceive and attend to what they hear, to recognise and process language data, use pragmatic information to interpret meaning, draw on background knowledge to help understand content, take information into the short-term memory and where appropriate transfer to long-term memory, etc. (see Anderson & Lynch, 1988; Brown, 1995; Rost, 2002). Particularly when listening to a lengthy and complex monologue such as a lecture, the listener must create an adequate mental representation of the spoken text as a ‘sequential-hierarchic network structure’ (Givo´ n, 1995: 64) in which information is not only recorded linearly in note form, but hierarchic relationships (e.g. between topics and sub-topics) and semantic relations such as cause/consequence are also recognised. A key aspect of this process is to recognise the connections between information chunks which are in themselves separate but which combine into larger information units (cf. Scott & Thompson, 2001: 5).

# 2.1. Text-structuring metadiscourse in academic lectures

Metadiscourse refers to language in a text which talks about that text rather than the propositional content. Crismore (1983: 1) distinguishes between ‘attitudinal’ and ‘informational’ metadiscourse. The former includes features such as hedging and evaluation, and therefore lies outside the scope of the present study. Informational metadiscourse refers to language which ‘serves to direct readers in how to understand the primary discourse message by referring, for example, to its text structure and content and to the author’s discourse actions, purposes or goals’ (Crismore & Farnsworth, 1990: 120–121). Text-structuring metadiscourse in academic monologue has been widely studied (see, for example, Coulthard & Montgomery, 1981; Flowerdew & Tauroza, 1995; Heino, Tervonen, & Tommola, 2002; Murphy & Candlin, 1979). Hyland’s (1998) study of metadiscourse in academic research articles identifies the category of ‘frame marker’ as the type of informational metadiscourse which provides ‘interpretive framing information about longer elements of the discourse’ (p. 443). Hyland describes frame markers as explicitly referring either to text boundaries or to elements of ‘schematic’ text structure, either ‘introducing shifts in the discourse or preparing for the next step in the argument’ (p. 443). Items include those which show sequencing (‘first’, ‘next’), label stages in the text (‘to conclude’), announce discourse goals (‘my purpose is’) and show shifts in topic (‘well’). It is the signalling of this macro-level of organisation that the present study deals with.

# 2.2. Phonological paragraphs in lectures

At the most basic level, orthographic paragraphs in written texts serve to break down a long text into more ‘eye-friendly’ chunks, and thus aid reading. Studies of orthographic paragraphs (e.g. Young & Becker, 1966) provide good experimental evidence that readers can recognise where a paragraph boundary is likely to occur, and that paragraphs in written texts have ‘psychological reality’. Further, features such as paragraph and section breaks can help the reader to recognise connections between information chunks in a text (Paltridge, 1994: 295). Hoey (1997) argues that paragraph boundaries indicate a semantic disjunction of some kind between the information on either side of the boundary, for example, one paragraph is followed by another in which contrasting information is given.

When we turn to spoken discourse, the equivalent unit is the phonological paragraph (also known as the paratone or sequence chain). Earlier studies have found that the phonological paragraph appears to share similarities with the orthographic paragraph (Yule, 1980), in that both represent a larger scale chunking of information into sequential-hierarchical segments. Rost (2002: 34) states that phonological paragraphs ‘correspond to global planning units of the speaker text’. Phonological paragraphs are most clearly encountered in what Tench (1996: 28) terms ‘semantically-prepared discourse’ rather than casual spontaneous speech. As such, they are likely to play an important role in the construction and interpretation of academic talks. However, surprisingly very little research has so far been performed on the use of phonological paragraphs in academic monologue (though see Barr, 1990; Thompson, 1997).

Although Yule (1980) argues that the phonological paragraph is topic-related, it is identified by phonological features at its boundaries. This unit is characterized by high pitch on the first prominent (stressed) syllable of the initial tone unit and may be marked by relatively high pitch across the whole of that first tone unit. Throughout the phonological paragraph there is an overall gradual lowering of this pitch level, and the phonological paragraph ends with its lowest pitch choice on the tonic syllable of the last tone unit. This low termination may also be accompanied by a lowering of volume, a slowing down and laryngealization (‘growliness’) of the voice (Lehiste, 1979). The end of the phonological paragraph may be followed by a significant pause (one second or more) before the speaker’s voice jumps up again to start the next phonological paragraph (Yule, 1980). There is some disagreement between analysts about which of these features are criterial, but most accept that the minimal requirements are relatively low termination followed by a jump up to relatively high pitch on the onset syllable, with other features such as lowering of volume and lengthy pause being non-criterial.

Earlier studies of phonological paragraphs have suggested that what comes near the beginning of the paragraph may be of particular importance for interpreting what happens in the remainder of the paragraph and how it relates to the surrounding text (e.g. Barr, 1990; Thompson, 1997). The beginning of the paragraph is defined phonologically as the stretch of speech starting at the initial tone unit of the paragraph and ending with the first occurrence of a tone unit carrying low termination on its tonic syllable (cf. Brazil’s, 1997, description of the ‘pitch sequence’). Brown and Yule (1983: 101) suggest that phonological paragraphs may open with some kind of introductory expression which encapsulates the topic of the whole paragraph. Since the present study focuses on textual organisation, it is worth investigating whether or not the opening pitch sequences of paragraphs in lectures contain any text-structuring signals.

# 3. The study

Six authentic undergraduate university lectures (coded as L1–L6) were selected for analysis: three were from the humanities (L1–3) and three from the sciences (L4–6), to lessen the possibility of discipline influences skewing the results. The lectures were transcribed orthographically. Five EAP published listening skills materials (see list at end of article) were selected for analysis, and coded as follows: Academic Listening Encounters (EAP1); Listening: English for Academic Purposes Series (EAP 2); Study Listening (EAP 3); Listening Comprehension and Note-taking Course (EAP 4); Text to Note (EAP 5). From each of these materials, two listening texts (a and b) were selected, making a total of 10 talks in all; wherever possible one talk was chosen with a topic from the humanities and one from the sciences, to match the authentic lecture data. These materials have been published over the past 25 years or so, and include listening texts which are clearly scripted and read-aloud as well as talks which are claimed to be authentic lectures. For these talks, the existing transcriptions provided in the Teachers Books were checked and modified where necessary.

For both the lectures and the EAP talks, the transcripts were manually searched for text-structuring signals. A fairly simple but robust system for categorising text-structuring metadiscourse was needed, and it was decided to screen out a number of types of informational metadiscourse, e.g. referring to visuals, references to earlier lectures, which are important but perhaps less central to the signalling of textual organisation in the lectures. For the same practical reasons of scope, the study was restricted to text-structuring markers which operate on a larger scale rather than, for example, those signalling more local relationships such as exemplification or contrast. The focus of interest was how a speaker can indicate the overall structure of a lecture, introduce major new topic sections, and signal major topic transitions. Moreover, a text may consist of a complex hierarchical organisation in which the overall topic may be broken down into sub-topics, which themselves may again be broken down further into smaller sub-topics, and so on. For practical purposes, it was decided to deal only with metadiscourse markers at the three highest levels: global (dealing with the overall organisation of the whole lecture), topical (relating to major topic areas covered in the lecture) and sub-topical (relating to component sub-topics within these major topics).

The recordings for both the lectures and the EAP talks were next analysed to identify phonological paragraph boundary features. The criteria used were as follows: low pitch on the final tonic syllable of the paragraph followed by a jump up to high pitch on the first prominent syllable of the new paragraph. To reduce the danger of subjectivity in analysing these features, a second independent rater was used, and only those paragraph boundaries which were identified by both raters were considered for further analysis. Although low pitch termination followed by high pitch on the new paragraph were regarded as the criterial features for phonological paragraphs, the following features were also noted as being of potential interest: extra low pitch choice at the end of the previous paragraph with a decrease in volume and/or speed, laryngealization, lengthy pausing before the start of the new paragraph, and exceptionally high pitch at the start of the new paragraph when compared with the other paragraphs in the lecture. It was hypothesised that these phonologically particularly outstanding paragraph boundaries might play a special role in the organisation of the text, perhaps somewhat akin to sections in a written text (cf. Thompson, 1997).

# 4. Structuring metadiscourse markers in the lectures and EAP talks

# 4.1. Structuring metadiscourse types

Two basic types of structuring metadiscourse were identified. The first of these are markers indicating the global organisation of the talk; typically these markers occur in the opening section of the talk, less commonly in the concluding section. The second type occurs throughout the talk, introducing new topics and sub-topics, indicating transitions from one (sub-)topic to another, etc. These markers are distinguished according to the following three features. Firstly, markers may make reference to the content of the talk or the topic, e.g.:

next obesity (EAP 1b)

Secondly, markers may make reference to the talk itself, or a part of the talk, rather than to the content, e.g.:

well now a conclusion (EAP 2b)

Thirdly, markers may include an interpersonal reference, explicitly mentioning the speaker and/or the audience, and often including a reference to the speaker’s aims:

so what I want to do now is to consider or continue considering a number of examples where we apply those rules to specific problems (L4)

Alternatively, the speaker may couch the marker as a command or a question, e.g.:

ok now let me make two points about how nonverbal communication functions (EAP 1a)

so what’s the species that is most like us? well it’s not the chimpanzee. . . (L1

At each of the three levels (global, topical and sub-topical), three types of marker were identified. Type one is the content-related marker, which gives information about the actual content of the lecture to come. Global content markers (GC) normally include a reference to content, some kind of interpersonal reference particularly reference to the speaker, and a time reference (e.g. ‘today’, ‘this morning’). There is often a distinct metadiscoursal phase in the opening part of the lecture where the lecturer outlines the content of the talk, his or her aims and approaches, e.g.:

in what is left of this hour which is actually half an hour I hope to give you a sort of brief idea of what it is that you are about to embark upon the study of what language study really is about and I’m going to do that really not by defining language but by talking about its typical characteristics (L1)

Topic content markers (TC) and sub-topic content markers (SC) introduce, or less commonly conclude, a topic. They involve reference to the topic, and frequently include an interpersonal element. They may for example come in the form of a question which is immediately answered by the lecturer; thus they are both ideationally-focused in terms of referring to the topic but also interpersonally marked as part of the interaction between the lecturer and the audience, e.g.:

what would be about the simplest mechanical system I could control? well I could take a block and I could mount it. . . (L5)

The second type of marker is the structuring marker. Global structuring markers (GS) indicate the ordering of the various topics or sub-topics covered in the lecture, and so typically consist of sequencing markers (‘firstly’, ‘next’) together with reference to the topic or sub-topic. They may also refer to the talk itself and have an interpersonal reference:

The structure of the talk is quite simple. I’ll take the terms one after the other. I’ll start with water . . . And then I’ll move on to farms . . . (EAP 2b)

Similarly, topic structuring markers (TS) and sub-topic structuring markers (SS) outline the points within the topic or sub-topic and their sequencing; they may make reference to topic, the talk itself and include an interpersonal reference; and they often include sequencers, e.g:

and finally of course mitosis which is a characteristic of eukaryotic cells (L6)

The third type of marker are metastatements. Global metastatements (GM), topic metastatements (TM) and sub-topic metastatements (SM) refer to what the speaker will do or has done in talk but do not refer to the content; they normally include an interpersonal element, e.g.:

right so with that let me start the lecture (L4)

# 4.2. Metadiscourse markers in lectures and EAP talks

Tables 1 and 2 show the numbers of different types of markers occurring in the authentic lectures and the EAP talks. The first thing to note is that the average number of markers per 1000 words is considerably higher in the EAP talks (9.1) than in the authentic lectures (3.0), showing that the EAP talks are more clearly signalled than their authentic counterparts. If we look more closely at the types of markers used by the lecturers and EAP speakers, we again see a clear difference. In the lectures, the largest proportion $( 4 9 \% )$ of markers are at the sub-topic level, showing that the lecturers primarily use metadiscourse markers to indicate lower level organisation of the lectures. The remaining markers are split more or less equally between global $( 2 7 \% )$ and topical $( 2 4 \% )$ . In contrast, the EAP speakers primarily use metadiscourse markers to indicate topical organisation $( 5 0 \% )$ , with the remaining markers being split between global $( 2 3 \% )$ and sub-topical $( 2 7 \% )$ . One clear implication here is that the lecturers rely less on metadiscourse structuring to indicate the highest levels of organisation $51 \%$ global and major topics) than do the EAP speakers $( 7 3 \% )$ . Another notable difference is that structuring markers (GS, TS and SS) are more common in the EAP talks $45 \%$ of total markers) than in the authentic lectures $( 3 0 \% )$ , indicating that in the EAP talks more emphasis is given to helping listeners grasp the structure of what is to come or what has gone. All in all, the picture which emerges is that the EAP talks are considerably more clearly signalled, particularly at the higher levels of organisation, than the authentic lectures.

Table 1 Occurrences of different types of markers in authentic lectures   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Type of marker.</td><td>L1</td><td>L2</td><td>L3</td><td>L4</td><td>L5</td><td>L6</td><td>Total</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>GC</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>12</td><td>13.6</td></tr><tr><td>GS</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>5.7</td></tr><tr><td>GM</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>7</td><td>7.9</td></tr><tr><td>Total global</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>6</td><td>3</td><td>24</td><td>27</td></tr><tr><td>TC</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>15</td><td>17.0</td></tr><tr><td>TS</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>5.7</td></tr><tr><td>TM</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1.1</td></tr><tr><td>Total topic</td><td>8</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>21</td><td>24</td></tr><tr><td>SC</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>6</td><td>2</td><td>7</td><td>25</td><td>28.4</td></tr><tr><td>ss</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>6</td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>16</td><td>18.2</td></tr><tr><td>SM</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>2.3</td></tr><tr><td>Total sub-topic</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>13</td><td>3</td><td>12</td><td>43</td><td>49</td></tr><tr><td>Total markers</td><td>18</td><td>8</td><td>10</td><td>22</td><td>13</td><td>17</td><td>88</td><td>100</td></tr><tr><td>Total words</td><td>4723</td><td>5016</td><td>5844</td><td>4919</td><td>3469</td><td>6772</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Markers/1000 words</td><td>3.8</td><td>1.6</td><td>1.7</td><td>4.5</td><td>3.7</td><td>2.5</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Occurrences of different types of markers in EAP talks   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Type of marker</td><td>1a</td><td>1b</td><td>2a</td><td>2b</td><td>3a</td><td>3b</td><td>4a</td><td>4b</td><td>5a</td><td>5b</td><td>Total</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>GC</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>13</td><td>9.8</td></tr><tr><td>GS</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>15</td><td>11.4</td></tr><tr><td>GM</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>2.3</td></tr><tr><td>Total global</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>9</td><td>8</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>31</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>TC</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>5</td><td>8</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>32</td><td>24.2</td></tr><tr><td>TS</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>6</td><td>0</td><td>31</td><td>23.5</td></tr><tr><td>TM</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>2.3</td></tr><tr><td>Total topic</td><td>7</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>12</td><td>13</td><td>6</td><td>8</td><td>6</td><td>8</td><td>0</td><td>66</td><td>50%</td></tr><tr><td>Sc</td><td>2</td><td>7</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>21</td><td>15.9</td></tr><tr><td>ss</td><td>2</td><td>7</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>14</td><td>10.6</td></tr><tr><td>SM</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total sub-topic</td><td>4</td><td>14</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>35</td><td>27%</td></tr><tr><td>Total markers</td><td>13</td><td>18</td><td>9</td><td>25</td><td>26</td><td>13</td><td>9</td><td>11</td><td>8</td><td></td><td>0 132</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>Total words</td><td>1040</td><td></td><td>999 2004</td><td>2277</td><td>2594</td><td>2264</td><td>788</td><td>1148</td><td>941</td><td>540</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Markers/1000 words</td><td>12.5</td><td>18</td><td>4.5</td><td>11.0</td><td>10.0</td><td>5.7</td><td>11.4</td><td>9.6</td><td>8.5</td><td>0</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

There are however differences between the individual EAP talks in how closely they resemble the use of metadiscoursal signalling in the authentic lectures. For example, in terms of the overall use of metadiscourse markers, EAP 2a (at 4.5 per 1000 words) and EAP 3b (at 5.7 per 1000 words) are the closest to the authentic talks, where the highest recorded use is 4.5 per 1000 words for L4. It is claimed by the materials writers that both of these talks are ‘authentic’, and certainly in terms of reliance on metadiscoursal signalling of organisation this claim appears to be justified. However, even in the case of these two talks, there is a greater use of metadiscourse at global and topic level $7 7 \%$ in the case of EAP 2a and $8 1 \%$ in the case of EAP 3a) when compared with the authentic lectures.

Overall, then it is quite clear that the EAP talks make considerably more use of metadiscoursal signalling, particularly at more global levels of organisation, and in particular focusing more on describing the structure of the talk, when compared with the authentic lectures. It may well be that all of these features make it easier for the EAP student to listen to a talk, but the obvious problem is that authentic lecturers may not be so aware of the usefulness of metadiscourse to help their audiences make a mental map of the lecture, against which they can match information.

# 5. Phonological paragraphing in the authentic and EAP talks

We now turn to our second aspect of organisation in academic monologue: the use of phonological paragraphs to break the overall text down into smaller information chunks. As can be seen from Tables 3 and 4, there is a notable difference in the degree to which these talks are broken down into phonological paragraphs. In the authentic lectures phonological paragraphs are comparatively long, ranging from 1.0 to 2.9 paratones per 1000 words), with an overall average of 1.7 paratones per 1000 words. This means that paragraphs on average range from 345 to 1000 words in length. In contrast, the EAP talks display much shorter phonological paragraphs, ranging between 1.8 and 8.5 paragraphs per 1000 words, with an overall average of 5.4 paragraphs per 1000 words, 3.2 times more than in the lectures. Clearly, then, the information in the EAP talks is being broken up into smaller chunks than in the lectures.

Table 3 Phonological paragraphs in the authentic lectures   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Lecture</td><td>Words</td><td>Paragraphs</td><td>Paragraphs/1000 words</td></tr><tr><td>L1</td><td>4723</td><td>9</td><td>1.9</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>5016</td><td>8</td><td>1.6</td></tr><tr><td>L3</td><td>5844</td><td>9</td><td>1.5</td></tr><tr><td>L4</td><td>4919</td><td>8</td><td>1.6</td></tr><tr><td>L5</td><td>3469</td><td>10</td><td>2.9</td></tr><tr><td>L6</td><td>6772</td><td>7</td><td>1.0</td></tr><tr><td>Average</td><td></td><td></td><td>1.7</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Phonological paragraphs in the EAP talks   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Talk</td><td>Words</td><td>Paragraphs</td><td>Paragraphs/1000 words</td></tr><tr><td>1a</td><td>1040</td><td>7</td><td>6.7</td></tr><tr><td>1b</td><td>999</td><td>7</td><td>7.0</td></tr><tr><td>2a</td><td>2004</td><td>6</td><td>3.0</td></tr><tr><td>2b</td><td>2277</td><td>10</td><td>4.4</td></tr><tr><td>3a</td><td>2594</td><td>6</td><td>2.3</td></tr><tr><td>3b</td><td>2264</td><td>4</td><td>1.8</td></tr><tr><td>4a</td><td>788</td><td>5</td><td>6.3</td></tr><tr><td>4b</td><td>1148</td><td>8</td><td>7.0</td></tr><tr><td>5a</td><td>941</td><td>8</td><td>8.5</td></tr><tr><td>5b</td><td>540</td><td>4</td><td>7.4</td></tr><tr><td>Average</td><td></td><td></td><td>5.4</td></tr></table></body></html>

Although there is a clear difference between the lectures and the EAP talks in this respect, it should be noted that there are also obvious differences between the individual EAP talks in their degree of resemblance to the lectures. For example, unashamedly read-aloud written texts such as those in EAP4 (Listening Comprehension and Notetaking Course) and EAP 5 (Text to Note) display higher numbers of paragraphs per 1000 words, (6.3 for 4a, 8.5 for 5a). This is perhaps not surprising—the read-aloud talks are more generally characterised by careful and ‘listener-friendly’ delivery, and the non-spontaneous nature of these talks no doubt allows for the speakers to consider how best to put across the message using intonational signals. In contrast, some of the EAP materials based on what are said to be ‘authentic’ lectures are much closer to the authentic undergraduate lectures. For example, EAP 2a (Listening: English for Academic Purposes Series) displays 3 paragraphs per 1000 words, while EAP 3a (Study Listening) displays 2.3, rather closer to the average of 1.7 for the undergraduate lectures. Oddly, perhaps, the talks from another coursebook using ‘authentic’ talks (EAP 1, Academic Listening Encounters) do not follow this trend, with 6.7 and 7.0 paragraphs/1000 words, indicating that in this respect the talks are in fact closer in character to the read-aloud talks.

The implications of the gap between authentic and EAP materials in their use of phonological paragraphing are I think clear. It is widely recognised that chunking into phonological paragraphs aids the listener in understanding the topic development of a monologue (e.g. Brown & Yule, 1983; Tench, 1996; Wichman, 2000). The approach taken by some EAP materials seems to be ‘the more paragraphs the better’ on the basis that this can help learners’ comprehension. The problem is, of course, that if talks are unnaturally high in paragraphing, learners will not be fully prepared for dealing with what happens in real lectures in their subject areas. Taking this alongside the fact that the EAP talks are typically much shorter than the authentic lectures and correspondingly less informationally complex, it is evident that there is a huge gap between the two types of text in their demands on the listener. EAP students may have quite unrealistic expectations of how much lecturers typically guide their audience, e.g. through careful signalling over overall organisation of texts and major transitions of topics and through careful breaking down of the text into phonological paragraphs to indicate chunking of information. Students may well be shocked by the ‘failure’ of their subject lecturers to follow the same models suggested by EAP teaching materials.

# 6. Interrelationship of metadiscourse and phonological paragraphing

If structuring metadiscourse and phonological paragraphing are two ways in which lecturers can indicate the sequential-hierarchic organisation of their lectures, it may be interesting to consider if and how these two phenomena relate to each other. Are they used in similar or different ways, and how far do they complement each other? On the face of it, there seems to be no clear relationship between the two. For example, we do not find a strong correlation between text-structuring metadiscourse and the initial pitch sequence of a paragraph, where it has been argued that key information about what is to come and how it relates to the surrounding text appears. In the authentic data, only $3 9 . 6 \%$ of paragraph-initial pitch sequences include a metadiscoursal element, while in the EAP talks the figure is quite similar at $4 2 . 3 \%$ . A full analysis of these interrelationships is unfortunately beyond the scope of this article. However, if we focus on the signalling of higher level organisation (i.e. global & topic), we find a rather stronger relationship between the two.

A very noticeable feature of both the EAP and, in particular, the authentic lectures is that the beginnings of some phonological paragraphs stand out more prominently in the text than others. These boundaries are not only signalled by the criterial features of low termination followed by high onset, but are accompanied by other signals: extra low termination at the end of the previous paragraph with a decrease in volume and/or speed, lengthy pausing before the start of the new paragraph, exceptionally high pitch at the start of the new paragraph when compared with the other paragraphs in the lecture. I hypothesised that these boundaries indicated the start of larger scale sections than paragraphs, perhaps something more akin to sections in a written text (cf. Thompson, 1997). Table 5 shows the number of phonological sections in each authentic lecture and the number of co-occurrences of text-structuring metadiscourse signals in the initial pitch sequences of these sections.

As can be seen from Table 5, out of a total of 24 phonological sections in the lectures, 18 $( 7 5 \% )$ begin with a text-structuring metadiscoursal element. This compares with the figure of $3 9 . 6 \%$ for phonological paragraphs as a whole. If we take as an example authentic lecture L1, which is the first lecture in a module on English language for undergraduate students, we find a total of nine phonological paragraphs in the talk. Of these, only two have the boundary features associated with phonological sections. The first of these starts with the pitch sequence:

Table 5 Phonological sections and text-structuring signals in authentic lectures   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Lecture</td><td>Phonological sections</td><td>Text-structuring signals</td></tr><tr><td>L1</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>L2</td><td>2</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>L3</td><td>5</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>L4</td><td>5</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>L5</td><td>6</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>L6</td><td>4</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Totals</td><td>24</td><td>18 (75%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

well may I start by saying sorry and then congratulations (L1)

Although not in fact the actual start of the lecture, it marks the formal beginning of the lecture in which the lecturer welcomes the students to the new course. The second one:

in the meantime though let’s look at this curious phenomenon (L1)

marks the beginning of the lecture proper in terms of the global topic: what is language.

Both of these initial pitch sequences contain metadiscoursal language: the first introduces the topics covered in the succeeding text (apologising and congratulating), while the second introduces the content of the rest of the lecture.

As can be seen from Table 6, the EAP talks display similar features, with $6 8 . 6 \%$ of phonological sections starting with some kind of text-structuring metadiscourse, compared with $4 2 . 3 \%$ overall. The difference between these two figures is not as great as for the lectures, perhaps indicating yet again that the organisation of the EAP talks is more carefully signalled overall than in the lectures, and that correspondingly relatively more signalling takes place at phonological paragraph level. Nevertheless, in this respect at least, the lectures and EAP talks share similar characteristics. For example, EAP 3a contains only three phonological paragraphs with boundary features indicating the start of a new phonological section:

well to start with food supply first, the term ‘the green revolution’. . .. um turning secondly now to the other element in the food supply and population balance. . .. and finally in this brief introduction I want to look at the area of technological innovation. . . (EAP 3a)

Table 6 Phonological sections and text-structuring signals in EAP talks   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Talk</td><td>Phonological sections</td><td>Text-structuring signals</td></tr><tr><td>EAP 1a</td><td>3</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>EAP 1b</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>EAP 2a</td><td>3</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>EAP 2b</td><td>5</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>EAP 3a</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>EAP 3b</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>EAP 4a</td><td>4</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>EAP 4b</td><td>6</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>EAP 5a</td><td>5</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>EAP 5b</td><td>2</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Totals</td><td>35</td><td>24 (68.6%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Reference to the analysis of the text-structuring metadiscourse phase of EAP 3a shows that these topics have already been predicted earlier in the talk:

well that by way of introduction and er explanation of terminology um I intend to talk as I said briefly about the subject under four main sub-headings the first is food supply second population the third economic development and lastly technological innovation.

(EAP 3a)

Comparison of the beginnings of the phonological paragraphs with this outline shows that three of the four major topics in the talk start with new phonological sections, indicating a strong relationship between intonation, text-structuring metadiscourse and topic change. However, for the third topic, economic development, the speaker instead relies only on metadiscourse and a reference to a visual to introduce the point:

I’d like to move on now to the third sub-heading that I’ve put up on the board here and that’s um economic development (EAP 3a)

It is clear then that, for both the authentic and the EAP talks, there is quite a strong likelihood that new phonological sections will contain text-structuring metadiscourse. This is particularly the case at the level of introducing major topic areas rather than the global organisation of the lecture, which is typically done by the use of structuring metadiscourse alone. One of the problems of working with naturallyoccurring data is, of course, that although a lecturer may well be working with notes which set out the topic-related segments of the presentation, he or she is talking in real time. We should, therefore, not be surprised if signalling of organisation is not always as unambiguously clear as one might, for example, expect in a piece of formal academic writing. Particularly bearing this in mind, these findings do indicate that the combination of the start of a strongly marked phonological paragraph (what I am calling a phonological section) and text-structuring metadiscourse may signal the start of a major new topic area in a lecture. This means that there are possible interrelationships between intonation and text-structuring metadiscourse which could be exploited for teaching purposes on EAP listening skills courses.

# 7. Conclusions

This study has shown some important differences between authentic lectures and EAP talks in the degree of support given to students as they listen to the talks. It has been argued that students need to be helped to understand how text-structuring metadiscourse and phonological paragraphing work in authentic lectures. A key issue, of course, is how to do this in the context of an EAP lecture listening programme, and how far the use of non-authentic EAP listening texts can be exploited to do it. Flowerdew and Miller’s (1997) study found that although text-structuring metadiscourse appears in both lectures and EAP talks there are important differences. EAP texts are comparatively very short, meaning that there is no opportunity to allow practice in recognising signals of structuring over extended stretches of the lecture. In Flowerdew and Miller’s study, text-structuring markers are much less common in the authentic lecture than in the EAP texts, and the lecturer in their study is much less consistent in his use of macro-markers than are the EAP texts. They conclude that students must be exposed to authentic lecture data, or at least to quasi-authentic talks spontaneously delivered by a live speaker (p. 44). The findings of the present study certainly support Flowerdew and Miller’s conclusions.

All the EAP materials examined for the present study include work on recognising text-structuring metadiscourse, but interest in intonational signals of organisation is generally conspicuous by its absence. Academic Listening Encounters Students Book explicitly states that ‘in a lecture, you cannot hear paragraph divisions’ although ‘[f]ortunately, lecturers do use signal words like first and finally, and these structural cues allow you to hear how the lecture is organized’ (Espeseth, 1999: 54). Only Study Listening focuses in any systematic way on the functions of intonation in lecture discourse, and even here the role of intonation in larger-scale text organization is not dealt with. However, Barr (1990) reports on a study investigating the language awareness activities to help L2 students use discourse intonation to interpret lecture organisation. Activities drew students’ attentions to the role of intonation in chunking lecture monologue at and below the level of the phonological paragraph. Barr reports that students who had been given language awareness training in discourse intonation outperformed students who had not, and concludes that ‘awareness of intonation was easily developed and successfully exploited with the students’ (1990: 20). Clearly, though, the teaching implications of such studies have not as yet filtered through to most published teaching materials.

A major reason for this may be that many teachers perceive intonation as being difficult to teach and difficult to learn (cf. Clennell, 1997). Undoubtedly, the systems of intonation and their discourse functions are technically quite complex. However, one implication of the present study is that only the most relevant aspects of intonation need to be included in a wider syllabus of lecture comprehension skills. For example, the complementary roles of text-structuring metadiscourse and phonological paragraphing could be introduced and compared. Quite simple listening activities which highlight the interrelationship between text-structuring signals and new phonological sections to indicate major topic shifts could be integrated into existing approaches to developing lecture comprehension skills and strategies. Students do not necessarily have to cope with all aspects of intonation to benefit from awareness raising activities on intonation in lecture discourse.

Finally, this study has implications for the training of both native- and non-native speaking lecturers who want to improve their lecturing skills, for example, through an in-service professional development programme. Lynch (1994) argues that, particularly in situations where substantial numbers of non-native speaking students form part of the audience, subject lecturers should be (re)-trained in lecturing skills. As part of this process, Lynch suggests that lecturers should be encouraged to use ‘more explicit marking of overall lecture structure and of salient points’ (1994: 285). As the present study has indicated, an awareness of the complementary functions of intonation and metadiscourse clearly has a key part to play in this process.

This is not to argue that text-structuring metadiscourse and phonological paragraphing are the only important variables influencing L2 lecture comprehension. Rost (2002: 234) emphasises the difficulty of deciding which of many different variables (speed of delivery, accent, use of text-structure metadiscourse etc.) have the greatest influence over lecture comprehension. Undoubtedly, for example, visual information (slides, OHTs, video clips etc.) can play a crucial role in signalling the organisation of a lecture (Charles & Ventola, 2002; King, 1994). Nevertheless, what we can claim is that lexical and intonational signals of organization play an important part in aiding lecture comprehension alongside other text-organising signals. The challenge for EAP course designers, materials writers and teachers is to provide a more accurate and more rounded experience of what really goes on in lecture monologue for their learners, and to strike a balance between supporting novice L2 lecture listeners by providing explicit signalling of organisation in EAP talks and hardening them to the realities of lecture comprehension in the real world.

# 8. EAP materials consulted

Adkins, A., & McKean, I. (1983). Text to note. London: Edward Arnold. Espeseth, M. (1999). Academic listening encounters: Listening, note-taking, and discussion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. James, K. Jordan, R. R., & Matthews, A. (1979). Listening comprehension and note-taking course. London: Collins. Furneaux, C., & Trzeciak, J. (1999). Listening: English for academic study series. London: Prentice-Hall. Lynch, T. (1983). Study listening: understanding lectures and talks in English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

# References

Anderson, A., & Lynch, T. (1988). Listening. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Barr, P. (1990). The role of discourse intonation in lecture comprehension. In M. Hewings (Ed.), Papers in Discourse Intonation. Discourse Analysis Monographs 16. Birmingham: ELR/University of Birmingham.   
Brazil, D. (1997). The communicative value of intonation in English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Brown, G. (1995). Speakers, listeners and communication: explorations in communication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Brown, G., & Yule, G. (1983). Discourse analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Charles, C., & Ventola, E. (2002). A multi-semiotic genre: the conference slide show. In E. Ventola, C. Shalom, & S. E. Thompson (Eds.), The language of conferencing. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
Chaudron, C., & Richards, J. (1986). The effect of discourse markers on the comprehension of lectures. Applied Linguistics, 7, 113–127.   
Clennell, C. (1997). Raising the pedagogic status of discourse intonation teaching. ELT Journal, 51, 117–125.   
Coulthard, M., & Montgomery, M. (1981). The stucture of monologue. In M. Coulthard, & M. Montgomery (Eds.), Studies in discourse analysis (pp. 31–38). London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.   
Crismore, A. (1983). Metadiscourse: what it is and how it is used in school and non-school social science texts (Technical Report 273). Urbana-Champaign: Center for the Study of Reading, University of Illinois.   
Crismore, A., & Farnsworth, J. (1990). Metadiscourse in popular and professional science discourse. In W. Nash (Ed.), The writing scholar: Studies in academic discourse. London: Sage.   
De Carrico, J., & Nattinger, J. R. (1988). Lexical phrases for the comprehension of academic lectures. English for Specific Purposes, 7, 91–102.   
Dunkel, P. A., & Davis, J. N. (1994). The effects of rhetorical signalling cues on the recall of English lecture information by speakers of English as a native or second language. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: Research perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Flowerdew, J., & Miller, L. (1997). The teaching of academic listening comprehension and the question of authenticity. English for Specific Purposes, 16, 27–46.   
Flowerdew, J., & Tauroza, S. (1995). The effect of discourse markers on second language lecture comprehension. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 17, 435–458.   
Givo´ n, T. (1995). Coherence in text vs. coherence in mind. In M. A. Gernsbacher, & T. Givo´ n (Eds.), Coherence in spontaneous text. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Heino, A., Tervonen, E., & Tommola, J. (2002). Metadiscourse in academic conference presentations. In E. Ventola, C. Shalom, & S. E. Thompson (Eds.), The language of conferencing. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
Hoey, M. P. (1997). The interaction of textual and lexical factors in the identification of paragraph boundaries. In M. Reinhardt, & W. Thiele (Eds.), Grammar and text in synchrony and diachrony. Frankfurt am Main: Vervuert.   
Hyland, K. (1998). Persuasion and context: the pragmatics of academic metadiscourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 30, 437–455.   
King, P. (1994). Visual and verbal messages in the engineering lecture: notetaking by postgraduate L2 students. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: Research perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Lehiste, I. (1979). Perception of sentence and paragraph boundaries. In B. Lindblom, & S. Ohman (Eds.), Frontiers of speech research. London: Academic Press.   
Lynch, T. (1994). Training lecturers for international audiences. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: research perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Murphy, D., & Candlin, C. N. (1979). Engineering lecture discourse and listening comprehension. Practical Papers in English Language Education, 2, 1–79 Lancaster: University of Lancaster..   
Paltridge, B. (1994). Genre analysis and the identification of textual boundaries. Applied Linguistics, 15, 288–299.   
Rost, M. (2002). Teaching and researching listening. London: Longman.   
Scott, M., & Thompson, G. (Eds.). (2001). Patterns of text: In honour of Michael Hoey. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Strodt-Lopez, B. (1991). Tying it all in: asides in university lectures. Applied Linguistics, 12, 117–140.   
Tench, P. (1996). The intonation systems of English. London: Cassell.   
Thompson, S. E. (1994). Frameworks and contexts: a genre-based approach to analysing lecture introductions. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 171–186.   
Thompson, S. E. (1997). Presenting research: a study of interaction in academic monologue. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Liverpool.   
Wichman, A. (2000). Intonation in text and discourse: Beginnings, middles and ends. London: Longman.   
Young, L. (1994). University lectures- macro-structure and micro-features. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: Research perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Young, R., & Becker, A. L. (1966). The role of lexical and grammatical cues in paragraph recognition. Mimeo: University of Michigan, Center for Research on Language and Language Behavior: Studies in Language and Language Behavior.   
Yule, G. (1980). Speakers’ topics and major paratones. Lingua, 52, 33–47.