# The shadow cost of education : How does private tutoring affect students’ well-being?

Junhee Lee Master Thesis Master in Applied Research in Economics and Business, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona Supervisor: Yarine Fawaz

Abstract Private supplementary tutoring has been highly popular for decades in South Korea. Despite much of past studies focussed on determinants of private tutoring and its effect on academic achievements, its effect on subjective well being has not been studied. This paper estimates the effect of private tutoring on students’ well being, using Korea Youth Panel Survey(KYPS) data of 6,293 middle and high school students over 2003-2008. Composite well being indices were constructed from taking into consideration multidimensional domains of well being. Hausman-taylor estimation was applied to address the potential endogeneity of private tutoring variable. Empirical results indicates that more hours spent on private tutoring has negative impact on overall well being and on satisfaction with family relationship, self esteem, study related stress, depressive feeling and self reported physical health.

# 1. Motivation and Background

This paper aims to estimate the causal effect of private tutoring on individual youth’s well being. Private tutoring(also called shadow education), a form of a private supplementary class provided by individuals or commercial companies, has been traditionally prosperous in Asian countries such as China, South Korea, Japan, Taiwan Singapore, India and Kazakhstan and some European countries such as Turkey, and is expanding and intensifying in other countries (Bray and Lykins (2012), Bray et al. (2013), Tansel and Bircan (2006) ). It has been pronounced and persistent in particular in South Korea (hereinafter “Korea”). A nationwide government survey on private tutoring showed that $6 8 . 8 \%$ of students in primary and secondary education received private tutoring in 2013. Main reasons of receiving private tutoring of academic subjects were to “makeup for classes $( 7 2 . 4 \% ) ^ { \prime \prime }$ , followed by “study in advance $( 4 1 . 2 \% ) ^ { \prime \prime }$ and “prepare for higher school level $( 2 3 . 6 \% ) ^ { \prime \prime }$ (Statistics-Korea (2014)). The main objective of private tutoring can thus be seen as raising academic grades for higher education, ultimately for university admission. The Korean students usually spend long hours after school taking classes in Hagwon(private academy or cram schools). It has been prevalent among students in particular in concentrated metropolitan area, as we can see from the fact that Seoul Metropolitan Education Office has imposed 10:00 pm curfew on hagwons in 2008 with an aim to secure health and leisure time of students(Constitutional Court ruling, 2008). The drivers of private tutoring from a social viewpoint can be Confucian traditions which value academic performance a main route to a socioeconomic advancement(Bray and Lykins (2012)). This cultural factor is still prevalent as academic credentialism;

The Korean government had strong commitment to expansion of public education. As a result of national campaign of building schools, primary school enrollment increased rapidly, from 1.37 million in 1945 to 4.94 million in 1965(Kim and Lee (2010)). In 1965 number of pupils per class in elementary school was 65.4, and student-teacher for elementary school ratio was 62.4, which more than halved in 40 years, by 2005 the figures were 31.8 and 25.1 respectively(KEDI (2005)).(in the case of middle school, the statistics are 60.7 and 39.4 in 1965, 35.3 and 19.4 in 2005) Public expenditure on education per student for the same period increased approximately 22 times in real term (from 139,171 KRW to 3,094,045 KRW). Enrollment rate to secondary school marked below $2 0 \%$ in 1945, but reached $9 0 \%$ for primary, middle and high school in 1964, 1979 and 1993 respectively(OECD (2012)).

Private tutoring has been dominant and of a persistent concern since the liberation from the Japanese colonial rule and the establishment of the first Republic in 1945. It has constantly increased despite various efforts to curb it. The Ministry of Education even described the history of the Korean education policy as “history of war against private tutoring”(Kim (2008)). Government policies to reduce private tutoring were major pledge in presidential elections, and exhaustive, ranging from outright prohibition to indirect strategy of improving public school quality. From 1950s to 1968, middle schools(school for students with age from 12 to 14) accepted new students based on their own entrance exams. As graduating from prestigious universities rather than individual’s ability has been decisive in obtaining higher social and economic status, elementary school students (from 6 to 11 years old) were forced to study intensively for entrance exams. Private tutoring has become was considered an effective means to obtain high grades in the entrance exam. In the late 1960s, approximately $6 0 \%$ of elementary school 4th to 5th grade students and $9 0 \%$ of 6th grade students were already receiving private tutoring in Seoul (Lee and Jang (2008)). Higher education, including high school(from age 15 to 17) and universities also had clear ranks and hierarchy then. Therefore entering prestigious middle school was a key that ensured a way to high ranking high schools and universities. Public teachers of elementary schools gave private tutoring classes after school, which earned them lucrative gains. The Park Jung-hee government responded to booming private tutoring by abolishing middle school entrance exam in 1968, which was hailed as a “July 15th liberation(from the date it was announced)”. The students were assigned to middle schools by lottery system. Although private tutoring at elementary school seemed to have decreased, it was still booming in the middle school to enter prestigious high schools. The government consequently abolished high school entrance exam and enacted “high school equalization policy” in 1974. This again could not abolish private tutoring, but shifted demand for it to high school students. The new military dictatorship government followed similar but more radical solution: it prohibited all types of private tutoring in

1980. The punishment was credible. A mayor of the province of Cheju island was dismissed in 1986 for giving his child English private tutoring. As a result, however, private tutoring became more clandestine and its cost rose as a consequence of higher risk.

Following government after democratization shifted from hard-line stance to gradual liberalization of the tutoring. In 1989 one-on-one private tutoring provided by university students was legalized, and students were allowed to take courses in private academies(cram schools: Hagwon) in school vacations. The policies focussing on restricting private tutoring faced a definite end when in 2000, the Constitutional Court ruled the law prohibiting private tutoring unconstitutional, on the grounds that it “restricts the learning children’s and juvenile’s right to free development of personality, parents’ right to educate children, and the occupational freedom and the right to pursue happiness of the person who wishes to provide extracurricular lessons.” However, the Court ruling also pointed out that private tutoring is “a social disease” and “the socio-pathological phenomena”, and “Over-heated competition for extracurricular lessons caused several undesirable side-effects other than economic burdens on parents. They are the deficiency in students’ creativity and self-initiated studying abilities, the impoverishment of school education due to the overheated race outside schools, the disadvantages and the feeling of relative deprivation suffered by those parents and children who cannot obtain extracurricular lessons for economic reasons, and the undesirable impact on the national economy due to wasteful investment in terms of human and physical resources”. Regarding detrimental effects of private tutoring on youth’s well-being, the constitutional judges also acknowledged that excessive private tutoring “disrupts their emotional state and sound physical growth”, and “the pressure about school grades has forced them into unstable emotional states and then to juvenile delinquency. The accumulated mental and physical fatigue damages children’s health”. (Constitutional Court of Korea (2000)). Since the ruling, the policy agenda shifted to reducing burden of expenditure on private tutoring. The new focus was to improve quality of public education to compete with and reduce the demand for private tutoring and reduce the effectiveness of private tutoring on university entrance exam. Regarding improvement of public education, the government provided extracurricular classes in public schools and televised courses for preparation of standardized national university exam(CSAT : College Scholastic Aptitude Test) through public television channel EBS (Educational Broadcasting System). These were aimed to complement private tutoring, in particular for students from poor families and in disadvantaged regions. In order to reduce the effectiveness of private tutoring on university entrance, the government guided the universities to reduce the weight of nationwide entrance exam and increase the weight of academic grades at high school. The universities also diversified the channels of entrance. They increased the proportion of students entering through special admission from $9 . 7 \%$ in 1997 to $2 3 . 4 \%$ in 2001 and $3 7 . 4 \%$ in 2006(Kim (2008)), which admitted students on the basis of talent and knowledge in certain subjects such as foreign language and mathematics rather than exam scores. The grades of the standardized university entrance exam was also simplified to reduce its influence in university admission.

Despite government’s various efforts curb private tutoring, its expenditure has increased constantly. Kim et al. (2012) estimated that the average household expenditure on private tutoring increased annually from 1990 to 2010 by $1 2 . 5 \%$ and $5 . 5 \%$ , respectively in nominal and real term, using national household survey data. This contrasts with the annual decrease of $0 . 3 \%$ of household expenditure on public(regular) education for the same period. The household expenditure on private tutoring relative to income also increased from $2 \%$ in 1990 to $5 . 2 \%$ in 2008, and $1 0 . 7 \%$ in 2010(OECD (2012)). For the same period, expenditure on public education relative to income remained between $1 \%$ to $2 \% ( 1 . 7 \%$ in 1990 and $1 . 2 \%$ in 2008). Private tutoring expenditure also increased in terms of proportion in total household expenditure, from $3 \%$ in 1990 to $7 . 7 \%$ in 2010. It is also notable that the gap in private tutoring expenditure between low and high income household increased over time. The ratio of the private tutoring expenditure between1st and 10th decile in 1990 was 4.7, which increased to 14.6 in 2010. (Kim et al. (2012))

Strikingly high portion of youth suffering from emotional disorder hints that excessive private tutoring has detrimental effect on well-being. Out of increasing concern on mental health of the youth, the Ministry of Education carried out a survey of emotional and behavioral characteristics on the $9 7 \%$ of the entire youth from age 6 to 18 in 2012 (approximately 6.5 million). The results showed that over a million students $( 1 6 . 3 \% )$ needed psychiatric counseling, 223,000 $( 4 . 5 \% )$ needed intensive treatment, and $1 . 5 \%$ (97,500) were under imminent danger, such as committing suicide(Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2013)). Evidence imply that this mental health problem is attributable to excessive studying. In a nationwide survey of 9,500 Korean youths, $6 8 . 7 \%$ of middle and high school students reported to be under stress due to study (NYPI (2009)). $3 8 . \%$ of the same students thought of committing suicide, of which $4 4 . 1 \%$ was due to academic grades at school. $6 0 . 8 \%$ reported that they are not happy, and $5 8 . 1 \%$ of them attributed their reason of being unhappy to stress of studying $( 3 2 . 6 \% )$ and anxiety about their future $( 2 5 . 5 \% )$ ). This shows how grave is the psychological burden due to excessive competition in education.

The rest of the paper is organized as following. Section 2 reviews the literature related with private tutoring and its implication for this paper. Section 3 and 4 explains the data and the empirical methods applied. Section 5 analyses the empirical results, and section6 concludes.

# 2. Related Literature

As literature on subjective well being is relatively new, there has yet been made empirical research on the effect of private tutoring on well being. Most of the literature on private tutoring has focused on the determinants of private tutoring(Kim and Lee (2010)) and the effect of private tutoring on academic achievement(Briggs (2001), Cheo and Quah (2005), Dang (2007), Lee et al. (2004), Stevenson and Baker (1992), Suryadarma et al. (2006), Tansel and Bircan (2006), Zhang (2013)Briggs (2001), Cheo and Quah (2005), Dang (2007), Lee et al. (2004), Stevenson and Baker (1992), Suryadarma et al. (2006), Tansel and Bircan (2006), Zhang (2013)). The literature on latter effect worth noting for the aim of this paper, because academic achievement can also have considerable effect on individual youth’s well being especially for countries with high participation in private tutoring. The empirical findings of the effect of private tutoring on academic achievement are mixed. Dang (2007) found that the expenditure on private tutoring has positive effect on academic ranking in Vietnam. Studies for other countries also found positive effect of tutoring on academic achievement, such as Stevenson and Baker (1992) for Japan, Taiwan (Liu, 2012) and Kenya (Buchmann, 2002). On the contrary, Lee et al. (2004), Cheo and Quah (2005) found negative effects of private tutoring on academic grades for Korea and Singapore respectively. Briggs (2001) estimated the effect of “coaching(short term course or counseling)” on SAT and ACT, which showed mixed effect depending on the subjects. Zhang (2013) also found that private tutoring among students in Jinan province had positive impact on National College Entrance Examination only for students in urban area with lower achievement or low quality of school. The major limitations of the literature of the effect of the private tutoring is insufficient control for endogeneity of private tutor variables. Most of the literature applied cross section or pooled OLS but they do not control for endogeneity of private tutoring. Others employed instrumental variables such as official hourly fee of tutoring in a district in Dang (2007), and the number of private tutoring participants among 5 closest friends and the distance between the nearest private tutoring agency and home in Zhang (2013). However, these instruments can be potentially endogenous. The official fee of tutoring inDang (2007) is decided by the government based on mean income of districts. the participation rate of friends on private tutoring in Zhang (2013) is positively correlated with the participation of the individual, but individual’s participation can be the cause of having more friends receiving private tutoring. This reverse causality cannot be disregarded because Zhang (2013) only used single period cross section data. The distance between home and private tutoring academies can also be endogenous because for instance, houses close to private academies can be correlated to higher house prices.

# 3. Data

This paper uses Korea Youth Panel Survey (KYPS) dataset collected by Korea’s National Youth Policy Institute. This dataset contains 2 subgroups of youths, consisting of a group which enters the survey from elementary school 4th grade(9 years old, hereinafter elementary group) and another group that enters at middle school 2nd grade(13 years old, hereinafter middle group). Each subgroup consists of classes of students randomly selected from provinces nationwide excluding Jeju island, proportional to student population. The sample size is 2844 and 3449 respectively for elementary school grade and middle school grade group. Therefore each individual belong to a class in the initial year, and the entire class was selected if an individual is in the sample. The panel dataset comprises of 5 and 6 years for elementary and middle group respectively. Elementary group enters the data from 2004 to 2008, when they became middle school 2nd grade, and the middle group entered from 2003 to 2008, when they became university freshmen or high school graduates.

The advantage of this dataset is that it contains rich set of private tutoring and public education variable and socioeconomic characteristics of individuals. For private tutoring, it has variables for hours spent on private tutoring of each subjects including academic, arts and physical subjects, expenditure on tutoring, and the types of tutoring (which consists of 1-on-1 individual tutoring, group tutoring, tutoring at private academies, correspondence papers, online courses, after school classes or overseas tutoring).

The dataset also contains rich set of variables related to subjective well being. These questions can be grouped as various domains of well being, such as overall well being, health, satisfaction with friends, family, stress due to study and exams, depressive feelings, and self confidence(see below for complete list of these questions). Composite well being indices are constructed in accordance with these groupings.

Other education variables that are considered important are hours spent on studying by oneself, academic achievement in terms of self assessed academic grade(in Likert scale, from very poor to very good), ranking and self assessed grades of oneself in class, school, and in nation(in national standardized practice exams or College Scholastic Aptitude Test(CSAT, Suneung, is the test conducted at the end of high school, and is the most important determinant in university admission process). All the rank variables are also available in percentile, so it allows to control for the difference in the size of the class and quality of public schools.

Other variables that exhibit socioeconomic characteristics are income of household, gender, years of education of parents, employment status of parents, binary dummy variable for parents owning a house.

# 4. Estimation Method

For a academic achievement oriented society like Korea, it is reasonable to assume that the subjective well being of youth depend much on academic grades. In particular, the effect of academic grade on subjective well being is expected to be more significant if it is observed in terms of rank in cohorts, who are potential competitors in university entrance, because if probability of entering prestigious universities is what matters, only the rank will affect this probability, not the improvement in the academic achievement per se without change in rank. Furthermore, the more hours spent on private tutoring the greater would be the negative effect on well being. Therefore, as long as more private tutoring raises rank in academic grade, it will have conflicting effect on well being. In other words, the positive effect of private tutoring on well being from rise in rank will be offset by increased psychological stress.

The empirical strategy is to estimate the effect of private tutoring on students’ well being. Fixed effects regression and GLS instrumental variable regression are applied to estimate the effect of private tutoring on well being. The regression equation can be

expressed as the following.

$$
i n g _ { i t } = \alpha + \beta R a n k _ { i t } + \delta P r i v a t e T u t o r i n g _ { i t } + C o n t r o l s _ { i t } + \epsilon _ { i t }
$$

Potential challenges with estimating the above equation is the following. Firstly the variation in single questions such as overall life satisfaction(measured in scales from 1- very unsatisfied to 5-very satisfied, phrased as “How satisfied are you with your life in general? Circle the number most suitable for your level of satisfaction”) is small across time and individuals. A limitation with the dataset is that the range of the possible responses are very narrow. Another possible reason could be that overall life satisfaction consists of subdomains of life that can offset each other. Distinct domains of child well being has been suggested in past literature such as Bronfenbrenner and Morris (1998) and Fernandes et al. (2013) and their ecological model of human development. We identified from the dataset the subdomains of well being : social relations(family and friends), health, school, materiel well being, and personal characteristics. The effect of private tutoring on overall life satisfaction can have such conflicting channels. For instance, on one hand, more hours spent on private tutoring can reduce life satisfaction by deteriorated physical health and more conflict with parents(given that parents force their children to have tutoring). On the other hand, it can increase life satisfaction by giving more friends(this would especially be plausible if many of his/her colleagues receives private tutoring after school) and higher academic achievement. Therefore, there is a need to desegregate the life satisfaction into different subdomains and estimate the effect of private tutoring on different subdomains. I constructed the domains as : physical health, satisfaction of interpersonal relationship(mainly with classmates and friends), satisfaction of relationship with family members, study related stress, depressive feelings, self confidence and aggregated overall well being. Composition of variables in each domains are given below with descriptive statistics. i and t denote individual i and year t(from 2003 to 2008). Each domain is created by summing up relevant items. Each response is answered in Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5, which mean “very untrue”, “somewhat untrue”, “neither true or untrue”, “somewhat true”, and “very true”. All responses are recoded to correspond to the increase in well being (increase means lower level of stress, higher satisfaction with friends, etc.). Each item of responses is standardized before summed.

Table 1: Summary statistics for domains of well being $:$ overall subjective well being   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td></tr><tr><td>composite WB</td><td>22.38</td><td>3.45</td><td>7.4</td><td>35</td></tr><tr><td>overall life satisfaction</td><td>3.53</td><td>0.79</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>N</td><td colspan="4">9083</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2: Summary statistics for domains of well being : family relationship(cronbach’s alpha:0.8914)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td><td>N</td></tr><tr><td>WB-family</td><td>3.95</td><td>0.41</td><td>1.98</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>My parents and I try to spend much time together</td><td>3.41</td><td>0.91</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>My parents always treat me with love and affection</td><td>3.75</td><td>0.85</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>My parents and I understand each other well</td><td>3.47</td><td>0.91</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>My parents and I candidly talk about everything</td><td>3.28</td><td>1.02</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I frequently talk about my thoughts and what I experience away from home with my parents</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>3.4</td><td>1.05</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>My parents and I have frequent conversations</td><td>3.55</td><td>0.93</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>When I go out, parents usually know where I am</td><td>3.58</td><td>0.97</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>When I go out, parents usually know whom I am with</td><td>3.49</td><td>0.98</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>When I go out, parents usually know what I am doing</td><td>3.38</td><td>0.98</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>When I go out, parents usually know when I return</td><td>3.32</td><td>0.98</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I always get along well with brothers or sisters</td><td>3.51</td><td>0.98</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I frequently see parents verbally abuse each other</td><td>4.04</td><td>1.04</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I frequently see one of my parents beat the other one</td><td>4.41</td><td>0.88</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I am often verbally abused by parents</td><td>4.37</td><td>0.89</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I am often severely beaten by parents</td><td>4.4</td><td>0.9</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed by disputes with my parents</td><td>3.31</td><td>1.01</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed by my parents&#x27; meddling into my life</td><td>3.38</td><td>1.04</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed by communication difficulty with my parents</td><td>3.48</td><td>1.03</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed by my parents&#x27; concern on my sch. grades</td><td>3.12</td><td>1.05</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I always get along well with brothers or sisters</td><td>3.51</td><td>0.98</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr></table></body></html>

Another potential problem is the endogeneity of regressors. The above equation can also be expressed as below.

Wellbeingit = βRankit + γ1PrivateTutoringi + γ2PrivateTutoring0it + δ1Controlsi + $\delta _ { 2 } C o n t r o l s _ { i t } ^ { \prime } + \mu _ { i } + v _ { i t }$

Controls i is time invariant and exogenous explanatory variables i.e. : gender and parents’ years of education. Controls it is time variant exogenous variables, which are income, income of sample households residing in the same district, age, school grade, parents’ occupation and employment status, whether living in urban or rural area, whether parents are biological parents, whether the household owns their house, and proximity of private academies. Academic achievement and private tutor variables are likely to be correlated with unobserved factors $\left( \mu _ { i } \right)$ such as innate ability, motivation or aspiration of individual and parents or household’s wealth. Therefore GLS (random effects) estimator is expected to be biased and inconsistent estimator because GLS assumes no correlation between $\mu _ { i }$ and explanatory variables. The within estimator(fixed effects) can eliminate endogeneity bias but it also makes impossible to estimate the parameter of time invariant variables( $\cdot \gamma _ { 1 }$ and $\delta _ { 1 }$ ). Hausman and Taylor estimator uses averages and deviation from the averages of the exogenous explanatory variables(Controlsi and Contro $ { \langle s _ { i t } ^ { \prime } }$ ) and within variation in the time variant endogenous variables(PrivateTutorin $g _ { i t } ^ { \prime }$ and $R a n k _ { i t }$ ) in the model as instruments(Baltagi (2014)). It would be more efficient estimator than within estimator given that the model is robust to overidentification test.

Table 3: Summary statistics for domains of well being : friends relationship(cronbach’s alpha:0.7093   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td><td>N</td></tr><tr><td>WB-interpersonal relationship</td><td>4</td><td>0.61</td><td>0.27</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I hope to maintain the close relationships for a long time</td><td>4.43</td><td>0.68</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I am happy whenever I get together with them</td><td>4.43</td><td>0.66</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I try to have the same thoughts and feelings with them</td><td>3.99</td><td>0.88</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>We can frankly talk about our troubles and worries</td><td>4.01</td><td>0.92</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed by my friends&#x27; teasing and ignoring me</td><td>4.09</td><td>0.88</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed by lack of recognition from my frd.</td><td>4.05</td><td>0.89</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed by sense of inferiority to my frd.</td><td>3.87</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>How often do you see your close friends in a week?</td><td>5.4</td><td>1.16</td><td>1</td><td>6</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I am not in good terms with frd. at sch.</td><td>4.5</td><td>0.72</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>7770</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4: Summary statistics for domains of well being : school satisfaction(cronbach’s alpha:0.7021)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td><td>N</td></tr><tr><td>WB-school I can talk about all my troubles and worries</td><td>3.1</td><td>0.70</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>to my teachers without reservation</td><td>2.52</td><td>1.04</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>Teachers treat me with love and affection</td><td>2.88</td><td>0.99</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I hope to become a person just like my teacher I am not interested in sch. work,</td><td>2.51</td><td>1.08</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>and find it difficult to catch up</td><td>4.04</td><td>0.99</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>7771</td></tr><tr><td>I am not in good terms with sch. teachers</td><td>4.37</td><td>0.82</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>7769</td></tr><tr><td>I find it difficult to follow sch. rules and regulations</td><td>4.29</td><td>0.93</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>7770</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5: Summary statistics for domains of well being : study related stress(cronbach’s alpha:0.7490)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td><td>N</td></tr><tr><td>WB-study related sress</td><td>2.28</td><td>0.99</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed by poor sch. grades</td><td>2.98</td><td>1.11</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed by home assignments or examinations</td><td>2.92</td><td>1.1</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed because it is boring to study</td><td>2.98</td><td>1.07</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>WB str study (0-5 scale)</td><td>12.62</td><td>4.37</td><td>3</td><td>25</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>I get stressed by college preparation or job prospect</td><td>2.71</td><td>1.1</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>6577</td></tr><tr><td>I am under great anxiety due to study</td><td>2.51</td><td>1.04</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6: Summary statistics for domains of well being : self confidence(cronbach’s alpha:0.8126)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td></tr><tr><td>WB-self esteem</td><td>3.04</td><td>0.71</td><td>0.15</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>I think that I have a good character</td><td>3.28</td><td>0.87</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>I think that I am a competent person</td><td>3.24</td><td>0.87</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>I think that I am a worthy person</td><td>3.49</td><td>0.85</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Sometimes I think that I am a worthless person</td><td>3.37</td><td>1.01</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Sometimes I think that I am a bad person</td><td>3.29</td><td>1.01</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>I generally feel that I am a failure in life</td><td>3.58</td><td>0.98</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>I have confidence in my own decision</td><td>3.53</td><td>0.81</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>I believe that I can deal with my problems by myself</td><td>3.57</td><td>0.81</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>I am taking full responsibility of my own life</td><td>3.54</td><td>0.83 9083</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">N</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7: Summary statistics for domains of well being : depression(cronbach’s alpha:0.8411)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td></tr><tr><td>WB-depression</td><td>3.08</td><td>0.99</td><td>0</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>I am not interested in anything.</td><td>3.76</td><td>0.89</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>I worry about everything</td><td>3.01</td><td>1.07</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Sometimes I feel extremely anxious with. no apparent reason</td><td>3.3</td><td>1.13</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Sometimes I feel extremely lonely with no apparent reason</td><td>3.34</td><td>1.13</td><td>1 1</td><td>5 5</td></tr><tr><td>Sometimes I feel extremely sad and gloomy with. no apparent reason</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Sometimes I feel suicidal with no apparent reason</td><td>3.37 3.91</td><td>1.14 1.08</td><td>1 1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>N</td><td colspan="3">9083</td><td>5</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 8: Summary statistics for domains of well being $:$ health   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td></tr><tr><td>I am not in good health</td><td>4.14</td><td>0.96</td><td>1</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>N</td><td colspan="4">9083</td></tr></table></body></html>

The variable of interest, private tutoring, is defined as supplementary education of academic subjects provided by private for-profit individuals or institutions. It is measured in following three terms. Firstly, hours spent on private tutoring is used. In this case, private tutoring refers to all types; one-on-one tutoring(which usually takes place at individuals’ homes), private academies, self-study sheets and online courses. Secondly, private tutoring is also measured in terms of the total expenditure, regardless of the types and hours. This expenditure variable is divided by hours spent on tutoring to create hourly cost of tutoring(ptcosthr), which captures the quality of tutoring, if controlled for the difference of cost of living across the regions. This cost variable is introduced to estimate the effect of the quality of tutoring on well being. It is expected that tutoring with higher cost will have greater effect on well being because it has greater impact on academic grades. Also we have a variable of participation rate of 5 closest friends in private tutoring. As seen in the table below, on average $9 \%$ of the five closest friends are taking the tutoring. This implies that private tutoring can be an important means to socialize with peers. Since our dataset is based on extracting the whole class in the initial year, we can extract the mean hours of tutoring received by the class in the initial year. This variable can help analyze the effect of the peer pressure on taking tutoring. The year 2008 for middle school group of the panel dataset is excluded from the analysis because individuals graduated from high school and thus stopped receiving private tutoring.

The control variables can be categorized into three types. One type is individual’s academic achievement. They are self reported rank of overall academic grade in previous semester in individual’s class and self reported academic achievement of five academic subjects. The rank variable is available for middle school and high school grades. Second type of variables is school related variables, which are school grade dummies for middle and high school and class size. The other type of controls are socioeconomic characteristics of individual and family, measured by $:$ gender(1 if male), age, monthly average income of household, father’s year of education and occupation(1 if professional or administrative managers), mother’s employment status(1 if employed), parents’ characteristic with regard to the child(“family”, which takes value 1 if both parents are biological parents and 0 otherwise), and whether parents owns a

house(1 if owns a house, 0 otherwise).

Table 9: summary statistics: private tutoring variables   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td><td>N</td></tr><tr><td>tutor cost per hour(ptcosthr)</td><td>3.3</td><td>7.59</td><td>0</td><td>360</td><td>8979</td></tr><tr><td>hours of tutoring(PTHR)</td><td>7.8</td><td>8.57</td><td>0</td><td>75</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>received PT before elem. school(PT1)</td><td>0.29</td><td>0.45</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td> participation rate of 5 closest friends in PT (PTFR)</td><td>0.09</td><td>0.4</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>proximity to private academy (DIST)</td><td>.0000959</td><td>.0000648</td><td>2.56e-06</td><td>.0004184</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 10: summary statistics: school related variables   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td> Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td></tr><tr><td>percentile rank in class, middle school(RANK1)</td><td>28.2</td><td>34.79</td><td>0</td><td>99</td></tr><tr><td>percentile rank in class, high school(RANK2)</td><td>32.18</td><td>34.92</td><td>0</td><td>99</td></tr><tr><td>hrs of studying by oneself(SUDY)</td><td>10.68</td><td>11.01</td><td>0</td><td>87</td></tr><tr><td>class size (CLASS)</td><td>35.19</td><td>4.57</td><td>9</td><td>72</td></tr><tr><td>N</td><td colspan="3">9083</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 11: summary statistics: socioeconomic characteristics   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. Dev.</td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td></tr><tr><td>first born(BORDER)</td><td>0.46</td><td>0.5</td><td>0</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Born before March(MONTH)</td><td>0.18</td><td>0.39</td><td>0</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>MALE</td><td>0.52</td><td>0.5</td><td>0</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>log household income(INC)</td><td>5.69</td><td>0.52</td><td>0</td><td>8.60</td></tr><tr><td>years of education-father(FEDUC)</td><td>13.41</td><td>2.79</td><td>0</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>father&#x27;s occupation(=1 if high skilled)(FJOB)</td><td>0.15</td><td>0.36</td><td>0</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>mother employed(MWRK)</td><td>0.51</td><td>0.5</td><td>0</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>both parents are biological parents(FAMILY)</td><td>0.97</td><td>0.17</td><td>0</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>own house(HOUSE)</td><td>0.78</td><td>0.41 9083</td><td>0</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">N</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 5. Empirical Results

Table 12 below reports the estimates of the conventional GLS and within(FE) estimators, on different domains of well being index. The effects of academic grades and its rank in class(hereinafter “rank”) and hours spent on private tutoring and school grade dummy are significant in both models, whereas father’s occupation is significant in GLS and owning a house and mother’s employment status are significant only in FE. The last two rows in the table reports chi-square statistics of the two models of Hausman test. The value is 16.56 so the test rejects the null hypothesis that $H _ { 0 } : E ( u _ { i t } | X _ { i t } ) = 0$ at any conventional significance level, therefore the parameters of GLS model does not satisfy the minimum asymptotic variance, leaving it biased and inconsistent. Hausman test also confirms the same results that for other specifications in the preceding columns. As Baltagi (2014) noted, FE model assumes endogeneity of all the regressors, and GLS model assumes that all regressors are exogenous, so the two models imposes “all or nothing” choice. It is clear that unobserved individual’s ability and socioeconomic background are correlated with some of the regressors, namely rank, wealth and private tutoring, but other regressors are exogenous, such as gender, month of birth, birth order and proximity to private academies. Therefore FE model is excessively restrictive and inappropriate for our model. Another viable alternative to GLS is Hausman Taylor specification.

The tables 13 to 15 shows the results of the Hausman-Taylor estimation. Column (1) and (2) are estimations for a single dependent variable for overall life satisfaction. (3) and (4) are regressions of Hausman Taylor specification(HT) and FE respectively for composite index of well being. The following columns reports the estimations of HT and FE for each domains $:$ family and interpersonal relationship, school life, study related stress, self esteem, depressive feelings and physical health. The last two rows of each table shows Hausman test of overidentification over coefficients of HT and FE. It fails to reject the null hypothesis that our regressors do not satisfy exogeneity, so we can conclude that the instruments derived from explanatory variables within the model are valid instruments, and HT estimator is consistent and more efficient. The effects of hours spent on private tutoring support the hypothesis that well being is multidimensional. Column (1) shows that the hours of tutoring on overall life satisfaction is negative and significant at $1 \%$ significance level. Its coefficient is similar to FE regarding academic achievement(rank) and wealth(owning a house). Column (3) is HT estimation for constructed composite well being. The estimated parameters are similar to (1) and (2) but it benefits from greater variation of dependent variable. We can see from columns (5) to (18) the effect of private tutoring and other regressors are different and in some cases contradictory. In particular, we can see that the effect of tutoring on interpersonal relationship domain is significant and positive, while the effect is negative and significant for study related stress, family relationship, self confidence, depressive feelings and health. The positive effect on interpersonal relationship is consistent with what we observe in reality, that since the majority of students receives private tutoring in private academies, more hours of tutoring functions as a means to socialize with their peers. Since we control for temporal and cross individual change in rank, it can also mean that students who receive tutoring but has no effect of it on academic grades are instead satisfied with interpersonal relationship. Likewise, more tutoring with no change in rank means that they are exerting low effort. It should also be noted that tutoring has negative and significant effect on study related stress and self reported physical health. Hours of studying by oneself is positive and significant in most of the domains, which can imply that in contrast to tutoring that has more involuntary and compulsory nature, studying by oneself comes from more motivation and may bring a sense of self accomplishment. Nevertheless, its effect on study related stress in negative and significant. In general students have greater well being in younger period compared to middle and high school periods. Proximity to private academies are positively and significantly correlated with most of the domains but the effect of mean income of households in the same district are not significant. This implies that students benefit from better quality of education environment such as more diverse choice of private academies, or less commuting time, other than higher income of the district. Greater wealth (proxied by whether the household owns a house) is positively correlated with well being, but father’s education and occupation in high skilled jobs are negatively correlated. Whether received tutoring before entering school shows no correlation with the domains of well being.

Table 12: Effects of private tutoring on well being : GLS and FE Estimation(1)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>(1)GLS</td><td>(2)FE</td><td>(3)GLS</td><td>(4)FE</td><td>(5)GLS</td><td>(6)FE</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTHR</td><td>WB_all</td><td>WB_all</td><td>WB_composite</td><td>WB_composite</td><td>WB_fam</td><td>WB_fam</td></tr><tr><td>-0.00322***</td><td>-0.00361**</td><td>-0.0164***</td><td>-0.0139***</td><td>-0.00104**</td><td>-0.00129**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PT1</td><td>(-2.71).</td><td>(-2.48)</td><td>(-4.17)</td><td>(-3.07)</td><td>(-2.25)</td><td>(-2.45)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.0733***</td><td></td><td>-0.300***</td><td>:</td><td>-0.0241*</td><td>:</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">STUDY</td><td>(-2.59)</td><td></td><td>(-2.72)</td><td></td><td>(-1.81)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0.00330***</td><td>0.00185*</td><td>0.0110***</td><td>0.00871***</td><td>0.00151***</td><td>0.000807**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">RANK1</td><td>(3.84)</td><td>(1.85)</td><td>(3.89)</td><td>(2.81)</td><td>(4.57)</td><td>(2.24)</td></tr><tr><td>0.00566***</td><td>0.00485***</td><td>0.0256***</td><td>0.0222***</td><td>0.00268***</td><td>0.00172***</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">RANK2</td><td>(10.16)</td><td>(6.15)</td><td>(13.51)</td><td>(9.07)</td><td>(11.98)</td><td>(6.06)</td></tr><tr><td>0.00409***</td><td>0.00326***</td><td>0.0171***</td><td>0.0150***</td><td>0.00171***</td><td>0.00110***</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTHRM</td><td>(7.09)</td><td>(4.46)</td><td>(8.86)</td><td>(6.61)</td><td>(7.54)</td><td>(4.16)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.00366</td><td>:</td><td>0.0418***</td><td>:</td><td>0.00403**</td><td>:</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTFR</td><td>(-1.00)</td><td></td><td>(2.92)</td><td>:</td><td>(2.32)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>-0.0190</td><td>-0.0178</td><td>0.0168</td><td>0.00642</td><td>-0.00585</td><td>-0.00912</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">CLASS</td><td>(-0.84)</td><td>(-0.69)</td><td>(0.23)</td><td>(0.08)</td><td>(-0.68)</td><td>(-0.97)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.00465**</td><td>-0.00465</td><td>-0.00978</td><td>-0.0226**</td><td>-0.00127</td><td>-0.00279**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">BORDER</td><td>(-1.97)</td><td>(-1.46)</td><td>(-1.22)</td><td>(-2.29)</td><td>(-1.35)</td><td>(-2.44)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.00697</td><td></td><td>0.0489</td><td>:</td><td>0.00408</td><td>.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MONTH</td><td>(-0.27)</td><td></td><td>(0.49)</td><td>:</td><td>(0.34)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>-0.000258</td><td>.</td><td>0.0969</td><td>:</td><td>0.00408</td><td>.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">HIGH</td><td>(-0.01)</td><td></td><td>(0.75)</td><td>.</td><td>(0.26)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>-0.0673</td><td>-0.0198</td><td>0.780***</td><td>0.378**</td><td>0.118***</td><td>0.0735***</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MALE</td><td>(-1.36)</td><td>(-0.32)</td><td>(4.76)</td><td>(1.97)</td><td>(6.12)</td><td>(3.31)</td></tr><tr><td>0.231***</td><td></td><td>0.318***</td><td>:</td><td>-0.0860***</td><td>.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">INC</td><td>(9.07)</td><td></td><td>(3.21)</td><td>:</td><td>(-7.16)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0.0539***</td><td>0.000750</td><td>0.0413</td><td>0.0461</td><td>-0.00227</td><td>-0.0182*</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">EDU</td><td>(2.60)</td><td>(0.03)</td><td>(0.59)</td><td>(0.56)</td><td>(-0.28)</td><td>(-1.89)</td></tr><tr><td>0.0169***</td><td>0.0138</td><td>-0.0155</td><td>1.061</td><td>0.00671***</td><td>0.0968</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">FJOB</td><td>(3.32)</td><td>(0.05)</td><td>(-0.79)</td><td>(1.25)</td><td>(2.82)</td><td>(0.98)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.0126</td><td>-0.138</td><td>-0.00294</td><td>-0.996**</td><td>0.0232</td><td>-0.0486</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MWRK</td><td>(-0.35)</td><td>(-0.99)</td><td>(-0.02)</td><td>(-2.31)</td><td>(1.39)</td><td>(-0.97)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.0451*</td><td>0.0355</td><td>-0.270***</td><td>0.0185</td><td>-0.0195*</td><td>0.0269</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">FAM</td><td>(-1.87)</td><td>(0.51)</td><td>(-2.97)</td><td>(0.09)</td><td>(-1.78)</td><td>(1.08)</td></tr><tr><td>0.102*</td><td>0.0552</td><td>0.301</td><td>0.0857</td><td>0.0731***</td><td>-0.00432</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">HOUSE</td><td>(1.72)</td><td>(0.68)</td><td>(1.49)</td><td>(0.34)</td><td>(3.08)</td><td>(-0.15)</td></tr><tr><td>0.0836***</td><td>0.101***</td><td>0.168**</td><td>0.173*</td><td>0.0251**</td><td>0.0270**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">DIST</td><td>(3.37)</td><td>(2.99)</td><td>(1.99)</td><td>(1.65)</td><td>(2.53)</td><td>(2.22)</td></tr><tr><td>114.2</td><td>292.1</td><td>208.0</td><td>6544.4***</td><td>-120.3</td><td>-43.09</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td>(0.59)</td><td>(0.41)</td><td>(0.29)</td><td>(2.98)</td><td>(-1.37)</td><td>(-0.17)</td></tr><tr><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>N. R2</td><td>0.0607</td><td>0.014</td><td>0.0536</td><td>0.026</td><td>0.0786</td><td>0.021</td></tr><tr><td>x32(p&gt; x33)</td><td>0.92(0.8217)</td><td></td><td>16.56(0.0009)</td><td></td><td>3.18(0.3644)</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

t statistics in parentheses

Table 13: Effects of private tutoring on well being $:$ GLS and FE Estimation(2)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>(7)GLS</td><td>(8)FE</td><td>(9)GLS</td><td>(10)FE</td><td>(11)GLS</td><td>(12)FE</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTHR</td><td>WB_per 0.000956</td><td>WB_per 0.00137</td><td>WB_sch 0.00114</td><td>WB_sch 0.000761</td><td>WB_std -0.00978***</td><td>WB_std -0.00464***</td></tr><tr><td>(1.22)</td><td>(1.44)</td><td>(1.28)</td><td>(0.68)</td><td>(-7.82)</td><td>(-3.03)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PT1</td><td>-0.0394**</td><td></td><td>-0.00162</td><td></td><td>-0.0443</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(-2.05)</td><td></td><td>(-0.08)</td><td>:</td><td></td><td>:</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">STUDY</td><td>0.00173***</td><td>0.00134**</td><td>0.00416***</td><td>0.00247***</td><td>(-1.51) -0.00440***</td><td>-0.000348</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">RANK1</td><td>(3.04) 0.00249***</td><td>(2.05) 0.00194***</td><td>(6.40) 0.00406***</td><td>(3.22)</td><td>(-4.85)</td><td>(-0.33)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.00383***</td><td>0.00593***</td><td>0.0105***</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">RANK2</td><td>(6.73) 0.00105***</td><td>(3.76) 0.000993**</td><td>(9.81) 0.00597***</td><td>(6.32)</td><td>(10.14)</td><td>(12.74)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.00446***</td><td>0.00212***</td><td>0.00357***</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTHRM</td><td>(2.74)</td><td>(2.08)</td><td>(13.89)</td><td>(7.93)</td><td>(3.50)</td><td>(4.66)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.00168</td><td>:</td><td>0.00218</td><td>:</td><td>-0.000851</td><td>:</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTFR</td><td>(-0.67)</td><td>-0.00625</td><td>(0.85) 0.0148</td><td></td><td>(-0.22)</td><td>.</td></tr><tr><td>-0.0162</td><td>(-0.37)</td><td></td><td>-0.00812</td><td>0.00866</td><td>0.0303</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">CLASS</td><td>(-1.09) -0.00111</td><td>-0.00314</td><td>(0.87) -0.00137</td><td>(-0.41)</td><td>(0.37)</td><td>(1.11)</td></tr><tr><td>(-0.71)</td><td>(-1.51)</td><td>(-0.79)</td><td>-0.00123</td><td>-0.00904***</td><td>-0.00403</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">BORDER</td><td>-0.0176</td><td></td><td>0.0494***</td><td>(-0.50)</td><td>(-3.65)</td><td>(-1.21)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>.</td><td></td><td>:</td><td>-0.0170</td><td>.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MONTH</td><td>(-1.02) -0.0149</td><td>:</td><td>(2.76)</td><td>:</td><td>(-0.64)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>.</td><td>-0.00898</td><td>:</td><td>-0.00519</td><td>:</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">HIGH</td><td>(-0.66)</td><td>0.103**</td><td>(-0.39)</td><td></td><td>(-0.15)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0.0970***</td><td></td><td>-0.104***</td><td>-0.0267</td><td>-0.0479</td><td>0.141**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MALE</td><td>(2.96)</td><td>(2.56)</td><td>(2.80)</td><td>(-0.56)</td><td>(-0.92)</td><td>(2.17)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.132***</td><td>:</td><td>0.0324*</td><td>:</td><td>0.225***</td><td>:</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">INC</td><td>(-7.64)</td><td></td><td>(1.81)</td><td>.</td><td>(8.50)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0.0145</td><td>-0.00461</td><td>-0.0221</td><td>-0.0180</td><td>0.0129</td><td>0.0395</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">EDU</td><td>(1.05)</td><td>(-0.26)</td><td>(-1.43)</td><td>(-0.87)</td><td>(0.59)</td><td>(1.41)</td></tr><tr><td>0.00380</td><td>0.103</td><td>-0.000520</td><td>0.197</td><td>-0.0262***</td><td>0.174</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">FJOB</td><td>(1.10)</td><td>(0.58)</td><td>(-0.14)</td><td>(0.94)</td><td>(-4.95)</td><td>(0.61)</td></tr><tr><td>0.00921</td><td>-0.218**</td><td>0.0379</td><td>-0.0539</td><td>-0.0274</td><td>-0.154</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MWRK</td><td>(0.37)</td><td>(-2.39)</td><td>(1.48)</td><td>(-0.50)</td><td>(-0.73)</td><td>(-1.05)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.00710</td><td>0.0211</td><td>-0.0158</td><td>0.00473</td><td>-0.0356</td><td>0.00685</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">FAM</td><td>(-0.44)</td><td>(0.47)</td><td>(-0.92)</td><td>(0.09)</td><td>(-1.41)</td><td>(0.09)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.0206</td><td>-0.0757</td><td>0.110**</td><td>0.0767</td><td>-0.0133</td><td>0.123</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">HOUSE</td><td>(-0.52)</td><td>(-1.42)</td><td>(2.50)</td><td>(1.23)</td><td>(-0.21)</td><td>(1.44)</td></tr><tr><td>0.0162</td><td>0.0212</td><td>-0.00747</td><td>0.0168</td><td>-0.00822</td><td>0.0172</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">DIST</td><td>(0.98)</td><td>(0.96)</td><td>(-0.41)</td><td>(0.65)</td><td>(-0.32)</td><td>(0.49)</td></tr><tr><td>194.9</td><td>888.8*</td><td>84.94</td><td>757.4</td><td>-139.0</td><td>2123.2***</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">N.</td><td>(1.50)</td><td>(1.92)</td><td>(0.62)</td><td>(1.39)</td><td>(-0.69)</td><td>(2.86)</td></tr><tr><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td> R2</td><td>0.0193</td><td>0.010</td><td>0.0593</td><td>0.018</td><td></td><td>0.052</td></tr><tr><td>x32</td><td>9.25(0.0262)</td><td></td><td>3.25(0.3552)</td><td></td><td>11.24(0.0105)</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

t statistics in parentheses

Table 14: Effects of private tutoring on well being $:$ GLS and FE Estimation(3)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>(13)GLS</td><td>(14)FE</td><td>(15)GLS</td><td>(16)FE</td><td>(17)GLS</td><td>(18)FE</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTHR</td><td>WB_conf</td><td>WB_conf</td><td>WB_dep</td><td>WB_dep</td><td>WB_health</td><td>WB_health</td></tr><tr><td>-0.00137</td><td>-0.00174*</td><td>-0.00278**</td><td>-0.00356**</td><td>-0.00348**</td><td>-0.00382**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PT1</td><td>(-1.59)</td><td>(-1.72)</td><td>(-2.26)</td><td>(-2.42)</td><td>(-2.25)</td><td>(-2.03)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.0160</td><td></td><td>-0.0776**</td><td>.</td><td>-0.0646*</td><td>:</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">STUDY</td><td>(-0.72)</td><td></td><td>(-2.53)</td><td></td><td>(-1.73)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0.00474***</td><td>0.00306***</td><td>0.00103</td><td>-0.0000902</td><td>0.00118</td><td>0.000692</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">RANK1</td><td>(7.69)</td><td>(4.40)</td><td>(1.16)</td><td>(-0.09)</td><td>(1.06)</td><td>(0.54)</td></tr><tr><td>0.00486***</td><td>0.00297***</td><td>0.00210***</td><td>0.00159**</td><td>0.00105</td><td>-0.000713</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">RANK2</td><td>(11.92)</td><td>(5.41)</td><td>(3.61)</td><td>(2.00)</td><td>(1.44)</td><td>(-0.70)</td></tr><tr><td>0.00304***</td><td>0.00211***</td><td>0.00215***</td><td>0.00237***</td><td>-0.0000669</td><td>-0.0000390</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTHRM</td><td>(7.24)</td><td>(4.14)</td><td>(3.59)</td><td>(3.22)</td><td>(-0.09)</td><td>(-0.04)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.000618</td><td></td><td>-0.00873**</td><td></td><td>-0.00350</td><td>:</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTFR</td><td>(-0.21)</td><td></td><td>(-2.19)</td><td></td><td>(-0.72)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>-0.00445</td><td>0.00309</td><td>-0.0482**</td><td>-0.0342</td><td>0.000690</td><td>0.0357</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">CLASS</td><td>(-0.28)</td><td>(0.17)</td><td>(-2.08)</td><td>(-1.31)</td><td>(0.02)</td><td>(1.06)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.000189</td><td>-0.00287</td><td>-0.00659***</td><td>-0.00946***</td><td>0.00287</td><td>0.00191</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">BORDER</td><td>(-0.11)</td><td>(-1.30)</td><td>(-2.68)</td><td>(-2.95)</td><td>(0.93)</td><td>(0.46)</td></tr><tr><td>0.0165</td><td></td><td>-0.0329</td><td></td><td>-0.0464</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MONTH</td><td>(0.82)</td><td></td><td>(-1.19)</td><td>.</td><td>(-1.38)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>-0.0345</td><td></td><td>-0.0345</td><td></td><td>0.0567</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">HIGH</td><td>(-1.33)</td><td></td><td>(-0.96)</td><td></td><td>(1.30)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0.143***</td><td>0.102**</td><td>-0.140***</td><td>-0.0650</td><td>0.0787</td><td>0.0131</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MALE</td><td>(4.00)</td><td>(2.38)</td><td>(-2.73)</td><td>(-1.04)</td><td>(1.22)</td><td>(0.16)</td></tr><tr><td>0.0836***</td><td></td><td>0.277***</td><td></td><td>0.0351</td><td>.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">INC</td><td>(4.18)</td><td></td><td>(10.03)</td><td></td><td>(1.04)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0.0450***</td><td>0.0363*</td><td>0.0499**</td><td>0.0354</td><td>0.0378</td><td>-0.00402</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">EDU</td><td>(2.98)</td><td>(1.95)</td><td>(2.32)</td><td>(1.31)</td><td>(1.40)</td><td>(-0.12)</td></tr><tr><td>0.00992**</td><td>0.375**</td><td>0.00241</td><td>0.136</td><td>-0.000966</td><td>-0.180</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">FJOB</td><td>(2.49)</td><td>(1.97)</td><td>(0.44)</td><td>(0.49)</td><td>(-0.14)</td><td>(-0.51)</td></tr><tr><td>0.0138</td><td>-0.0975</td><td>-0.0386</td><td>-0.161</td><td>0.00702</td><td>-0.261</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MWRK</td><td>(0.49)</td><td>(-1.01)</td><td>(-0.98)</td><td>(-1.15)</td><td>(0.15)</td><td>(-1.45)</td></tr><tr><td>-0.0457**</td><td>0.0523</td><td>-0.0480*</td><td>-0.0534</td><td>-0.0395</td><td>-0.0562</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">FAM</td><td>(-2.45)</td><td>(1.08)</td><td>(-1.85)</td><td>(-0.76)</td><td>(-1.24)</td><td>(-0.63)</td></tr><tr><td>0.0635</td><td>0.0448</td><td>0.128**</td><td>0.0878</td><td>-0.0523</td><td>-0.145</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">HOUSE</td><td>(1.46)</td><td>(0.79)</td><td>(2.07)</td><td>(1.07)</td><td>(-0.68)</td><td>(-1.37)</td></tr><tr><td>0.0515***</td><td>0.0730***</td><td>0.0133</td><td>-0.0156</td><td>0.0812**</td><td>0.0312</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">DIST</td><td>(2.84)</td><td>(3.11)</td><td>(0.51)</td><td>(-0.46)</td><td>(2.51)</td><td>(0.71)</td></tr><tr><td>374.6**</td><td>1510.6***</td><td>495.3**</td><td>814.5</td><td>409.7</td><td>731.5</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">N.</td><td>(2.51)</td><td>(3.07)</td><td>(2.39)</td><td>(1.14)</td><td>(1.61)</td><td>(0.80)</td></tr><tr><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>R2</td><td>0.0633</td><td>0.025</td><td>0.0404</td><td>0.007</td><td>0.0068</td><td>0.004</td></tr><tr><td>x32(p&gt; x32)</td><td>10.87(0.0125)</td><td></td><td>1.26(0.7397)</td><td></td><td>2.73(0.4356)</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

t statistics in parentheses

Table 15: Effects of private tutoring on well being : Hausman-Taylor Estimation(1)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>(1)</td><td>(2)</td><td>(3) WB_fam</td><td>(4)</td><td>(5)</td></tr><tr><td>PTHR</td><td>WB_all -0.00355***</td><td>WB_composite -0.0140***</td><td>-0.00130***</td><td>WB_per 0.00136*</td><td>WB_sch 0.000735</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(-2.72) 0.951</td><td>(-3.97) 7.204</td><td>(-3.15) 0.245</td><td>(1.81) 0.728</td><td>(0.84) 1.377</td></tr><tr><td>PT1</td><td>(0.80) 0.00192**</td><td>(0.31) 0.00865***</td><td>(0.14) 0.000803***</td><td>(0.36) 0.00134***</td><td>(0.31) 0.00246***</td></tr><tr><td>STUDY RANK1</td><td>(2.15) 0.00481***</td><td>(3.57) 0.0222***</td><td>(2.85) 0.00173***</td><td>(2.61) 0.00195***</td><td>(4.10) 0.00384***</td></tr><tr><td>RANK2</td><td>(6.84) 0.00325***</td><td>(11.61) 0.0150***</td><td>(7.76) 0.00110***</td><td>(4.79) 0.000997***</td><td>(8.10) 0.00446***</td></tr><tr><td>PTHRM</td><td>(4.98) -0.00797</td><td>(8.47) 0.0311</td><td>(5.33) 0.00357</td><td>(2.64) -0.00484</td><td>(10.15) -0.000960</td></tr><tr><td>PTFR</td><td>(-1.20) -0.0185</td><td>(0.18) 0.00661</td><td>(0.28) -0.00903</td><td>(-0.35) -0.00653</td><td>(-0.03) -0.00797</td></tr><tr><td>CLASS</td><td>(-0.84) -0.00563** (-2.15)</td><td>(0.10) -0.0224***</td><td>(-1.23) -0.00277***</td><td>(-0.49) -0.00307*</td><td>(-0.51) -0.00119</td></tr><tr><td>BORDER</td><td>-0.0531 (-0.76)</td><td>(-2.90) -0.308</td><td>(-3.09) -0.00723</td><td>(-1.88) -0.0544</td><td>(-0.62) -0.0139</td></tr><tr><td>MONTH</td><td>-0.0324 (-0.54)</td><td>(-0.20) -0.0852</td><td>(-0.06) -0.00404</td><td>(-0.41) -0.0405</td><td>(-0.05) -0.0476</td></tr><tr><td>HIGH</td><td>-0.0442 (-0.81)</td><td>(-0.06) 0.385**</td><td>(-0.04) 0.0743***</td><td>(-0.32) 0.103***</td><td>(-0.17) -0.0259</td></tr><tr><td>MALE</td><td>0.353** (2.29)</td><td>(2.58) 1.241</td><td>(4.27) -0.0583</td><td>(3.25) -0.0338</td><td>(-0.70) 0.201</td></tr><tr><td>INC</td><td>0.0184 (0.82)</td><td>(0.40) 0.0450 (0.69)</td><td>(-0.25) -0.0181**</td><td>(-0.13) -0.00431</td><td>(0.35) -0.0181</td></tr><tr><td>EDU</td><td>0.0229*** (2.61)</td><td>0.122 (0.57)</td><td>(-2.41) 0.0147 (0.89)</td><td>(-0.31) 0.0163 (0.89)</td><td>(-1.12) 0.0195 (0.48)</td></tr><tr><td>FJOB</td><td>0.0105 (0.18)</td><td>-0.948*** (-2.86)</td><td>-0.0395 (-1.05)</td><td>-0.154** (-2.40)</td><td>-0.0455 (-0.56)</td></tr><tr><td>MWRK</td><td>-0.0366 (-1.07)</td><td>0.00839 (0.05)</td><td>0.0233 (1.23)</td><td>0.0161 (0.48)</td><td>0.00335 (0.08)</td></tr><tr><td>FAM</td><td>0.0652 (1.01)</td><td>0.0868 (0.44)</td><td>-0.00288 (-0.13)</td><td>-0.0741* (-1.78)</td><td>0.0770 (1.58)</td></tr><tr><td>HOUSE</td><td>0.0878*** (3.17)</td><td>0.172** (2.11).</td><td>0.0269*** (2.84)</td><td>0.0206 (1.19)</td><td>0.0163 (0.80)</td></tr><tr><td>DIST</td><td>358.5 (1.12)</td><td>(3.72) 6278.7***</td><td>-44.13 (-0.23)</td><td>764.6** (2.32)</td><td>720.7* (1.75)</td></tr></table></body></html>

t statistics in parentheses

Table 16: Effects of private tutoring on well being : Hausman-Taylor Estimation(2)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>(6)</td><td>(7)</td><td>(8)</td><td>(9)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTHR</td><td>WB_std</td><td>WB_conf</td><td>WB_dep</td><td>WB_health</td></tr><tr><td>-0.00469***</td><td>-0.00178**</td><td>-0.00357***</td><td>-0.00379**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PT1</td><td>(-3.92)</td><td>(-2.24)</td><td>(-3.03)</td><td>(-2.56)</td></tr><tr><td>0.636</td><td>4.913</td><td>2.604</td><td>1.063</td></tr><tr><td>STUDY</td><td>(0.12) -0.000358</td><td>(0.62) 0.00304***</td><td>(0.82) -0.0000956</td><td>(0.22) 0.000709</td></tr><tr><td>RANK1</td><td>(-0.44) 0.0105***</td><td>(5.56) 0.00297***</td><td>(-0.12) 0.00157**</td><td>(0.70)</td></tr><tr><td>RANK2</td><td>(16.32) 0.00357***</td><td>(6.89) 0.00211***</td><td>(2.48)</td><td>-0.000708 (-0.89)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(5.98)</td><td>(5.28)</td><td>0.00237*** (4.01)</td><td>-0.0000411 (-0.06)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTHRM</td><td>-0.000715</td><td>-0.0148</td><td>-0.0199</td><td>-0.00830</td></tr><tr><td>(-0.02)</td><td>(-0.26)</td><td>(-0.92)</td><td>(-0.25)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTFR</td><td>0.0300</td><td>0.00308</td><td>-0.0349*</td><td>0.0351</td></tr><tr><td>(1.41)</td><td>(0.22)</td><td>(-1.67).</td><td>(1.33)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">CLASS</td><td>-0.00406</td><td>-0.00283</td><td>-0.00934***</td><td>0.00187</td></tr><tr><td>(-1.56)</td><td>(-1.63)</td><td>(-3.66)</td><td>(0.58)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">BORDER</td><td>-0.0602</td><td>-0.232</td><td>-0.163</td><td>-0.102</td></tr><tr><td>(-0.17)</td><td>(-0.43)</td><td>(-0.79)</td><td>(-0.32)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MONTH</td><td>-0.0133</td><td>-0.176</td><td>-0.122</td><td>0.0208</td></tr><tr><td>(-0.04)</td><td>(-0.34)</td><td>(-0.62)</td><td>(0.07)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">HIGH</td><td>0.143***</td><td>0.103***</td><td>-0.0702</td><td>0.0118</td></tr><tr><td>(2.84)</td><td>(3.06)</td><td>(-1.41)</td><td>(0.19)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MALE</td><td>0.326</td><td>0.686</td><td>0.613</td><td>0.177</td></tr><tr><td>(0.46)</td><td>(0.65)</td><td>(1.47)</td><td>(0.28)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">INC</td><td>0.0389*</td><td>0.0363**</td><td>0.0361*</td><td>-0.00317</td></tr><tr><td>(1.78)</td><td>(2.48)</td><td>(1.68)</td><td>(-0.12)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">EDU</td><td>-0.0276</td><td>0.0968</td><td>0.0234</td><td>0.0144</td></tr><tr><td>(-0.56)</td><td>(1.40)</td><td>(0.82)</td><td>(0.33)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">FJOB</td><td>-0.144</td><td>-0.0956</td><td>-0.110</td><td>-0.202</td></tr><tr><td>(-1.32)</td><td>(-1.27)</td><td>(-1.10)</td><td>(-1.54)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MWRK</td><td>0.00546</td><td>0.0507</td><td>-0.0554</td><td>-0.0558</td></tr><tr><td>(0.10)</td><td>(1.34)</td><td>(-1.07)</td><td>(-0.84)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">FAM</td><td>0.121*</td><td>0.0448</td><td>0.0883</td><td>-0.143*</td></tr><tr><td>(1.82)</td><td>(1.01)</td><td>(1.36)</td><td>(-1.74)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">HOUSE</td><td>0.0165</td><td>0.0726***</td><td>-0.0159</td><td>0.0325</td></tr><tr><td>(0.60)</td><td>(3.94)</td><td>(-0.59)</td><td>(0.95)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">DIST</td><td>1888.7***</td><td>1498.0***</td><td>873.0*</td><td>722.5</td></tr><tr><td>(3.39)</td><td>(3.90)</td><td>(1.70)</td><td>(1.08)</td></tr><tr><td>N</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td><td>9083</td></tr><tr><td>x32(p&gt; x32)</td><td>0.75(0.8608)</td><td>2.47(0.4813)</td><td>0.47(0.9264)</td><td>0.53(0.9113)</td></tr></table></body></html>

t statistics in parentheses

Table 17: Effects of private tutoring on well being : Hausman-Taylor Estimation(3)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>(1) WB_all</td><td>(2) WB_composite</td><td>(3) WB_fam</td><td>(4) WB_per</td><td>(5) WB_sch</td></tr><tr><td>PTHR</td><td>-0.00303** (-2.02)</td><td>-0.0117*** (-3.27)</td><td>-0.00112*** (-2.71)</td><td>0.00155** (2.05)</td><td>0.00128 (1.45)</td></tr><tr><td>PT1</td><td>1.786 (1.49)</td><td>9.909 (0.41)</td><td>0.434 (0.23)</td><td>0.905 (0.43)</td><td>2.004 (0.44)</td></tr><tr><td>STUDY</td><td>0.00155 (1.52)</td><td>0.00681*** (2.81)</td><td>0.000652** (2.32)</td><td>0.00114** (2.23)</td><td>0.00238*** (3.96)</td></tr><tr><td>PTHRM</td><td>-0.00981 (-1.51) -0.0143</td><td>0.0257 (0.15) 0.0299</td><td>0.00321 (0.25) -0.00715</td><td>-0.00517 (-0.36) -0.00416</td><td>-0.00219 (-0.07) -0.00575</td></tr><tr><td>PTFR CLASS</td><td>(-0.57) -0.00706**</td><td>(0.47) -0.0285***</td><td>(-0.97) -0.00325***</td><td>(-0.31) -0.00364**</td><td>(-0.37) -0.00203</td></tr><tr><td>BORDER</td><td>(-2.42) -0.0797</td><td>(-3.68) -0.377</td><td>(-3.63) -0.0116</td><td>(-2.24) -0.0577</td><td>(-1.06) -0.0322</td></tr><tr><td>MONTH</td><td>(-1.16) -0.0569 (-0.97)</td><td>(-0.23) -0.165 (-0.10)</td><td>(-0.09) -0.00968</td><td>(-0.42) -0.0459</td><td>(-0.11) -0.0655</td></tr><tr><td>HIGH</td><td>-0.147*** (-6.15)</td><td>-0.0711 (-1.11)</td><td>(-0.08) 0.0347*** (4.71)</td><td>(-0.35) 0.0441*** (3.31)</td><td>(-0.22) 0.00815 (0.52)</td></tr><tr><td>MALE</td><td>0.447*** (2.87)</td><td>1.526 (0.47)</td><td>-0.0387 (-0.16)</td><td>-0.0160 (-0.06)</td><td>0.269 (0.44)</td></tr><tr><td>INC EDU</td><td>0.0310 (1.23) 0.0316***</td><td>0.0776 (1.19)</td><td>-0.0157** (-2.07)</td><td>-0.00186 (-0.14)</td><td>-0.0103 (-0.63)</td></tr><tr><td>FJOB</td><td>(3.71) 0.0468</td><td>0.168 (0.76) -0.915***</td><td>0.0180 (1.05) -0.0372</td><td>0.0197 (1.04) -0.154**</td><td>0.0282 (0.67). -0.0332</td></tr><tr><td>MWRK</td><td>(0.78) -0.0532</td><td>(-2.73) 0.0386</td><td>(-0.98) 0.0256</td><td>(-2.38) 0.0180</td><td>(-0.41) 0.00985</td></tr><tr><td>FAM</td><td>(-1.55) 0.0669 (0.93)</td><td>(0.23) 0.0677</td><td>(1.34) -0.00442</td><td>(0.54) -0.0757*</td><td>(0.24) 0.0737</td></tr><tr><td>HOUSE</td><td>0.0780** (2.52)</td><td>(0.34) 0.160*</td><td>(-0.19) 0.0260***</td><td>(-1.81) 0.0197</td><td>(1.50) 0.0132 (0.65)</td></tr><tr><td>DIST</td><td>492.9 (1.51)</td><td>(1.93) 6912.2*** (4.06)</td><td>(2.72) 0.541 (0.00)</td><td>(1.14) 809.5** (2.44)</td><td>901.1** (2.16)</td></tr></table></body></html>

t statistics in parentheses

Table 18: Effects of private tutoring on well being : Hausman-Taylor Estimation(4)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>(6) WB_std</td><td>(7) WB_conf</td><td>(8) WB_dep</td><td>(9) WB_health</td></tr><tr><td>PTHR</td><td>-0.00383*** (-3.16)</td><td>-0.00146*</td><td>-0.00330***</td><td>-0.00383***</td></tr><tr><td>PT1</td><td>1.526 (0.27)</td><td>(-1.83) 5.324 (0.66)</td><td>(-2.80) 2.872 (0.88)</td><td>(-2.59) 1.020 (0.21)</td></tr><tr><td>STUDY</td><td>-0.00168** (-2.04)</td><td>0.00280*** (5.16)</td><td>-0.0000622 (-0.08)</td><td>0.000823 (0.82)</td></tr><tr><td>PTHRM</td><td>-0.00245 (-0.06)</td><td>-0.0157 (-0.27)</td><td>-0.0204 (-0.91)</td><td>-0.00822 (-0.25)</td></tr><tr><td>PTFR</td><td>0.0445** (2.07) -0.00739***</td><td>0.00610 (0.43)</td><td>-0.0345* (-1.65)</td><td>0.0339 (1.29)</td></tr><tr><td>CLASS BORDER</td><td>(-2.81) -0.0759</td><td>-0.00364** (-2.09) -0.244</td><td>-0.00962*** (-3.77) -0.170</td><td>0.00212 (0.66) -0.102</td></tr><tr><td>MONTH</td><td>(-0.20) -0.0407</td><td>(-0.45) -0.188</td><td>(-0.80) -0.130</td><td>(-0.32) 0.0222</td></tr><tr><td>HIGH</td><td>(-0.11) -0.287***</td><td>(-0.35) 0.0481***</td><td>(-0.64) -0.0235</td><td>(0.07) 0.0528**</td></tr><tr><td>MALE</td><td>(-13.30) 0.415</td><td>(3.36) 0.730</td><td>(-1.13) 0.642</td><td>(2.01) 0.173</td></tr><tr><td>INC</td><td>(0.56) 0.0502** (2.26)</td><td>(0.68) 0.0407***</td><td>(1.49) 0.0398*</td><td>(0.27) -0.00370</td></tr><tr><td>EDU</td><td>-0.00996 (-0.19)</td><td>(2.78) 0.104 (1.48)</td><td>(1.85) 0.0270</td><td>(-0.14) 0.0134 (0.30)</td></tr><tr><td>FJOB</td><td>-0.139 (-1.24)</td><td>-0.0908 (-1.20)</td><td>(0.91) -0.105 (-1.04)</td><td>-0.202 (-1.55)</td></tr><tr><td>MWRK</td><td>0.0158 (0.28)</td><td>0.0549 (1.45)</td><td>-0.0532 (-1.02)</td><td>-0.0563 (-0.84)</td></tr><tr><td>FAM</td><td>0.112* (1.66)</td><td>0.0422 (0.95)</td><td>0.0870 (1.33)</td><td>-0.142* (-1.73)</td></tr><tr><td>HOUSE</td><td>0.0121 (0.43)</td><td>0.0709*** (3.82)</td><td>-0.0174 (-0.64)</td><td>0.0327 (0.96)</td></tr><tr><td>DIST</td><td>2059.5*** (3.63)</td><td>1586.0*** (4.12)</td><td>956.3* (1.84)</td><td>719.6 (1.08) 9083</td></tr></table></body></html>

t statistics in parentheses

Table 19: Effects of private tutoring on well being : Hausman-Taylor Estimation(5)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>(1)</td><td>(2)</td><td>(3) WB_fam</td><td>(4)</td><td>(5)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"> ptcosthr</td><td>WB_all -0.000654</td><td>WB_composite 0.000875</td><td>0.000402</td><td>WB_per 0.00187***</td><td>WB_sch 0.000312</td></tr><tr><td>(-0.43)</td><td>(0.26)</td><td>(1.02)</td><td>(2.61)</td><td>(0.37)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTHR</td><td>-0.00327**</td><td>-0.0121***</td><td>-0.00116***</td><td>0.00175**</td><td>0.00121</td></tr><tr><td>(-2.05)</td><td>(-3.36)</td><td>(-2.78)</td><td>(2.30)</td><td>(1.35)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PT1</td><td>2.254*</td><td>10.41</td><td>0.545</td><td>1.118</td><td>2.050</td></tr><tr><td>(1.78)</td><td>(0.41)</td><td>(0.28)</td><td>(0.50)</td><td>(0.43)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">STUDY</td><td>0.00158</td><td>0.00713***</td><td>0.000673**</td><td>0.00114**</td><td>0.00237***</td></tr><tr><td>(1.47)</td><td>(2.92)</td><td>(2.40)</td><td>(2.22)</td><td>(3.93)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTHRM</td><td>-0.0112</td><td>0.0240</td><td>0.00314</td><td>-0.00568</td><td>-0.00252</td></tr><tr><td>(-1.59)</td><td>(0.13)</td><td>(0.23)</td><td>(-0.36)</td><td>(-0.07)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">PTFR</td><td>-0.0126</td><td>0.0378</td><td>-0.00706</td><td>-0.00448</td><td>-0.00560</td></tr><tr><td>(-0.48)</td><td>(0.59)</td><td>(-0.96)</td><td>(-0.33)</td><td>(-0.36)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">CLASS</td><td>-0.00729**</td><td>-0.0272***</td><td>-0.00313***</td><td>-0.00359**</td><td>-0.00164</td></tr><tr><td>(-2.35)</td><td>(-3.48)</td><td>(-3.49)</td><td>(-2.19)</td><td>(-0.85)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">BORDER</td><td>-0.102</td><td>-0.409</td><td>-0.0182</td><td>-0.0667</td><td>-0.0351</td></tr><tr><td>(-1.39)</td><td>(-0.24)</td><td>(-0.14)</td><td>(-0.45)</td><td>(-0.11)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MONTH</td><td>-0.0722</td><td>-0.193</td><td>-0.0136</td><td>-0.0524</td><td>-0.0659</td></tr><tr><td>(-1.14)</td><td>(-0.12)</td><td>(-0.11)</td><td>(-0.37)</td><td>(-0.21)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">HIGH</td><td>-0.149***</td><td>-0.0872</td><td>0.0330***</td><td>0.0453***</td><td>0.00562</td></tr><tr><td>(-5.86)</td><td>(-1.35)</td><td>(4.47)</td><td>(3.37)</td><td>(0.35)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">MALE</td><td>0.505***</td><td>1.582</td><td>-0.0257</td><td>0.0106</td><td>0.275</td></tr><tr><td>(3.04)</td><td>(0.47)</td><td>(-0.10)</td><td>(0.04)</td><td>(0.44)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">INC</td><td>0.0233</td><td>0.0810</td><td>-0.0161**</td><td>0.00173</td><td>-0.00880</td></tr><tr><td>(0.86)</td><td>(1.23)</td><td>(-2.12)</td><td>(0.12)</td><td>(-0.54)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">EDU</td><td>0.0328***</td><td>0.176</td><td>0.0185</td><td>0.0204</td><td>0.0290</td></tr><tr><td>(3.62)</td><td>(0.77)</td><td>(1.04)</td><td>(1.01)</td><td>(0.67)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">FJOB MWRK</td><td>0.0584</td><td>-0.913***</td><td>-0.0375</td><td>-0.162**</td><td>-0.0330</td></tr><tr><td>(0.91)</td><td>(-2.72)</td><td>(-0.99)</td><td>(-2.47)</td><td>(-0.40)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">FAM</td><td>-0.0539 (-1.47)</td><td>0.0434 (0.26)</td><td>0.0215</td><td>0.0195</td><td>0.0129</td></tr><tr><td>0.0573</td><td>0.0200</td><td>(1.12) 0.00254</td><td>(0.57) -0.0868**</td><td>(0.31) 0.0791</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">HOUSE</td><td>(0.75)</td><td>(0.10)</td><td>(0.11)</td><td>(-2.06)</td><td>(1.59)</td></tr><tr><td>0.0732**</td><td>0.154*</td><td>0.0284***</td><td>0.0171</td><td>0.0165</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td>(2.26)</td><td>(1.85)</td><td>(2.97)</td><td>(0.98)</td><td>(0.80)</td></tr><tr><td>582.4*</td><td>6808.2***</td><td>26.46</td><td>837.1**</td><td>854.4**</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">DIST</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(1.67)</td><td>(3.98)</td><td>(0.14)</td><td>(2.49)</td><td>(2.04)</td></tr><tr><td>N</td><td>8979</td><td>8979</td><td>8979</td><td>8979</td><td>8979</td></tr><tr><td>x32(p&gt; x32)</td><td>2.43(0.4885)</td><td>1.36(0.7151)</td><td>0.80(0.8483)</td><td>1.09(0.7793)</td><td>0.77(0.8558)</td></tr></table></body></html>

t statistics in parentheses

Table 20: Effects of private tutoring on well being : Hausman-Taylor Estimation(6)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>(1) WB_std</td><td>(2) WB_conf</td><td>(3) WB_dep</td><td>(4) WB_health</td></tr><tr><td> ptcosthr</td><td>-0.00269**</td><td>0.000193</td><td>0.000697</td><td>0.0000601</td></tr><tr><td>PTHR</td><td>(-2.33) -0.00414***</td><td>(0.25) -0.00152*</td><td>(0.62) -0.00330***</td><td>(0.04) -0.00399***</td></tr><tr><td>PT1</td><td>(-3.38) 1.417</td><td>(-1.88) 5.609</td><td>(-2.77) 2.765</td><td>(-2.67) 1.399</td></tr><tr><td>STUDY</td><td>(0.25) -0.00171** (-2.07)</td><td>(0.67) 0.00275***</td><td>(0.82) 0.0000806</td><td>(0.28) 0.00100</td></tr><tr><td>PTHRM</td><td>-0.00252 (-0.06)</td><td>(5.05) -0.0166 (-0.27)</td><td>(0.10) -0.0211 (-0.90)</td><td>(0.99) -0.00908 (-0.26)</td></tr><tr><td>PTFR</td><td>0.0458** (2.12)</td><td>0.00591 (0.42)</td><td>-0.0358* (-1.71)</td><td>0.0412 (1.57)</td></tr><tr><td>CLASS</td><td>-0.00686*** (-2.60)</td><td>-0.00357** (-2.05)</td><td>-0.00958*** (-3.75)</td><td>0.00222 (0.69)</td></tr><tr><td>BORDER</td><td>-0.0690 (-0.18)</td><td>-0.260 (-0.46)</td><td>-0.164 (-0.74)</td><td>-0.122 (-0.37)</td></tr><tr><td>MONTH</td><td>-0.0403 (-0.11)</td><td>-0.201 (-0.36)</td><td>-0.126 (-0.60)</td><td>0.00680 (0.02)</td></tr><tr><td>HIGH</td><td>-0.290*** (-13.34)</td><td>0.0431*** (3.00)</td><td>-0.0261 (-1.24)</td><td>0.0510* (1.93)</td></tr><tr><td>MALE</td><td>0.396 (0.52)</td><td>0.768 (0.68)</td><td>0.630 (1.41)</td><td>0.221 (0.34)</td></tr><tr><td>INC</td><td>0.0464** (2.07)</td><td>0.0397*** (2.69)</td><td>0.0387* (1.79)</td><td>-0.00147 (-0.05)</td></tr><tr><td>EDU</td><td>-0.00919 (-0.17) -0.137</td><td>0.109 (1.52)</td><td>0.0254 (0.83)</td><td>0.0149 (0.33)</td></tr><tr><td>FJOB</td><td>(-1.23) 0.0309</td><td>-0.0894 (-1.18)</td><td>-0.109 (-1.07)</td><td>-0.203 (-1.55) -0.0642</td></tr><tr><td>MWRK FAM</td><td>(0.55) 0.102</td><td>0.0619 (1.62) 0.0362</td><td>-0.0591 (-1.12) 0.0669</td><td>(-0.95) -0.157*</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(1.49) 0.0113</td><td>(0.81) 0.0724***</td><td>(1.02)</td><td>(-1.90) 0.0163</td></tr><tr><td>HOUSE</td><td>(0.40) 2100.1***</td><td>(3.90)</td><td>-0.0140 (-0.52)</td><td>(0.47)</td></tr><tr><td>DIST</td><td>(3.69)</td><td>1585.4*** (4.11)</td><td>897.7* (1.72)</td><td>675.5 (1.01)</td></tr><tr><td>N x32(p &gt; x32)</td><td>8979 0.71(0.8711)</td><td>8979 2.42(0.6584)</td><td>8979 0.41(0.9379)</td><td>8979 0.52(0.9145)</td></tr></table></body></html>

t statistics in parentheses

Tables 17 and 18 above shows the results of Hausman Taylor estimation without control for rank variable, to allow for the presumed positive effect of tutoring on academic achievement. Hausman test results of chi square statistics are reported in the last two rows. It shows that HT estimators are consistent and efficient, except for interpersonal relationship. However the coefficients have decreased in value compared to previous specifications. We can see here the effect of rank variable working as a channel of the effect of private tutoring, that private tutoring has positive impact on raising the academic achievement which brings greater well being. This channel seems to offset the negative effect of tutoring on well being when controlled for rank variable.

We introduced hourly price of tutoring(ptcosthr) as a proxy for differentiated effect with the quality of the tutoring, as shown in tables 19 and 20. Its effect is positive and significant for interpersonal relationship and negative and significant for study related stress, but it is insignificant in other domains including the composite well being. More expensive tutoring tend to be individual or group tutoring or private academies that are considered more competitive, which can explain its negative impact on study related stress. This could imply that students are more satisfied with their relationship with peers because they suffer similarly higher level of stress, or it could be that more expensive tutoring puts them in advantageous position vis a vis their peers. impact on raising the academic achievement which brings greater well being. This channel seems to offset the negative effect of tutoring on well being when controlled for rank variable.

# 6. Conclusion

This paper applied panel data regressions to estimate the effect of hours spent on private tutoring on multidimensional well being of 6,293 Korean students from age 10 to 16 over the period 2003-2008. Hausman and Taylor and FE models estimates indicate that hours of tutoring has negative impact on domains of well being such as study related stress, health and overall life satisfaction, while its effect has different effects on different domains. The result shows that there clearly exists a shadow cost of private tutoring, in the form of reduced well being of students. So far the cost of private tutoring has been only assessed in terms of economic burden of households and inefficiency in public education system, and its causal effect on well being has been neglected. The results of this paper calls for more attention and resources to measure the negative impact of excessive private tutoring prominent in some societies, as negative effect on children’s well being can have more severe effect in the long run.

References   
Baltagi, B. (2014). Econometric analysis of panel data, volume 1. John Wiley & Sons.   
Bray, M. and Lykins, C. R. (2012). Shadow education: Private supplementary tutoring and its implications for policy makers in Asia. Asian Development Bank Mandaluyong City, Philippines.   
Bray, M., Mazawi, A. E., and Sultana, R. G. (2013). Private tutoring across the Mediterranean: power dynamics and implications for learning and equity. Sense.   
Briggs, D. C. (2001). The effect of admissions test preparation: Evidence from nels: 88. Chance, 14(1):10– 18.   
Bronfenbrenner, U. and Morris, P. A. (1998). The ecology of developmental processes. Handbook of child psychology, 1:993–1028.   
Cheo, R. and Quah, E. (2005). Mothers, maids and tutors: An empirical evaluation of their effect on children’s academic grades in singapore. Education Economics, 13(3):269–285.   
Constitutional Court of Korea (2000). Extracurricular Lesson Ban Case. 12-1 KCCR 427,:1–47.   
Dang, H.-A. (2007). The determinants and impact of private tutoring classes in vietnam. Economics of Education Review, 26(6):683–698.   
Fernandes, L., Mendes, A., and Teixeira, A. (2013). A weighted multidimensional index of child wellbeing which incorporates children’s individual perceptions. Social indicators research, 114(3):803–829.   
KEDI (2005). Analysis on the Growth of Korean Education for 60 Years. pages 1–221.   
Kim, S. and Lee, J.-H. (2010). Private tutoring and demand for education in South Korea. Economic development and cultural change, 58(2):259–296.   
Kim, Y.-B., Yang, S.-K., and Park, S.-H. (2012). An Analysis of Private Educational Expenditure Transitions and Trends: Analysis of the “Household Survey” Data. The Journal of Korean Education, 39(1):261– 284.   
Kim, Y. C. (2008). A Study on the history of education policy of the Republic of Korea. Technical report, Ministry of Education of Korea.   
Lee, C. J. and Jang, H. M. (2008). An analysis of patterns of the government policy to shadow education. Asian Journal of Education, 9(4):173–200.   
Lee, J.-T., Kim, Y.-B., and Yoon, C.-H. (2004). The effects of pre-class tutoring on student achievement: Challenges and implications for public education in korea. KEDI Journal of Educational Policy, 1(1):25– 42.   
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2013). Announcement of major student mental health projects of 2013(Press Release).   
NYPI (2009). Human Rights Condition of Korean Youth and Children In Comparison to International Standards IV: Right of Survival and Protection(in Korean). Technical report.   
OECD (2012). OECD Economic Surveys: Korea 2012. OECD Publishing.   
Statistics-Korea (2014). Private Education Expenditure 2013 (Press Release). Technical report.   
Stevenson, D. L. and Baker, D. P. (1992). Shadow education and allocation in formal schooling: Transition to university in japan. American Journal of Sociology, 97(6):1639.   
Suryadarma, D., Suryahadi, A., Sumarto, S., and Rogers, F. H. (2006). Improving student performance in public primary schools in developing countries: Evidence from indonesia. Education Economics, 14(4):401–429.   
Tansel, A. and Bircan, F. (2006). Demand for education in Turkey: A tobit analysis of private tutoring expenditures. Economics of Education Review.   
Zhang, Y. (2013). Does private tutoring improve students national college entrance exam performance? a case study from jinan, china. Economics of Education Review, 32:1–28.