# Reading in preparation for writing a PhD thesis: Case studies of experiences

Becky S.C. Kwan\*

Department of English, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong

# Abstract

The paper presents stories of how a group of doctoral students chose the key disciplinary literature that they read in preparation for their thesis-undertaking (RT). The stories were analyzed in light of current understanding of literature reviewing as a situated practice and theory of doctoral education as socio-cognitive apprenticeship. As the stories reveal, key disciplinary literature does not exist ‘cut-and-dried’. This applies particularly to undertakings carried out in fields where multiple paradigms exist. The complex epistemic landscapes of the students’ research made selecting key literature to review much a difficult task. The task was in many cases facilitated by guidance provided by mentors such as thesis supervisors and panel members. Guidance was provided at various stages of the thesis-undertakings especially when theoretical and methodological issues emerged that called for the mentors’ advice, often resulting in new directions and selections of reading. The stories suggest that choices of reading for a thesisundertaking are partly socially mediated and partly driven by contingencies arising in the students’ fieldwork. This stands in some contrast to how RT is presented in thesis manuals, which tend to construe RT as an autonomous practice and emphasize search techniques via discipline-specific electronic databases. While not downplaying the importance of independence that students need to develop and that of the product-based approach to RT driven by the generic conventions of a literature review, the paper suggests that the contingent and social dimension deserves some attention in instructional literature and thesis preparatory courses.

$^ { © }$ 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: disciplinary literature; reading for the thesis; guided participation; literature reviewing; thesis writing

# 1. Introduction

One major task in a doctoral undertaking is reading in preparation for the thesis (RT). Students need to read extensively and thoroughly to collect ideas that can inform their studies and that can be used to construct the literature review and other parts in their theses. RT is seldom an easy task not least because of the large amount of literature that needs to be surveyed. The formidable task has spurred the proliferation of commercial and free on-line instructional materials, which offer advice that runs from library searches, to recording reading, and to reading critically (see, e.g., Creswell, 2003; Hart, 1998, 2001; Lester & Lester, 2006; Peters, 1997; Ridley, 2008; Rudestam & Newton, 2001). While instruction of the types is all essential and indeed helpful to many starting students, it seems to miss out the very much needed advice on how to select among the multitude of references the appropriate ones that can bear on students’ studies (see, e.g., Meloy, 2002).

A similar gap can also be observed in the empirical literature of doctoral undertakings, which tends to be skewed towards the production and textual products of the thesis (e.g., Allison, Cooley, Lewkowicz, & Nunan, 1998; Bitchener & Basturkmen, 2006; Bunton, 2002; Cooley & Lewkowicz, 1995, 1997; Dong, 1998; Dudley-Evans, 1999; Hocking, 2003; Paltridge, 2002; Richards, 1988; Shaw, 1991; Torrance & Thomas, 1994; Torrance, Thomas, & Robinson, 1993; Turner, 2003). Very few attempts have been directed at the task of reading in preparation for the thesis (RT). The only few studies that examined reading in the context of doctoral undertaking relate more to the final stage of the journey (Dong, 1996; Tchigaeva, 2003) with the exception of Kwan (2008) which shows that choices of crucial reading can be shaped by issues that emerged from the processes of researching and thesis-writing. The study reported in this paper is to add to this line of inquiry by examining how a group of doctoral students selected the key readings some of which have informed the theoretical frameworks and the methodologies of their studies as reflected in the literature reviews in their theses.

# 2. Theoretical assumptions

The study is premised on two theoretical assumptions. One concerns RT as a socially constructed practice situated in a particular research community. The other relates to doctoral education as a socialization process in which the novice researcher is apprenticed progressively into a full member of a target research community. The two theoretical assumptions will be elaborated in the following sections.

# 2.1. RT as a socially constructed practice

One major goal of RT is to review work by others that can eventually be cited in the literature review (LR) of the thesis. As such, one crucial starting point to consider the reading practice is the purpose of an LR. The functions of an LR have received some attention in both thesis manuals (see, e.g., Peters, 1997; Hart, 1998, 2001) and have also been taken up in some empirical literature of citation practices (see, e.g., Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995; Geisler, 1994; Matsuda & Tardy, 2007; Myers, 1990, 1991). An LR, whether it is written for a thesis, a proposal or a research article, is an extensive survey of empirical and theoretical literature, and more importantly an in-depth examination of current debates and issues of a topic that are addressed in the researcher’s own work.

Citations in an LR are selected not only because they have bearings on the researcher’s work. Many of them are chosen because they represent the scholarship of a field in which the work is situated and to which the work seeks extension (see, e.g., Geisler, 1994; Swales & Feak, 2000). This rhetorical purpose of LR becomes more apparent in gate-keeping exercises such as thesis examination, proposal vetting and paper reviewing, in which the researcher’s familiarity with the scholarship of the field is judged based on the citations provided in the LR. Often, an under- or mis-representation of its key and updated literature can risk the acceptance of the research (see, e.g., Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995; Myers, 1990; Peters, 1997). Seen in this light, the LR is where the writer’s disciplinary identity is manifested, and not uncommonly, deliberately constructed through a strategic inclusion of representative and relevant works by scholars in the field (e.g., Matsuda & Tardy, 2007; Myers, 1990). One implication of this understanding of an LR is that when carrying out RT, the researcher needs to know the field to which his/her work belongs and develops an awareness of its literature that can or needs to be cited eventually in the LR in the final thesis.

A key notion in this conceptualization of RT is that of field, a central theme that appears often in debates about higher education (see, e.g., Becher, 1989; Becher & Trowler, 2001). A field is often understood as a community of practitioners operating in a specific knowledge domain characterized by its paradigmatic devices constituted in general by its objects of studies, methodological approaches, and theoretical orientations. A field can also be defined by various social devices which encompass inter alia, professional societies, the journals read by its members, the conferences and seminars they attend, the formal and informal networks of communication, idols and heroes (Becher, 1989; Becher & Trowler, 2001; Kuhn, 1977). This understanding of field suggests that knowledge of what to read and what to cite amounts to knowledge of the specific devices that characterize the research community in which one’s research undertaking is situated.

The paradigmatic devices that characterize a research community may or may not be all time stable as alluded to in the literature of sociology of knowledge (see Becher & Trowler, 2001 for a review of the taxonomies). Kuhn (1977)

notes of three types of stability. The first type is found in communities in which a clear and stable core paradigm exists. The second type is primarily pre-paradigmatic and is characteristic of communities where a mature core is still developing. The third type refers to that observed in communities characterized by multi-, if not competing, paradigms. In communities of this last type, one can easily find different camps of scholars who identify themselves with a specific paradigm (e.g., the different theoretical camps of genre such as the New Rhetoric, the ESP and the SFL approaches, see, e.g., Hyon, 1996). Paradigmatic consensus, or lack of it, in a research community has implications for a neophyte’s choice of discipline -specific literature. While it may be relatively easy in a stable community, such is not the case in communities where consensus still has not been achieved.

What can also complicate the negotiation of discipline-specific literature for RT is the increasingly multidisciplinary nature of inquiries. Researchers now find the need to consult literature read not only by members of their home research communities but also that read by researchers in other relevant (secondary) communities that their research straddles. Thus, sociologists now need to turn to literature on discourse for their analyses in much the same way that applied linguists need to consult sociology literature for theoretical insights (Becher & Trowler, 2001).

# 2.2. Doctoral education as a form of intellectual apprenticeship

One point that comes out clearly from the above discussion is that reading for research writing can be a slippery task. To read and cite the ‘right’ references, a researcher needs to know the specific research community(ies) to which his/her work belongs (or straddles), the specific paradigm to follow in case where multi-paradigms exist, and whose works must be read and cited, or indeed whose works must not be cited. For a seasoned researcher, this knowledge develops over time in situ through participation in a research community and through interactions with its members (see, e.g., Gilbert & Mulkay, 1984; Myers, 1990). Yet for a newcomer, such as a doctoral student, this situated cognition could be developed through some other routes, such as guided participation which forms the second theoretical assumption that underpins the present study.

The study conceives doctoral education and in particular learning of postgraduate literacy practices as part of disciplinary socialization and more precisely a socio-cognitive apprenticing experience (see, e.g., Belcher, 1994; Blakeslee, 1997; Burgess, Pole, & Hockey, 1994; Dong, 1996; Gardner, 2007; Hill, Acker, & Black, 1994; Li, 2006; Pearson, 1996; Prior, 1998; and see in particular the edited volume by Casanave & Li, 2008). Literature in this regard has heavily drawn on situated learning theory (Lave & Wenger, 1991). One central tenet of the theory is that a newcomer to a community of practice develops community-specific knowledge and skills through participation in its various activities.

The notions of apprenticeship and participation have been taken further by theorist Rogoff (1995, 2003), 1 who sees that learning occurs on three related levels: community, interpersonal and intra-personal. In developing a conceptual and methodological heuristic to inform inquiries of situated learning, Rogoff thus proposes three corresponding planes of analyses: apprenticeship, guided participation and participatory appropriation.

When operating on the apprenticeship plane, the researcher examines the macro conditions which facilitate (or constrain) situated learning in a specific community. The conditions include i) the nature of specific activities in which a newcomer participates and through which community-specific knowledge and skills are developed, ii) the practices of the community, iii) the economic, political, material institutions of the community, and above these all iv) how the conditions are related to each other, e.g., how specific activities are connected to the practices of community and how the practices are in turn shaped by the various institutions of the community.

On the guided participation plane, the researcher is concerned with learning primarily at the interpersonal level, i.e., how a newcomer’s participation in various activities is enabled by guidance provided by other members of the community e hence guided participation. Guided participation occurs in different types of interactions with oldtimers, which are realized in different forms. They can be

tacit, explicit, face-to-face or distal, involved in shared endeavors with specific familiar people or distant unknown individuals.deliberate attempts to instruct and incidental comments or actions that are overheard or seen as well as involvement with particular materials and experiences that are available, which indicate the direction in which people are encouraged to go or discouraged from going. (p.147)

The plane of participatory appropriation targets at learning that occurs mainly at the intra-personal level. The analysts focuses on the changes an individual undergoes when involved in a preparatory, presumably guided, activity for subsequent participation in related activities and when an individual adapts community practices in ways that facilitate the operations of his/her own tasks.

Though presented as three different planes of analysis, as Rogoff stresses, they are not independent of each other nor are they hierarchical. An inquiry that starts on one plane may necessarily draw on the other two. In the present study, guided participation was chosen as the focal level of analysis. It examines the types of guided participation in RT as experienced by a group of doctoral students. In particular, it investigated how the students negotiated the choices of key disciplinary literature that has informed the theoretical and methodological frameworks of their studies as reflected in the LRs in their draft and final theses.

# 3. The study

The study involved interviews with sixteen Hong Kong-based Chinese doctoral students of social sciences and humanities whose topics of research include teacher education $( n = 6 )$ , applied linguistics $( n = 7 )$ ), intercultural communication $( n = 2 )$ ) and psychology $( n = 1 )$ ).

At the point of their interviews, the students had progressed in their studies to differing degrees, which could be roughly grouped into four stages. Students of Stage 1 $( n = 5 )$ ) had started their Ph.D. programs for no more than 2 years. All were in the process of preparing their Qualifying Reports $\left( \mathrm { Q R s } \right) ^ { 2 }$ to be assessed by a panel before proceeding further for their Ph.D. candidacy. They had barely started their research, which was mostly in some crude form of piloting. Students of Stage 2 $( n = 4 )$ ) were in their third or fourth year of study and engaged intensively in data collection or analysis. Students of Stage 3 were either completing or had submitted their theses. Post-stage 3 students had completed their studies for no more than a year.

A master interview guide3 was developed and was adapted for each of the informants according to the progress made in their studies and also the LR texts that some of them provided (see below for the description of the text-based interviews). The guide consisted of four sections. Section I contains general questions relating to the informant’s study (e.g., Can you briefly introduce your study, e.g., its aims, methodology, preliminary findings, etc.?). Part II raises openended questions to elicit responses that could be used to construct a chronology (see Clandinin & Connelly, 1998) of the informant’s RT experiences (e.g., When did you start reading for and writing the literature review? Describe some of the crucial events which you think have impacted the direction or selection of reading done in the past year/months of study.). Section III consists of items that prompted the informant to recount how specific readings were chosen, the contexts in which they were chosen, and the people involved when the decisions were made (e.g., Describe briefly the reading you have done. Name some of the major items you’ve read in terms their authors, themes, specific references. What made you choose these items? Was there anybody involved in the process of selecting the literature for reviewing? If there was, who was the person(s)?).

Text-based interviews were carried out with nine of the students. When approached to participate in the study, all the students were asked to supply LR texts produced at various crucial stages of their studies. Nine of them responded by providing qualifying reports (QRs) and draft/qualified theses that bore extensive reviews of the literature. One student even volunteered a set of notes that summarized the discussions and email exchanges with his supervisor. I analyzed these various artifacts, formulated extra informant-specific questions, and incorporated them into Section III of the corresponding interview guides for the nine students. The questions were used to prompt the students to describe of how the students had selected the cited sources and especially those relating to the theoretical and methodological frameworks of their studies. Four of the nine informants offered both their QRs and theses or different versions of their theses. I marked the major changes across the LRs in these texts and prepared questions to probe into the events that had implicated the changes. In the text-based interviews, I allowed the informants to briefly browse through their texts before asking them questions relating to the texts as listed on their guides. I also invited them to comment on specific parts of the texts which they wanted to discuss.

Each interview lasted at least an hour. Follow-up interviews were also conducted with three of the informants. Ten of the informants were interviewed in Cantonese and the other six in English. The interviews were transcribed into English texts, which were then coded and analyzed using the MAX QDA (2001) program. The stories related in the interviews were analyzed using a paradigmatic approach. (Bruner, 1985; Goodfellow, 1998a,b). That is, they were first studied for common themes, and the themes were then grouped and coded. Special attention was paid to the people involved in their reading experiences, the types of guidance they provided, and the events which implicated the guidance.

# 4. Findings and discussion

This section will present and discuss some of the representative RT stories told by the students. As the stories unveil, their RT was in part shaped by their mentors. The first part of the section will report and discuss anecdotes that shed light on the types of RT guidance provided by internal mentors such as supervisors and panel members. It will also report the events that had implicated the guidance. The second part relates stories of how three students came to develop their knowledge of the key literature through contacts with external mentors such as visiting scholars and associates of the supervisor.

# 4.1. Scaffolding from supervisors and panel members

# 4.1.1. Coaching in form of reading lists

As told by the majority of the informants $( n = 1 4$ ), thesis supervisors and occasionally panel members4 had been pivotal sources of input for some of the key references that they consulted. One common theme that ran through their recalls is the long lists of readings suggested by these mentors.

Jiawen5 (Stage 1): So, I began to read and uh my supervisor gave me a long list of reading and now I began to go . and then I began to retrieve books and articles that were cited on my reading list.

Mary (Stage 4): He [supervisor] sent me some [references] directly. they’re sources of studies done overseas which adopted different perspectives in their investigations. Or, he would send me some notes [with references included] he used in his classes whenever he felt that I hadn’t got enough sources.

Wenzhong recalled how he obtained his guidance from both his supervisor and one of his panel members. Wenzhong’s study was situated at an interdisciplinary nexus anchored primarily in the field of second language acquisition (SLA). His supervisor, an expert of SLA, was particularly helpful in suggesting sources relating to language learning. However, since Wenzhong’s inquiry involved the acquisition of speech act X, he needed to consult literature relating to X. His initial attempts at searching for sources on the speech act were met with frustration. Using the keyword search method to identify literature on X through the electronic databases of his university, Wenzhong was returned with ‘‘thousands of hits of sources that did not seem to be related to what [he] studied’’. Exasperated, Wenzhong eventually went to Ted for advice and was referred by Ted to James, an expert in the speech act and also a panel member of Wenzhong’s study. Wenzhong approached James first by email, and James responded by providing a bibliography that included a few items of his own.

# 4.1.2. Coaching of RT contingent upon issues arising in research

The RT guidance the students received from their supervisors and panel members involved more than mere lists of references. Students recounted in situ coaching directed at issues emerging in different stages of their research which inevitably implicated advice on new lines of reading. Four cases will be highlighted here for illustration.

4.1.2.1. Joshua’s story of reading of literature on triangulation. Explaining how the various themes of reading for his study had emerged, Stage 3 student Joshua related how he had grown aware of the need to triangulate the data collected in an earlier phase of his study, a theme discussed in some length in the methodology chapter of his thesis. The theme actually came as a result of his discussion with his supervisor Walter, who pointed out to Joshua the possible biases in his focus group interviews. As Joshua recalled:

I actually managed to do some focus groups with people from X [an ethnic minority residing in Hong Kong]. the reason why I did some focus groups with these people is because I’ve got the criticism from Walter. He said that you know all your focus groups have been done with are British you know white participants and local Chinese. You never consulted the real ethnic people who are being portrayed [in the texts that Joshua was analyzing]. So, I had looked into that [topic].

Because of the feedback from Walter, Joshua began to consult the literature and ‘‘looked at what’s really meant by triangulation.what sorts of people have been using triangulation, . what sorts of research have been done by using triangulation, and how [he] can appropriate that into [his own] research’’.

4.1.2.2. Jiawen’s story of reading of SLA conceptual and methodological issues. Stage 1 student Jiawen recollected the interactions he had with his supervisor in which they discussed various methodological and conceptual issues to which Jiawen needed to attend. Some of the interactions were evident in the notes Jiawen compiled from the email exchanges with Ted:

e-mail communication with Ted [date provided], 11:00

- Read Mason’s article concerning Chinese learners’ acquisition of the article.   
- Read Pienneman’s article concerning stages of development .   
- .Operationalization issues: a) Clear definition of the treatment; b) Observation of the classroom to ensure carrying out the treatment and objectives of the treatment or the research. . Learnability of the target form has to be considered, because there is evidence that structure may be a powerful moderating variable when assessing instructional effectiveness (Noris and Ortega, 2002:448; .)   
- .Conceptualize comparisons between the treatment group and the control group. (The structure-based approach emphasizes language form through either metalinguistic instruction (e.g., grammar translation) or pattern practice (e.g., audiolingual) (Lightbown and Spada, 1999:96)

As the quote shows, Jiawen’s acquisition of the disciplinary literature (e.g., acquisition of the article and developmental readiness; ‘‘learnability’’ and ‘‘structure’’; ‘‘treatment’’ and ‘‘control groups’’) was embedded in the coaching he received from the supervisor while the pair were attending to some of the conceptual and operational issues of his study.

4.1.2.3. Chloe’s story of reading of the socio-critical theory for data analysis. Stage 3 student Chloe told a revealing story of her own acquisition of the theoretical framework that had informed her research on strategies of vocabulary learning adopted by a group of Chinese learners. Initially registered as an MPhil student, Chloe submitted her thesis for examination towards the end of the third year of her study when the examination panel recommended that she proceed to pursue a Ph.D. degree by expanding her study. Taking the advice to convert her work into a doctoral piece, Chloe continued to collect data and develop the theoretical framework for the study.

Chloe provided the literature reviews (LRs) she had produced at several key stages of her study, including an earlier version she had written for her MPhil qualifying report (QR) and two drafts she had submitted to her supervisors and panel members for feedback during the final stage of her writing. I conducted a close examination of the content of the LRs and noticed significant differences between the LR in the QR and that in the thesis drafts. As reflected in the headings and also the citations in the QR, Chloe adopted a predominantly cognitive approach to her study in the MPhil stage, an approach that is commonly found in the mainstream literature on language learning strategies. The LR in the QR, which takes up one major part of the report, is devoted to the discussion of vocabulary learning strategies. Among the key names cited are Oxford, Chamot and O’Malley. The literature review in Chloe’s doctoral thesis, however, was far more extensive. Though the discussion of the cognitive approach is retained, it only takes up about one-third of the review. Added to it is an extensive discussion of socio-critical works by authors such as Apple, Norton, and Bourdieu, names that are less commonly cited in the literature on vocabulary acquisition.

I asked Chloe how she had come to learn about the authors. She recalled that when she was doing her M.Phil, she did not know much about the names. They were introduced to her by her supervisor when she was working on the data after her advancement to PhD candidacy. Her supervisor was a critical researcher, who was very prolific in language education research that also drew extensively on critical works and especially the those by Bourdieu. Chloe recalled that her supervisor had suggested that she add the socio-critical edge to her framework and had stressed that it was a powerful lens that could enable Chloe to account for the learning strategies that her participants employed, that is, by referring to their habitus and cultural capital.

4.1.2.4. Yixin’s story of reading of the discourse theory for data analysis. Yixin, who had completed his study, had also made critical changes to the theoretical framing of his thesis. Yixin’s shift was quite similar to Chloe’s except that his was more radical. Yixin worked with a topic that had to do with English teacher education located in the discipline of English Language Teaching (ELT) and, more specifically, problems associated with a particular teaching methodology that was being promoted in Mainland China. He held the strong conviction that the problems had been caused by inadequate leadership and teacher training, and hence had been reading literature relating to these two areas of work since he started to conceive the study. Yixin brought with him the inadequacy assumption to start his study in an interdisciplinary department, which housed experts from several related fields including Applied Linguistics, ELT, and Intercultural Communication. He attempted to search for a theoretical framework that could fit best this assumption and that could explain some of the data he had already collected prior to the start of his study at the university. However, Yixin gradually shifted in his orientation and eventually selected theories by influential scholars in the fields of situated learning and discourse.

Yixin’s supervisor Alan related a similar version of story and elaborated that Yixin’s reorientation was a result of Yixin’s frequent discussions with Gareth, a member of Yixin’s advisory panel, and his associate Faye, whose theoretical framework has been cited extensively in Yixin’s thesis:

Many comments on information gaps [in Yixin’s work] were made through many informal interactions between Yixin and these two authors. I also had read stuff written by the authors [Gareth and Faye] and so when he wrote his work I wouldn’t find it unfamiliar. But, the topic, and stuff were drawn from the authors.My feeling was that when Gareth had contacts with Yixin, he didn’t just do that as fulfilling his duty as a panel member.informally they had got to know each better. It was like friend-supervisor kind of role.

In a similar vein, Yixin noted the influence received from the two authors and explained that ‘‘the current framework [adopted in his thesis] is the discourse system of Gareth and Faye .This is a big framework, very powerful. But, since it’s big, [he needed] to read many books’’. Yixin recalled that many of the books were recommended by Gareth, among which were Foucault’s works and also Rosendall’s writings about the remaking of culture which are seldom cited in the literature on English language teacher education.

What has come out clearly from Chloe and Yixin’s stories of theoretical shifts is the negotiable nature of disciplinary paradigms and the creativity in their invocations allowed at least within the context of thesisundertaking. Chloe’s shift in her theoretical inclination from being predominantly psycholinguistic to being predominantly critical-sociolinguistic shows the existence of the two different paradigms or, more specifically, the existence of the two sub-communities in the field of $\mathrm { S L A } ^ { 6 }$ . Though the two paradigms tend to be separately followed in their own respective research communities, Chloe was encouraged to introduce some hybridization of the two in her own study. Yixin’s shift on the other hand was more of a cross-disciplinary negotiation, suggesting the blurred and porous boundaries of the ELT discipline and its neighboring fields of applied linguistics. Chloe’s and Yixin’s stories thus suggest that core paradigms and core literatures perhaps do not exist ‘cut-and-dried’.

# 4.2. Turning to external mentors

Not all the student informants were able to receive close coaching on reading from their supervisors or panel members. Stage 1 student Liza, for instance, lamented the little support her supervisor had provided. As she explained, the supervisor was ‘‘an extremely busy person, supervising a dozen of undergraduates on top of the many graduate supervisees she needed to take care of’’. Liza had been very much on her own in struggling with her reading, a plight seemingly aggravated by her part-time, distance-learning status. Liza communicated with the UK-based supervisor primarily through email. Being a schoolteacher herself also made it difficult for Liza to establish contacts with local academics working in the field. Some of the difficulties faced by Liza were also shared by some other informants such as Frank and Rebecca who, however, had managed to manoeuvre their situations by turning to external mentors for support.

# 4.2.1. Frank’s story of seeking help from an overseas theorist

Working with a supervisor who did not know much about his topic and could provide very little coaching in his RT, Post-stage 3 student Frank resorted to seeking help from an overseas theorist. He recounted how he identified some of the key references relating to one of the theoretical models that had informed his study, which takes up almost onethird of the discussion in his literature review in his qualified thesis. Frank recalled that he had come across the first few sources about the model through his library searches. However, his list of readings grew as a result of his communication with one of the theorists who had developed the model as he described the experience,

‘I wrote a letter to [one of] the guys that developed the model. He’s in the university of Q. I told the guy I’m interested in his model and I’m a Ph.D. student.and he gave me an updated list.’

4.2.2. Rebecca’s stories of recruiting resources from a visiting expert

Post-stage 3 Rebecca told a different story. With a supervisor who was a methodology expert knowing very little about her topic estress experienced by parents of adopted children, Rebecca needed to rely on her own as a practicing academic in the fields of psychology and sociology to identify some core literature on stress. This insider position, unfortunately, did not carry Rebecca very far for her reading as a large part of her study was situated within a sub-field of sociology of adopted parenthood. She considered herself to be lucky because she met a visiting scholar who had provided great help:

And it so happened that during the final stage [of her study], one expert from Canada was in Hong Kong for a year as a visiting scholar. Luckily, he’s a child welfare scholar. So as soon as he gave me the information, it dawned on me that I knew nothing coz there’s no one person who could advise me on this. I was like a pioneer [in Hong Kong]. And then this person gave me several lists . I started there. The more I read, the more I knew. And then luckily there were these sources. Otherwise I wouldn’t have known how to do my study. I had several personal talks with him a couple of times, which were very inspiring.

Among the key sources the Canadian scholar suggested was a model that formed a key part of Rebecca’s theoretical framework and was cited extensively in a major LR chapter in her thesis.

The narratives related in this section thus far raise two interesting points worth discussing further. The first has to do with the mismatch between students’ pursuits and their supervisors’ expertise, a situation becoming more common these days (see also Hill et al.,1994) and bringing with it a definite constraint on guided participation crucial to the students’ initiation into their fields of studies. Secondly, we can see different strategies of coping with the mismatches, ranging from having no effective tactics to circumventing the situation by proactively seeking help from external scholars through direct contacts or attending their seminars. Appealing as it is, seeking outside help may not be affordable for off-network students such as Liza, who studied part-time, held a full time practitioner job, and above these all, did the study through distance-learning.

# 4.2.3. Patricia’s networking through peripheral participation in supervisor’s work

RT stories told by starting student Patricia were the most distinct and apparently the most successful among all cases. Before entering the doctoral program, Patricia was a research assistant to her supervisor in one of his funded projects. Through this capacity, she had established contacts with many prominent scholars in her field and had developed a sound awareness of the expertise of these scholars and the work they had published. At the point of interview, Patricia had only started her Ph.D. program with yet a qualifying report to submit. However, she was already able to name whose works she needed to read and what works to cite in the report. In fact, she had met many of the authors in her supervisor’s project, which explained why she ‘‘felt very comfortable with contacting these people directly through email for advice’’. Patricia readily named Merrill Johnson to illustrate the experience:

I know Merrill Johnson in person. [She] has done a lot of work in the area I’m studying. She was one of the coinvestigators in Roger’s project. Yes, mainly because of this I’ve got to know her in person. When I was working on my proposal, I sent her an email. I told her I was working on X. Roger also told me that Merrill Johnson has done a lot of work on X. And I went to her directly and told her my case and asked her if she had any suggestions for reading.

While doing her study, Patricia also volunteered to assist her supervisor Roger in many ways that allowed her to learn about the key players and conversations in the field (Bazerman, 1988). For example, she offered to handle some of the correspondence for international conferences in which Roger played key roles. As she recalled, ‘‘I started to learn names of people in the field through communicating with these conference participants and got to know their work’’.

Patricia also sat in some of Roger’s classes to observe his teaching and learned from his lectures. It is not surprising to see that Patricia took Roger’s advice to pursue a topic developed partly from one of Roger’s former major research projects. The work relationship greatly facilitated her theoretical alignment with Roger’s and thus the start of her RT. It thus became very natural that Patricia read quite a number of Roger’s works, which included a widely cited volume. As she described, ‘I keep a copy of this book . It’s my Bible [laughs]’. Through peripheral participation (Lave & Wenger, 1991) in some major projects of her supervisor, Patricia was able to construe the field to which her thesis belonged and develop an awareness of its key players whose works could hence be considered for reading and citing in her literature review. In short, Patricia’s former peripheral participation had enabled her to develop an external network of mentors to whom she could turn for further coaching.

# 5. Conclusion

# 5.1. The contingent and social nature of RT

Using two theoretical lenses inspired by present work on literature reviewing as a situated literacy practice and work on situated learning, and, in particular, Rogoff’s (1995, 2003) notion of guided participation, I have examined how a group of doctoral students developed their insider’s knowledge of the key disciplinary literature. I investigated how the students acquired the theoretical and methodological works that had informed their studies and had been cited in the LR in their theses.

From some of the stories retold by the students, we can see that ‘key’ literature does not exist ‘cut-and-dried’. This situation is particularly evident in cases where the students’ studies were carried out at cross-disciplinary nexuses (as evident in Rebecca’s, Jiawen and Wenzhong’s stories) or in disciplines where multiple paradigms exist (as revealed in Chloe’s and Yixin’s vignettes). The complex disciplinary landscapes of the students’ studies had made selecting key literature to review a much challenging task. The task, however, was in many cases facilitated in various degrees with the guidance from mentors ranging from thesis supervisors, to panel members of the students’ studies, and, to a much less extent, to external mentors such as visiting scholars and supervisors’ collaborators. As also revealed in the stories, most guided participation in RT occurred in situ when methodological, theoretical and conceptual issues emerged at various stages of thesis-undertaking and when mentors came in to provide advice, which often resulted in new directions and new selections of reading.

What has come out clearly from the stories is that RT is never neat and tidy. The stories also show that directions of reading and choices of key references are in part socially mediated and that RT forms part of the socialization process through which students are initiated into the research communities to which their mentors and especially their supervisors belong.

# 5.2. Pedagogical implications

The contingent and social nature of RT as revealed in the stories contrasts somewhat with some of the beliefs which many beginning PhD students bring to their studies. Some may assume that there is a closed list of references that they need to exhaust before they can embark on their research and thesis-writing. Many who believe in the individualistic nature of a doctoral pursuit may also tend to underestimate the importance of obtaining guidance from experts. The guidance is important not only in facilitating their reference searches but also in socializing them into the research communities into which they are seeking entry. Unfortunately, these assumptions are apparently reinforced in thesis manuals (see, e.g., Hart, 1998, 2001; Lester & Lester, 2006) and preparatory courses where RT tends to be construed as an autonomous practice. Often attention is given to techniques of literature search (e.g., keyword/subject searches) via library catalogues and electronic databases categorized according to subject disciplines defined by the Library of Congress (e.g., Linguistics, Psychology, Communication). Instruction also tends to focus on the types of information to survey as part of the generic conventions of the LR while remaining mostly silent on various contingencies arising in a student’s research, as well as writing, that necessarily shapes the direction of reading. This is not to downplay the importance of independence that students need to develop and generic constraints set on RT. What is argued in this paper is that the partly social and partly contingent dimension of RT be given some attention in self-help guides and thesis preparatory programs.

Students can be guided to build their awareness of this nature of RT by studying stories such as those described in this paper and those reported elsewhere (see, e.g., Dong, 1996; Kwan, 2008; Tchigaeva, 2003). They can be guided to appreciate the importance of consulting experts of their research communities (e.g., supervisors, panel members and visiting scholars) for directions of reading especially in the initial and middle stages of their studies. They can also be guided to identify the successful types of participation (e.g., networking, attending conferences, assisting supervisors in their projects, etc.) as experienced by Frank, Rebecca and Patricia through which they can be acquainted with the literature consulted by members of their research communities. Alternatively, students can be encouraged to interview graduated students of their research communities for strategies to inform their own RT practices.

# Acknowledgements

The author would like to thank the editors, the two anonymous reviewers, John Swales and Vijay Bhatia for their constructive comments on some of the earlier versions of this paper. Any faults, however, remain my own responsibility.

# References

Allison, D., Cooley, L., Lewkowicz, J., & Nunan, D. (1998). Dissertation writing in action: the development of a dissertation writing program for ESL graduate research students. English for Specific Purposes, 17(2), 199e217.   
Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge: The genre and activity of the experimental article in science. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.   
Becher, T. (1989). Academic tribes and territories: Intellectual enquiry and the cultures of disciplines. Milton Keynes: The Society for Research into Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Becher, T., & Trowler, P. R. (2001). Academic tribes and territories: Intellectual enquiry and the cultures of disciplines (2nd ed.). Buckingham, UK: The Society for Research and Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Belcher, D. (1994). The apprenticeship approach to advanced academic literacy: graduate students and their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13(1), 23e34.   
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (1995). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication: Cognition, culture, power. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Bitchener, J., & Basturkmen, H. (2006). Perceptions of the difficulties of postgraduate L2 thesis students writing the discussion section. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 5(1), 4e18.   
Blak8eslee, A. M. (1997). Activity, context, interaction, and authority: learning to write scientific papers in situ. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 11(2), 125e169.   
Bruner, J. (1985). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.   
Bunton, D. (2002). Generic moves in Ph.D. thesis introductions. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 57e75). London: Pearson Education.   
Burgess, R. G., Pole, C. J., & Hockey, J. (1994). Strategies for managing and supervising the social science PhD. In R. G. Burgess (Ed.), Postgraduate education and training in the social sciences: Processes and products (pp. 13e33). London, UK: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.   
Casanave, C. P., & Li, X. (Eds.). (2008). Learning the literacy practices of graduate school: Insiders reflections on academic enculturation. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.   
Clandinin, D. J., & Connelly, F. M. (1998). Personal experience methods. In N. K. Denzin, & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Collecting and interpreting qualitative materials (pp. 150e178). Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications.   
Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications.   
Cooley, L., & Lewkowicz, J. (1995). The writing needs of graduate students’ at the University of Hong Kong: a project report. Hong Kong Papers in Linguistics and Language Teaching, 18, 121e123.   
Cooley, L., & Lewkowicz, J. (1997). Developing awareness of the rhetorical and linguistic conventions of writing a thesis in English: addressing the needs of EFL/ESL postgraduate students. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse (pp. 113e129). Berlin, Federal Republic Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Dong, Y. R. (1996). Learning how to use citations for knowledge transformation: non-native doctoral students’ dissertation. Research in the Teaching of English, 30(4), 428e457.   
Dong, Y. R. (1998). Non-Native graduate students’ thesis/dissertation writing in science: self-reports by students and their advisors from two U.S. institutions. English for Specific Purposes, 17(4), 369e390.   
Dudley-Evans, T. (1999). The dissertation: a case of neglect? In P. Thompson (Ed.), Issues in EAP writing research and instruction (pp. 28e36) CALS: Reading University.   
Ellis, R. (1994). The study of second language acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Gardner, S. (2007). ‘‘I heard it through the grapevine’’: doctoral student socialization in chemistry and history. Higher Education, 54, 723e740.   
Geisler, C. (1994). Academic literacy and the nature of expertise: Reading, writing, and knowing in academic philosophy. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Gilbert, G. N., & Mulkay, M. (1984). Opening Pandora’s box: A sociological analysis of scientists’ discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Goodfellow, J. (1998a). Analysing data in narrative inquiry research. In J. Higgs (Ed.), Writing qualitative research (pp. 105e120). Sydney: Hampden Press.   
Goodfellow, J. (1998b). Constructing a narrative. In J. Higgs (Ed.), Writing qualitative research (pp. 175e187). Sydney: Hampden Press.   
Hart, C. (1998). Doing a literature review: Releasing the social science research imagination. London: Sage.   
Hart, C. (2001). Doing a literature search: A comprehensive guide for the social sciences. London: Sage.   
Hill, T., Acker, S., & Black, E. (1994). Research students and their supervisors in education and psychology. In R. G. Burgess (Ed.), Postgraduate education and training in the social sciences: Processes and products (pp. 54e72). London, UK: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.   
Hocking, D. (2003). The genre of the postgraduate exegesis in art and design: an ethnographic examination. In L. Cooley, & J. Lewkowicz (Eds.), Thesis and dissertation writing at postgraduate level: Theory and practice. A Special Issue of Hong Kong Journal of Applied Linguistics. 8, 2, 54e77.   
Hyon, S. (1996). Genres in three traditions: implications for ESL. TESOL Quarterly, 30(4), 693e722.   
Kuhn, T. (1977). The essential tension: Selected studies in scientific tradition and change. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
Kwan, B. S. C. (2008). The nexus of reading, writing and researching in the doctoral undertaking of humanities and social sciences: implications for literature reviewing. English for Specific Purposes, 27(1), 42e56.   
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Lester, J. D., Sr., & Lester, J. D., Jr. (2006). Writing research papers in the social sciences. New York: Pearson/Longman.   
Li, Y. Y. (2006). A doctoral student of physics writing for publication: a sociopolitically-oriented case study. English for Specific Purposes, 25(4), 456e478.   
Matsuda, P. K., & Tardy, C. M. (2007). Voice in academic writing: the rhetorical construction of author identity in blind manuscript review. English for Specific Purposes, 26(2), 235e249.   
Max QDA. (2001). VERBI software. Berlin, Germany: Consult. Sozialforchung. GmbH.   
Meloy, E. (2002). Writing the qualitative dissertation: Understanding by doing (2nd ed.). Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Mitchell, R., & Myles, F. (2004). Second language learning theories. New York: Hodder Arnold.   
Myers, G. (1990). Writing biology: Texts in the social construction of scientific knowledge. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.   
Myers, G. (1991). Stories and styles in two molecular biology review articles. In C. Bazerman, & J. Paradis (Eds.), Textual dynamics of the professions (pp. 45e75). Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press.   
Paltridge, B. (2002). Thesis and dissertation writing: an examination of published advice and actual practice. English for Specific Purposes, 21(2), 125e143.   
Pearson, M. (1996). Professionalising Ph.D. education to enhance the quality of the student experience. Higher Education, 32(3), 303e320.   
Peters, R. L. (1997). Getting what you came for (revised edition). New York: Noonday.   
Prior, P. (1998). Writing/disciplinarity: A sociohistoric account of literate activity in the academy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Richards, R. T. (1988). Thesis/dissertation writing for EFL students: an ESP course Design. English for Specific Purposes, 7(3), 171e180.   
Ridley, D. (2008). The literature review: A step-by-step guide for students. London: Sage.   
Rogoff, B. (1995). Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: participatory appropriation, guided participation, and apprenticeship. In J. V. Wertsch, P. Rio, & A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studies of mind (pp. 139e164). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. New York: Oxford University Press.   
Rudestam, K. E., & Newton, R. R. (2001). Surviving your dissertation: A comprehensive guide to content and process (2nd ed.). Oaks, Calif.:Sage Publications: Thousand.   
Shaw, P. (1991). Science research students’ composing processes. English for Specific Purposes, 10, 189e206.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2000). English in today’s research world: A writing guide. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Tchigaeva, S. (2003). An activityetheoretical account of a postgraduate student’s reading. A paper presented at The First METU Postgraduate Conference in Linguistics and Language Teaching, METU-Turkey.   
Torrance, M. S., & Thomas, G. V. (1994). The development of writing skill sin doctoral research students. In R. G. Burgess (Ed.), Postgraduate education and training in the social sciences: Processes and products (pp. 105e123). London, UK: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.   
Torrance, M. S., Thomas, G. V., & Robinson, E. J. (1993). Training in thesis writing: an evaluation of three conceptual orientations. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 63, 170e184.   
Turner, J. (2003). Writing a PhD in the contemporary humanities. In L. Cooley, & J. Lewkowicz (Eds.), Thesis and dissertation writing at postgraduate level: Theory and practice. A Special Issue of Hong Kong Journal of Applied Linguistics. 8, 2, 34e53.