JEAP Special Issue - Introduction

Practitioner voices, scholarship and practice-led research in the evolution of EAP: celebrating the 50th anniversary of the formation of SELMOUs/BALEAP and the 20th anniversary of JEAP.

The field of English for Academic Purposes has evolved considerably since the first meeting in 1972 of teachers from the uni. versities of Birmingham, Leeds, Manchester, and Newcastle in the UK, who were involved in remedial support in English for overseas students (Jordan, 2002). The group, which came to be known as SELMOUs (Special English Language Materials for Overseas University Students), had a practitioner focus from the start with membership \*restricted to individuals or departments of British uni. versities dircty nolved in the teching of Englishfor Specil Puroses to overs students Jordan, 2002, p.71, r italics. The term English for Academic Purposes (EAP) was irt coined in the UK by Tim Johns in 1974 (Jordan, 2002) and SELMOUS changed its name to the British Association of Lecturers in English for Academic Purposes (BALEAP) in 1989. The association was registered as a company with charitable status in July 2010, adopting the acronym, BALEAP, as a name with the aspirational strapline The global forum for EAP professionals.

Also in the 1970s in places such as Chile, Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Kuwait as well as the USA, students were being prepared for technology transfer in the oil industry through courses and textbooks in English for Science and Technology (Swales, 2020). Swales notes that practitioners in the field operated largely in isolation with lttle knowledge of what was happening in other contexts. There was a felt need for practitioner collaboration, which resulted in a variety of ESP/EST newsleter and ultimatel the journal nglish for Specific Puose (ESPJ), whose first isue appeared in 1980 (Swales, 2020). SPJ grew from just two issues each year to over 500pages in 4 isue in 2001, with a special supplementary ssue dedicated to EAP (Hyland & Hamp-Lyons, 2002) Liz Hamp-Lyons, as co-editor of ESPJ from 1994 to 1998 and with"acaree as apracticing EAP teacher as well s test developer, researcher, and testing programme administrator" (Hamp-Lyons, 2015, p.A1), responded to the pressure of submssions to ESPJ by proposing a new Jounal of English for Academic Purposes (JEAP), whose frst ssue appeared in 2002 with Ken Hyland as co-editor. This specialissue celebrates the 50th anniversary of the formation of SELMOUs/BALEAP and the 20th anniversary of JEAP and notes with sadness the passing of Liz Hamp-Lyons in March 2022.

In her final editorial on stepping down as editor of JEAP, Hamp-Lyons reflected on what had changed over the preceding 15 years (2015). She noted the impact of the advances in corpus linguisics and the proliferation of . corpus analys software" (p.2) and it is not surprising that two papers in this ssue use corpus analysis, though not, as she had remarked on, in deepening understandings of disciplinary and genre variation but in exploring historical activity in the BALEAP community. Charles draws on a corpus of BALEAP conference proceedings and accounts of Professional Isues Meetings over the period 1975-2019 to examine the most frequentlyresearched topics and how these varied over the 45 years. She identifie trends in research and gaps to be addressed and argues that the current wide diverst f research topics should be maintained. This paper complements the bibliometric study by Hyland and Jiang, published in an earlier isue of JEAP (2021). Ding, Bond, and Bruce draw on a selective corpus of posts to the BALAP JISCM@il discussion list from 1998 to 2021 in order to explore practitioner identity and agency within BALEAP, especially around the time (2010) that the organisation changed its name from the British Asociation of Lecturers of English for Academic Purposes to BALEAP, and adopted thestrapline the global forum for EAP professionals'. The interests and concerns of practitioners have always been at the heart of the BALEAP community, as this exploration of the inward aspects of the BALEAP culture makes clear.

Hamp-Lyons continued her reflection, restating the view she and Hyland had expressed in the first JEAP issue (2002) that the "concept of EAP is only possible as part of a concept of community" (2015, p.A2) centering on the leaners and their preset and future contexts. This emphasis on community and context is integral to the BALEAP Competency Framework for Teachers of EAP which is considered in two papers on the professional development of teachers. Kirk and King revisit their highly successful scheme for EAP teacher observation and development, which was closely informed by the BALEAP Competency Framework for Teachers of EAP (CFTEAP) published in 2008. They r-examine the principles underpinning their scheme and asses it enduring value through the lens of epistemic relations from Legitimation Code Theory. Their analysis provides a theoretical underpinning to their claim that teachers and the wider EAP community would be beter served by conversations that orient to academic discourses and practices, and how these shape teaching that meet EAP student needs. Aksit and Aksit describe the implementation of an EAP teacher development scheme in an English-Medium Higher Education context in Turkey. The scheme was informed by the BALEAP CFTEAP in its 2008 format to explore the meaning of competency within the target context in terms of core, function-specific, and technical areas of competency. The paper highlights the need to consider competency at diffrent levels of expertise, from those new to teaching EAP to more experienced teachers and those with responsibilities beyond the classroom.

Teacher development is also central to two other papers with a slight shift of focus to addressthe needs of EAP practitioners for professional development and scholarship Fitpatrick, Costley and Tavakoli select from a larger global survey of EAP practitioners to report the views of those based in the UK (the largest group in the study) on the professional development opportunities available to them and the extent to which these reflect their views on what they should be engaging in. The paper highlights the diversity of routes into teaching EAP by professionals with a range of high level academic and teaching qualifications and a strong commitment to professional development. Webster reports a case study of a practical intervention to promote EAP practitioner scholarship through the introduction of a workload alocation model in a Higher Education context. The paper explores the motivations, challenges and professional identity implications of scholarship writing for EAP practitioners in this context. The findings sugest that the institutional workload initiative facilitated a cultural shft, in which scholarship writing became more normalised and academic identities of EAP practitioners were strengthened.

Hamp-Lyons 2015 editorial marking the end of her influential role as editor of JEAP also introduced the Researching EAP Practice. initiative, a new genre of paper complementing "traditional fll-length rearch articles" (2015, p.A3). This reconised that most EAP teachers have ittle oportunity to engage in funded research and, as practitioners, would share Hamp-Lyons own interest in \*articles that have practical implications or that arise from practical problems faced by EAP teachers, programmes, and programme managers' (2015, p.A3). One specific strand of inquiry in our field, that of Exploratory Practice (EP), sems to align well with this view of the interests and constraints of the EAP practitioner, though papers ased on EP are as yet rarely found in JEAP. This is partilly rectified by two papers in the special issue, one representing the established research article genre and the other a Researching EAP Practice paper. In the irt, Hanks recognises that traditional approaches to conducting research may be les suited to EAP teachers than a form of practitioner research such as EP. P takes as its focus an aspect of pedagogic interest to the researcher and Hanks illstrates this by means of published studies and vignettes arguing that this type of research provides a means tosustainable investigations which do genuinely contribute to the field. She also highlights the importance of BALEAP's work \*in providing spaces for EAP practitioners to engage in critical discussions and to share their work (2022, p.9). In the Researching EAP Practice paper, Consoli demonstrates the "affordances which EP may offer to both EAP teachers and learners (p.1) and the research is located firmly in a practical classroom teaching context. The paper describes the classroom-based inquiries, with their challenges and benefit, concluding that EP has the potential not only to enhance practice but to motivate students and teachers alike.

While Consoli's paper takes as its context a UK-based pre-sessional course and the activities that go with this (what might be considered a very typical and traditional context for EAP teaching), Weekly, Pollard and Macpherson explore an aspect of EAP teaching in a context familiar to many more EAP teachers who work in English Medium Instruction (EMI) setigs across the world, in ths case, in China. The focus of their research is oral corrective feedback, an area of continuing interest as perspectives on appropriate norms continue to be debated. The authors' research explored student and teacher perceptions of the place of corrction and accuracy and they highlight the need to reorientate corrective fedback towards meaning-focused correction rather than form-focused correction.

The final two papers of the special ssue represent a key area in EAP and one where again Liz Hamp-Lyons had substantial interest and influence - testing and asssment. Despite significant advance in developing inovative assessment forms in Higher Education and a focus on assessment for' rather than 'of learning, EAP teachers are often in the position of administering and marking traditionally created writen exams and coursework and, almost equally often, are in the position of gatekeepers to entry onto other programmes. Oonnell describes the process of deloping a Logic Model as part of a processto provide more efective rater training for teachers, making explicit the underlying rationale and creating a stronger connection betwen the two communities of EAP teaching and language testing and assessment. Westbrook presents a study of an integrated EAP listening-into-writing task, where lecture input is presented as audio only in one half and video in the other half of the input to investigate test-taker performance and preferences and the implications these have for EAP teaching.

The 11 papers in this special isue represent some of the many practitioner voices in what continues to be a very small academic field" ut one with a wide "diversity of . interests" (Hamp-Lyons, 2015, p.A3). Sill largely missing is a representationof growing \*socio-political awarenessin relation to the role of English, a gap that Hamp-Lyons noted as significant in her 2015 editorial, but the activity of the recently formed BALEAP Social Justice Special Interest Group may indicate the likelihood of future papers in this area. The papers do, however, reflect a continued commitment to scholarship and practitioner research with the application of a range of approaches, from the more traditional, to corpus analysis, to Legitimation Code Theory, and Exploratory Practice. They present a snapshot of current activity at a point where we can celebrate the respective 50th and 20th anniversaries of BALEAP and JEAP and recognise the huge contribution that Liz Hamp-Lyons made to our field. They may also be a prompt to reflect on future directions and an encouragement to EAP teacher-researchers wherever they practise to both engage in and publish their research.

Our thanks go primarily to the authors of these papers, but also to the editors of JEAP (and especially to Hilary Nesi for all her support and guidance, the JEAP central team (particularly Dipudas Dasan who was always thereto help with technical isues) and to the many reviewers who gave generously of their time to help us process the papers for this special issue.

# References

Hamp-Lyons, L. (2015). Editorial. The future of JEAP and EAP. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 20, A1-A4.   
Hyland, i 2021)ric  A  i  w of is   9  1092.   
Hyland, K., & Hamp-Lyons, L. (2002). EAP: Isues and directions. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1, 1-12.   
Jordan, R. R. (2002). The growth of EAP in Britain. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1, 69-78. 60, 4-8.