# Claiming centrality as promotion in applied linguistics research article introductions

Weihong Wang a, b , Chengsong Yang c, d, \* a School of Foreign Languages, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China b Faculty of Education, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China c School of International Studies, Xi'an Jiaotong University, China d Faculty of Education, The University of Auckland, New Zealand

# a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history:   
Received 26 October 2014   
Received in revised form 17 April 2015   
Accepted 4 May 2015   
Available online xxx   
Keywords:   
Claiming centrality   
Promotion   
Research article introductions   
Appeals   
Linguistic devices

# a b s t r a c t

This study explores how promotion is realized in applied linguistics (AL) research article introductions (RAIs). We focus on one promotional strategy, claiming centrality, and examine what appeals and linguistic devices applied linguists (ALs) employ and how they deploy them in RAIs to achieve positive evaluation of the significance of the topic or the research area. Fifty-one RAIs from three top-tier journals in AL were selected for a corpusbased study. Qualitative analyses of the texts revealed four major types of appeals, that is, appeals to salience, magnitude, topicality, and problematicity of the topic in either the research world or the real world, which ALs made in varied ways. Linguistic devices realizing these appeals were also analyzed with the tool of appraisal. Quantitative analyses further unveiled ALs' frequent use of appeals, their reliance on indirect over direct approaches to promotion, and their preferred patterns in appeal deployment. The pervasion of promotional elements is interpreted as indicative of academic marketization and as discipline-specific, and the indirect way of promotion is viewed as indicating a compromise between the need for promotion and the need to maintain objectivity.

$^ ©$ 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Academic discourse has been unexceptionally infused with promotionalism in a “market society” (Mautner, 2010) permeated by what Wernick (1991) defined as a “promotional culture”. Research articles (RAs), especially, have been written with much “boosterism” (Swales, 2004) as if they were products packaged for sale (e.g., Bhatia, 1993; Fairclough, 1995; Law & Williams, 1982). Given the extent of academic promotion, Berkenkotter and Huckin (1995) even remarked, “It is not so much the amount of news value that is remarkable in today's scientific journal arguments as it is the promoting of it” (p. 43).

Further knowledge on the realization of promotion in RAs can be derived from studies that have identified or analyzed some of the strategies/moves/steps and linguistic devices that serve or may serve this purpose (e.g., Afros & Schryer, 2009; Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995; Cortes, 2013; Dahl, 2008, 2009; Haggan, 2004; Harwood, 2005; Hood, 2010; Hyland, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2005a, 2005b; Hyland & Tse, 2005; Law & Williams, 1982; Lim, 2012; Lindeberg, 2004; Martín & Leon P  erez,  2014; Shaw, 2003; Swales, 1981, 1990, 2004; Thompson & Ye, 1991; see also Hunston & Thompson, 2000). These studies differ in their coverage of disciplines and/or features that are or may be promotional, and the extent of their interest in promotion, but as a whole demonstrate that promotional elements may have pervaded academic discourse when it is examined carefully. Just as Hyland (1999) has summarized, successfully published researchers seldom stop at displaying factual information of their research, but skillfully manipulate “various rhetorical and interactive features” to promote their work (p. 341).

The primary concerns of a number of these studies, however, are not specific investigations of the realization of promotion, despite the frameworks, lenses, instruments, or observations they have provided or utilized, for example, the rhetoric structures proposed by Swales, Hyland's metadiscourse theories, and the appraisal and evaluation systems (e.g., Martin & Rose, 2007; Martin & White, 2005; Thetela, 1997). Some of them are bound to certain aspects of linguistic features carrying promotional tenor (e.g., first-person pronouns, Harwood, 2005; reporting verbs, Thompson & Ye, 1991). Some are case studies observing how maximal attractiveness of papers was sought during composing processes (e.g., Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995; Law & Williams, 1982). Others bear relevance for exploring the realization of move-based persuasion (e.g., Lim, 2012) or a step-based function (e.g., making new knowledge claims, Dahl, 2009). Only a limited few, to our knowledge, are corpus-based, cross-disciplinary studies focusing on how promotion is realized strategically and linguistically in RAs (i.e., Afros & Schryer, 2009; Lindeberg, 2004; Martín & Leon P erez, 2014; Shaw, 2003 ). Martín and Leon P erez recently de fine what they term “persuasive promotional rhetoric as being realized by means of those linguistic choices that seek to change or affect the opinions or behaviors of an audience in terms of positively assessing the research contribution” (p. 1). However, none of these latter studies have examined how linguistic choices can bring about the promotional change or effect by revealing the attitudes encoded in these choices based on the appraisal and evaluation framework.

An analysis of linguistically encoded attitudinal tones in promotion research may hopefully help address the question of how the seemingly pervasive practice of promotion is fitted into RAs, whose socially recognized purpose is reporting research objectively (e.g., Barrass, 2002; Hamp-Lyons & Heasley, 1987; Zobel, 2004). Overt promotion, which is expected and acknowledged in advertisements, may not be acceptable in the academic world. While RAs typically cannot be “dramatically self-justificatory” (Swales, 2004, p. 237), there may be a “hidden agenda”, as Bhatia put it (2004, p. 73), which handles promotional intentions. Studies on promotion, therefore, should not miss the opportunity to differentiate the subtle ways academic promotion is realized by scrutinizing the shades of attitudes expressed in RAs to elicit positive response.

# 2. Literature review

Research article introductions (RAIs) have been recognized as one of the vital sites where persuasive/promotional acts are likely to accumulate (Afros & Schryer, 2009; Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995; Bhatia, 2004; Law & Williams, 1982; Lindeberg, 2004; Myers, 1990; Swales, 1981, 1990, 2004). As to how promotion is realized in such a section, Swales (2004) suggested that his three-move (Move 1 Establishing a territory, Move 2 Establishing a niche, and Move 3 Occupying the niche) or Create a Research Space (CARS) model (Swales, 1990, 2004; see also Swales, 1981) represents a very promotional rhetorical structure in constructing RAIs, where “originality (especially in theory) tends to be highly prized, competition tends to be fierce, and academic promotionalism and boosterism are strong” (p. 226). Later studies on promotion in RAIs basically support such a claim (e.g., Afros & Schryer, 2009; Lindeberg, 2004). For example, Lindeberg (2004) showed that in Move 1, the research topic is promoted by strengthening its significance (Claims of centrality); in Move 2, the research gap is promoted by presenting previous research as deficient so as to open space for further research (Statements of knowledge gaps), and in Move 3, the current study is promoted for possible research contributions (Boosts of writers' own contributions).

The scarcity of investigation on the realization of claiming centrality (Move 1 Step 1, Swales, 1990) as a promotional strategy is noticeable in the literature. In studies which aimed to account for the generic structures of RAIs across disciplines (e.g., Anthony, 1999; Chang & Schleppegrell, 2011; Dahl, 2008, 2009; Del Saz-Rubio, 2011; Fakhri, 2004; Kanoksilapatham, 2005; Lim, 2008, 2012; Loi, 2010; Ozturk, 2007; Samraj, 2002, 2005; Shehzad, 2008, 2010; Sheldon, 2011; Swales & Najjar, 1987), there is indeed occasional mentioning that certain moves or steps in RAIs carry promotional intentions. Of these mentions, however, quite a number concern Move 3 in Swales's model, for instance, announcing the research purpose (Swales & Najjar, 1987, p. 188), positive evaluation of the research (Anthony, 1999), or previewing research findings in introductions (e.g., Dahl, 2008, 2009; Kanoksilapatham, 2005; Shehzad, 2010), whereas few are made about Move 1. Where there are longer discussions on move/step-specific promotion/persuasion or promotion/persuasion strategies, Move 2 and Move 3 have been elaborated exclusively (i.e., Lim, 2012; Martín & Leon P  erez,  2014; Shehzad, 2008, 2010), but Move 1 has been insufficiently, though insightfully, studied (e.g., Lindeberg, 2004; Shaw, 2003; Swales, 1990).

In fact, claiming centrality is the only step mentioned by Swales (1990) that carries an overt promotional flavor. Swales took centrality claims as “appeals” which intend to persuade readers that the research topic or research area is “lively, significant or well-established” (p. 144). To claim centrality, Swales suggested appeals possibly be made to “interest”, “importance” or “the central character” of a certain issue or topic (p. 144). Although he exemplified the realization of centrality claims, he did point out that the actual practices are related to a series of factors like “the disciplinary area itself”, “the particular journals” and “the nature of the research”, and that the “[p]ossible rationales for utilizing or avoiding a centrality claim remain an unexplored but interesting research area” (p. 144). Lindeberg (2004) took claiming centrality as a direct promotional strategy. Following Swales's concept of appeals, she identified six types of appeals economists often made to realize centrality claiming, namely, appeals to authority, economy, practitioner, research, scope, and topicality. More recently, Sheldon (2011) argued that “Move 1 inSwales's (2004) model is too broad, and that further analysis of the data is needed to learn how writers persuade their readers to accept their claims” (p. 242). His suggestion echoed Swales's (1990) call for indepth studies on Move 1.

Given the insufficiency of specific studies on the realization of promotion in RAs, especially the lack of insights gained from the appraisal and evaluation perspective, and in light of the need for further inquiries into claiming centrality as a promotional strategy, we design a corpus-based study to find out how claiming centrality is realized in RAIs in one discipline, applied linguistics. AL is selected because promotion in RAIs may be highly discipline-specific (Dahl, 2008; Kanoksilapatham, 2005; Swales & Najjar, 1987) and research findings in other disciplines may not be readily transferable because of its “emerging” (Dahl, 2008), “interdisciplinary” (Grabe, 1995, p. vii) and “applied” (Shaw, 2003) nature, and because the discipline is relatively under-researched in terms of promotion (e.g., Hyland, 1999, 2000). Borrowing the term “appeal” (Swales, 1990, p. 144), we aim to answer the following three research questions:

1) What types of appeals do ALs usually make in RAIs to promote topic significance?   
2) How are these types of appeals realized linguistically in terms of the attitudes conveyed?   
3) How frequently do ALs make appeals and what are their preferred patterns of appeal making?

# 3. Methodology

# 3.1. Compilation of the corpus

Three journals, TESOL Quarterly (TESOL), Modern Language Journal (MLJ), and Applied Linguistics (AL) were selected based on their impact factors and rankings (1.0, 1.181, and 1.833 respectively, ranking the 41st, 32nd, and 11th out of the 169 journals in linguistics, according to ISI Journal Citation Reports © Ranking: 2013), after we took from two expert informants advice on journal representativeness, prestige, and stability in style, and considering their coverage of general issues in language teaching and learning, which would exclude sub-disciplinary differences arising out of a narrow focus (e.g., Ozturk, 2007).

Fifty-eight RAs were first shortlisted from 12 issues of the three journals published between 2011 and 2012. They all presented empirical studies with the classical macrostructure of Introduction-Method-Results-Discussion (IMRD). Articles in special issues, theoretical articles, reviews, forum articles, or short reports were excluded. After further sifting, 51 articles were retained for final analyses because they contained separate introduction and literature review sections, given the recommendation that these two sections be preferably treated separately in social sciences for their different functions (e.g., Holmes, 1997; Ozturk, 2007). Among the 51 articles, 18 were from TESOL, 16 from AL, and 17 from MLJ (see Appendix 1 for a list of these articles and their serial numbers). Table 1 provides an overview of our corpus that comprises the introductions of the 51 RAIs.

# 3.2. Data analysis

Both qualitative and quantitative analyses were undertaken. The qualitative analysis, based on genre analysis (Swales, 1990, 2004) and appraisal (Martin & Rose, 2007; Martin & White, 2005; Hood, 2010), aimed to identify and examine the types of appeals made and their corresponding linguistic realizations. For this purpose, text segments describing the research topic or area were first highlighted. In the process, we took Swales's CARS model as our starting point and paid particular attention to the initial part of each RA introduction. Our search also expanded to the whole introductory section, because seven RAIs started with Move 3, and because there was frequent recycling of moves in some introductions, particularly the longer ones. It is worth noting that claiming centrality as a promotional strategy may run through Move 1, especially considering Swales's (2004) reduction of Move 1 to just one step (i.e., topic generalizations of increasing specificity). It might also be incorporated within Move 2, when, for example, a problem in the general research area is pinpointed to foreground the significance of the chosen research topic.

The text segments were then read repeatedly to categorize appeals made in promoting topic significance. Drawing on Thetela's (1997) concepts of evaluated entities and ascribed values in interpreting evaluation, decisions on the types of appeals were made by identifying in each text segment 1) the types of values or meaning potentials foregrounded, and 2) the types of entities to which values were ascribed (i.e., entities in the research world such as the research or the researcher; entities in the real world such as particular phenomena or particular populations affected by the phenomena). Similar values or meanings were grouped together. For example, values such as prevalence, duration, or depth assigned to previous research in different forms of linguistic expressions such as numerous studies, investigated from a variety of aspects, have been widely documented, since the 1980s, and for several decades were viewed as the same category of meanings, all making appeals to magnitude in the research world.

In identifying linguistic resources that contained appeals, we drew on the appraisal framework proposed by Martin and Rose (2007) and Martin and White (2005), in particular, its application in academic discourse by Hood (2010). Based on this framework, evaluation or the expression of values can be achieved from three broad semantic dimensions in texts, namely, attitude (i.e., the types of feelings we express about things or people), graduation (i.e., the degree of strength in expressing these attitudes), and engagement (i.e., the intersubjective position someone takes up in relation to the ideas of others). Hood (2010) has enriched our understanding of the phenomena of attitude and graduation. To her, RAs are, instead of being absolutely objective, replete with resources encoding inscribed attitudes or invoked attitudes. Inscribed attitudes refer to attitudes expressed directly or explicitly in linguistic resources that carry intrinsic positive or negative values (e.g., concerned), and can be turned up or down by degree (e.g., from concerned to extremely concerned or to somewhat concerned). Invoked attitudes are attitudes conveyed by grading non-attitudinal or experiential meanings in force or focus. For example, the force of an experiential meaning can be graded in amount (e.g., a large number of participants), in scope (e.g., has a pervasive influence), in proximity in time (e.g., in recent literature), or in frequency (e.g., frequently found). The focus of an experiential meaning can also be sharpened (e.g., real research) or softened (e.g., tried to show) around categorical meanings. Through graduation of experiential meanings, writers encode a subjective slant in the discourse. In line with appraisal, linguistic resources that can generate inscribed or invoked attitudes and direct readers to a positive evaluation of the significance of the research topic were taken as promotional elements realizing appeals.

Table 1 Corpus profile.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Journal</td><td>No. of articles</td><td>Words in RAIs</td><td>Mean lengths of RAIS</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL</td><td>18</td><td>10009</td><td>556.1</td></tr><tr><td>AL</td><td>16</td><td>6105</td><td>381.6</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ</td><td>17</td><td>8307</td><td>488.6</td></tr><tr><td>TOTAL</td><td>51</td><td>24421</td><td>478.8</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>MLJ TOTAL</td><td>17 8307 51 24421</td><td>488.6 478.8</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">(1) The goal of this study is to investigate the importance of target language morphological awareness in reading comprehension among English-as-a-foreign-language (EFL) learners. (2) A number of recent first-language (L1; mostly English monolingual) studies have documented a strong link between morphological awareness and reading</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">abilities. (3) Skilled readers are more sensitive to the morphemic structure of aword than their les skilled counterparts (e.g., Fowler &amp; Liberman, 1995; Stoltz &amp; Feldman, 1995). (4) Morphological awareness has also been</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">found to make a significant contribution to passage-level reading comprehension over and beyond key reading- related variables such as phonology and vocabulary (e.g., Carisle, 1995, 2000; Deacon &amp; Kirby, 2004; Katz, 2004;</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Mahony, 1994; Nagy, Berninger, &amp; Abbott, 2006; Nagy, Berninger, Abbott, Vaughan, &amp; Vermeulen, 2003; Singson, Mahony, &amp; Mann, 2000). (5) Considering that morphology plays an important role in L1 reading comprehension and that it is a readily teachable resource that, unfortunately, is not always exploited by novice readers (Koda, 2005), it</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">is important to examine the contribution that target language morphological awareness makes to second language (L2) reading comprehension. (6) Current research on L2 morphological awareness and its relationship with passage. level L2 reading comprehension is, however, limited. (7) In fact, Droop and Verhoeven (2003) and Wang, Cheng, and</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Chen (2006) may be the only published L2 studies that have assessed the importance of morphology-related variables to passage-level reading comprehension relative to other variables (e.g., vocabulary knowledge, phonological awareness). (8) The more popular research topic in L2 morphology has been the crosslinguistic transfer of morphological awareness on word-level reading (e.g., Bindman, 2004; Deacon, Wade-Woolley, &amp; Kirby, 2007;</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Saiegh-Haddad &amp; Geva, 2008). (9) Although word-level reading ability often highly correlates with passage-level reading comprehension, the two are clearly distinct constructs because the latter entails many more cognitive processes (e.g. syntactic parsing, inference, proposition formation). (10) If the ultimate goal of L2 reading instruction is to help students achieve eficient passage-level reading comprehension, it is necessary that relevant L2 research also include passage-level reading comprehension as its dependent variable. (11) The present study addresses this</td></tr></table></body></html>

Coding sample source: MLJ3 Jeon (2011). Codes: I: Reference to the research world; II: Reference to the real world; a: Appeal to salience; b: Appeal to magnitude; c: Appeal to topicality; d: Appeal to problematicity.

When the types of appeals were identified in the qualitative analysis, a coding scheme was built up and all RAIs were coded accordingly for the quantitative analysis. While in a sentence each appearance of one type of appeal was counted as one promotional act, each type of appeal was counted only once when more than one linguistic device contributed to the same appeal. However, when a same appeal related to both entities in the research world and entities in the real world, it would be counted twice, differentially. To increase the reliability of coding, 12 RAIs were first randomly selected from the corpus and coded separately by the two authors. A crosscheck of the inter-coding showed an agreement in $8 3 . 3 \%$ of all cases, with all discrepancies resolved after further discussion. After this trial work, the first author went on to code all the data individually. One and a half months later, she coded all the data again, and a comparison of the two rounds of coding showed a high agreement in $9 2 . 5 \%$ of all cases.

The following is a sample, which shows how appeals and linguistic devices were identified and coded. In this sample and all other examples that follow, the linguistic devices expressing inscribed attitudes are marked in bold type; those generating invoked attitudes are both bold and italicized; the entities evaluated are underlined, and where applicable, additional devices that contribute to decision on the category of entities are both underlined and italicized.

The topic of this study is the relationship of morphological awareness with passage-level L2 reading comprehension, as is explicit in (1), (6), and (11). In (2), the topic is promoted indirectly first by indicating the existence or prevalence of the L1 research (coded as an appeal to magnitude in the research world, with a number of … documented grading studies to generate an invoked attitude) and then by showing the novelty of this line of research (coded as an appeal to topicality in the research world, with recent also grading studies to produce an invoked attitude). It is then more directly promoted by emphasizing the importance of the focal construct of investigation (i.e., morphological awareness) in the real world (i.e., reading abilities) as a salient finding in previous comparable research (coded as an appeal to salience, the use of strong link carrying an inscribed attitude towards topic significance). In (4), the importance of the construct is reiterated directly with an attitudinal expression carrying inscribed attitude again (make a significant contribution … over and beyond key reading-related variables, where the adjective and the prepositional phrase grade up the value of importance for passage-level reading comprehension, coded as an appeal to salience in the real world). In (5), the importance of the generic construct (morphology) is emphasized directly, where adjectival expressions (in plays an important role and is a readily teachable resource) grade up the inscribed value of importance and usefulness (coded as an appeal to salience in the real world). This aspect of learning is more worthy of exploration for the indirect reason that its importance has been unattended (unfortunately, is not always exploited by novice readers, coded as an appeal to problematicity in the real world, realized by unfortunately indicating an inscribed negative attitude and not always grading is exploited to generate an invoked negative attitude). The importance of the research topic is then explicitly stated finally (important, carrying an inscribed attitude, coded as an appeal to salience in the research world).

(6), (7), (8), (9), and (10) complete Move 2 Step 1, the more specific step of indicating a gap in previous L2 research on the topic of this study (11) achieves Move 2 Step 2, presenting positive justification, while (12) corresponds to Move 3 presenting the present work (Swales, 2004). (8) was taken as also contributing to justification of the research area because it indicates potentially a problem in the broad research area of L2 morphology research, namely, the more popular concern over wordlevel comprehension (coded as an appeal to problematicity in the research world, realized indirectly by emphasizing the prevalence of other research through the invoked attitude conveyed by more popular which is in fact graduation in terms of amount).

# 4. Types of appeals and their linguistic realization

Our qualitative analysis identified four types of appeals based on a categorization of the values they express, namely, appeals to salience, magnitude, topicality and problematicity, which are further differentiated according to whether the entities these values are ascribed to belong to the research world or the real world. Appeals to salience, magnitude, and topicality rest on positive values, whereas appeals to problematicity make use of negative values. The appeal to salience is a more direct approach to promoting topic significance than the latter three types. These appeals are realized by linguistic devices that either inscribe or invoke attitudes. In the following, we will illustrate these appeals and their linguistic realizations in turn.

# 4.1. The appeal to salience

In an appeal to salience, the importance or significance of a research topic or the importance, usefulness, or advantages of a key construct involved in the topic in either the research world or the real world is directly stated. The appeal to salience is realized by capitalizing on linguistics devices that convey inscribed attitudes towards topic significance, the degree of which can be amplified through lexical graduation and/or syntactic means. The following is a case in point:

[1] There has been general agreement in recent years that collocation is an important aspect of knowledge for language learners (4 citations). An increased knowledge of collocation not only allows learners to improve levels of accuracy, but it also aids fluency (1 citation) and the development of pragmatic skills (1 citation) (AL10).

Here, an appeal to salience (i.e., an important aspect of knowledge) is first made of an entity (i.e., collocation) that is associated with the real world (i.e., language learners). It is then intensified through another layer of appeal to salience sustaining such a positive evaluation with a couple of attitudinal expressions (i.e., allows … to improve, and aids the development of … skills) jointed by coordinating connectors (i.e., not only …, but … also … and …), whereby the writers unfold the importance of the issue of concern to learners (i.e., the advantages of an increased knowledge of collocation). The elaboration of topic significance in this way renders the importance of the topic even more prominent and impressive.

# 4.2. The appeal to magnitude

The appeal to magnitude relates to the prevalence or popularity of a research topic or a phenomenon by indicating, for example, the multiplicity of studies having been conducted on it or researchers' perpetual interest in it, hence its significance implied and the topic indirectly promoted. Appeals to magnitude are realized via creating invoked attitudes by grading experiential meanings. In the research world, the graduation usually centers on the research or the researcher.

[2] In recent years, a sizeable body of research has been undertaken into the nature of questions used by or addressed to second language learners. These studies have dealt with a variety of issues, including native language interference (2 citations), the emergence, processing, and comprehensibility of wh-questions among second language learners (3 citations), and the degree to which second language learners' questions reflect aspects of interlanguage or native-like competence (2 citations) (AL2).

In this example, the research topic concerned is first promoted through graduation in terms of the amount of research already conducted on it (i.e., a sizeable body of). Its significance is then enhanced indirectly again with a demonstration of the miscellaneous issues the previous research has covered, which, together with the number of citations, centers on the meaning of prevalence and grades it.

Example 3 shows the graduation of experiential meanings around researchers.

[3] The past two decades have witnessed burgeoning interest in … (TESOL1)

In this example, describing researchers' interest in a research topic as burgeoning invokes an attitude that recognizes its increasing popularity.

Differently, the appeal to magnitude in the real world emphasizes the prevalence of the topic-related phenomenon in the real world. The following is an example:

[4] Television, however, has not been widely researched as a source of input for EFL learners, despite its indisputable worldwide popularity (TESOL9).

In this example, promotion of television as a research topic by appealing to its magnitude is first achieved as the authors claim its popularity. The effect of such promotion is enhanced when the authors grade up the popularity of the entity in scope by using the premodifier worldwide and in degree by using another premodifier indisputable.

The prevalence of a phenomenon can also be indicated by referring to its frequency, as is shown in [5].

[5] Spanish is the most frequently spoken language on the continent, and … (AL6)

Exact numbers, sizes, volumes, or years can add to the value of magnitude as well. The following is an example:

[6] … in many Asian countries an important strategy in the promotion of English language learning is the hiring of nativeEnglish-speaking teachers (one citation). In Hong Kong, the Native English Teacher Scheme was established in 1998 … By 2008 more than 900 NETs were deployed in Hong Kong schools … (TESOL4)

In this example, the extent of prevalence of the promoted phenomenon as a research topic (i.e., the hiring of native-Englishspeaking teachers) can be felt as the author presents in the single Hong Kong example the exact year (i.e., in 1998) when the Native English Teacher Scheme was initiated, which seems to convey a sense of history, and as he provides the number of NETs hired accumulatively over the 10-year span (i.e., By 2008), which quantifies the prevalence.

Another way to achieve the appeal to magnitude is through elaboration. In [7], for example, to illustrate the wide application of argumentative discourse in life, the author goes into details by depicting a series of vivid everyday scenes which entail argumentative discourse.

[7] One communicative activity that permeates all aspects of life is argumentative discourse, from an early morning quarrel with a teenage daughter about whether a miniskirt is appropriate attire for school, over a debate about the future direction of one's department at work, to a pub dispute about politics (MLJ1).

# 4.3. The appeal to topicality

The appeal to topicality relates to the newness or recency of a research topic or a phenomenon, hence the implication that the research is very likely to add new knowledge to this little-traversed/novel area. Like the appeal to magnitude or problematicity, this type of appeal is an indirect promotion strategy, which is realized by linguistically encoding invoked attitudes.

Example 8 shows how this appeal is realized by referring to entities in the research world.

[8] Although the first use of the term collocation can be dated back to Palmer (1933), experimental research with collocation as a primary focus is still in its infancy (AL10).

To describe research on collocation as in its infancy, the scarcity of research on the topic is invoked so that the writers' own study may be interpreted as highly desired and contributing to the little knowledge present. The adverb still grades up the force of this appeal, for it creates a compelling effect indicating an urgency to increase research on this specific topic.

Even if the topic is not new, topicality can still be flagged by describing the research area as a lively field which is still advancing with an influx of new ideas or theories.

[9] Based on Dornyei's (€ 2005) theory of the motivational self-system, a number of studies have recently been conducted which highlighted the important role of self-concept in motivation. Parallel to this, recent thinking about motivation has started to reinterpret motivation in the light of dynamic systems theory (2 citations) … (AL6).

Motivation as a topic, which may not be a new one, is promoted by appealing to topicality in [9] for the parallel application of two new theoretical frameworks to either recent studies on it or its recent reinterpretation, as shown by the temporal pointers (recently, parallel to this, recent, and has started to, all since 2005). Due to these innovations, the authors create the impression that their research on this topic is not out of date but advances the new developments in the field.

The appeal to topicality can also be made in relation to entities in the real world, where phenomena such as participants in real world activities are evaluated, as is shown below:

[10] … more and more translators are now choosing to retain a degree of ‘foreignness’ in their translations in an attempt to familiarize children with foreign cultures and as part of a broader foreign language education (AL11).

Here, promotion is achieved by appealing to the currency of a phenomenon that involves entities in the real world (i.e., translators), as is indicated by the present progressive used, which creates an invoked attitude towards topic significance.

# 4.4. The appeal to problematicity

The appeal to problematicity relates to the conflicts, problems, difficulties, or challenges a topic or a phenomenon involves that are introduced or presented in establishing the research territory. The research topic is promoted due to the expectation created for further endeavor and accordingly, the positive evaluation invoked of the author's choice of his/her research area. Although the appeal to problematicity is an indirect means of claiming centrality, attitudes towards the problematic nature of a topic are largely spelt out, that is, inscribed.

[11] A major challenge that has been facing researchers who apply syntactic complexity measures to large language samples is the lack of computational tools to automate syntactic complexity analysis and the labor-intensiveness of manual analysis (TESOL15).

In this example, presenting syntactic complexity analysis as posing a challenge for researchers to meet realizes an appeal to problematicity linking to the research world. The pre-modifier major enhances the promotional effect.

The problematic nature of a topic can also be intensified by pointing out that the very issue involves conflicting views or research findings, as Example 12 shows:

[12] Consequently, much research has identified TLD's (Teacher-Led Discourse) instructional limitations … Nonetheless others have argued that … important benefits can be derived from his or her L2 expertise (4 citations) (MLJ7).

In this example, the paired appearance of much research and others, limitations and benefits points to the conflicting opinions surrounding TLD as a research world concern. The use of the conjunctive nonetheless sharpens the contrast. The appeal to problematicity is thereby achieved due to debate concerning the pros and cons of the entity and the compelling need for further research created herein.

The appeal to problematicity associated with entities in the real world can also be realized by presenting the topic as a challenge, problem, or difficulty facing real world populations.

[13] [Integrated writing tasks] have only been incorporated as part of assessment batteries in the Internet-based Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL iBT) in recent years. The inclusion of integrated tasks has stirred controversy among language testers and educators, with some supporting the use of such tasks and others voicing concerns about their validity (TESOL3)

In this example, the authors point out the controversial opinions held by real-world testers and educators on an issue they have just introduced (i.e., the inclusion of integrated tasks in TOEFL iBT). By relating the research topic to such controversies, the significance of the research is flagged because of its potential to solve practical problems.

# 5. ALs' diverse ways of making appeals in RAIs

ALs are found to often employ the same type of appeals recurrently, or make flexible use of different types of appeals in combination. [14] shows how appeals to magnitude are manipulated skillfully in succession:

[14] The last two decades have been years of growing complexity and sophistication for second-language (L2) teacher preparation and development research. Numerous books and papers currently deal with different aspects of teacher education, and teacher growth is addressed from professional, cognitive, social, as well as contextual perspectives (7 citations) (MLJ9).

In [14], the last two decades relates to the extension of research on teacher preparation and development in time. growing and numerous books and papers connotes the wealth of research on this topic by referring to its amount. different aspects and perspectives add variety and dimensions to the amount of existing research. It is by grading a series of different experiential meanings in force that a multitude of appeals to magnitude are achieved and the research significance is conveyed.

Reference to both the research and the real world entities offers another source of diversity:

[15] When the instructional implications of vocabulary size hinge so directly on the percentage of coverage figure, it is important to better establish the relationship between vocabulary coverage and reading comprehension (MLJ8).

In [15], the authors derive the importance of vocabulary coverage in the research world from its significance (that of the percentage of coverage figure) in real world language instruction. The salience of the selected topic is therefore amplified because of its dual involvement of entities in both the research and the real worlds.

The combined use of several different types of appeals on one topic also lends weight to the significance of the topic:

[16] Much research into second language (L2) learning points to reading as an important source for linguistic development in the target language (3 citations) (TESOL13).

In [16], by appealing to both magnitude in the research world (i.e., Much research) and salience in the real world (i.e., an important source for linguistic development in the target language), the significance of the topic is fleshed out and orchestrated. In longer stretches of RAIs, the recycling of appeals is even more prominent:

[17] (1) Because of their extremely high frequency in the English language and the great difficulty they present to language learners, phrasal verbs (PVs) have long been a subject of interest and importance in English as a foreign language (EFL) or English as a second language (ESL) teaching and research, as evidenced by the many publications on the topic (8 citations). (2) The unique challenge for teaching PVs is that, although PVs are ubiquitous in the English language, EFL or ESL speakers, especially those with a lower and intermediate level of proficiency, consistently avoid using them (4 citations). (3) The reasons for this avoidance are many, including cross-linguistic differences and the complexity of syntactic and semantic structures of PVs (3 citations). (4) The enormous number of PVs in English also contributes to the problem, because it makes learners feel overwhelmed, not knowing which ones to learn. (5) Thus identifying the most useful PVs is paramount for language learning purposes (TESOL8).

Three types of appeals are present in this segment, appeals to magnitude, to salience, and to problematicity. First, throughout the segment, a series of appeals to magnitude are made by grading the frequency of occurrence and number of PVs in English (i.e., extremely high frequency in (1), ubiquitous in (2), and enormous number in (4)), whereby the value of PVs as a crucial constituent of English and target of language learning is co-constructed. Then, at a different meaning level, appeals are made in (1) to magnitude via grading time, attention, and number (i.e., long, interest, and many) and to salience (i.e., importance) in both the research and real (teaching) worlds (i.e., teaching and research) surrounding PVs as a subject. These appeals, in different degrees of explicitness, promote PVs as a justifiable research concern. Advancing from the values ascribed to PVs, an appeal is finally made in (5) to salience oriented to the real (learning) world (most useful and paramount, relating to language learning purposes) proclaiming the significance of the very research topic (i.e., identifying the most useful PVs). All these above appeals draw on positive values. They contrast with and are enhanced by the recurrent appeals to problematicity made by employing negative attitudinal expressions centering around PVs learning as a problem (e.g., great difficulty in (1), unique challenge and consistently avoid in (2), avoidance in (3), and problem and overwhelmed in (4)), which warrant settlement and accordingly, further research. The blended appeals altogether convey a message that prevalent as PVs are in English and important as they are for both research and teaching/learning practices, they pose a great challenge for learners, all pointing to the significance of their identification as a worthy topic for exploration.

# 6. ALs' frequent use of appeals and preferred patterns in making appeals in RAIs

A total of 226 instances of appeals were coded from the 51 RAIs, averaging 4.3 instances per introduction. There are differences in the types and quantities of appeals used, though. While only three RAIs employ a single type of appeal, 20 RAIs use two, 14 RAIs use three, and eleven use four. In terms of quantity, two RAIs contain as many as 10 occurrences of appeals, but three RAIs do not contain any appeal. Table 2 presents the exact numbers and percentages of the occurrences of the four types of appeals in the 51 RAIs:

Table 2 The distribution of instances of appeals by type.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Salience</td><td>Magnitude</td><td>Topicality</td><td>Problematicity</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Instances</td><td>67</td><td>75</td><td>41</td><td>43</td><td>226</td></tr><tr><td> Percentages</td><td>29.6%</td><td>33.2%</td><td>18.1%</td><td>19.0%</td><td>100%</td></tr></table></body></html>

As can be seen, the most frequently used type of appeals in AL RAIs is the appeal to magnitude, which accounts for $3 3 . 2 \%$ o f all instances. Next is the appeal to salience, which takes up $2 9 . 6 \%$ . The appeals to topicality and problematicity are less frequent, occupying $1 8 . 1 \%$ and $1 9 . 0 \%$ respectively. Taken together, the appeals to magnitude, topicality, and problematicity, all of which promote topics indirectly, constitute $7 0 . 4 \%$ of the total number of appeals, indicating ALs' preference to an indirect approach to promotion.

Table 3 presents figures on the division of the research or real world orientation.

Table 3 Orientation to research/real world entities.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Types of appeals</td><td>Total instances</td><td>Research world</td><td>Real world</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Instances (%)</td><td>Instances (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>226</td><td>116 (51.3%)</td><td>110 (48.7%)</td></tr><tr><td> Salience</td><td>67</td><td>15 (22.4%)</td><td>52 (77.6%)</td></tr><tr><td>Magnitude</td><td>75</td><td>43 (57.3%)</td><td>32 (42.7%)</td></tr><tr><td>Topicality</td><td>41</td><td>35 (85.4%)</td><td>6 (14.6%)</td></tr><tr><td> Problematicity</td><td>43</td><td>23 (53.5%)</td><td>20 (46.5%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

As is shown, in total, 116 instances of appeals are made with reference to entities in the research world, in proximity to the 110 instances made to entities in the real world $5 1 . 3 \%$ versus $4 8 . 7 \%$ . But figures in each subcategory of appeals do bear differences. ALs are much more likely to claim the topicality of their topics with reference to new or recent developments in the research world rather than developments in the real world $8 5 . 4 \%$ versus $1 4 . 6 \%$ , whereas they often turn to entities in the real world rather than entities in the research world $7 7 . 6 \%$ versus $2 2 . 4 \%$ ) in making appeals to salience. They also seem to relate more to the magnitude of their research topics in the research world than in the real world $5 7 . 3 \%$ versus $4 2 . 7 \%$ ). Finally, when appeals to problematicity are made, there are no major differences in frequencies referencing the real world and the research world $5 3 . 5 \%$ as opposed to $4 6 . 5 \%$ ).

Table 4 shows the distribution of appeals when we broke RAIs down into thirds.

Table 4 The distribution of appeals in different portions of RAIs.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Types of appealse</td><td colspan="3">Occurrences (percentages)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>First 1/3 of RAIs</td><td>Middle 1/3 of RAIs</td><td>Last 1/3 of RAIs</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>131 (58.0%)</td><td>76 (33.6%)</td><td>19 (8.4%)</td></tr><tr><td>Salience</td><td>35 (52.2%)</td><td>23 (34.3%)</td><td>9 (11.7%)</td></tr><tr><td>Magnitude</td><td>53 (68.8%)</td><td>20 (30%)</td><td>4 (5.2%)</td></tr><tr><td>Topicality</td><td>26 (66.7%)</td><td>12 (30.8%)</td><td>1 (2.7%)</td></tr><tr><td> Problematicitya</td><td>17 (39.5%)</td><td>21 (48.8%)</td><td>5 (11.6%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

This table indicates that 1) instances of appeals can be observed in all three portions; 2) the first two thirds of RAIs are where the vast majority of appeals $( 9 1 . 6 \% )$ are made, and 3) appeals to problematicity differ from other types of appeals in location preference, for nearly half of the instances of appeals to problematicity appear in the middle $1 / 3$ portion $( 4 8 . 8 \% )$ , while appeals of the other three categories favor the first $1 / 3$ portion instead ( $5 2 . 2 \% $ , $6 8 . 8 \%$ , and $6 6 . 7 \%$ , respectively).

# 7. Discussion

Based on Swales's (1990) conceptualization of appeals making as a promotional act and Lindeberg's (2004) elaboration of appeals made by economists, our study has identified four types of appeals made by ALs in RAIs, namely, appeals to salience, to magnitude, to topicality, and to problematicity, which are related to entities in either the research world or the real world. Compared with Swales's suggestion (appeals made to interest or importance of the research area, the classic, favorite or central character of the issue, and the active or widespread states of research in this area) and Lindeberg's categorization (appeals to authority, economy, practitioner, research, scope, and topicality, ours provides a possibly clearer differentiation that disentangles the aspects of values that are rested on from the entities that these values are attached to in appeal making. This disentanglement may help remove the arguably unwanted perplexities in coding and barriers to finer interpretation of actual promotional acts arising from overlapping demarcations.

With the tool of appraisal, our study connects linguistic choices to the rhetorical functions of promotion, specifically, the appeals they serve. A system of promotion in academic discourse may therefore be fleshed out by grouping miscellaneous promotional elements by the types of appeals they correspond to.

Our qualitative analysis of embedded attitudes and distribution-by-type statistics disclose how centrality is claimed indirectly through strategic manipulation of experiential meanings in making appeals to magnitude, topicality, and problematicity, more often than is more directly realized by making appeals to salience. This finding enriches previous understanding of claiming centrality as an explicit promotional strategy (e.g., Lindeberg, 2004). The overwhelming use of indirect forms of appeals helps to explain how the conflict between promotion and objectivity is resolved in RAIs, that is, by primarily manipulating invoked attitudes, rather than by expressing inscribed attitudes. This choice is understandable considering that ALs must strive for rigor while also considering the needs of their readership. The wide use of invoked attitudes in our corpus is in line with a succession of notions explicating promotion and objectivity in academic discourse, most notably, for example, Fairclough's (1993) description of the changing public discourse under the influence of marketization as “hybrid partly promotional genres” (p. 141), Bhatia's (2004) designation of “hidden agenda” (p. 73), and Hyland's (2005a) conceptualization of increasing promotional practices in academic articles as “undercurrent of informative texts” (p. 85). Though with different terms, all these scholars refer to the same phenomenon recurrent in academic discourse, that is, academic discourse usually does not contain only one layer of communicative purposes. What we are normally aware of is only the ideational meaning it expresses in its reporting of factual information. Unless we try to understand the interpersonal meaning somewhat concealed in academic discourse, we may not be able to appreciate its subtlety fully.

As regards how appeals are used in AL RAIs, our study provides both quantitative and qualitative evidence for their diverse aggregation (i.e., the number of RAIs having centrality claims, the average instances of appeals per RAI, the variety of appeals in tandem with entities in the research and the real worlds, the recurrent and combined use of appeals, and the appearance of appeals throughout RAIs but their accumulation in earlier sections). This tendency supports the very promotional nature of claiming centrality as pointed out by Swales (1990). Disciplinarily speaking, it shows that applied linguists attach great importance to and rely heavily on centrality claims for promoting topic significance. Beyond AL, it corroborates previous findings or observations that promotion permeates academic RAs (e.g., Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995; Hyland, 2000; Law & Williams, 1982; Lindeberg, 2004). That appeals appear earlier in RAIs is natural since claiming centrality is usually made in Move 1, its varying lengths notwithstanding.

The infusion of promotional elements in AL RAIs reflects the need for ALs to convince peers of the wellestablishedness and well-chosenness of their research topics and therefore, of the worthiness of their studies. This need responds to the popularity of promotionalism in academic discourse, or what Fairclough (1993) termed the marketization of academic discourse, and is a likely result of the much-competed-for chance of publication, whereby “names are made, knowledge authenticated, rewards allocated and disciplinary authority exercised” (Hyland, 2005a, p. 90). The considerable presence of promotional elements may also be understood by reference to the nature of AL as social science. Bazerman (1981, reprinted in 1988), in his comparison of the characteristics of natural and social sciences, points out that the goal of social sciences, unlike that of natural sciences, is not to represent nature but to establish a perception of reality. Therefore, different from natural sciences where knowledge is built on the prior existence of phenomena in the real world and developed progressively and cumulatively along well-defined paths, social sciences have “less cohesive and established frameworks of knowledge” (Hyland, 2002, p. 124). Rather, because it deals with human subjects and data, research in social sciences is affected far more often by contextual factors, shows “less control of variables, more diversity of research outcomes, and generally fewer unequivocal bases for accepting claims” (Hyland, 2005a, p. 146), and is therefore more open to explicit interpretation and persuasion (Hyland, 2000, 2005a). To justify their work, writers in social sciences have to endeavor to construct a legitimized platform from which they can proceed to report on their own study, to align readers with their line of argument and to establish the significance of their work against alternative interpretations.

As one discipline of social sciences, AL shares the above-mentioned characteristics. To complicate the issue, as an interdisciplinary field, research in AL often borrows theories from diverse disciplines. All these lead to the fact that there may be no assumed general bases for research in AL. Research in this discipline may develop on “different competing theories” (Hood, 2010, p. 175), often making establishing a persuasive research territory an indispensable task. Just as Dahl (2008) once put it, in linguistics, “[r]esearch issues themselves are not always acknowledged as relevant entities by the research community. Rather, they have to be negotiated in the text” (p. 1197). ALs commonly make efforts to justify the research topic by turning to its real world or/and research world relevance, in negotiation with readers for its acknowledgment, who might not possess equivalent background knowledge. This overall tendency does not seem to be reduced much even though journals may have a filtering effect.

Our study also indicates that overall, applied linguists refer to both entities in the research world and entities in the real world equally, but their appeals to topicality, magnitude and problematicity are more often associated with entities in the research world while their appeals to salience are more frequently related to entities in the real world. The roughly equal reference to both the research and real world entities indicates that in such an applied discipline as AL, both research and practitioner interests are taken into due account. This equilibrium follows analogous findings reported in studies conducted in such disciplines as Economics (Shaw, 2003; Lindeberg, 2004) and Enviromental Sciences (Samraj, 2002, 2005). This is because AL is primarily concerned with solving “problems in language in social use”

(Brumfit, 1987, p. 3), and derives many of its research topics directly from real world needs, such as problems in learning a language, newly emerging language phenomena in everyday life, difficulties and challenges in language teaching and learning, etc. This need to solve real world issues entails an emphasis on the utility of research to the real world. In addition, not to mention that most authors are themselves both practitioners and researchers, readers of journal articles in applied disciplines may be researchers, teachers, translators, educators, policymakers, and many other practitioners. Academic writers in AL seem to know this well and are correspondingly able to strategically promote their research by catering for the interests of such a wide readership.

The propensity for appeals being made to topicality in the research world instead of topicality in the real world may indicate that in AL there may be few newly emerging practical issues (e.g., language learning or teaching) that are unexplored and AL community members are more ready to accept as topicality recent developments in research or newly formed theories in the research world. On the contrary, the appeal to salience seems to be more convincing if the significance of a topic is evaluated by relating to real world entities.

# 8. Conclusion

Our study identifies four types of appeals applied linguists make in claiming centrality, that is, appeals to salience, magnitude, topicality, and problematicity of the topic in either the research world or the real world. We also illustrate how ALs' hidden intention of promoting their research is achieved by manipulating experiential meanings to invoke readers' positive interpretations of topic significance. We then provide further statistical evidence as regards their intensive and dexterous making of centrality claims, their preference to an indirect approach to promotion, their reference to entities in the research and the real world, and the distributions of their appeals. Overall, our study demonstrates that claiming centrality is an important means to promote research in AL RAIs, but ALs tend to display certain patterns of promotional use characteristic of AL as a particular discipline.

Our study can be both awareness-raising and pedagogically useful. With a better sense of how indirectly, flexibly, and resourcefully expert writers promote their work by claiming centrality in academic writing, readers could read RAs more critically and may better manipulate lexico-grammatical resources to realize promotional appeals. Following our approach to form-function connections, teachers can establish an expanding network weaving linguistic resources with specific appeals to guide students through AL RAIs writing and promotion, in addition to presenting to them the prescriptive conventions of academic writing.

More studies that focus on other promotional strategies in RAIs are clearly warranted. Promotion in other sections of a RA and across its different sections is also worthy of exploration.

# Acknowledgments

We sincerely thank associate professor Ramona Tang at the National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore for her earnest, enlightening supervision of the first author's MA dissertation, which forms the basis of this paper, for her inspiring lectures, and for her consistent, selfless support. We are also indebted to the two anonymous reviewers, whose broad expertise, insightful critique, and mastery of language have helped improve our paper greatly. Above all, we are grateful to Editor Professor Hamp-Lyons for her scrunity of our paper and advice, whose admirable accomplishments have been illuminating our academic path and always inspire us.

Appendix 1. RAs in the corpus and their serial numbers.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Number</td><td>Source</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL1</td><td>Li, Q. (2012). Effects of instruction on adolescent beginners&#x27; acquisition of request modification. TEs0L Quarterly, 46(1), 3055.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL2</td><td>Ko, M. H. (2012). Glossing and second language vocabulary learning. TEs0L Quarterly, 46(1), 56-79.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL3</td><td>Yang, H-C., &amp; Plakans, L. (2012). Second language writers&#x27; strategy use and performance on an integrated Reading. Listening-Writing task. TEs0L Quarterly, 46(1), 80-103.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL4</td><td>Trent, J. (2012). The discursive positioning of teachers: Native-speaking English teachers and educational discourse in Hong Kong. TEsOL Quarterly, 46(1), 104-126.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL5</td><td>Park, G.(2012). &quot;I am never afraid of being recognized as an NNES&quot;: One teacher&#x27;s journey in claiming and embracing her nonnative-speaker identity. TEs0L Quarterly, 46(1), 127-151.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL6</td><td>Razfar, A., &amp; Simon, J. (2011). Course-taking patterns of Latino ESL students: Mobility and mainstreaming in urban community colleges in the United States. TEs0l Quarterly, 45(4), 595-627.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL7</td><td>Winke, P. (2011). Evaluating the validity of a high-stakes ESL test: Why teachers&#x27; perceptions matter. TEs0l Quarterly, 45(4), 628660.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL8</td><td>Liu, D. (2011). The most frequently used English phrasal verbs in American and British English: A multicorpus examination. TEs0L Quarterly, 45(4), 661668.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL9</td><td>Rodgers, M. P. H., &amp; Webb, S. (2011). Narrow viewing: The vocabulary in related television programs. TEs0L Quarterly, 45(4), 689717.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL10</td><td>Chan, A.Y. W. (2011). The perception of English speech sounds by Cantonese ESL learners in Hong Kong. TES0L Quarterly 45(4), 718748.</td></tr></table></body></html>

(continued )   

<html><body><table><tr><td>TESOL11</td><td>Ferris, D., Brown, J., Liu, H., &amp; Stine, M. E. A. (2011). Responding to L2 students in college writing classes: Teacher</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>perspectives. TEs0L Quarterly, 45(2), 207234. Alptekin, C. E. M., &amp; ErCEtin, G. (2011). Effects of working memory capacity and content familiarity on literal and</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL12</td><td>inferential comprehension in L2 reading. TEs0l Quarterly, 45(2), 235266.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL13</td><td>Martinez, R. O. N. &amp; Murphy, V. A. (2011). Effect of frequency and idiomaticity on second language reading comprehension. TEs0L Quarterly, 45(2), 267-290.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL14</td><td>Walker, C. P. (2011). A corpus-based study of the linguistic features and processes which influence the way collocations are formed: Some implications for the learning of collocations. TEs0L Quarterly, 45(2), 291312.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL15</td><td>Lu, X. (2011). A corpus-based evaluation of syntactic complexity measures as indices of college-level ESL writers&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>language development. TEs0L Quarterly, 45(1), 3662. Ruegg, R., Frit,E, &amp; Holland, J. (2011). Rater sensitivity to qualities of lexis in writing. TEs0L Quarterly, 45(1), 63-80.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL16 TESOL17</td><td>Sasaki, M. (2011). Effects of varying lengths of study-abroad experiences on Japanese EFL students L2 writing ability and</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>motivation: A longitudinal study. TEs0L Quarterly, 45(1), 81-105.</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL18</td><td>Collins, L, &amp; White, J. (2011). An intensive look at intensity and language learning. TEs0L Quarterly, 45(1), 106-133.</td></tr><tr><td>AL1 AL2</td><td>Copland, F. (2012). Legitimate talk in feedback conferences. Applied Linguistics, 33(1), 1-20. Belhiah, H. (2012). You know Arnold Schwarzenegger? On doing questioning in second language dyadic tutorials.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Applied Linguistics, 33(1), 21-41.</td></tr><tr><td>AL3</td><td>Al-Gahtani, S., &amp; Roever, C. (2012). Proficiency and sequential organization of L2 requests. Applied Linguistics, 33(1), 4265.</td></tr><tr><td>AL4</td><td>Pichette, F., de Serres, L, &amp; Lafontaine, M. (2012). Sentence reading and writing for second language vocabulary acquisition. Applied Linguistics, 33(1), 66-82.</td></tr><tr><td>AL5</td><td>Mulder, K, &amp; Hulstijn, J H. (2011). Linguistic skill of adult native speakers, as a function of age and level of education. Applied Linguistics, 32(5), 475-494.</td></tr><tr><td>AL6</td><td>Kormos,J., Kiddle, T., &amp; Csizer, K. (2011). Systems of goals, atitudes, and self-related beliefs in second-language-learning</td></tr><tr><td>AL7</td><td>motivation. Applied Linguistics, 32(5), 495-516. Luzon, M. J. (2011). Interesting post, but I disagree&#x27;: Social presence and antisocial behavior in academic weblogs.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Applied Linguistics, 32(5), 517-540.</td></tr><tr><td>AL8 AL9</td><td>Forman, R. (2011). Humorous language play in a Thai EFL classroom. Applied Linguistics, 32(5), 541-565. Littlemore, J., Chen, P. T., Koester, A., &amp; Barnden,J.(2011). Difficulties in metaphor comprehension faced by international</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>students whose first language is not English. Applied Linguistics, 32(4), 408--429.</td></tr><tr><td>AL10</td><td>Webb, S., &amp; Kagimoto, E. (2011). Learning collocations: Do the number of collocates, position of the node word, and synonymy affect learning? Applied Linguistics, 32(3), 259-276.</td></tr><tr><td>AL11</td><td>Pounds, G. (2011). Foreignizing or domesticating&#x27; the ideology of parental control in translating stories for children:</td></tr><tr><td>AL12</td><td>Insights from contrastive discourse analysis. Applied Linguistics, 32(3), 277-298. Asencion-Delaney, Y., &amp; Collentine, J. (2011). A multidimensional analysis of a written L2 Spanish corpus. Applied</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Linguistics, 32(3), 299322.</td></tr><tr><td>AL13</td><td>Szczepaniak, R., &amp; Lew, R. (2011). The role of imagery in dictionaries of idioms. Applied Linguistics, 32(3), 323-347.</td></tr><tr><td>AL14 AL15</td><td>Millar, N. (2011). The processing of malformed formulaic language. Applied Linguistics, 32(2), 129-148. Macintyre, P. D., &amp; Legatto, J. J. (2011). A dynamic system approach to willingness to communicate: Developing an</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>idiodynamic method to capture rapidly changing affect. Applied Linguistics, 32(2), 149-171.</td></tr><tr><td>AL16</td><td>Tin, T. B.(2011). Language creativity and co-emergence of form and meaning in creative writing tasks. Applied Linguistics, 32(2), 215-235.</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ1</td><td>Dippold, D. (2011). Argumentative discourse in L2 German: A sociocognitive perspective on the development of</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ2</td><td>facework strategies. The Modern Language Journal, 95(2), 171-187. Gatbonton, E., Trofimovich, P., &amp; Segalowitz, N. (2011). Ethnic group affliation and patterns of development of a</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>phonological variable. The Modern Language Journal, 95(2), 188-204..</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ3</td><td>Jeon, E. H. (2011). Contribution of morphological awareness to second-language reading comprehension. The Modern Language Journal, 95(2), 217-235.</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ4</td><td>Kanno, Y., &amp; Stuart, C. (2011). Learning to become a second language teacher: Identities-in-practice. The Modern</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ5</td><td>Language Journal, 95(2), 236-252. Sparks, R. L., Humbach, N., Patton, J. O. N., &amp; Ganschow, L. (2011). Subcomponents of second-language aptitude and</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>second-language proficiency. The Modern Language Journal, 95(2), 253-273.</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ6</td><td>Martinsen, R. A., Baker, W., Bown,J., &amp; Johnson, C. (2011). The benents of living in foreign language housing: The effect of Ianguage use and second-language type on oral proficiency gains. The Modern Language Journal, 95(2), 274-290.</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ7</td><td>Toth, P. D. (2011). Social and cognitive factors in making teacher-led classroom discourse relevant for second language</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>development. The Modern Language Journal, 95(1), 1-25.</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ8</td><td>Schmitt N., Jiang, X., &amp; Grabe, W. (2011). The percentage of words known in a text and reading comprehension. The Modern Language Journal, 95(1), 26-43.</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ9</td><td>Akbari, R., &amp; Dadvand, B. (2011). Does formal teacher education make a difference? A comparison of pedagogical thought</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>units of B.A. versus M.A. teachers. The Modern Language Journal, 95(1), 4460.</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ10</td><td>Mills, N. (2011). Teaching assistants&#x27; self-efficacy in teaching literature: Sources, personal assessments, and</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>consequences. The Modern Language Journal, 95(1), 61-80.</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ11</td><td>Macintyre, P. D. Burns, C., &amp; Jessome, A. (2011). Ambivalence about communicating in a second language: A qualitative</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>study of French immersion students&#x27; wilingness to communicate. The Modern Language Journal, 95(1), 81-96.</td></tr><tr><td>mLJ12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Matsumoto, Y. (2011). Successful ELF communications and implications for ELT: Sequential analysis of ELF pronunciation</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>negotiation strategies. The Modern Language Journal, 95(1), 97114..</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>MLJ13</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Yilmaz, Y.(2011). Task efects on focus on form in synchronous computer-mediated communication. The Modern</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

(continued on next page)

(continued )   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Number</td><td>Source</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ14</td><td>Masuda, K. (2011). Acquiring interactional competence in a study abroad context: Japanese language learners&#x27; use of the interactional particle ne. The Modern Language Journal, 95(4), 519-540.</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ15</td><td>Pytlyk, C. (2o11). Shared orthography: Do shared written symbols influence the perception of L2 sounds? The Modern Language Journal, 95(4), 541-557.</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ16</td><td>Samimy, K.,Kim, S., Le, J.A., &amp; Kasai, M. (2011). A participative inquiry in a TES0L program: Development of three NNES graduate students&#x27; legitimate peripheral participation to fuller participation. The Modern Language Journal, 95(4),</td></tr><tr><td>MLJ17</td><td>558-574. Taguchi, N. (2011). Pragmatic development as a dynamic, complex process: General patterns and case histories. The Modern Language Journal, 95(4), 605-627.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Afros, E., & Schryer, C. F. (2009). Promotional (meta) discourse in research articles in language and literary studies. English for Specific Purposes, 28(1), 58e68.   
Anthony, L. (1999). Writing research article introductions in software engineering: how accurate is a standard model? IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 42(1), 38e46.   
Barrass, R. (2002). Scientists must write: A guide to better writing for scientists, engineers and students (2nd ed.). NY: Routledge.   
Bazerman, C. (1981). What written knowledge does: three examples of academic discourse. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 11, 361e388.   
Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge: The genre and activity of the experimental article in science. Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press.   
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (1995). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication: Cognition/culture/power. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analyzing genre: Language use in professional settings. London & New York: Longman.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2004). Worlds of written discourse. London and New York: Continuum.   
Brumfit, C. (1987). Applied linguistics and communicative language teaching. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 8(1), 3e13.   
Chang, P., & Schleppegrell, M. (2011). Taking an effective authorial stance in academic writing: making the linguistic resources explicit for L2 writers in the social sciences. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 10, 140e151.   
Cortes, V. (2013). The purpose of this study is to: connecting lexical bundles and moves in research article introductions. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 12(1), 33e43.   
Dahl, T. (2008). Contributing to the academic conversation: a study of new knowledge claims in economics and linguistics. Journal of Pragmatics, 40(7), 1184e1201.   
Dahl, T. (2009). The linguistic representation of rhetorical function: a study of how economists present their knowledge claims. Written Communication, 26(4), 370e391.   
Del Saz-Rubio, M. M. (2011). A pragmatic approach to the macro-structure and metadiscoursal features of research article introductions in the field of Agricultural Sciences. English for Specific Purposes, 30(4), 258e271.   
Fairclough, N. (1993). Critical discourse analysis and the marketization of public discourse: the universities. Discourse and Society, 4(2), 133e168.   
Fairclough, N. (1995). Critical discourse analysis: The critical study of language. London & New York: Longman.   
Fakhri, A. (2004). Rhetorical properties of Arabic research article introductions. Journal of Pragmatics, 36(6), 1119e1138.   
Grabe, W. (1995). Survey of the field of applied Linguistics. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 15 (p. vii).   
Haggan, M. (2004). Research paper titles in literature, linguistics and science: dimensions of attraction. Journal of Pragmatics, 36(2), 293e317.   
Hamp-Lyons, L., & Heasley, B. (1987). Study writing: A course in written English for academic and professional purposes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Harwood, N. (2005). ‘Nowhere has anyone attempted… in this article I aim to do just that’: a corpus-based study of self-promotional I and we in academic writing across four disciplines. Journal of Pragmatics, 37(8), 1207e1231.   
Holmes, R. (1997). Genre analysis, and the social sciences: an investigation of the structure of research article discussion sections in three disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 16(4), 321e337.   
Hood, S. (2010). Appraising research: Evaluation in academic writing. Hampshire, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Hunston, S., & Thompson, G. (2000). Evaluation in text: Authorial stance and the construction of discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Hyland, K. (1999). Academic attribution: citation and the construction of disciplinary knowledge. Applied Linguistics, 20(3), 341e367.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. London: Longman.   
Hyland, K. (2001). Humble servants of the discipline? self-mention in research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 20(3), 207e226.   
Hyland, K. (2002). Activity and evaluation: reporting practices in academic writing. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 115e130). London: Longman.   
Hyland, K. (2005a). Metadiscourse: Exploring interaction in writing. NY: Continuum.   
Hyland, K. (2005b). Stance and engagement: a model of interaction in academic discourse. Discourse Studies, 7(2), 173e192.   
Hyland, K., & Tse, P. (2005). Hooking the reader: a corpus study of evaluative that in abstracts. English for Specific Purposes, 24(2), 123e139.   
Kanoksilapatham, B. (2005). Rhetorical structure of biochemistry research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 24(3), 269e292.   
Law, J., & Williams, R. J. (1982). Putting facts together: a study of scientific persuasion. Social studies of science, 12(4), 535e558.   
Lim, J. M. H. (2008). Indicating significance of current research: pedagogical implications of a genre analysis for dissertation writing. Open Applied Linguistics Journal, 1, 46e55.   
Lim, J. M. H. (2012). How do writers establish research niches? A genre-based investigation into management researchers' rhetorical steps and linguistic mechanisms. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 11, 229e245.   
Lindeberg, A.-C. (2004). Promotion and politeness: Conflicting scholarly rhetoric in three disciplines. Abo, Finland: Abo Akademi University Press.   
Loi, C. K. (2010). Research article introductions in Chinese and English: a comparative genre-based study. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9(4), 267e279.   
Martín, P., & Leon P erez, I. K. (2014). Convincing peers of the value of one's research: a genre analysis of rhetorical promotion in academic texts. English for Specific Purposes, 34, 1e13.   
Martin, J. R., & Rose, D. (2007). Working with discourse: Meaning beyond the clause (2nd ed.). London: Continuum.   
Martin, J. R., & White, P. R. R. (2005). The language of evaluation: Appraisal in English. NY: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Mautner, G. (2010). Language and the market society: Critical reflections on discourse and dominance. NY: Routledge.   
Myers, G. (1990). Writing biology: Texts in the social construction of scientific knowledge. Wisconsin: The University of Wisconsin Press.   
Ozturk, I. (2007). The textual organisation of research article introductions in applied linguistics: Variability within a single discipline. English for Specific Purposes, 26(1), 25e38.   
Samraj, B. (2002). Introductions in research articles: Variations across disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 21(1), 1e17.   
Samraj, B. (2005). An exploration of a genre set: research article abstracts and introductions in two disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 24(2), 141e156.   
Shaw, P. (2003). Evaluation and promotion across languages. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(4), 343e357.   
Shehzad, W. (2008). Move two: establishing a niche. Iberica, 15, 25e50. Shehzad, W. (2010). Announcement of the principal findings and value addition in computer science research papers. Iberica, 19, 97e118.   
Sheldon, E. (2011). Rhetorical differences in RA introductions written by English L1 and L2 and Castilian Spanish L1 writers. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 10(4), 238e251.   
Swales, J. (1981). Aspects of article introductions. Birmingham, UK: Aston University, The Language Studies Unit.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Exploration and applications. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J., & Najjar, H. (1987). The writing of research article introductions. Written Communication, 4(2), 175e191.   
Thetela, P. (1997). Evaluated entities and parameters of value in academic research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 16(2), 101e118.   
Thompson, G., & Ye, Y. (1991). Evaluation in the reporting verbs used in academic papers. Applied Linguistics, 12(4), 365e382.   
Wernick, A. (1991). Promotional culture: Advertising, ideology, and symbolic expression. London: Sage.   
Zobel, J. (2004). Writing for computer science. NY: Springer.

Weihong WANG is an associate professor in applied linguistics at China University of Geosciences (Wuhan). Currently, she is a PhD candidate at the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. She received her MA in Applied Linguistics at the National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Her research interests include academic literacies, second language writing, language education, and the globalization of English. She had articles published at Chinese Journal of Applied Linguistics, Asian EFL Journal, etc.

Chengsong YANG currently is a PhD candidate in applied linguistics at The University of Auckland, New Zealand. He is also a lecturer of English at Xi'an Jiaotong University, China. He holds an MA in Foreign Linguistics and Applied Linguistics from Xidian University, China and an MA in Applied Linguistics from the National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests lie in second language acquisition, academic writing, and world Englishes. He has got articles published in Journal of Second Language Writing, System, and Chinese Journal of Applied Linguistics.