Editorial

# Introduction to the Special Issue: English for international medical communication

# 1. Re-envisioning English for Medical Purposes

We introduce this Special Issue of English for Specific Purposes with the assertion that a re-envisioning of English for Medical Purposes (EMP) is in order: a re-examination of some of the methodological and pedagogical assumptions which have underpinned approaches to this particular branch of ESP. In the section that follows, we suggest four areas where a rethink of EMP research and pedagogy may be appropriate, and show how this Special Issue of English for Specific Purposes might, in some small way, contribute toward that aim.

# 2. Why is a Special Issue on English for international medical communication particularly important?

In a re-think of the research and pedagogical foci of EMP, we note first of all the importance of incorporating translanguaging perspectives (García and Li, 2014). In this Special Issue, Huang, Lin and Tsou commingle such standpoints through the lens of medical instructors’ professional development for English Medium Instruction (EMI) in healthcare. The researchers contrast the traditional focus of EMP with the increasing global prevalence of EMI in postsecondary institutions, medical education specifically, and propose a novel means whereby the expertise of ESP instructors is deployed for strengthening EMI. In doing so, the authors challenge the “fallacy that the “E” in EMI stands for English-only and Standard English”; rather, the aims of the professional development in the study were to “empower and enable EMI instructors to teach disciplinary content intelligibly and comprehensibly to students in their contexts” (p. 6). Such an approach suggests creating space for the maximum use of the range of semiotic and multimodal resources (Garcia and Li, 2014) upon which multilingual users draw to negotiate meaning from complex linguistic tasks, a point made in both conceptualizations of English as a lingua franca (Seidlhofer, 2011) and Medical English as a lingua franca (Tweedie and Johnson, 2022).

As a counterpoint, it is also critical to note at the same time that translanguaging perspectives, as articulated to date, may bump up against limitations when it comes to EMP. Features of translanguaging pedagogy, such as “privileging the internal language of learners” (García and Li, 2018, p. 4), over and above the external (prescribed) language of the institution, may fall short in health professions education, where we are tasked with preparing learners for the urgency and precision required in medical communication, and may run counter to locally mandated international communication protocols for patient safety (Tweedie et al., in press). It is therefore vital in EMP research and pedagogy that translanguaging principles like negotiated meaning are explored with attention to the accuracy and exactitude required for safe healthcare contexts. In this Special Issue, Brdar and Brdar-Szabó draw our attention to these limits through a discussion of medical eponyms. Medical language employs thousands of eponyms (e.g., Crohn’s disease; Ackerman tumour; Asperger syndrome) which have been shown to cause confusion leading to misdiagnosis and mistreatment within individual languages (e.g., Kucharz, 2020; Pritchard et al., 2003); in this Special Issue Brdar and Brdar-Szabó ask us to consider how medical errors might be amplified as eponyms move across languages. The authors note that while multilingual learners naturally do (and should) draw upon all their pre-existing lexical resources when encountering new vocabulary, eponyms - rife in medical language - pose a particular challenge, with very real consequences for patient safety as they are transferred to new linguistic contexts.

In keeping with the centrality of accuracy and precision in medical vocabulary, this Special Issue includes an article by Mbodj and Cortes considering the challenge faced by novice writers in mastering multiword collocations for medical writing. Since inaccuracies in one of the multitudes of conventionalized terms hold the potential for medical error, the authors analyze a million-word corpora of medical research articles and case reports to consider the discourse functions of multiword collocations. Their suggestions for task-based instruction on noun modification processes (found in their research to be a central feature of medical writing) should provide valuable tools for EMP instructors and course designers.

Third, a re-envisioning of EMP may be in order because of the rapid and widespread adoption of powerful, new, and revolutionary technologies prevalent in healthcare. Medical fields have tended to be early adopters of technological innovation, and it is widely asserted that the AI revolution (Makridakis, 2017) stands to benefit medicine, and therefore human health in significant ways (Rajpurkar et al., 2022). The article in this Special Issue by Khazaie and Derakhshan serves to illustrate how the technological innovation in healthcare generally finds its way into health professions education, and thus to EMP. The authors present the findings of research on augmented reality for EMP, in flipped classroom environments, where students interact with a humanoid robot. Khazaie and Derakhshan found that embodied cognition as presented by the robot’s information rich content, supported comprehension of EMP texts to significant degrees, and led to enhanced learner engagement. While the field of education is often a laggard in take-up of AI technology relative to other fields such as medicine (Baker and Siemens, 2014), it is impossible for EMP instructors and course designers to continue with a “business as usual” approach, given our role in preparing the language skills of healthcare professionals for what are increasingly becoming technologically-driven workplaces.

Finally, we feel a re-envisioning of EMP is in order due to how the English language is increasingly deployed for interlingual medical communication among healthcare professionals and patients from differing linguistic backgrounds. EMP researchers and instructors would be remiss if not considering the super-diversity (Vertovec, 2007) of many contexts around the world in which healthcare is now delivered: multiethnic, multicultural, multilingual zones of contact, with English as a vehicular medical lingua franca. Consider the following examples:

Observed in a large children’s hospital (Thailand): A Thai doctor conducts a pre-admission assessment of a child’s severe allergic reaction, with questions to the child’s increasingly frantic Japanese parents – in English. Observed in a diagnostic imaging clinic (Canada): A newcomer Iraqi-Canadian radiologist directs a recently arrived Venezuelan refugee through a mammogram procedure – in English. Observed in a medical clinic (Qatar): an Indian pharmacist deciphers the instructions of a Filipino doctor to a Qatari patient, mediated through a Sri Lankan nurse – all using English (adapted from Johnson and Tweedie, 2022, p. vii).

Yet, English language curriculum and classroom practice designed to support healthcare professionals often carry unstated assumptions of medical practice in near-monolithic linguistic-cultural contexts (Tweedie and Johnson, 2022), often oversimplifying the communicative task. Typical research studies consider the English language preparation of healthcare professionals, or their communication challenges, in light of uniform targets, often drawing upon broad brush ‘native’ or ‘nonnative speaking’ categories for medical colleagues or patients, belying the super-diversity characterising much healthcare delivery today.

# 3. A reminder of the relative nascency of the EMP as a field of study

With the value and necessity of EMP firmly established, and perceiving it to be a rapidly growing area of study, we expected to publish a Special Issue with a larger number of papers than were eventually included. We were reminded, however, of the relative nascency of the field on more than one occasion. As an Open Call issue, for example, we quickly came to realize the lack of readily accessible EMP venues - digital forums, working groups, special interest groups and the like - to reach a large audience of researchers who might have relevant work ready to publish. While we always wished to cast a wide net and reach academics from a variety of fields, we found ourselves posting open calls to forums whose focus was more generally language acquisition, ESP, or medical professional training, hoping that some members of those groups would be working on EMP-relevant research. While these calls generated substantial interest, few had concluded research studies ready to offer. For those who did, and whose manuscripts met ESP’s high standards for consideration, another limitation soon emerged. We frequently had considerable difficulty finding reviewers with expertise in EMP, let alone when backgrounds in one, two, or more other areas were required, such as English-medium instruction, corpus linguistics, the use of advanced technology such as augmented reality and/or robots in language pedagogy, and so on. We would therefore be remiss if we failed here to acknowledge and thank the exceptional work of reviewers for this Special Issue, who were asked to lend their multidisciplinary expertise in providing peer review across a range of very diverse, but intersecting topics. A transdisciplinary skill set has always been central for EMP teachers and researchers, and we anticipate that the need for transdisciplinary expertise in our field is likely to continue to grow in importance.

While the variety and scope of the work being done in the area of English for Medical Purposes is indeed impressive, we are reminded there is still a lot of growth to come for such a vital and fertile area of transdisciplinary study. We believe that the four papers in this Special Issue make a significant addition to that aim.

# References

García, O., Li, W., 2018. Translanguaging. In: Chapelle, C.A. (Ed.), The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics, pp. 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781405198431. wbeal1488.   
Johnson, R.C., Tweedie, M.G., 2022. Introduction. In: Tweedie, M.G., Johnson, R.C. (Eds.), Perspectives on Medical English as a Lingua Franca. Cambridge Scholars, pp. 1–8.   
Kucharz, E.J., 2020. Medical eponyms from linguistic and historical points of view. Reumatologia/Rheumatology 58 (4), 258–260. https://doi.org/10.5114/ 2Freum.2020.98440.   
Makridakis, S., 2017. The forthcoming Artificial Intelligence (AI) revolution: its impact on society and firms. Futures 90, 46–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. futures.2017.03.006.   
Pritchard, J., Foley, P., Wong, H., 2003. Langerhans and Langhans: what’s misleading in a name? Lancet. 362 (9387), 922. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140- 6736(03)14323-1.   
Rajpurkar, P., Chen, E., Banerjee, O., Topol, E.J., 2022. AI in health and medicine. Nat. Med. 28 (1), 31–38. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01614-0.   
Seidlhofer, B., 2011. Understanding English as a Lingua Franca. Oxford University Press.   
Tweedie, M.G., Johnson, R.C., 2022. Medical English as a Lingua Franca. De Gruyter. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110697025.   
Tweedie, M. G., Khanum, M., Johnson, R. C., & LaRiviere, M. (in press). Translanguaging for high stakes intercultural clinical communication in multilingual Qatar: health professions education and patient safety where English is a medical lingua franca. In W. K. Abdul-Jabbar (Ed.), Teaching Interculturally in Qatar: Local Epistemologies, Ethics, and Pedagogies. Routledge.