# Beginning and first-year language teachers' readiness for the generative AI age

Benjamin Luke Moorhouse

Department of Education Studies, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China

# ARTICLEINFO

Keywords:   
Generative AI   
ChatGPT   
Beginning teachers   
Initial teacher education   
Language teacher education   
Teacher readiness

# ABSTRACT

The public release of ChatGPT in November 2022 ignited an intense debate about the effects generative AI (GAI) tools will have on language teaching. The advanced capability of GAI tools and their rapid uptake by students has brought both challenges and opportunities to language teachers. This qualitative study, using in-depth individual and group interviews with ten beginning teachers and seventeen first-year English language teachers, explored their readiness for using GAI tools in their professional work and their perceptions of GAI in language teaching. The study found that first-year teachers were generally ready for the use of GAI tools and could recognize its potential to support their professional work. This was largely due to their experiences using ChatGPT. However, beginning teachers were not ready to use GAI tools in their professional work and had little knowledge about them. The study provides insights into the participants' GAI readiness; awareness of GAI tools and their capabilities and functions; utilization of GAI tools for language teaching; views towards students' use of GAI tools, and thoughts on how to prepare language learners to use GAI tools productively and critically. The study has implications for the preparation and professional development of early career teachers in the GAI-age.

# 1. Introduction

Since the public release of ChatGPT in November 2022, and the proliferation of generative AI (GAI) tools that followed, there has been intense debate about their effects on language education. GAI represents a dramatic advancement from previous AI models. GAI leverages deep learning models to generate human-like content, including audio, code, images, text, simulations, 3D objects and videos. These tools can complete a huge range of human tasks and create unexpected outputs responding to varied and complex prompts and maintain interactions (e. g. languages, instructions, questions) (Lim et al., 2023).

Initial reactions by language educators were mainly concerns regarding the validity and reliability of assessment practices (Yeo, 2023). However, more recently, the discussion has focused on the potential pedagogical benefits these tools could provide to language learners' linguistic development and how teachers may be able to utilize them in the language classroom productively as well as critically (Hockly, 2023).

As with other technological developments, GAI tools have ushered in a new age' that will affect the knowledge and skills base language teachers need to teach effectively (Chiu, 2023). However, GAI has arguably developed more rapidly than previous advancements, and the speed of its uptake by students at various levels of education has been staggering. For example, The Times Newspaper reported that nearly half of the students at Cambridge University in the United Kingdom admitted to using ChatGPT in their studies only a few months after its release (Sleator, 2023).

Given the rapid uptake of these tools by students and the potential of the tools to dramatically change the educational landscape, there is a pressing need to understand the current readiness of language schoolteachers and how they can be best prepared with the competencies needed to teach effectively in the GAI-age.

Two specific groups that are particularly under-researched but important to explore are beginning and first-year teachers. In this paper, beginning teachers refer to pre-service teachers who have completed their initial teacher education (ITE) programmes and are therefore qualified to teach but have not started their teaching careers in schools. They are transitioning from ITE to the teaching profession. Beginning teachers have been found to have specific challenges as they undergo a period of professional adjustment from ITE to full-time teaching (Clark & Newberry, 2019). First-year teachers refer to in-service teachers who have just finished one academic year in the teaching profession. These teachers will likely be experiencing a period of self-reflection regarding their teaching experiences and professional self. Both groups are at a vulnerable point in their career (Bullough, 2005). Indeed, in Hong Kong, the site of the study reported here, attrition rates of early career teachers are significantly higher than their experienced colleagues (Harfitt, 2015). This is also true in other international contexts (Clandinin et al., 2015). This situation is partly due to beginning teachers' lack of confidence and competence to successfully engage in the professional role of being a teacher. One area where beginning teachers and first-year teachers have been found to lack the required knowledge and skills is technology integration (Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018; Moorhouse, 2021; Park & Son, 2022; Wang, 2023).

Although all teachers will likely see the effects of GAI on their professional practices, this study specifically focuses on English language teachers. GAI tools have subject-specific pedagogical uses and challenges requiring subject-specific competence. Language education scholars have speculated the possible pedagogical uses of GAI tools for language teaching and learning, including acting as a conversation partner and reference tool, creating lesson plans and task-based activities (Hong, 2023), providing tailored feedback on students' written work (Barrot, 2023), and assisting the writing process (e.g., idea generation, drafting, revising, editing and evaluating; Yan, 2023). Equally, the same scholars have warned of the risks to academic integrity and student learning by using GAI tools (e.g. Yan, 2023). Indeed, the ability of GAI tools to generate human-like texts that are difficult to detect even by experts (Casal & Kessler, 2023) and engage in interactive complex written and oral conversations has specific implications for language teachers.

The study reported here aimed to understand the readiness of beginning and first-year Hong Kong English language teachers for the GAI-age. Specifically, it explored the perceptions of beginning and firstyear teachers who graduated from two initial language teacher education (ILTE) programmes in Hong Kong in the summer of 2023 and 2022, respectively. By exploring teachers from two different ILTEs and at different early stages of their teaching careers, comparisons can be drawn to provide a more nuanced understanding of recently qualified teacher readiness. Data were collected through in-depth group or individual interviews in the summer of 2023. The study has implications for the preparation and professional development of early career teachers in the GAI-age.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Generative AI and language teaching

Although not widely used in primary and secondary school language teaching, AI-powered tools have been an area of interest for language educators and researchers for several years. Chatbots and digital writing assistants have been shown to have pedagogical benefits, including aiding students' self-directed learning (Fryer et al., 2020; Godwin-Jones, 2022).

Rule-based chatbots, chatbots designed for specific roles that cannot deviate from pre-programmed answers, have been found to have utility in the language classroom, as they can simulate specific interactions in roleplays (e.g. customer service agent), and can sustain interaction on pre-programmed topics. For instance, Chiu et al. (2023), reporting on an intervention in a primary school language classroom using a chatbot designed for a customer service role, found that chatbots can be used to maintain learner interest and motivation. However, chatbots have not been widely used in mainstream language education due to their limited functionality.

In addition, digital writing assistants, such as Grammarly, that can suggest alternative ways to present text generated by a user or evaluate texts submitted to the tool, can help students notice their common errors, evaluate them against pre-inputted evaluation rubrics and guide them on where to improve their writing (Barrot, 2022).

The capabilities of GAI tools greatly expand the potential of AI beyond conversation partners, role play or writing assistants to any aspect of language teaching and learning. Tools such as ChatGPT can respond to user inquiries based on an enormous human language dataset. Users can ask these tools to adjust the proficiency level of their outputs, provide personalized learning materials and responses, and suggest bespoke learning paths (Kuhail et al., 2023). These GAI tools can provide a range of expressions, questions, and vocabulary (Hong, 2023) and maintain a coherent interaction through multiple back-and-forth questions and answers.

In a language teacher's professional work, there is already evidence that these tools can offer support. For example, Mizumoto and Eguchi (2023) found that, through a study involving 12,100 student essays, ChatGPT can be used to score essays in terms of language accuracy effectively and rapidly. Such uses could potentially save teachers time and provide more consistent feedback to students more quickly.

However, as stated earlier, there have been many scholars suggesting that GAI can have negative impacts on student motivation and learning with the possibility of a decline in writing and critical thinking skills (Warschauer et al., 2023) and negatively affect student learning outcomes (Chan & Lee, 2023). There are also legitimate and real concerns about how the tools can be used ethically given the ways the data was harvested and the reported bias in the training data (King, 2023; Rudolph et al., 2023).

# 2.2. Language teacher readiness for using technology for teaching

There have long been calls for a greater focus on the use of technology for teaching in ILTE due to the perceived and established benefits of using technology in language education. Teachers' technology use has been linked to student motivation (Lin, 2015), the development of bilingualism (Macaruso & Rodman, 2011), academic performance, and skills development (Cheung, 2023). Since the COviD-19 pandemic, language teachers have been found to be more comfortable in using digital technologies, and have integrated specific tools into their teaching practices, including (1) learning management systems; (2) digital noticeboards; (3) interactive digital worksheets and quizzes; and (4) interactive presentation software (Moorhouse, 2023a; Moorhouse, 2023b).

Yet, integrating technology-focused components and courses into ITE, specifically ILTE, still seems to be piecemeal (Park & Son, 2022). This can mean beginning teachers may not feel adequately prepared for the digital realities of schools (Starkey, 2020).

Although different individual and contextual factors can affect a teacher's transition and adjustment to the profession (Hatlevik, 2017; Hattie, 2008; du Plessis & Sunde, 2017), a teacher's perceived sense of readiness for teaching and their first experiences of teaching are two of the most important predictors (Colognesi et al., 2020; du Plessis et al., 2020; Hatlevik, 2017). Beginning and first-year teachers sense of readiness can affect their self-efficacy, teaching confidence (Clark & Newberry, 2019; Rowan et al., 2017), and job satisfaction (Mackenzie Davey & Arnold, 2000). It is important to remember that although beginning and first year teachers are likely to be familiar with digital technology from a young age, given their limited practical experience, and the understanding that the competencies needed for personal and professional life, they will not automatically have developed advanced digital competencies needed for teaching (Konig et al., 2020).

The COvID-19 pandemic shed light on the lack of readiness of language teachers globally to utilize technology for teaching - especially using tools for online teaching (Moorhouse, 2021). However, studies have shown that for early career teachers, if there were positive school-based induction practices, such as supportive colleagues, team teaching or well-structured orientations, they were able to cope and adapt to the need for online teaching (Moorhouse, 2021; Konig et al., 2020; Paetsch et al., 2023).

The situation GAI tools have created is clearly different from the requirement to use technology for online teaching during the COvID-19 pandemic. One was due to a global health emergency that 'forced' teachers to use technology as a means to continue teaching when inperson contact was restricted, while the other is due to the development and general release of a new and highly advanced type of AI. Yet, both require a response from teachers and a reconceptualization of the competencies needed to be an effective language teacher (Mishra et al., 2023).

# 3. The study

The study was exploratory, so a qualitative design was adopted (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011). It aimed to explore the sense of readiness and perceptions towards GAI of beginning and first-year English language teachers who recently graduated from two ITE institutions in Hong Kong. By focusing on the perceptions of two groups of teachers from different institutions, a more nuanced understanding of these perspectives and the effects the participants' lived experiences have had on their perceptions can be understood. Importantly, given the rapid development of GAI tools, the findings represent the participants' perceptions at the time of data collection, and these may change over time. However, they can provide valuable insights into the preparation of teachers for the GAI-age. The study was guided by the following research questions:

1. How ready do beginning and first-year English language teachers feel for the use of GAI tools in their professional work?   
2. What are beginning and first-year English language teachers' perceptions of GAI tools?

The study provides important insights into the perceptions of beginning and first-year English language teachers, which can aid ILTE providers in reforming their programmes in response to GAI and guide teacher professional development providers to consider how best to support teachers as they adapt to GAI.

# 3.1. Research context and participants

Hong Kong has four government funded ITE institutions (The University of Hong Kong, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, the Education University of Hong Kong, and Hong Kong Baptist University). Each institution offers two routes to becoming a qualified teacher in Hong Kong. One route is an undergraduate route -- these are five-year programmes with graduates awarded a double degree in Education and a subject content area (e.g. Bachelor of Arts in Language and Literature and a Bachelor of Education in English Language Teaching). Another route is a Postgraduate route -- these are one-year full-time or two-year part-time programmes (e.g. Postgraduate Diploma of Education in English Language Teaching) designed for students with a relevant content degree (e.g. Bachelor of Arts in English). The programmes involve a combination of subject knowledge, educational psychology, sociology, and pedagogical skills courses with professional teaching practicums conducted in relevant contexts.

Participants attended two of the four institutions. The institutions are referred to as Institution A and Institution B for anonymity. Participants were recruited through convenience and snowball sampling. Invitations were sent out through instant messaging groups, that included the target participants. The invitation included details of the purpose and data collection method of the study. Ethical approval was granted by [Hong Kong Baptist University Research Ethics Commitee ref: REC/20-21/ 0218]. All participants gave active consent to participate. In total, ten beginning teachers (Institution A: 6 /Institution B: 4) and seventeen first-year teachers (Institution A: 7 /Institution B: 10) agreed to participate. All except two participants studied a five-year double degree programme. All were teaching or about to begin teaching the English language in a primary or secondary school in Hong Kong. Six first-year teachers taught in primary schools while eleven taught in secondary schools. Five beginning teachers were about to begin teaching in primary schools. The remaining five were about to begin teaching in secondary schools. Seven identified as male, while twenty identified as female (See Table 1 for the participants' demographic information).

# 3.2. Data collection

In order to get in-depth understanding of the participants' GAI readiness and their perceptions towards GAI for language teaching, interviews were deployed. Interviews were conducted in groups (2-3) or individually, depending on the preference of the participants. They were conducted through video-conferencing software (e.g. Zoom) or inperson at a place mutually agreed between the researcher and participant between June and September 2023. Two similar interview guides were developed for the two groups to reflect the differences in the stage of their teaching career (pre-service /in-service) Table 2. For example, the guide for first-year teachers asked if they had used GAI tools in their teaching or if their students had used GAI tools and how they were used. The questions helped guide the interviews however, each interview was unique, and the researcher used the participants' responses used as springboards for more profound reflections and responses. The interviews were conducted in English and lasted between 30 and $6 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ . They were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim for analysis.

# 3.3. Data analysis

The data were analyzed inductively using thematic analysis approach proposed by Braun and Clarke (2006). The data set was split into two sets: beginning teachers' and first-year teachers' groups. Each dataset were treated as one cohesive dataset, meaning that themes were identified across multiple items. The themes were determined using a five-stage reflexive and discursive coding process. The stages are as follows: (1) responses were read and reread to familiarise the researcher with the data; (2) initial codes were generated within each set; (3) codes were categorised with themes and subthemes identified. At this stage, the datasets were compared to one another to see if there were similarities or differences between the two groups. It was observed that while the themes were similar, the sub-themes, and codes were different. For example, codes pertaining to GAI readiness indicated a greater sense of readiness in the first-year teacher group than the beginning teacher group. Therefore, the researcher decided to clearly indicate the differences between the two groups in the findings; (4) themes were reviewed, organised, and finalised. The final themes were:

Table 1 Participants' demographic information.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Participant (Pseudonym)</td><td>Gender</td><td>Institution and programme</td><td>Beginning /first- year teacher</td><td>Teaching level</td></tr><tr><td>Clint</td><td>m</td><td>A</td><td>first-year</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Sarah</td><td>F</td><td>A</td><td> first-year</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Wendy</td><td>F</td><td>A</td><td>first-year</td><td>Primary</td></tr><tr><td> Jimmy</td><td></td><td>A</td><td>first-year</td><td>Primary</td></tr><tr><td>Kelly</td><td>F</td><td>A</td><td>first-year</td><td>Primary</td></tr><tr><td> Jackie</td><td>m</td><td>A</td><td>first-year</td><td>Primary</td></tr><tr><td>Samantha</td><td>F</td><td>A</td><td>first-year</td><td>Primary</td></tr><tr><td>Karin</td><td>F</td><td>B</td><td> first-year</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Kathy</td><td>F</td><td>B</td><td>first-year</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Yvie</td><td>F</td><td>B</td><td>first-year</td><td>Primary</td></tr><tr><td>Valerie</td><td>F</td><td>B</td><td>first-year</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Derek</td><td>m</td><td>B</td><td> first-year</td><td>Secondary</td></tr><tr><td> Natasha</td><td>F</td><td>B</td><td>first-year</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Philip</td><td>m</td><td>B</td><td> first-year</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Katy</td><td>F</td><td>B</td><td>first-year</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Nina</td><td>F</td><td>B</td><td>first-year</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Connie</td><td>F</td><td>B</td><td>first-year</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Janet</td><td>F</td><td>A</td><td>Beginning</td><td>Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Kennis</td><td>F</td><td>A</td><td>Beginning</td><td>Primary</td></tr><tr><td>Cindy</td><td>F</td><td>A</td><td>Beginning</td><td> Primary</td></tr><tr><td>Clara</td><td>F</td><td>A</td><td>Beginning</td><td>Primary</td></tr><tr><td>Rachel</td><td>F</td><td>A</td><td>Beginning</td><td>Primary</td></tr><tr><td> Melanie</td><td>F</td><td>A</td><td>Beginning</td><td>Primary</td></tr><tr><td>Susanne</td><td>F</td><td>B</td><td>Beginning</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Mathew</td><td></td><td>B</td><td>Beginning</td><td>Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Rebecca</td><td>F</td><td>B</td><td>Beginning</td><td> Secondary</td></tr><tr><td>Vincent</td><td>m</td><td>B</td><td>Beginning</td><td> Secondary</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Interview questions.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Beginning teachers</td><td>First-year teachers</td></tr><tr><td>1.How familiar are you with generative AI tools such as ChatGPT? 2.Have you used generative AI tools in any aspects of your life? 3.Do you understand how generative AI tools work? Do you know how to use them?</td><td>1. How familiar are you with generative AI tools such as ChatGPT? 2. Have you used generative AI tools in your teaching or any aspects of your life? 3. Have you students been using generative AI tools? Should they be</td></tr><tr><td>4.Do you have any ideas of how to use them for English language teaching? 5.What do you think students need to know about these tools? Can they help them learn English? 6.How might teachers use generative Ai in their professional tasks? (e.g. lesson</td><td>using them? 4. Do you understand how generative AI tools work? Do you know how to use them?</td></tr><tr><td>planning) 7.What challenges might there be to using these tools? 8. Do you feel there are any risks or</td><td>5. Do you have any ideas of how to use them for English language teaching? 6. What do you think your students need to know about these tools? Can they help them learn English? 7. How might teachers use generative</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ai in their professional tasks? (e.g. lesson planning) 8. What challenges are there to using these tools?</td></tr><tr><td>ethical issues in using these tools? 9. How might generative AI change English language teaching?</td><td>9. Do you feel there are any risks or ethical issues in using these tools? 10. How might generative AI change</td></tr></table></body></html>

1. GAI readiness   
2. Awareness of GAI tools and their capabilities and functions   
3. Utility of GAI tools for language teaching   
4. Views towards students' use of GAI tools   
5. Preparing students to use GAI tools productively and critically

Finally, extracts that illustrated the themes were selected, and this article was compiled. The process of analysis aimed to provide transparency and access to the participants' interpretations of their GAI readiness and views towards the use of GAI tools in their professional work (Braun & Clarke, 2006). Limitations and calls for further research are included in the conclusion of this article.

# 4. Findings

# 4.1. GAI readiness

Responses suggest a general sense of readiness within the first-year teacher group. All of them had tried using GAI tools, specifically ChatGPT, within their professional work. These experiences gave the teachers an understanding of how these tools may aid their professional work as well as the tools' limitations. The relatively fast uptake of ChatGPT by the teachers seems largely due to its integration into the Learning Management System (LMs) that many schools in Hong Kong utilize - eClass (eClass, 2023). Jackie mentioned, "the eClass system where teachers receive and send out emails has already got ChatGPT built into it. Teachers can try to use ChatGPT in that platform'. This integration has meant language teachers have easy access to the tool within a familiar platform used daily for class administration (e.g. emails, attendance) and as a LMS (e.g. sharing materials with students, assigning work, grading). At the time of the study, ChatGPT was not available directly from Openai in Hong Kong. It needed to be accessed through third-party platforms, such as eClass, Microsoft Azura or poe. com. Therefore, schoolteachers had access to ChatGPT in their professional work before many other people in Hong Kong had access publicly.

However, responses from the beginning teachers suggested a general lack of familiarity and readiness to use GAI. Some of the respondents (e. g. Janet, Rachel, Clara) had not tried or had very limited experiences with GAI tools. Janet mentioned that she did not have a VPN (Virtual Private Network), and, therefore, did not think she could access ChatGPT. Other beginning teachers had some experience with GAI from their practicum that took place in the final semester of their programme (spring 2023) or their own self-exploration of the tools but had not had any specific preparation during their ITE on the use of GAI for teaching. While these teachers had some conceptions about GAI, their responses suggested lower readiness than the first-year teacher group. This extract from Susanne illustrates the beginning teachers' sense of readiness, \*I don't feel prepared for AI, but then I think it's not something someone can be fully prepared for because it's never one thing. Technology is always changing". Similarly, Vincent mentioned that you need to "experience it in the field' in order to fully understand how GAI might impact on our teaching.

# 4.2. Awareness of GAI tools and their capabilities and functions

The first-year teachers were aware of the availability of GAI tools and their general functions. Some teachers were able to name specific tools for generating images (e.g. Midjourney) while all teachers were aware of ChatGPT. Their responses indicated that the teachers understood these tools could be used to generate a large number of different genres (e.g. stories, information reports) and could engage in back-and-forth interactions. Some first-year teachers could also see the 'revolutionary' nature of these tools and how they could potentially change education and the knowledge and skills teachers and learners would need in the future. For example, Yvie stated, I do believe there will be a huge change in the education system, maybe teaching kids how to use AI in a way that helps them enrich their knowledge'. Valerie contemplated the kinds of writing skills students would need in the future,

It seems to me that English writing or language writing in general doesn't have much use after all. Like after a short period of time. Because if ChatGPT can write you a very formal business e-mail, then why do we need to write it?

Derek, a first-year teacher, provided an interesting analogy for ChatGPT that suggested he understood the capabilities of the tool and its limitations,

I think [ChatGPT] is a handy Teaching Assistant [TA]. Because the things in can do, technically, you can do it yourself, but if you outsource it to ChatGPT, it becomes a lot quicker. Like you can ask it to provide you with a passage. Technically you can always ask the TA to do that, but you will take him a lot of time. I think it's more than just grammar checking and stuff it's actually a TA because you still need to check what it creates. You're responsible for the materials you make. So you still need to check everything yourself.

These examples show that first-year teachers are aware of these tools' potential and capabilities.

However, it was not evident that all the first-year teachers knew the diversity and complexity of the tasks these tools can perform, nor felt competent to use them productively. Indeed, some interviewees likened GAI tools to other digital tools, such as Microsoft Word's auto-correct function. Natasha asked, \*Is ChatGPT essentially like a fancier version of the auto-correct?". Rebecca, a beginning teacher, described ChatGPT, as "a very simplified form of Google".

Other responses suggested they had yet to master effective ways to prompt ChatGPT. They were not able to generate the kinds of responses they wanted. For example Yvie mentioned, "Whatever they generate, it just deviates from what I want. I'm trying to make sure I can be more efficient".

Most first-year teachers were also aware of the limitations of the GAI tools, such as the lack of accuracy in its responses and that some models do not have access to "real-time data' (Jackie). For beginning teachers, their limited use of these tools in a professional context and no preparation meant they knew little about their functionality.

# 4.3. Utility of GAI tools for language teaching

Most first-year teachers reported using GAI tools as an aid to their language teaching. Specifically, they reported using it to create English language teaching materials and assessments. Teachers mentioned that can it can often be difficult to find materials online that are at an appropriate level and topic for their students. First-year teachers found GAI tools particularly useful for creating grammar and vocabulary exercises and reading passages for comprehension activities. For example, Nina mentioned that she would enter the target vocabulary that she was teaching into ChatGPT, and then ask it to generate a "contextualized passage". Similarly, Wendy used ChatGPT to create "grammar quizzes". Jonathan mentioned that he used it to create tailored "reading comprehension" activities for his students by typing in the grade level and requirements into the tool. Valerie said it was useful for coming up with "teaching ideas'. Kathy described how she used ChatGPT to help her plan and cross-check her lesson content,

Sometimes when I'm preparing classes for grammar rules, I'll use ChatGPT to double-check if I missed any details. For some of the rules, perhaps I've not stated clearly so I'll use it ChatGPT or Plus AI [a GAI presentation tool] to double-check or cross-check the contents just to make sure that I've got everything in my PowerPoint.

Kathy's use of GAI tools seems particularly valuable for a first-year English language teacher. It could increase her confidence that her materials are accurate and comprehensive.

The first-year teachers found using GAI tools to create and check their materials could help them save time which they found particularly important given their "heavy administrative work' (Wendy) and the challenges of adjusting to the role of a teacher. Jimmy said, It only takes a minute to generate a grammar exercise that before could have taken hours".

Importantly, several first-year teachers mentioned the need to carefully check the content generated by GAI tools before using the materials with students. Derek shared a case where he used a GAI tool to generate a text to illustrate the use of the 'past tense' however, the GAI tool included many examples of other tenses that were more complicated than his students could manage. He concluded that the quality of the prompts was very important and that teachers had a "duty to check the texts generated by AI'.

Although most of the beginning teachers did not have much experience using GAI, some did have some ideas of how it could support language teaching. For example, Vincent, who was generally skeptical of using other technologies in the classroom as it could create a "barrier' between him and his students, could see the benefit of using GAI to create "more personalized learning materials." He said, before, you might make one error correction passage for the whole class, "but with AI, you can make thirty different passages with different errors for students to find and fix depending on their needs'. Most beginning teachers had limited ideas of how GAI tools could be used in language teaching. For example, Janet, said, "At the moment, I can't think of any examples of how they could use ChatGPT'.

# 4.4. Views towards students' use of GAI tools

Several of the first-year teachers reported that they had already seen evidence of their students using GAI tools to help them to complete their English language homework. Most of the teachers said it was quite obvious when students used GAI tools, as the quality of their work substantially improved. Natasha said,

Suddenly [a student's] language is so good. For example, they use really fancy idioms. They use it really well. And they're writing has advanced grammar structures. I'm like, "you improved a lot. What do you wanna share with me in the class?" "How have you improved this much and then?" ... And some of them are honest that they used ChatGPT.

Because of the use of GAI tools by students, some first-year teachers shared that their schools had told teachers that all writing tasks must be completed in class and could not be completed at home. A couple of teachers agreed with this kind of policy (Sarah, Valerie). They felt school students were not mature enough to effectively critique the responses generated by the tools, or there was not equal access to GAI tools outside of school. Not all students could access these tools as they may not have a device and the use of ChatGPT was restricted at the time of data collection. However, others argued that students' use of GAI was unavoidable. For example, Clint mentioned that we cannot bubble proof' students. He elaborated,

You have to unlock AI, you have to tell them how to use these AI tools, how to manage yourself well with the AI tools. It's about maturity and in the English language teaching context, it is about learning more syntactic rules so you can use this knowledge to test it. You can have more choices. Secondary school students will have a lot of questions. They will be curious about why they can't use it, so instead we must teach them how to use it.

There was a general concern amongst the first-year teachers that students may become over-reliant on the use of GAI tools, and this may negatively affect their learning motivation and performance. Karin mentioned,

I feel like most language teachers, they still have this fear towards AI. They're not worried that AI will replace our jobs, but we see it as something dangerous. Like students are going to rely on it, and they're not going to be able to produce their own stuff in their [exams].

This kind of concern was also evident in the beginning teachers' group. Although not opposed to students using GAI tools, Mathew mentioned that schools and teachers may have concerns. He stated, \*if [a teacher] teaches students how to be a prompt engineer, how to make very good prompts ... Will that be a bad influence on their students because it subconsciously teaches them to rely on AI at certain extent?".

The data suggested that early-career language teachers understand that they cannot ignore the existence of GAI. Suzi mentioned her secondary-school-age brother was using it "every day"' for his schoolwork. Valerie described a lesson where students were researching a debate topic and had to come up with arguments when "one girl immediately went to chatGPT, but then, of course, I asked her not to. But then I guess that's the general trend'. These examples suggest that GAI tools are already being used habitually by some school students in Hong Kong.

# 4.5. Preparing students to use GAI tools productively and critically

A majority of the first-year teachers believed there is a need to explicitly teach students how to use GAI tools productively and critically. The teachers were concerned that their students are not able to use GAI tools properly and did not understand some of the issues and limitations of the tools. Philip, a first-year teacher working in a school that he described as \*incorporating ChatGPT quite early", mentioned that his students are uncritical of GAI. Philip stated,

They just ask ChatGPT, but sometimes it can be wrong as well. They refuse to believe AI can be wrong. Yeah, yeah. And it's scary really. But that I kind of understand because this generation was born after technology, like after the Internet. They grew up with social media and AI was kind of the normal thing for them. So they just think it is this super robot brain. It must be correct.

This extract illustrates the need to educate students about GAI tools. Teachers suggested that students can be taught how to better prompt GAI and use it as a self-learning tool. The teachers suggested the best way to do this was to model the use of GAI tools in class. Clint had already introduced ChatGPT in his classes and modelled how to prompt and interpret the response it generated. He did this by showing them how he used ChatGPT to create a quiz and how he wrote the original prompt and subsequent prompts. Then he discussed why he used these specific prompts,

I told my students how I prepared the quiz about prepositions using ChatGPT. In front of the class, I opened ChatGPT and wrote "Please create a exercise consisting of six open and close items to practice prepositions sentences for Grade 8 students". I then showed them the response. I asked them what they thought, and they said, the questions were "too hard'. I then said, how can we make them easier, so we added "English language learners' By doing this, they can see that not all the results are useful and you need to improve the prompts to get what you want.

Similarly, Natasha shared the example of a teacher she observed who showed students how they could get personalized feedback on their writing using ChatGPT. He would ask them to put their work in the tool and then prompt the tool to suggest improvements to the work using the marking rubric of the Hong Kong secondary school examination.

In addition, first-year teachers felt it was important to teach students the limitations of the tools and the impact their use may have on their learning if they use them excessively or inappropriately. Primarily, they suggested that students need to be shown the GAI can produce incorrect responses sometimes and that they need to evaluate their responses before using them. At the same time, students need to be reminded that if they use the tools, they may miss out on important learning opportunities. Finally, three first-year teachers raised the issue of plagiarism and citing the use of GAI. They suggested students need to be taught ways to be transparent about their AI use. Natasha's school already had a policy where students were required to cite their use of GAI tools in essays. However, she was unsure how many students honestly declared their use of it.

A few beginning teachers also expressed an understanding that school students need to be taught how to use GAI tools properly. Yet, they did not have many ideas on how this could be done.

# 5. Discussion

The findings show a clear difference in the sense of readiness between the first-year teacher group and the beginning teacher group. The findings show that beginning teachers do not feel ready nor have clear awareness of the utility of GAI tools for English-language teaching. This is somewhat understandable. The recent release and rapid adoption of GAI tools have made it challenging for ITE institutions to effectively prepare beginning teachers for the realities of the GAI-age. Indeed, higher education institutions in Hong Kong were initially unsure how to respond to GAI. Several institutions initially banned their use (Chan, 2023). This could have left both instructors and students unclear whether they could integrate GAI into their courses (Rudolph et al., 2023) -- even with limited time to do so before students graduated. Given what we know about the technological competence of teacher educators, they may also have lacked the required readiness to integrate GAI into ITE programmes (Lindfors et al., 2021). Other studies exploring GAI readiness found a similar sense of unreadiness amongst experienced in-service teachers (e.g., Kohnke, Moorhouse, & Zou, 2023; Kaplan-- Rakowski et al., 2023).

However, it is surprising to see the rapid uptake of GAI by the firstyear teachers. This could be due to the easy accessibility of ChatGPT.

Accessibility is an important predictor of technology use (Batane & Ngwako, 2016). As the findings show, ChatGPT has been offered through some schools' LMSs. This provided teachers with a legitimate and authorized way to use the tool in their professional work. In addition, the findings suggest that first-year teachers have had a positive initial experience with ChatGPT. They described how it aided them in creating teaching and learning materials and cross-checking the materials they created for content and accuracy. They could see how the tools could help them with their professional work and reduce the time they spent on certain tasks, such as creating tailored teaching materials.

The potential of these tools to support teachers with various professional tasks may mean teachers are more interested in GAI tools than non-GAI tools (Chiu, 2023). Other digital tools have specific functions, require students to have their own devices, or are designed to facilitate certain teaching and learning practices (e.g. Student responses systems) - which have generally had slower uptakes by schoolteachers, especially before the COvID-19 pandemic (Bai et al., 2021). However, GAI tools can save teachers time from searching for appropriate teaching materials or creating quizzes and exercises - tasks they are required do anyway, rather than, digital enhancements to their instructional practices.

Furthermore, first-year teachers are generally using GAI tools outside of the classroom for lesson preparation and not in the classroom with their students. Teachers can experiment with the tools without their students observing them. Therefore, the fear commonly associated with integrating technology into lessons is less evident (Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018; Henderson & Corry, 2021). Technical issues, classroom management concerns and other classroom stressors associated with technological integrated teaching are not issues when the teachers are using technology outside of the classroom (Fernandez-Batanero et al., 2021).

Importantly, GAI tools may help first-year teachers manage some of the intensity of the experience of being new to the profession (du Plessis et al., 2020; Clark & Newberry, 2019). Lesson planning and preparation can take up a considerable amount of time for new teachers (Bauml, 2014) and clearly this study shows that GAI can help reduce the time spent. Although there was an understanding by some first-year teachers that they need to carefully check any materials they create on GAI tools.

At the same time, there were misconceptions about the utility of GAI tools. These misconceptions could mean teachers are not utilizing GAI tools to their full potential. There was also evidence that some teachers are still developing the skills needed to prompt GAI effectively to get the desired responses. Ineffective prompting could lead teachers to generate irrelevant texts or products from GAI tools. This could limit their usefulness in a teacher's professional practice (Lo, 2023). Specific training and resources on prompt engineering for teachers could help facilitate the development of teachers' prompting skills - increasing the readiness of teachers and the benefits GAI tools could potentially offer.

There was limited evidence that first-year language teachers are widely using GAI tools in their classrooms. Some widely promoted uses in English language teaching scholarship, such as providing personalized feedback on a student's work, or supporting the writing process by giving suggestions for improvement (Yan, 2023; Barrot, 2023; Yao, 2023), were only raised by one first-year teacher..

This suggests that more research needs to be done to understand the possible utilities of GAI tools in primary and secondary schools Englishlanguage lessons so that teachers can be guided on how they may use GAI in their classrooms. We can speculate that GAI tools will have different uses in primary and secondary school English-language classrooms given the different ages and proficiencies of learners. In secondary schools, the tools may be used to assist students in their self-directed learning, act as a conversation partner in role play activities or coach students to improve their language skills. However, in primary schools, the tools could be used to make games and other learning materials tailored to students' needs.

In addition, primary school and secondary school teachers may have different considerations on whether to use GAI tools or not and what implications their use might have on learners. In primary schools, the main concerns are likely to center around safeguarding and responsible child-centered design in using GAI (Kurian, 2023). In secondary schools, plagiarism and learning loss may be bigger concerns (Yan, 2023).

Indeed, the findings suggest the perceptions of language teachers regarding students' use of GAI in their language learning seem somewhat mixed. Some teachers expressed a fear that an over-reliance of GAI could negatively affect their language learning and exam performance. There was also a concern that students may not be critical of the outputs GAI tools produce and take them as fact or truth. Studies in the higher education sector have highlighted similar concerns (e.g. Warschauer et al., 2023). For other teachers, it was understood that students are going to naturally explore new technologies, and if they find uses for them, they will adopt them into their lives (Lai et al., 2012). As one teacher mentioned, we cannot 'bubble-proof' our students.

Therefore, language teachers must have the knowledge and skills to guide their students to use GAI tools productively and critically (Javier & Moorhouse, 2023; Javier & Moorhouse, 2023). This will require teachers to have open and honest conversations with students about the use of GAI and policies and guidelines that support proper uses and advise students on the risks of improper uses (Rudolph et al., 2023). Transparent use of GAI tools is potentially one important aspect to include in these guidelines (Hockly, 2023). These kinds of guidelines are becoming more common in higher education institutions (Moorhouse, Yeo, & Wan, 2023) but may yet be typical in pre-tertiary settings.

In addition, participants recommended the use of teacher modeling of GAI use as the most effective way to develop students' productive and critical use of these tools. Modelling is well known to be an effective pedagogical strategy (Loughran & Berry, 2005), and one-way teachers can use to raise students' critical awareness of these tools and stimulate discussion of their potential to support learning but also highlight the risks they may bring to student learning and debates around their use of data (e.g. bias, copyright) (King, 2023).

Although this study suggests that English-language teachers are gaining their GAI readiness 'on the job', this may not be enough to make them professional competent users of GAI. These tools are highly complex, have a huge range of functions for language teaching and learning, but also raise many ethical, social, legal and moral issues (Kurian, 2023). Therefore, it is essential that pre-service and in-service teachers receive relevant subject-specific professional development and ITE on the use of GAI tools. This will help maximize their benefits while increasing the likelihood that they are used critically and ethically (Chiu, 2023; Hockly, 2023).

# 6. Implications and conclusion

The study has several implications. First, there is a pressing need for ILTE institutions to integrate the development of pre-service teachers' GAI competence into their programmes. The study has shown that beginning teachers do not feel ready and do not have well-formed perceptions of the use and issues around the use of GAI in their professional work. Second, while the study shows that first-year teachers are using GAI, the use is limited to aiding their lesson preparation. Some participants' responses suggested they had a limited understanding of how GAI works or could be used. Emphasis needs to be placed on developing teachers' GAI competence for teaching, and this includes helping them develop the knowledge and skills necessary to support their students' GAI competence development and language learning. Third, the study suggests that GAI tools have the potential to support beginning and early-career teachers as they transition and adapt to a career in teaching by providing teaching ideas, helping teachers create materials, and cross-checking teacher-made materials for accuracy and content. By helping reduce some of the demands associated with teaching, the transition into the profession may be smoother. It is important to explore other ways GAI tools can support beginning and early career teachers' as they adapt to school life in the GAI-age.

Although the exploratory study has added to our understanding of GAI readiness of beginning and first-year teachers in Hong Kong, it has limitations. First, the study was perceptional and did not explore teachers' actual use of GAI. An observational study could explore teachers' actual uses of GAI. Second, the study was conducted in Hong Kong, where teachers can access digital technologies easily. Further research should be conducted in other international contexts. Third, the study was conducted in the Summer of 2023. The rapid development and adoption of GAI tools likely mean studies conducted at later time periods may yield different findings. Tracking teachers' GAI readiness and continuously adapting teacher preparation and professional development in response to any changes and development is necessary to keep it relevant.

# Ethical approval

The study was approved by the Hong Kong Baptist University, Human Research Ethics Committee in November 2020. The reference number is REC/20-21/0218.

# Funding

The study was funded by the Early Career Scheme 2021/2022 of the Research Grants Committee, Hong Kong (Ref No: 22612121)

# Data availability statement

The data supporting this study's findings are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

# Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

# References

Bai, B., Wang, J., & Chai, C.-S. (2021). Understanding Hong Kong primary school English teachers' continuance intention to teach with ICT. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 34(4), 528-551. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2019.1627459   
Barrot, J. S. (2022). Integrating technology into ESL/EFL writing through grammarly. RELC Journal, 53(3), 764-768. https://doi.org/10.1177/0033688220966632   
Barrot, J. S. (2023). Using ChatGPT for second language writing: Pitfalls and potentials. Assessing Writing, 57, Article 100745. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2023.100745   
Batane, T., & Ngwako, A. (2016). Technology use by pre-service teachers during teaching practice: Are new teachers embracing technology right away in their first teaching experience? Australasian Journal of Educational Technology. https://doi.org/ 10.14742/ajet.2299   
Bauml, M. (2014). Collaborative lesson planning as professional development for beginning primary teachers. The New Educator, 10(3), 182-200.   
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2o06). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77-101.   
Bullough, R. V., Jr. (2o05). Teacher vulnerability and teachability: A case study of a mentor and two interns. Teacher Education Quarterly, 23-39.   
Casal, J. E., & Kessler, M. (2023). Can linguists distinguish between ChatGPT/AI and human writing?: A study of research ethics and academic publishing. Research Methods in Applied Linguistics, 2(3). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmal.2023.100068   
Chan, C. K. Y., & Lee, K. K. W. (2023). The AI generation gap: Are Gen Z students more interested in adopting generative AI such as ChatGPT in teaching and learning than their Gen X and Millennial Generation teachers?. arXiv.org.   
Cheung, A. (2023). Language teaching during a pandemic: A case study of zoom use by a secondary esl teacher in Hong Kong. RELC Journal, 54(1), 55-70. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/0033688220981784   
Chiu, T. K. F. (2023). The impact of generative AI (GenAI) on practices, policies and research direction in education: A case of ChatGPT and midjourney. Interactive Learning Environments. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2023.2253861   
Clandinin, D. J., Long, J., Schaefer, L., Downey, C. A., Steeves, P., Pinnegar, E., . Wnuk, S. (2015). Early career teacher attrition: Intentions of teachers beginning. Teaching Education, 26(1), 1-16.   
Clark, S., & Newberry, M. (2019). Are we building preservice teacher self-efficacy? A large-scale study examining teacher education experiences. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 47(1), 32-47.   
Colognesi, S., Van Nieuwenhoven, C., & Beausaert, S. (2020). Supporting newly-qualitied teachers' professional development and perseverance in secondary education: On the role of informal learning. European Journal of Teacher Education, 43(2), 258-276.   
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (Eds.). (2011). The Sage handbook of qualitative research. sage.   
du Plessis, A. E., Cullinan, M., Gramotnev, G., Gramotnev, D. K., Hoang, N. T., Mertens, L., ... Schmidt, A. (2020). The multilayered effects of initial teacher education programs on the beginning teacher workforce and workplace: Perceptions of beginning teachers and their school leaders. International Journal of Educational Research, 99, Article 101488.   
du Plessis, A. E., & Sunde, E. (2017). The workplace experiences of beginning teachers in three countries: A message for initial teacher education from the field. Journal of Education for Teaching, 43(2), 132-150.   
Fernandez-Batanero, J. M., Roman-Gravan, P., Reyes-Rebollo, M. M., & MontenegroRueda, M. (2021). Impact of educational technology on teacher stress and anxiety: A literature review. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(2), 548.   
Fryer, L., Coniam, D., Carpenter, R., & Lapusneanu, D. (2020). Bots for language learning now: Current and future directions. Language, Learning and Technology, 24(2), 8-22. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/10125/44719.   
Godwin-Jones, R. (2022). Partnering with AI: Intelligent writing assistance and instructed language learning. Language, Learning and Technology, 26(2), 5-24, 10125/73474.   
Gudmundsdottir, G. B., & Hatlevik, O. E. (2018). Newly qualified teachers' professional digital competence: Implications for teacher education. European Journal of Teacher Education, 41(2), 214-231.   
Harfitt, G. J. (2015). From attrition to retention: A narrative inquiry of why beginning teachers leave and then rejoin the profession. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 43(1), 22-35.   
Hatlevik, I. K. R. (2017). The impact of prospective teachers perceived competence on subsequent perceptions as schoolteachers. Teachers and Teaching, 23(7), 810-828. https:/doi.org/10.1080/13540602.2017.1322056   
Hattie, J. (2008). Visible learning: A synthesis of over 800 meta-analyses relating to achievement. Abingdon: Routledge.   
Henderson, J., & Corry, M. (2021). Teacher anxiety and technology change: A review of the literature. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 30(4), 573-587.   
Hockly, N. (2023). Artificial intelligence in English language teaching: The good, the bad and the ugly. RELC Journal. https://doi.org/10.1177/00336882231168504. Advance online publication.   
Hong, W. C. H. (2023). The impact of ChatGPT on foreign language teaching and learning: Opportunities in edu- cation and research. Journal of Educational Technology and Innovation, 5(1), 37-45. Retrieved from https://jeti.thewsu.org/inde x.php/cieti/article/view/103.   
Javier, D. R., & Moorhouse, B. L. (2023). Developing secondary school English language learners' productive and critical use of ChatGPT. TEsOL Journal. https://doi. org/10.1002/tesj.755.   
Kaplan-Rakowski, R., Grotewold, K., Hartwick, P., & Papin, K. (2023). Generative AI and teachers' perspectives on its implementation in education. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 34(2), 313-338. Waynesville, NC: Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE). Retrieved November 15, 2023 from https://www.learntechlib.org/primary/p/222363/.   
King, M. R. A. (2023). Conversation on artificial intelligence, chatbots, and plagiarism in higher education. Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering, 16(1), 1-2. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s12195-022-00754-8   
Kohnke, L, Moorhouse, B. L., & Zou, D. D. (2023). Exploring generative artificial intelligence preparedness among university language instructors: A case study. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence, 5, 100156. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j. caeai.2023.100156.   
Konig, J., Jager-Biela, D. J., & Glutsch, N. (2020). Adapting to online teaching during COVID-19 school closure: Teacher education and teacher competence effects among early career teachers in Germany. European Journal of Teacher Education, 43(4), 608-622.   
Kuhail, M. A., Alturki, N., Alramlawi, S., & Alhejori, K. (2023). Interacting with educational chatbots: A systematic review. Education and Information Technologies, 28(1), 973-1018.   
Kurian, N. (2023). AI's empathy gap: The risks of conversational Artificial Intelligence for young children's well-being and key ethical considerations for early childhood education and care. Contemporary Issues in Early Childhood, o(o). https://doi.org/ technology for learning? A case from Hong Kong. Computers & Education, 59(2), 569-579.   
Lim, W. M., Gunasekara, A., Pallant, J. L., Pallant, J. I., & Pechenkina, E. (2023). Generative AI and the future of education: Ragnarok or reformation? A paradoxical perspective from management educators. International Journal of Management in Education, 21(2), Article 100790. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2023.100790   
Lin, H. (2015). A meta-synthesis of empirical research on the effectiveness of computermediated communication (CMC) in SLA. Language, Learning and Technology, 19(2), 85-117, 10125/44419.   
Lindfors, M., Pettersson, F., & Olofsson, A. D. (2021). Conditions for professional digital competence: The teacher educators' view. Education Inquiry, 12(4), 390-409.   
Lo, L. S. (2023). The clear path: A framework for enhancing information literacy through prompt engineering. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 49(4), Article 102720.   
Loughran, J., & Berry, A. (2005). Modelling by teacher educators. Teaching and Teacher Education, 21(2), 193-203.   
Macaruso, P., & Rodman, A. (2011). Benefits of computer-assisted instruction to support reading acquisition in English language learners. Bilingual Research Journal, 34(3), 301-315. https://doi.org/10.1080/15235882.2011.622829   
Mackenzie Davey, K. M., & Arnold, J. (2o0o). A multi-method study of accounts of personal change by graduates starting work: Self-ratings, categories and women's discourses. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 73(4), 461-486. https://doi.org/10.1348/096317900167164   
Mishra, P., Warr, M., & Islam, R. (2023). TPACK in the age of ChatGPT and generative AI. Journal of Digital Learning in Teacher Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 21532974.2023.2247480   
Mizumoto, A., & Eguchi, M. (2023). Exploring the potential of using an AI language model for automated essay scoring. Research Methods in Applied Linguistics, 2(2), Article 100050.   
Moorhouse, B. L.. Beginning teaching during COviD-19: Newly qualified Hong Kong teachers' preparedness for teaching online. Educational Studies. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/02607476.2021.1952844.   
Moorhouse, B. L. (2023a). Teachers' digital technology use after a period of online teaching. ELT Journal. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccac050.   
Moorhouse, B. L. (2023b). Teachers' professional digital competence after a period of online teaching: the case of Hong Kong primary school English-language teachers. Asia Pacific Education Review. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12564-023-09885-7.   
Moorhouse, B. L., Yeo, M., & Wan, Y. (2023). Generative AI tools and Assessment: Guidelines of the World's top-ranking universities. Computers & Education Open. htt ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeo.2023.100151.   
Paetsch, J., Franz, S., & Wolter, I. (2023). Changes in early career teachers' technology use for teaching: The roles of teacher self-efficacy, ICT literacy, and experience during COviD-19 school closure. Teaching and Teacher Education, 135, Article 104318.   
Park, M., & Son, J.-B. (2022). Pre-service EFL teachers' readiness in computer-assisted language learning and teaching. Asia Pacific Journal of Education, 42(2), 320-334. https://doi.org/10.1080/02188791.2020.1815649   
Rowan, L., Kline, J., & Mayer, D. (2017). Early career teachers' perceptions of their preparedness to teach'diverse learners': Insights from an Australian research project. Australian Journal of Teacher Education (Online), 42(10), 71-92.   
Rudolph, J., Tan, S., & Tan, S. (2023). ChatGPT: Bullshit spewer or the end of traditional assessments in higher education? Journal of Applied Learning & Teaching, 6(1). https://doi.org/10.37074/jalt.2023.6.1.9   
Sleator, L. (2023). Almost half of Cambridge students admit they have used ChatGPT. The Times. https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/cambridge-university-students-chat gpt-ai-degree-2023-rnsv7mw7z.   
Starkey, L. (2020). A review of research exploring teacher preparation for the digital age. Cambridge Journal of Education, 50(1), 37-56. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 0305764X.2019.1625867   
Wang, W. (2023). Hong Kong EFL pre-service teachers' readiness for technology integration into future teaching practices: An explanatory sequential mixed methods study [Master's thesis]. University of Oxford.   
Warschauer, M., Tseng, W., Yim, S., Webster, T., Jacob, S., Du, Q., & Tate, T. (2023). The affordances and contradictions of AI-generated text for second language writers. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4404380   
Yan, D. (2023). Impact of ChatGPT on learners in a L2 writing practicum: An exploratory investigation. Education and Information Technologies, 1-25. https:/doi.org/ 10.1007/s10639-023-11742-4   
Yeo, M. (2023). Academic integrity in the age of artificial intelligence (AI) authoring apps. TEs0L Journal, 14(3), e716. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesj.716