Guide to Research Projects for Engineering Students: Planning, Writing and Presenting, Eng-Choon Leong, Carmel LeeHsia Heah, Kenneth Keng Wee Ong. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL (2016). xxiii $^ +$ 220 pp., US\$39.95, ISBN: 978-1-4822-3878-5

For engineering students who need to complete and present engineering projects, the publication of the interdisciplinary volume Guide to Research Projects for Engineering Students: Planning, Writing and Presenting is good news. Drawing on their experiences supervising engineering projects and discrete expertise in engineering and language communication, the authors (engineering expert Leong and language experts Heah and Ong) aim to organically synthesize planning, writing and presenting engineering projects by integrating relevant software application skills.

This volume, consisting of three parts, includes 24 chapters, 22 in three parts preceded by an introduction and a chapter with Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs). While the introduction roughly discusses cognitive skills, the supervisor’s role and information technology (IT) skills related to doing research projects, the second chapter exhaustively lists ninety-eight FAQs students may ask when doing projects and cross-references the answers to specific chapters or sections in the book. By foregrounding FAQs, the authors intend the volume to serve as an “immensely practical” and “self-contained guide” (p. xxii) which would allow readers to use it as a reference book to complete any specific task covered.

Part I, Planning (Chapters 3 – 8), begins with down-to-earth suggestions about planning and conducting a research project. Chapters 3 – 6 entail concrete steps from choosing an engineering research project to carrying it out. Specifically, Chapter 3 offers advice on project selection to undergraduate and graduate students separately since the two groups may differ considerably in aspects including project duration, goals and consequences of different outcomes. In Chapter 4, the authors illustrate how to research a selected topic by searching for and evaluating relevant information online as well as using the university library system via Boolean operators to connect and define the relationship between search terms. Subsequently, Chapter 5 guides prospective graduate engineering students to write a research project proposal by elucidating its function via exemplification as this document is generally indispensable for admission to a graduate program in the engineering field. Chapter 6 proceeds to offer recommendations about process management of the project by sticking to a Gantt chart, a computer generated process management tool.

In Chapter 7, the authors, after differentiating methodology from methods, probe the three most frequently used methods in the engineering fields, namely experimental, quasi-experimental and survey methods. Chapter 8 concludes this part by emphasizing the importance of keeping a research record or log throughout the entire project and showing the way to do it. It is particularly insightful of the authors to foreground research record keeping in the planning stage because this will alert student readers early on that a detailed research log not only supplies crucial information for later stages of writing and presentation but also helps them to save much time.

Part II, Writing (Chapters 9 – 20), is the central part of the volume. It focuses on the writing of an engineering research project, a process all students have to face and most of them find challenging. This part involves a wide range of topics including the preliminary stage of writing, textual consideration at the lexicogrammatical level, functional deconstruction of different sections of the final report/thesis, and considerations of referencing, source use and plagiarism avoidance. Specifically, Chapters 9 – 12 sketch overall directions toward the writing process. Chapter 9 highlights the necessity of embarking on writing early by periodically reviewing the research log as many of its timely revised entries may later be directly transferred to the report/thesis draft. Next, Chapters 10 and 11 respectively explore the most commonly occurring lexicogrammar problems and stylistic choices of technical writing. Then, Chapter 12 tackles general strategies about writing a sound report.

After introducing the general guidelines, the authors dissect individual sections in the report/thesis in the order of introduction and literature review (Chapter 13), materials and methods (Chapter 14), results and discussion (Chapter 15), conclusions (Chapter 16) and, abstract and front matter (Chapter 17). Most space in these chapters is devoted to the move structure analysis of the project report/thesis genre in the EAP genre-based approach, which functionally exposes the purpose of each part explicitly to student readers. Functional analysis of section components is not only elaborated in great detail but also accompanied by deconstruction of authentic examples of equivalent sections in published articles. Additionally, each of these chapters incorporates language features. For example, the linguistic feature of the verb tense is covered repetitively in each chapter.

After the main body of the report/thesis is discussed, attention is turned to the skills of referencing, source use, and techniques of revising and editing. Chapter 18 provides information about two main referencing systems used in engineering documents, the author/year system and the number system, respectively exemplified by the APA (American Psychology Association) style and the IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineering) style. Chapter 19 primes student readers on how to use sources and avoid plagiarism. After differentiating primary, secondary and tertiary sources, this chapter strongly recommends that student writers use reliable primary sources and avoid citing from predatory open-access publications with dubious quality. Meanwhile, guidelines for plagiarism avoidance are supplied by illustration of paraphrasing, summarizing and quoting skills. Chapter 20 ends Part II by introducing revising and editing techniques in five stages, namely, macroscopic revision of content and organization, editing at the sentence level, proofreading for mechanical consistency, formatting and document integrity (that is, matching of different parts of the report/thesis).

Part III, Presenting (Chapters 21 – 24), encompasses topics on the creation of figures and layout in the presentation and the final written document (Chapters 21 and 22) and the oral presentation (Chapters 23 and 24). Chapter 21 addresses the key role of different types of figures, including photographs, images, schematic drawings, graphs and charts, avoidance of figure plagiarism from copyrighted materials, ways to make high quality figures and tips to position them optimally in a Microsoft office word file. Chapter 22 proposes ideas for the formatting of the written report/thesis. In Chapters 23 and 24, attention is shifted toward the oral presentation which is usually arranged at the end of the engineering project. While Chapter 23 insightfully advises readers on how to arrange slides appropriately to transmit the core message visually to the audience, Chapter 24 instructs readers how to manage the oral presentation process by listing dos and don’ts.

Undoubtedly, this book offers a mine of useful advice for both undergraduate and graduate engineering and technical science students preparing for or in any stage of doing a research project. Pooling expertise from different disciplines, the authors piece together a helpful interdisciplinary mosaic of engineering project planning, writing and presenting skills with integration of necessary IT skills. This volume, to a large extent, effectively dispenses with the need for engineering students to search for guidance in different disciplines, a time-consuming and challenging task. Some valuable points raised in the book set out to foster helpful habits which may benefit student readers’ whole research careers rather than just providing advice for a single project. For example, the suggestions about keeping detailed and regular research records in Part I and the admonishment about embarking on writing early in Part II have very far-reaching potentials.

Another worthy aspect of this volume is that it elaborates different sections of the research report/thesis functionally. While engineering students may obtain useful information about the planning and presentation of a research project with some ease, they can experience much greater difficulty retrieving the most relevant genre analysis knowledge about writing up their projects since that part of the literature is not well-known in the engineering field. Without functional knowledge of the target genre, student writers run the risk of losing the sight of the purpose of individual sections and subsequently produce less effective research report/thesis. Chapters 13 – 17 provide readers with tailor-made knowledge in this aspect. The book would strike a stronger chord with readers if the examples provided were excerpts of authentic student engineering project reports/theses rather than those of published articles.

An additional merit of this book is its superb reader-friendliness on several counts. Above all, the authors consistently adopt a reader-friendly writing style by using concrete subjects, action verbs and short sentences as well as avoiding technical jargons whenever possible. Their stylistic choice perfectly resonates with their advice for student readers that the stylistic goal of writing “is to make it as easy as possible for the reader to understand exactly what you mean” (p. 81). Next, the ingenious organization of the volume, including but not limited to the conciseness of each chapter, the foregrounding of FAQs in front of the main body and research record keeping in Part I, also reflects the authors’ concern to ease reading for their audience. All chapters, with the exception of Chapters one, two and seven, end with a short section of “interesting facts”, which adds extra flavor to the reading process.

A drawback with the book is that too much emphasis has been laid upon language features. First, the theme of lexicogrammar is taken up all over Chapter 10, the second chapter of Part II. Subsequently, language features resurface throughout Chapters 13 to 17, the functional analyses of different sections of the report/thesis. Finally, the same string is harped again in Chapter 20 on revising and editing. Addressing this topic early and throughout part II with so much space seems to imply the authors’ epistemology of the primacy of language in writing. While language is definitely important, it is just one of many dimensions and does not deserve so much coverage. It seems advisable to condense Chapter 10 and incorporate it into Chapter 20. Meanwhile, the whole volume might be structurally tighter-knit if the language-oriented sections in Chapters 13 – 17 were also arranged in Chapter 20 and properly cross-referenced.

However, this redundancy does not change the fact that engineering students who have to complete research projects will find this book an immensely helpful reference to hone their skills throughout the whole project. Engineering project supervisors will also find it a great workload reducer if their students can use this volume to its full potential.

# Introducing Business English, Catherine Nickerson, Brigitte Planken. Routledge, New York (2016). 172 pp., US\$ 39.95, ISBN: 978-1-315-69433-7

Business English is a broad and difficult to define concept within the English for Specific Purposes (ESP) varieties. The term conceives multiple approaches depending on the goals for which is being taught and whose classification is determined by