# L2 master's and doctoral students' preferences for supervisor written feedback on their theses/dissertations

MohammadHamed Hoomanfard

nglish Department, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK, United State.

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
L2 graduate students   
Supervisor feedback preferences   
Academic writing

The present study employed a qualitative research design to investigate possible differences between L2 master's and doctoral students' preferences for supervisor written feedback. Although the role of learners' preferences, as a part of attitudinal engagement, has been emphasized in the literature on feedback, there are still niches in the literature that need to be occupied. One of these gaps is the examination of L2 master's and doctoral students' preferences for supervisor written feedback on their theses/dissertations. To bridge this research gap, the researcher interviewed 52 master's and 21 doctoral Iranian English Language Teaching students. Thematic analysis of the interview data identified five main preferences: feedback that is clear, specific, encouraging, dialogic, and non-appropriative. The examination of interview data showed that both master's and doctoral students expressed high levels of preference for receiving clear and encouraging feedback. A significantly higher percentage of master's students expressed their preference for specific comments. In contrast, doctoral students exhibited heightened preferences for non-appropriative and dialogic feedback. The findings also provided insights into the underlying factors that can shape master's and doctoral students' preferences. Several practical implications and suggestions for further research are also discussed in this study.

# 1. Introduction

Supervisors employ oral and writte feedback to help their graduate students accomplish their thesis/dissertation writing tasks and become self-regulated members of academic communities of practice (Bitchener & Storch, 2016; Bastola & Hu, 2023). Feedback is widely used because it is regarded as an educational element that students ned and want (Bitchener, 2017). It helps students take more responsbility for ther academic writing tass and facilitate ther idntty formation proces to become full participants in thir academic community of practice (Morton et al., 2014). Additionall, feedback can also improve students' writing ability and the quality of their final products (Bitchener & Storch, 2016; Can & Walker, 2014; Hoomanfard & Rahimi, 2021).

While these advantages, among many others, have been put forth for fedback in academic settings, graduate students' dissatis faction with supervisor feedback, for being unclear, subjective, unfair, general, and authoritative is welldocumented in the literature (e.g., Andrews et al., 2018; Can & Walker, 2014; Carter & Laurs, 2017; Huxham, 2007; Okuda & Anderson, 2018). One of the primary steps to improe fdback quality and minimize students dissatisfaction is uncovering students preferences and informing upervisors about the sources of their discontent (Can & Walker, 2014; Harwood & Petric, 2020).

Extensive research has explored students' preferences for instructor feedback in general second language (L2) learning and un. dergraduate L2 education contexts; however, while there is some rearch on graduate students supervisor feedack preferences in 2 contexts, the inconclusive findings cal for further empirical research to inform the theory and practice of supervisor fedback on L2 graduate students.

Despite bothflling under the overarching category of graduate programs, distinctions between master's and doctoral degrees have been acknowledged by numerous researchers, indicating master's and doctoral students' variations in emotional and cognitive capacities (Chesut et al, 2015), reearch and subject area knowledge (Pilcher, 2011), and pecived feedack needs (Hoomanfard t al. 2018). In addtion, the differene between master's thees and doctoral disrttions in tems of length, novelty isues, and pass/fal standards have ben identified in previous research (Bastola & Hu, 2023). Although these differences suggest that we are dealing with different groups, ittleis known about the similarities and differences in supervisor feedback preferences between L2 master's and doctoral students. In addition to contributing to the literature by examining an underexplored research area in the iterature on L2 academic writing, the indings of this research can help supervisors improve the quality of feedback on their 2 masters and doctoral students' theses/dissertations by considering their distinct feedback preferences.

# 1.1. Feedback on thesis/dissertation

Feedback in higher education has been investigated in both L1 and L2 academic writing contexts. Most of these studies have examined different aspects of fedback provided by university instructors on students' academic writing development within writing classes; however, significantly fewer studies have focused on supervisor feedback on L2 students' theses/disserations (Bitchener, 2018).

The study of the literature on thesis/dissertation writing shows that diffrent characteristics have been identified for sucessul supervisor feedback. Prior studies have reported that specific comments are perceived as more valuable for being more accessible and practical to act upon (Can & Walker, 2014; Carless, 2006; East et al., 2012; Price et al., 2010). However, other scholars (Goodman et al., 2004; Hattie & Timperle, 2007; Huxham, 2007) advocate for the use of general fedback because it can deepen the learning process toward indendnt pefmance n adtion, while it sms obvious that fedack to be useful ns t e cler, there e til complaints about the clarity of comments on theses/dissertations (East et al., 2012; Hoomanfard et al., 2018; Mehrpour et al., 2023; Wang & Li, 2011).

Encouraging comments have also been recommended since they could help students tolerate the dificulties of writing extended texts (East et al., 2012; Ferguson, 2011; Stracke & Kumar, 2010; Wagener, 2018). Prior studies have also mentioned that those comments that respect learners' text ownership (Can & Walker, 2014; Inouye & McAlpine, 2017) and facilitate dialogic discussions (Kumar & Stracke, 2007; Li & Seale, 2007; Stracke & Kumar, 2010) are favored by graduate students. Although these studies have claimed different feedback types that can benefit graduate students, they have not examined whether these types are preferred uniformly by both master's and doctoral students.

# 1.2. Master's and doctoral students' preferences for supervisor feedback

Few studies have studied L2 graduate students' preferences for supervisor fedback. In her comprehensive study, Can (2009), who investigated the preferences of 276 doctoral students for supervisor feedback in an American context found that the participants preferred encouraging, specific, and clear feedback that respected their ownership. In a mixed-methods study, East et al. (2012) investigated the preferences of 53 L1 and L2 students in New Zealand. They found no significant difference between the preferences of these two groups. The participants of this study believed that effective feedback should be positive, consistent, timely, and clear.

Although these two studies provide some general insights into graduate students preferences for supervisor feedback, the study by Can (2009) focused only on doctoral students, and the study conducted by East et al. (2012) lumped master's and doctoral students together, and they did not examine the possble differences that might characterize master's and doctoral students' preferences for supervisor feedback. Considering the nche inthe literre and thestablished argument that feedback efectivenes hinges, to a large extent, upon students preerenes for it (eg., Busse, 2013; Elli, 2010; Han & Hyland, 2015), the current reearch studied L2 master's and doctoral students' preferences for supervisor feedback using a qualitative research design. The present study was guided by a research question:

How do L2 master's and doctoral students differ in preferences for supervisor feedback?

# 2. Method

# 2.1. Context of the study: Iran

The present study was carried out i Iran, where English serves as a foreign language (EFL). In Iran, English is formally taught in schools for six years; however, a large number of studentsattend private English language clases to improve their English language proficiency. At the tertiary level, in some felds of study such as applied linguistics, ELT (English Language Teaching), and linguistics, undergraduate students must pas some general English courses to improve their general English language proficiency and specialized courses to attin subjectarea knowledge (Ahmadi, 2022). In these fields, graduate students are required to pass some specialized courses, write their theses/disertations in English, and defend them in viva sessions (Jallifar & Mayahi, 2023). In addition, the students are not allowed to defend their research unlessthey publish at least one paper extracted from their theses/dissertations in prestigious national or international journals (Rahimi et al., 2021)..

# 2.2. Participants

The participants included 73 (52 master's and 21 doctoral) ELT students. These participants, selected through convenience sampling, were drawn from ten distinct universtes acrossfour provinces in Iran, namely Fars, Tehran, Yazd, and Hormozagan. They included 42 female and 31 male students. Notably,all doctoral candidates and 17 master's students boasted a track record of publishing at least one scholarly paper in refereed journals, with an average publication count of 2.8 papers. The participants, aged 24 to 36 years, included students who had either recently (within the last three months) completed or were in the proces of composing their theses/dissertations and had reeived at least two rounds fedback on them. The participants were asked to self-asses their English language proficiency based on the Common European Framework of Reference (Council of Europe, 2001). The i levels, from A1 to C2 are described succinctly by Biedron and Szczepaniak (2012,p. 304) as follows: A1 and A2 represent the ability to communicate in simple, everyday situations. B1 reflects limited operational proficiency, B2 denotes one's fluent and spontaneous communication with a native speaker. C1 reflects the abilit to communicate complex and detailed messages, and C2 represents native-like proficiency. The results of the self-assessment showed that doctoral students expressed higher levels of proficiency $\mathrm { { C 1 } } = 6$ and $\mathbf { C } 2 = 1 5$ ) than master's students ( $\mathbf { B } 2 = 3 6$ $\mathbf { C 1 } = 1 3$ , and $\mathbf { C } 2 = 3$

# 2.3. Instrument and Procedure

Semi-structured interviews were administered face-to-face in four provinces, and each interview lasted approximately $2 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ on average. Due to the inguistic context features, the individual interviews were conducted in Persian to prevent the los of any vital information (Pavlenko, 2007). To present the participants' preferences in this paper, approximately $2 5 \%$ of the entire dataset was translated into English. The selection of translated excerpts was made with careful consideration to ensure their representativeness across distinct categories.

After obtaining written consent from the participants, the researcher conducted face-to-face interviews to gather the requisite data. The interviews were meticulously recorded and transcribed by the author to facilitate in-depth analysis. On average, each interview yielded 3.5 double-spaced pages of transcription. The interview sessions were guided by three questions (Appendix 1), fllowed by additional questions tailored to the participants' responses.

The transcripts were analyzed using Miles and Huberman's (1994) qualitative data analysis framework, which includes data reduction, datadisplay, conclusion drawing, and verification. Thematic analysis was employed to inductively categorize the students preferences regarding supervisor feedback. Subsequently, frequencies of respondents favoring specific themes were computed to facilitate comparative analysis. Finall, the researcher employed a set of Chi-square tes to xamine the significance of the dfferences between the master's and doctoral students' preferences for different items.

# 3. Findings

The thematic analysis of the interview data revealed five main themes: specific, clear, encouraging, non-appropriative, and dialogic discussions (Table 1).

In addition to the participants' preferences reported in Table 1, several sub-themes were identified for each of the five main themes (Table 2). These sub-themes can provide insights into the underlying factors that can affect master's and doctoral students preferences.

# 3.1. Be specific

As provided in Table 1, noticeably more master's students $( \mathtt { n } = 4 1$ $7 8 . 8 \%$ ) than doctoral students $( \mathbf { n } = 1 1$ $5 2 . 3 8 \%$ showed their preference for specific comments on their texts $( \mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } \left( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 \right) = 5 . 1 1 , p < . 0 5 ) .$ However, both groups, with no significant difference $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 2 1$ $4 0 . 3 8 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 1 1$ $5 2 . 3 7 \%$ , stated how specific comments allowed them to improve their texts $( \mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } \left( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 \right) =$ .87, $\mathbf { p } = . 3 5 )$ . One of the master's students said, When she told me the steps to rvise my text, I was successful. Iknew what she wanted me to do, so I could follow her dirctions". Similarly, a doctora student highlighted the actionable nature of specific comments: "omments are ueful whn thy ce usd y the ents. I mewhn thgive eltd coets, Icn drdwht s mising y text, dI cn fix the problems easily."

As provided in Table 2,significantly more doctoral than master's students talked about the benefits of specific comments for developing their knowledge $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 1 1$ $2 1 . 1 5 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 1 0$ $4 7 . 6 1 \%$ $\mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 ) = 5 . 1 1 , p < . 0 5 )$ . Consider the following two quote. "eack houlde peific. ou know, the superisor sould show yuh erroneous setion Then yo n correc yr text nd avoid reeating the mistake." ad "I like i when Mr.  [hs supervisor] highlighs th errors and proides explanations pertinento that item. I call them knowledge boxes, which can help me learn, but his general comments? [He moves his head to express discontent]'.

Table 1 Students' Preferences for Supervisor Feedback.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Themes</td><td colspan="2">Frequency (percentages)</td><td>Chi-square</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Master&#x27;s</td><td>PhD</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Specific</td><td>41 (78.8%)</td><td>11 (52.38%)</td><td>x2 = 5.11, p &lt; .05 *</td></tr><tr><td>Clear</td><td>48 (92.3%)</td><td>19 (90.4%)</td><td>x2 = .638, p = .425</td></tr><tr><td>Encouraging</td><td>45 (86.5%)</td><td>16 (76.2%)</td><td>x2 = 1.16, p = .28</td></tr><tr><td> Non-appropriative</td><td>14 (26.9%)</td><td>18 (85.7%)</td><td>x2 = 21.00, p &lt;.05 *</td></tr><tr><td>Dialogic discussions</td><td>8 (15.3%)</td><td>16 (76.2%)</td><td>x2 = 25.06, p &lt;.05 *</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Sub-Themes Identified for Each Theme.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Themes</td><td colspan="3">Sub-themes</td><td>Chi-square</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Master&#x27;s Freq. (%)</td><td>PhD Freq. (%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Specific</td><td>: Specific comments helped them improve their texts.</td><td>21 (40.38)</td><td>11 (52.37)</td><td>x2 = .87, p = .35</td></tr><tr><td>: Specific comments helped them improve their knowledge</td><td>11 (21.15)</td><td>10 (47.61)</td><td>x2 = 5.11, p &lt;.05</td></tr><tr><td>: General comments being useless</td><td>33 (63.46)</td><td>7 (33.33)</td><td>x2 = 5.48, p &lt;.05</td></tr><tr><td>: The usefulness of general comments</td><td>2 (3.84)</td><td>8 (38.09)</td><td>x2 = 14.84, p &lt; .05</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Clear</td><td>: The negative effects of unclear comments</td><td>39 (75)</td><td>18 (85.71)</td><td>x2 = 1.03, p = 316</td></tr><tr><td>: Using strategies to uncover the meaning.</td><td>33 (63.46)</td><td>19 (90.47)</td><td>x2 = 5.32, p &lt;.05</td></tr><tr><td>: Using terminating strategies</td><td>26 (50)</td><td>8 (38.09)</td><td>x2 = .852, p = 356</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Encouraging</td><td>: Reasons for the importance of encouraging comments</td><td>27 (51.92)</td><td>13 (61.9)</td><td>x2 = .602, p = .438</td></tr><tr><td>: Supervisors&#x27; focus on negative aspects discouraging them</td><td>31 (59.61)</td><td>9 (42.85)</td><td>x2 = 1.7, p = .193</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Non-appropriative</td><td>: Self-efficacy issues</td><td>9 (17.3)</td><td>1 (4.76)</td><td>x2 = 4.08, p &lt;.05</td></tr><tr><td>: Financial issues</td><td>11 (21.15)</td><td>3 (14.28)</td><td>x2=.45, p =.5</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Dialogic discussionse</td><td>: The significance of dialogic discussions.</td><td>6 (11.5)</td><td>13 (61.9)</td><td>x2 = 19.7, p &lt;.05</td></tr><tr><td>: Cultural obstacles to dialogic discussion</td><td>29 (55.7)</td><td>11 (52.3)</td><td>x2 = .069, p = .792</td></tr></table></body></html>

More master's students than doctoral students stated that general comments were futile $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 3 3$ $6 3 . 4 6 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 7 _ { \mathrm { : } }$ $3 3 . 3 3 \%$ $\mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 ) = 5 . 4 8$ A $p < . 0 5 )$ . The interviewees mentioned how general comments could deprive them of actionable steps to modify their texs. Some instances of general comments stated in the interviews included "Use academic tone!", \*Why didn't you use a more sophisticated sttisticl forula nsted f ll theset-tests and NVAs?", and "Some unctuations are inapropriat. oect them!t". A participant expressed discontent with comments of a general nature, particularly those on grammatical aspects, as such feedack left them puzzled and compelled them to review their text without knowing the specific erroneous item(s). A representative complaint was mentioned by a master's degr student who said "She sked me to omit the redundant definit articles. Do you know how many the I had in my text?I couldn't understand which ones were erroneous, so I asked a language editor to corrct my text". Excerpt 1 also shows how students became frustrated with general comments that did not immediately help them revise their texts.

Excerpt 1. . One of his comments was Follow APA manual'. Ok, but which part? In-tex itations? Heading levels? Or what?! Or on another occasion, he said, We need a stronger argument here!' What was wrong with my argument? He told me I was lost, but he didn't show me the way out of i. I think most of his comments were useles since I didnt learn much from them. I just tried to correct the mistakes, and I'm not sure if I was successful.

The noticeably lower level of doctoral students' preference for specific feedback might stem from their greater awareness of the potential benefits of general comments. Significantly more doctoral than master's students talked about the usefulness of general comments $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 2$ $3 . 8 4 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 8$ $3 8 . 0 9 \%$ $\mathrm { X } ^ { 2 }$ (1, $\Nu = 7 3 ) = 1 4 . 8 4$ $p < . 0 5 )$ . The interviewees noted how general comments could push them toward being independent academic writers. Excerpt 2illustrates how one of the interviewees recognized the benefits of general feedback, but still preferred specific feedback.

Excerpt 2. . I think those comments that make you think are also useful. You know, those comments that do not tell you what to do directly can help you research and lean more. The hints make you read several papers and books, and it can improve your knowledge, but ifall comments are gneral, it ill take years to finish a dissertation, so I prefer to receive general feedback on a few important issues and get detailed feedback on others.

# 3.2. Be Clear

The interview findings highlighted a consensus among the participants, with a substantial majority of both doctoral $( 9 2 . 3 \% )$ and master's $( 9 0 . 4 \% )$ students identifying clarity as a pivotal attribute of high-quality supervisor feedback $( \mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 ) = . 6 3 8 , p = . 4 2 5 )$ The interview data showed that the participants believed that unclear comments (i., syntactically diffiult comments illegible comments, question marks without any explanation, unfamiliar concept, and jargon) were not applicable and, in effct not useful. Both master's and doctoral students, with no significant difference, alked about the negative effects of unclear comments (master $= 3 9$ $7 5 \%$ and $\mathfrak { I } _ { \mathrm { d o c t o r a l } } = 1 8 , 8 5 . 7 1 \% , \mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } \left( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 \right) = 1 . 0 3 , p = . 3 1 6 ) .$ In addition to the inapplicability of unclear comments (Nmaster $= 3 6$ $6 9 . 2 3 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 1 5 , 7 1 . 4 2 \% $ , the students talked about the way these comments could give them the feeling of having a deficiency that avoided understanding comments $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 2 8$ $5 3 . 8 4 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 1 2$ $5 7 . 1 4 \%$ . Some interviewees $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 2 3$ $4 4 . 2 3 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 6$ 28.57) also said that the avoidance of incorporating comments might be construed as a form of disrespectful behavior against feedback providers (i.., their supervisors). Th following quotes show how detrimental unclear comments are: "Ifeel miserable when I cannot understand her omments. Sometimes, I think I am so dumb that I cannot understand what she means by the com ments." and.

Excerpt 3..I ge so nervous when I canot understand my supervisor's comments. You know, when Ifee I cannot understand them,I ignore them, but what if he thinks I am ignoring him or his comments? He would think that I don't take him or his comments seriously. It is not good at all.

To address this frustration, significantly more doctoral than master's students $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 3 3$ $6 3 . 4 6 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 1 9$ $9 0 . 4 7 \%$ $\mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 ) = 5 . 3 2 , p < . 0 5 )$ articulated a set of strategies, including seeking clarification by asking their professors or fellow students. to rephrase unclear comments and conducting research on ambiguous elements using online resources, to uncover the meaning of comments. Another reaction pattern that emerged in the data was that students used some strategies to avoid applying these com ments. These reactions are calle tenating staegie in this study and are defined as conscous strategie  feedback recipient mploys to terminate the communication episode initiated by a comment. The students stated two main types of terminating strategies: outright ignoring the comment and omiting/changing the section of texto which the feedback pertained. Notably, both master's and doctoral students, with no significant difference, talked about these ambiguous comments $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 2 6$ $5 0 \%$ and $\mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { d o c t o r a l } } = 8 .$ $3 8 . 0 9 \%$ $\mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N }$ $= 7 3 ) = . 8 5 2$ $\pmb { p } = . 3 5 6 )$

# 3.3. Be encouraging

The findings revealed that both master's and doctoral students showed their preference for receiving encouraging comments $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 4 5$ $8 6 . 5 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 1 6 , 7 6 . 2 \% , \mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } \left( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 \right) = 1 . 1 6 , p = . 2 8 )$ . The interviewees believed that the intricacies of thesis/ dissertation writing warranted the need for encouraging comments to propel them forward in their task acomplishment. A subset of these participants $( 5 1 . 9 2 \%$ of master's and $6 1 . 9 \%$ of doctoral students, $\mathrm { X } ^ { 2 }$ (1, $\Nu = 7 3 ) = . 6 0 2$ $\begin{array} { r } { p = . 4 3 8 ) } \end{array}$ also articulated the positive effects of encouraging comments. A representative quotation is provided in Excerpt 4.

Excerpt 4. . Providing critical fedback is something normal in academic reviews, but there should also be room in comments for students positive performance. Allstudents have some strengths reflcted in their exts. Why dont supervisors highlight these positive points to encourage students to tolerate the diiculties? Encouraging comments can make negative comments bearable.

Further, some master's $( 6 0 \% )$ and doctoral $( 4 2 . 8 5 \% )$ students, non-significantly $( \mathrm { X } ^ { 2 }$ (1, $\mathbf { N } = 7 3 ) \mathrm { = } 1 . 7$ $p = . 1 9 3 )$ mentioned the detrimental psychological impacts resulting from supervisors' oversight of students' strengths in their comments. Consider Excerpt 5 taken from the interview data.

Excerpt 5..If they want t focus on our problems, supervisors should just provide negative comments, but if they want to review our texts, they should highlight the negative and positive points. I had written a two-hundred-something-page thesis, and not even one of my supervisor'scomments was about its trengths. I it possible for my text not to have a positive point? I gotrelly demotivated when I saw tens of negative comments without any positive comments on my text. Believe me, I hated my performance when I saw all those comments. It took weeks for me to restore my morale.

Surprisingly, a few doctoral students $( \Nu = 4$ $1 9 . 0 4 \%$ bluntly stated that they did not expect to receive encouraging comments at the doctoral level, as they believed it was unnecessary for a well-prepared doctoral student. Excerpt 6 represents this nonconformist mindset.

Excerpt 6. . Supervisors should give encouraging feedback to master's students. They are novice academic writers who do not know how cruel this task i. They don't know that receiving harsh criticism is apart of academic writing until they become experienced and write flawlessl. We [doctoral students] welcome encouraging comments, but we do not expect them on our dissertations. A qualified doctoral student is happy when he/she gets a few negative comments. It is the best encouraging message!

# 3.4. Be Non-Appropriative

One of the themes that highlighted the difference between doctoral and master's students' preferences was related to text ownership. Analysis of the interview data revealed that doctoral students valued their text ownership significantly more than master's students $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 1 4 $ $2 6 . 9 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 1 8$ $8 5 . 7 \% , X ^ { 2 } \left( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 \right) = 2 1 . 0 0 , \mathrm { p } < . 0 5 )$ . Some students from both groups expressed their discomfort with comments that altered the traectory of their texts or sought to impose supervisors personal preferences without adequate explanation. Examples of such comments included directives like "Change the organization of the whole chapter based on the following outine!", "Delet all these lines; they are irelevant!", and "Put these examples in a separate sectin. It is not what I want"

While talking about text ownership, some students talked about the reasons why they were not resented if their texts were appropriated by their supervisors. Signficantly more masters than doctoral students explained how their low elf-fficacy convinced them to relinquish their text ownership $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 9$ $1 7 . 3 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 1$ $4 . 7 6 \%$ $\mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 ) = 4 . 0 8$ $\mathbf { p } < . 0 5 )$ . The participants mentioned their academic inadequacy, including research and subject-area knowledge, academic writing proficiency, and perceived lower English language proficiency, made it acceptable for them to ignore the ownership. Excerpt 7 is an example of this perspective.

Excerpt 7. . She [her supervisor] is full professor, and I'm just a master's student. She definitely knows what a high-qualit thesis should be. She adds different theories and concepts to my text that I have never heard of. I think it is teamwork, and she is doing her part by adding or deleting these parts.

A doctoral student cited his limited academic writing abilities in English as the rationale behind relinquishing ownership of the text. He articulated this viewpoint, stating,

Excerpt 8. . ot my master's degre in educational psychology. Then, I had to write my thesi n Persian, but I have to write my PhD dissertation in English. I'm competent enough to writ academic texs in Persian, but I need my supervisor'sfeedback to completethis project since it is in English. ..His feedback changes my diction, but I need his comments to get the project done.

Furthermore, some doctoral $( \mathtt { n } = 3$ $1 4 . 2 8 \%$ ) and master's $( \mathbf { n } = 1 1$ $2 1 . 1 5 \%$ ) students, with no significant difference $( \mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N } =$ $7 3 ) =$ .45, $\mathtt { p } = . 5 \mathtt { . }$ , perceived that resistance against their supervisors' efforts to exert control over their texts could result in additional revision rounds and subsequently delay their graduation. This delay, in turn, caried the financial consequence of having to pay for an additional semester of tuition fees. An ilustrative example of te financial considerations prompting students to abandon ownership of their texts is presented in Excerpt 9.

Excerpt 9.. As a teacher, I don't make much money. I have een a Ph.D. student for 10 semesters, and if I do not defend this semester, I have to pay a fine each subsequent semester. At this point, I rell do not like to argue, I mean argue academically, with my supervisor. Ijust want to get things done and finish the project this semester. I just follow whatever he says to finish the project.

# 3.5. Be dialogic

Another difference between masters and doctoral students was their preference for dialogic feedback. A significantly lower per. centage of master's students $( \mathtt { n } = 8$ $1 5 . 3 \%$ compared to doctoral students ${ \bf \langle n = 1 6 }$ $7 6 . 1 \%$ expressed a desire for dialogic feedback $( \mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 ) = 2 5 . 0 6$ $p < . 0 5 )$ . Within the interview responses, significantly more doctoral than master's students highlighted the advantages of dialogic discussions $( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { m a s t e r } } = 6$ $1 1 . 5 \%$ and $\mathrm { N _ { d o c t o r a l } } = 1 3$ $6 1 . 9 \%$ $\mathrm { X } ^ { 2 }$ (1, $\Nu = 7 3 ) { = } 1 9 . 7$ 3 $p < . 0 5 )$ . These benefits included creating a favorable environment for articulating and defending their choices, receiving feedback on their argumentation, and gaining insight into their supervisors' rationale behind specific comments. Excerpt 10 is one of several relevant examples:

Excerpt 10. . Good feedback should be in the form of dialogues. Yes, some comments are fine, you need to follow the directions; however, I sometimes fee the need to mention my reasons to my supervisor so he can understand the reason behind my decision. I don't know, maybe my reasons are not valid, but I would like to get feedback on my reasons too.

Finally, master's and doctoral students mentioned that macro-cultural norms hindered their inclination to engage in dialogic discussions with supervisors about their writing issues $( \mathbf { M A } = 2 9 $ $5 5 . 7 \%$ and $\mathrm { P h D } = 1 1$ $5 2 . 3 \%$ $\mathrm { X } ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 7 3 ) { = } . 0 6 9 , p = . 7 9 2 )$ . These interviewees found it unconventional or culturally inappropriate to request dialogic interactions with their supervisors, who are viewed as authoritative figures and not academic pers. The following two excerpts are taken from the interviews. In Excerpt 11, a master's student describes how she avoided dialogic feedback because of the social norms. In Excerpt 12, a doctoral student states that although it could be against social norms, she cautiously rejected some of her supervisor's comments.

Excerpt 11. . In several cases, I did not gree with my supervisors comments. You know, I was sure he was making mistakes about dynamic asessment. I preferred not to ask him about his rationalebehind the comments or even send him my reasons for not acepting the comments beause he might have felt direspected if a master's student had challenged his knowledge. In our culture, it i difficult or risky [laughing] to challenge what supervisors, especially aged ones, say. Anyway, I applied some of is comments that did not ruin my research and ignored the other ones, but I did not talk to him about my doubts.

Excerpt 12. . One of the most challenging partsof my disertation writing was when I wanted to write an email to disagree with my supervisor's comments. My supervisor is kind and open-minded, but I thought he might be upset i I refused to aply his comments. I rewrote the mails several times to make them as respectful as possible so as not to annoy him. I knew it might not be cceptable in our culture to reject a professor's suggestions, but I refused to apply his comments more than ten times. I think he wil not write recommendation letters for me [laughing].

# 4. Discussion and implications

The current qualitatie research studied L2 master's and doctoral students preferences for supervisor feedback. The findings of the thematic analysis identified five prominent feedback preferences: specifi, clear, non-appropriative, encouraging, and dialogic. The findings of this study align with the oft-cted feedback framework proposed by Yang and Carles (2013), in which feedack content (cognitive dimension), interpersonal negotiation (social-affective dimension), and the organization of fedback provision (structural dimension) formed the feedback triangle. Clarity and specificity are the two themes that are related to the cognitive dimension. Encouragement falls under the affctive dimension, and text ownership and dialogic feedback can be categorized under the social aspect. However, the structural facet, mentioned in Yang and Carles (2013), did not appear in the present empirical study. This finding suggets that the 2 graduate students in the Iranian context do not perceive insttion-related factors directly affcting thir supervisor feedback preferences It should be noted that these dimensions are not exclusively separate, and each component involves a combination of different factors; however, an aspect might be more salient than others.

The first theme from the cognitive dimension is fedback specificity. Most participants articulated a shared belief that supervisors comments need to be specific to be useful as they are easier to implement and help improve their knowledge. They believed that general comments merely indicated erors in a text, falling short of providing the detailed instructions necessary for students to effectively modify their work. This finding is in line with those of prior studies (Can & Walker, 2014; Carles, 2006; East et al., 2012, Price et al., 2010) that underscored the superiority of specific comments.

Nonetheless not all researchers advocate for providing specific comments on students' academic texts. As expressed by a few graduate students in this study, some reearch has shown that specific comments may fail to enhance students capabilies in the long term as they can discourage exploration, which is at the heart of the deep learning proces toward indeendent performance (Goodman et a. 004; Hatie & Timperley, 2007; Huxham, 2007). Alternatively, others (Lantolf & Poehner, 2014) have argued that there is no certain optimum level of specificity for feedback, and the decision should be made based on students' level of responsivenes.

The findings of the present study showed that master's students expressed a preference for specific comments more than doctoral students did. The former group articulated their negative perceptions of general comments because they were difficult to apply. However, a noticeable number of doctoral students, while acknowledging the benefits of specific comments, recognized the benefit of general comments for long-term learning purposes. Considering master's and doctoral students' subject area, academic writing, and second language knowledge, the former group is likely to have more dificulty applying general feedback, which functions as a verification tool without actionable guidance (Qwai, 2024). General feedback is infamous for being more difficult for ess knowl. edgeable students to apply since their knowledge does not allow them to behaviorally engage with feedack (Carless, 206; Qwai, 2024). On the other hand, doctoral students, sem to be les reliant on the elaboration embedded in specificomments. Shute (2008) asserts that more knowledgeable students are more likely to have less negative perceptions of general feedback due to their higher chances of successul fedback implementation. This was also observed in the present research, where doctoral students, significantly more than masterstudents, found general feedack useful, and noticeably fewer doctoral students labeled general fedback useles.

Thus, considering the graduate students' preference for specific fedback, and the benefits of both specific and general comments mentioned in the literature, it can be sugested that supervisors employ a range of comments with varying levels of specifict to help their students improve their texts, eel supported, and stay motivated throughout the theis/disrtation writin journey. Addtionally, providing students with the opportunities to explore major points related to subject area content or academic writing issues allows them to engage deeply with the intended points. However, supervisors should prioritize the constant evaluation of students' incorporation of general comments. This i especially crucial whil commenting on the texts of master's students, who are more likely to perceive general comments as useles. A safer altenative to general feedack to improve ong-term devlopment is the employment of both feedback and feedforward, defined as the specific information needed to achieve learning goals" (Stracke & Kumar, 2020, p. 276). Providing feedback that focuses on the reviewed text and the forward-looking feedforward that guides students on how to progress to the next developmental level can create an effective condition for task completion and development (Carter & Kumar, 2017).

The second theme related to the cognitive dimension of feedback deals with the clarity of comments. As diffrent scholars from different schoos of thought (Krashen, 1985; Vygotsky, 1978) have argued, language acquisition/development is doomed to failue When students cannot comprehend the provided item. Further, emphasizing the multi-layerednes of comprehension, Miller and Parlett (1974), use the term \*cue-deaf' to describe students who find writtenfeedback deely encrypted or cannot grasp the implicit disciplinary rule since they cannot hear what i intended to be communicated by instructors. This multi-layeredness of knowledge embedded in feedback signifies the role of comprehension as a prerequisite for both immediate text-related and sustained academic development.

As observed in this study, when students confront unclear comments, they are likely to use a range of strategies, from employing cognitive and social strategies to uncover the meaning (e.g., consulting resources or reaching out for help) to giving up implementing comments and resorting to terminating strategies (Alvira, 2016). In the present study, the findings showed that doctoral students reported a higher level of strategy use to uncover the meaning of comments; however, both master's students and doctoral students articulated using terminating strategies. Doctoral students' higher level of articulated readiness to use different trategies can be attriuted to their fdback experience (eg, Liu & Yu, 2022 Sadler, 2010). Their knowledge, in the form of L2 background knowledge and experience in handing feedback on their academic high-stakes texts, could enable them to utilize a host of strategies to deal with unclear comments more effectively than master's students. On the other hand, master's students who were ess equipped with these problem-solving alternatives seemed more likely to ignore the comments or omit annotated sections.

Given the significance of feedback comprehension in influencing students' engagement with feedback, learning outcomes (East et al. 2012; Han & Hyland, 2015; Hoomanfard & Rahimi, 2021; Wang & Li, 2011), andisciplinary knowledge development (Miler & Parlett, 1974; Yang & Carless, 2013), academic writing instructors and supervisors, are invited to work on their students feedback literacy (Carless & Boud, 2018) so they have a wide range of strategies at their disposal when they are given unclear comments. The findings of this study suggest (though this should be empirically tested in further studies that focus on students' cognitive and behavioral engagement) that master's students cannot implement strategies to uncover feedback meaning as much as doctoral students do. Thus, feedback litracy instruction should start a early as possible to transform cuedeaf students into cue-conscious ones, who can understand the meaning of the comments at both textual and disciplinary levels (Yang & Carless 2013). Finally, supervisors should monitor their students' understanding of comments using comprehension checks when they detect the signs of terminating strategies in their students' revised versions.

The third extracted theme was encouraging feedback, which aligns with the affctive dimension of the feedback model suggested by Yang and Carless (2013). Encouraging feedback plays a significant role in motivating graduate students and can positively affct their self-eficacy beliefs (Can & Walker, 2014), students' identity formation process and the qualit of their work (Yang & Cares, 2013). Some researchers (Carter & Kumar, 2017; Ferguson, 2011; Stracke & Kumar, 2010) have posited that encouraging feedack could motivat students to apply more comments, improve the qualit of the revised version, and improve their emotional relationship with their supervisors. The findings of the present study, in line with those of the previous ones (Can, 2009; ast et al, 2012) revealed that both master's and doctoral students showed a strong preference for encouraging fedback on their theses/dissertations.

In addition to its inherent advantages, encouraging fedback can also be used to decrease the adverse emotional aspects of negative comments, which are needed when the student is \*overconfident and underperforming" (Yang & Carless 2013, p. 290). However, negative emotions are reported to threaten students' sense of identity and self-eteem and can create unproductive feedback expe. riences (Higgins et al., 2001); thus, to make a balance between negative and encouraging comments, Hyland and Hyland's (2001) sandwich technique, in which two positive comments are provided before and afer a critical comment, seems to be the effective solution. This technique can provide students with the negative evidence they need to extend their knowledge and provide them with positive feedback, which can keep students motivated in the long journey of writing their theses/diserations in a second language (Hyland & Hyland, 2019; Stracke & Kumar, 2010).

The third set of extracted themes pertains to the social dimension (Yang & Carless 2013) of the feedack process. This aspect deals with the composition of the relationship between feedback providers) and feedback recipient(s). The theme of non-appropriatie feedback that emerged in this study belongs to this category. Drawing on Bakhtin's (1986) theory of dialogism, Morton et al. (2014) hae argued that graduatestudents often experience fierce conflict between centripetal and centrifugal forces that encourage them to accept or reject their supervisors' contribution to textual creation. Supervisors are supposed to be the source of inspiration, motivation, and change; however, they should le thir students retain ownership of their texts (Bartlett & Mercer, 200); in other words, they should craft a mindful balance between centrifugal and centripetal forces to be successul. However, this s esier said than done since high level of supervisor control can lead o students dssatisfaction (Alsadi, 2014) or even feelings f losing ownershi of the text (Hoomanfard et al., 2021). On the other hand, when supervisors ask students to make significant decisions alone, students might feel that they are left unsupported (Krase, 2007).

It should be noted that directive comments, known as the main vehices f text approriation, are not necessaril devised to change the direction of students texts. For instance, Pare (2011) contends that in the proces of enculturing students into the intended academic community of practice, supervisors, as full members of the community, are likely to provide directive comments without explicit referencing to "disciplinary conventions, rhetorical strategy, personal preference, or any other justification'" (p. 108). Pare argues that supervisors might intend to pas on some disciplinary conventions that they may not be able to verbalize, so they only guide their students on how to change their texts using directive. Pare suggests that when students receive such directive comments, they should request explanations since the follow-up open and explicit conversations can uncover supervisors' academic rationale behind the comments and provide insights into the disciplinary culture in which these judgments are formed. These open and explicit dis cussions are also known as dialogic fedback, discussed below. It should be noted that ignoring supervisors comments isnot inherently bad however, disagrements should be addressed in dialogic interactions (Carter & Kumar, 2017), so fdback incorporation decisions can be the result of extensive negotiation of meaning.

The findings of this study showed that significantly more doctoral than master's students voiced a clear dislike for comments that compelle them to relinquish ownership of their texts. One reason for this significant ifference might be master's students low self efficacy levels. As was evident i the present study and suggested by Can and Walker (2014) and Inouye and McAlpine (2017), academic writing selfefficacy beliefs can be a determining factor in shaping writers text ownership perceptions. The findings revealed that L2 master's students are more inclined to ignore text ownership when they perceive challenges in executing a task due to self-perceived limitations i research and academic writing abilities. In contrast, doctoral students, who have relatively more suc. cessful experience in academic settings (eg, publishing academic text, presenting at conferences, passing courses during their doctoral program), seem to claim ownership of their texts more than master's students.

The potential influence of financial conditions on graduate students' feedback preferences was also found in this study. Some participants expressed a desire to mitigate the burden of high tuition fees for an additional semester, promptig them to wiligly abandon ownership of their texts. As indicated in the literature (Sundijo & Kamardeen, 2018), inancial constraints can exert pressure on tuition-paying students to expedite ther studies, potentilly impacting both the process and outomes of their education (Jungbluth et l., 2011). Siilarl, Carter and Kumar (2017) have reported that time pressure an adversely affct both the provided feedback and students' engagement. The findings of this section underscore how factors beyond the immediate educational sphere can intricately shape the feedback preferences of L2 graduate students.

The last theme extracted from the interviews was dialogic feedback, which is defined as \*interactive exchanges in which in terpretations are shared, meanings negotiated, and expectations clarified" by Carles (2013). Dialogic fedback has been lauded for several advantages, including assisting students' transition to become independent researchers by providing opportunities for negotiation of meaning, which can reveal those tacit disciplinary rules that might otherwise stay unspoken (Pare, 2011). It also facilitates the proces of control handover to students so that they experience the responsibilities of conducting research projects independently when supervisorsfeel they are ready. Ths transition can be facilitated within dialogic discussions in which supervisors \*guide, pre scribe, inform, confront, elict, clarify, support, summarise and move the work on (Wisker et al., 2003, p. 396). It promotes students reflection, enculturation, and critical thinking abilit (Carter & Kumar, 2017; Lee & Murra, 2015), decreases the chances of text appropriation (Merkel, 2018), enhances students engagement with feedback (Liu & Yu, 2022), improves their feedback understanding (Pare, 2011), and helps develop into independent research writer (Carter & Kumar, 2017).

While the benefits of dialogic feedback have been well-documented in the literature, several factors can hinder is implementation. Carless (2016) identified factors such as the high number of students, lack of time, resources, and incentives, students' lack of motivatio, and techrs lakf sment and fedack litracy as barriers t fftie dili feackhe findins of the preent study highlight the significance of the quality of the relationship between supervisors and students, whichi regulated mainly by the macro-cultural norms of society. For instance, as data from some Iranian students revealed, even if supervisors welcomed dialogic feedback, the asymmetrical relationship could impede the formation of extended dialogic discussions. Iranian L2 master's sudents, due to the dominant culture in Iran that values respect for senior people (Hasrati, 2013), perceive their academic status to be lower than their supervisors. Hence, they are likely to find it inappropriate to challenge senior people's ideas. Previous studies (e.g, Jones et al., 2006) have also found that non-native English language learners of some cultures prefer their tutors to take charge of the interactions as they se their instructors as infallible authoritative academic institutional representatives who can show them the road to academic success. This mindset conflicts with the significant role of symmetrical relationships in dialogic feedback activities (Steen-Utheim & Wittek, 2017).

As the data pertinent to this theme showed, doctoral students expressed a greater preference for dialogic feedback compared to masters students. A reason for doctoral students' high level of preference for dialogic fedback could be their academic proficiency. Doctoral students, who are generally more academically proficient than master's students, feel more comfortable having dialogic discussions with their supervisors. Doctoral students prior academic achievements (subject-area knowledge, publication records, and L2 academic writing ability) can also function as capital that empowers them to ask for dialogic discussions in the proces of writing their dissrtations. In the same vein, other scholars (Merkel, 2018; Tardy, 2006) contend that in the case of highly advanced L2 writers (e.g., doctoral and postdoctoral students, who are usually more competent in a specific subject area than their instructors), are more likely to use dialogic interactions to defend their textual choices.

The extent to which supervisors facilitate dialogic discussions for master's and doctoral students plays a crucial role in shaping the effectiveness of these educational interactions. As noted in previous research (Hoomanfard et al., 2018), Iranian supervisors do not show interest in intiating dialogic feedback with their master's students as much as they do with doctoral students. The analysis of their feedback on master's and doctoral students shows that they seem to defer the transformative approach to supervision (Lee & Murray, 2015) until students reach the doctoral level and do not go beyond a transmission model when they supervise master's students. This one-way banking model o education (Freire, 1970), where knowledge is merely deposited into students, can minimize the opportunities for establishing dialogic discussions with master's students.

In contexts where symmetrical discussions between supervisors and students are not encouraged by cultural norms, different measures can be taken at various educational levels. First, as suggested by Carter and Kumar (2017) and Pare (2011) students should be informed that they can disagree with their supervisors' suggestions; however, they must do so using formal academic language in dialogic discussions. These finely-tuned disagreements can potentially open the doors to precious enculturating tacit disciplinary knowledge that might otherwise remain unshared. To promote this practice, policymakers and curriculum developers can include a pedagogical unit on dialogic feedback in academic writing workshops and semester-long courses to inform students about the sig nificance and appropriateness of dialogic discussions. They may also teach students how to argue for or against an idea using formal academic language.

Second, besides recognizing both master's and doctoral students right to benefit from dialogic discussions, supervisors can employ open-ended questions to encourage students to participate in these two-way discussions. Supervisors can use dialogues to encourage students to be proactively engaged with their tasks using fedforward. The provided feedforward can shape a new round of bilateral communication between novice and experienced members of the academic community of practice which can facilitate the completion of the task and the development of students' self-regulation (Carter & Kumar, 2017).

Third, supervisors and students can clarify their perceptions of thesis/dissertation writing tasks and supervision by using the Feedback Expectation Tool (Stracke & Kumar, 2020). The use of such tools can minimize misunderstandings and promote a healthy relationship between supervisors and students. In sum, cllaboration among the three key groups (i.e, policymakers, supervisors, and students) sems neesary to adressthe individual and macro-cultral isues that can impede the efective implementation of dialogic feedback.

# 5. Conclusions and suggestions for further research

This qualitative study examined L2 master's and doctoral students preferences for supervisor feedback. The preference of master's and doctoral students are not identical. While both groups highly value clear and encouraging feedback, master's students exhibit a stronger preference for specific comments. In contrast, doctoral students prioritie feedack that respects text ownership and fosters dialogic discussions. These insights emphasize the importance of tailoring feedback approaches to the distinct preference of master's and doctoral students. Based on the findings, even when both groups express a preference for a fedback type, it is not necessrily shaped by the same underlying factors. Finall, the findings support the significance of the role of macro-cultural norms in shaping students' preferences for feedback.

Considering the significant role of context inthe formation of preferences, other researchers are invited to conduct similar research in other cultural and educational contexts to examine the extent to which mastr's and doctoral students in different settings have identical preferences for supervior fdback. In addition, the data collection in the current rearch was limited to interviews; other studies can utilize triangulated research designs to collect data from a larger number of participants. Other researchers can study the extent to which supervisors usefedack to create the pacefor dialogic discussion. The efects of instruction on students peceptions and practices in dialogic discussions can also be explored in further studies. Researchers can also investigate the efects of using pedagogical tools (e.g., Fedback Expectation Tool, Stracke & Kumar, 2020) on students' atitudinal, behavioral, and cognitive engagement with comments. In adition, considering the possble departmental culture on practices and preferences, the supervisor feedback preferences of master's and doctoral students from diffrent hard and soft disciplines can also investigated. Finall, the comparative critical analysi of supervisor fedack characterisics within different cultural contexts can inform us about the practices in different contexts.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Data curation, Conceptualization

# Data Availability

Data will be made available on request.

# Appendix I

Semi-Structured Interview Questions.

1. What should supervisor feedback be like? Why?   
2. What do you like/dislike about your supervisor's feedback? Why?   
3. What are your suggestions to your own supervisor to provide high-quality comments?

# References

Amadi  2.  t    t      , at ee Higher Education Research & Development, 41(2), 211-225.   
Alsaedi, . S. (2014). ntion gte stdens petions f the this rh witing Master theis). Idin Univerity f Psyvana.   
Avira, R. 016.  f o an wn  n w h the uf ss.   c Po en, 18, 79-92.   
Andews,  Bo   Meer  2018). ig ds whset nd feak mi m for lg wt  s par. Practitioner Research in Higher Education, 11(1), 32-46.   
Hsati13 14, 455-465.   
Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. University of Texas Press.   
Bartlet, A, & Meer, G. (200. Rconctalising dscoures f power in postgrauate pedggie. ching in Hgher catin, 5(2) 195-204.   
Basola,  023  r sif t i  f sik  f  9, ie 100965.   
Bidron, , Saniak,  (2012). Wkin mery and horte memory ailties n aomplishd mlinal. he dem ng Jol, 962) 290-306.   
Bitchener, J. (2017).  guid to supervising non-native English witer of theses and disrtations: Focusing on the writing process. Routledge..   
Bitchener, J. (2018). Teacher writte fdack. In J. I Liontas (Ed.), The TE0L ecycloped of English langug eching (p. 1-7). John Wiley.   
Bitchener, J., & Storch, N. (2016). Written corrective feedback for L2 development. Multilingual Matters.   
Buse,  013. iek  ti f n206424   
Can, G., & Walker, A. (2014). Social science doctoral students' needs and preferences for written feedback. Higher Edcation, 68, 303-318.   
Carless, D. (2006). Diffring perceptions in the feedback process. Studies in Higher Education, 31(2), 219-233.   
Carless, D. (2016). Feedback as dialogue. Encyclopedia of Educational Philosophy and Theory, 1-6.   
Car    . education: Developing dialogue with students (pp. 113-122). Routledge.   
Cares,  d 018Tf  c   f fk  go 438) 1315-1325.   
Carr ,  07.   i  h 1) 68-75.   
Carter, S., & Laurs, D. (Eds.). (2017). Developing research writing: A handbook for supervisors and advisors. Routledge.   
Chesut, R Si,   oung, H A & To . (2015. xag h rltionhip btn th h g ont, core expriee, and graduate students' research self-efficacy beliefs. International Journal of Doctoral Studies, 10, 399-418.   
Council of Europe. (2001). Cmon ope Frmework f Rce for Lagag: Lning teching ssmnt. Cambridge Universt Pe,   
st  cr,   12  fie    i University Teaching and Learning Practice, 9(2), 1-16.   
Ellis R. (2010). A framework for investigating oral and write feedback. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 32, 335-349.   
Ferguson, P. (2011) Student pereptions of quality feback in teacher education.Aesment & Evaltion in Highe Edction, 36(1), 51-62.   
Freire, P. (1970). The adult literacy process as cultural action for freedom. Harvard Educational Review, 40(2), 205-225.   
Goodman, J. S., Wood, R E & Hndrick, M. (2004) Fedack peificity, exploration, ad eng. J of Aplied Pychogy, 89(2), 248258   
n, 15. i g 30, 31-44.   
Harwood, N., & Pri, B. (2020). Adaptive master's disertation suprvision: A longidil cae study. Techng n Higher dction, 25(1), 68-83.   
Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research, 77(1), 81-112.   
Hgins   .  01n e  a     gein, 62) 26974.   
Homand, H Jar,   Jlr, 2021).  t ti  w fk  thr a x. ZABANPAZHUHI (Journal of Language Research), 12(37), 219-246.   
Han  1ti    k n supervisors' perceptions. Journal of Research in Applied Linguistics, 9(2), 24-46.   
Ho1) f   r  it a language-related episodes. Journal of Language Horizons, 5(2), 51-73.   
Huxham, M. (2007). Fast and effctivefedack: Are model answers the answer? Asssment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 326) 601-611.   
Hyland, F., & Hyland, K. (2001). Sugaring the pill Praise and criticism in witen fedack. Jodl of Second Language in writing 10, 185-212.   
Hylandd019.s   wg  .,    xs d issues. Cambridge University Press.   
ue  017   ni r f  f  g Practice, 14(2), 3.

Linguistics, 11(1), 160-189. Second Language Writing, 15(1), 1-23. Jnglt ,  h   . 11 i s  nt e e students. Journal of Genetic Counseling, 20(3), 270-286. Krase E. 2007. ye the mncatin etw s a nt gh nside tiol vir/2 avie tionh. Jol f Engish for d Purposes, 6, 55-70. Krashen, S. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. Torrance, CA: Laredo,. Kumar, V., & Stracke, E. (2007). An analysis of written feedback on a PhD thesis. Teaching in Higher Education, 12(4), 461-470. Lanf Lee, A ra,  015). iiwtin n    s r.o  tin d chn i 25) 558-570. Li, S., & Seale, C. (2007). Managing criticism in Ph.D. supervision: A qualitatiecase study. Studies in Higher Education, 32(4), 511-526. Li . th f  nting 030 Mepour,  mad H V  2023). Pr k racy n ous and hus mutr-mtondtion  n  cont Iranian Journal of Language Teaching Research, 11(1), 97-116. Merkel, W. (2018). Role reverals: A case study of dialogic interactions and feedback on L2 writing. Journal f econd Languge Writing 39, 1628. Millr, C M. L., & Parlett, M. (1974). Up to the mark: study of the examination game. London: Society for Research into Higher Educatin, oron, J., toch  mpo. (2014) ak  wtin in th upersi f pe ss: ights from th workf k ad akh. Journal of Academic Language & Learning, 8(1), 24-36. kuda,   1 , 52, 391-413. Pare 1 doctoral students, supervisors and administrators. Dordrecht: Springer. Pavlenko, A. (2007). Autobiographic narratives as data in applied linguistics. Applied Linguistics, 28(2), 163-188. Pilcher, N. (2011). The UK postgraduate masters disertation: An elusive chameleon'? Teaching in Higher Education, 16, 29-40. Price   i  0t    tf  g, 53) 277-289. Qwai, N. (2024). Empath in writen feedback to graduate students (Doctoral dissertation). Universite d'Ottawa| Universty of Ottawa. Rahmi,  fi, h . 2021). e ks fr h rtice in hr ctio: tiv fro sh  ch in a. Iranian Journal of Language Teaching Research, 9(2), 109-127. Sader, DR (2010. ond feack Dig stnt capabiit in cople apa. Asmet & ion n Hghr tion 35(5), 535-550. Shute, V. J. (2008). Focus on formative feedback. Review of Educational Research, 78(1), 153-189. Steen-Uth, A,  Witek A L. (2017). Digic fak ad tlties fr studnt lng. Lg Ce an Scil nctin, 15, 1830. Strcke a1k   r   Ph ti ic ) 1932. Stace,  ar,. (20.rn e  uisihe  f t fa i .   of Studies, 15, 265-284. Sundjo  amard . (2018.  cls ig gt stion t n  Inio Jo of onion Education and Research, 14(4), 1-16. Tad,  (006)h     k  i.  l  .) k  eond language writing: Contexts and issues (pp. 60-78). Cambridge University Press. Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press. Wagner,  018 of fs fon d  i e tn f amr t.  e  3 27-242. 12(2), 101-112. Wiker, ,   Tf e,  03. uy   h ng a in t learning conversations of staff and students at postgraduate level. Teaching in Higher Education, 8(3), 383-397. Yang, M & Crs,  2013). h feack trigle ad the nme f c fack r. chi  Hgh tion, 183), 285-29.