# Exemplification in Chinese English-major MA students' and expert writers' academic writing: A local grammar based investigation

Hang Sua,\*, Yuqing Zhanga, Meng Huat Chaub

a Sichuan International Studies University, China b Universiti Malaya, Malaysia

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Local grammar   
Exemplification   
Chinese English-major MA students   
Expert writing

This study adopts a local grammar approach to investigate exemplification in Chinese Englishmajor MA student writers' and expert writers' academic writing. Using corpora compiled of Chinese English-major MA students' degree dissertations and expert writers' published research articles in the field of Applied Linguistics as the data, the investigation shows that although the Chinese MA student writers used exemplification as frequently as expert writers to specify abstract superordinate categories, they underused exemplification with regard to aspects such as performative verbs, exemplificatory imperatives, and the strategy of exemplifying by citing relevant studies. The implications of local grammar based investigation into academic writing for EAP writing research and pedagogy are further discussed.

# 1. Introduction

English for Academic Purposes (EAP) writing research has traditionally focused on investigating lexicogrammatical features such as lexical bunde (e.., Corte, 204; Hyland, 2008), signalling nouns (.g., Flowerdew, 206, 2010), and yntactic complexity ( u, 2010; Ortega, 2015). Whil some studies have also considered discoursal features such as cohesion and coherence (e.g., Crossley, yle, & McNamara, 2016; Todd, Thienpermpool, & Keyuravong, 2004) and the interpersonal aspect of academic writing within the framework of metadiscourse (e.g., Hyland, 2004; Adel, 2006), the pragmatic aspect seems to have been largely neglected in EAP writing reearch. This study attempts to bridgethis gap by exploring English second language (hereafter 2) student writers pragmatic performance of discourse acts, with the term discourse act' used as an equivalent of communicative or rhetorical functions such as giving examples, defining terminologies, and making comparison and contrast.

Specifically, the study focuses on the discourse act of exemplification. Following the tradition of research established in many studies comparing student and expert writers' practices (e.g., Ansarifar, Shahriari, & Pishghadam, 2018; Larsson, 2016), the current study compares the use of exemplification by one specific group of L2 student writers, i., Chinese English-major MA student writers, with that by expert writers in their published rearch articles in the field of Applied Linguistics. To that end, t draws on insights from local grammar research, as local grammars have been shown to be useful for quantifying reliably the realisations of discourse acts across contexts and as such facilitate contrastive investgation (Section 3). The study wl not oly further the dicussion on the needto raise the pragmatic or rhetorical awareness of academic writers, especially L2 and novice academic writers but also ffer a viable method (i.., local grammar) to explore their pragmatic performance of discourse acts in academic writing, thereby contributing to EAP writing research.

The remainder f the paper is organised into five sections. In Section 2 we discus exemplification and highlight the importance of investigating exemplification in academic writing In Section 3 we propose a local grammar approach to explore academic writers pragmatic performance of discourse acts in the context of EAP. Section 4 introduces the corpora and the method used to retrieve the data. Section 5presents the analyses, iscusses the result, and considers the implications and applications of the (kind of research reported in this paper for EAP writing research and pedagogy. Section 6 concludes the paper.

# 2. Exemplification in academic writing.

Previous studies have observed that there are a number of discourse acts, that is, rhetorical or communicative functions, that are frequently performed in academic writing, and have also emphasised the importance of the teaching of these acts in academic contexts (e.g., Widdwson & Allen, 1985; Jordan, 1999 [1st ed. 1980]; Paquot, 2008). Paquot (2010 p.83), fr instance, idnified twelve such acts or functions as exemplificatin (i.e, the act of giving examples, cause and effect (.., the act of explaning why things happen), and comparison and contrast (i.., the act f comparing and contrasting). In adition to the forementioned ones, Kirszner andMandel (2017) and Fang (2021) further iscussed many other such acts or writing sills as definition (i.e. the act of defining terms/concepts) and classfication (i.e, the act of sorting items into categories). The present study focuses on exemplification which, according to Hyland (2007, p. 270), refers to a communication process through which meaning is clarified or supported by a second unit which illustraes the firt by citing an example". For our purpose we slightly modified Hyland's (2007) definition. We define exemplification as a discourse act performed by the writer him/herself to llustrat or support an argument, a viewpoint, an observation, etc., or to present subordinate categories or subtypes to clarify or specify abstract, superordinate ones, as illustrated in examples (1) and (2) respectively.

(1) This analytical framework has also been applied to other more specialised domains. For example, Cortes (2013) applies the lexical bundle framework to the study of university student writing in history. (2) An example of this potential oversight is the lack of discussion by the researchers regarding notable disparities ..

In example (1), the second sentence starting with Cortes (2013) pplie. cites a relevant study to llustrat or support the argument i.e., the framework has been applied to other specialised domains) presented in the preceding sentence, and in example(2), the lack of liscussion ...is a specific example that specifies this potential oversight.

The importance f focusing on exemplification can be een on a number of grounds. First, exemplification is a frequently performed discourse act in academic writing across various disciplines. For example, Siepmann (2005) points out that exemplification is particularly prominent in humanities texts. Hyland (2007, p. 270) notes that exemplifiction is "a recurrent feature of academic writing and a cerl aset f exposition, a part of the outine ways in which writers i all field seek  make the ids accessible and persuasive". Similarly, Paquot (2010) observes that presenting examples is much more frequent in academic texts than in other genres (e.g., conversation, fiction).

Next, a number of important functions of exemplification are evident in academic writing. For example, studies such as Coltier (1988, cited in Siepmann, 2005, p. 112) suggest that exampleserve to support astract knowledge and generate new knowledge. Hinkel (2004, p. 297) further points out that \*roviding contextuall relevant examples and illustrations represents a reasonable and valid means of thesis support in explaining one's position on an issue'. In a similar vein, Hyland (2007, p. 283) argues that offering examples can \*make other channels of persuasion availabletosupport the writer's argument, diluting unrelieved technical argument or flights of abstraction with specific, material description with which the reader can more immediately identify". In a nutshell exemplification serves to provide additional information to clarify or specify relatively abstract concept or knowledge,to illustrate or support aguments or viewpoints and, ultimatel, to ensure the persuasivenes and accessbilit of an academic text (ee also Hinel, 2004; Hyland, 2007; Su & Zhang, 2020; Triki, 2021).

Despite the widespread employment and importance of exemplification in academic writing, studies have found that L2 or novice writers have difficulty using exemplification appropriatly. For example, Hinkel (2004, p. 297) observes that \*allthough giving examples represents a prevalent explanatory and thesis support trategy in constructing persuasive text in English, teachers and re searchers have found that collge-level L2 writers rarely employ this strategy sucesfully and in accordance with the guidelines identified inL2 composition instruction'. Siemann (2005, p. 112) similarly argues that t exemplification] poses serious dificulties for L1 and L2 learners". Paquot's (2008) investigation further shows that English L2 writers repertoire of exemplifying phraseologies is far more limited than that of their English 1 counterpart. In short, L2 writers have been reported to experience difficulty in per. forming exemplification appropriately, which is likely due to a perceived limited repertoire on their part in exemplifying phraseologies. Hence a thorough investigation into exemplification in academic writing is itelf a worthwhile undertaking in that it could help to systematically document and describe the lexicogrammatical resources that are available to peform exemplification. Findings from investigations of this kind could also usefull inform the teaching and learning of exemplification in EAP contexts (se also Oliveira & Brown, 2016; Su & Zhang, 2020; Zhang & Su, 2021).

Another reason for focusing on exemplification relates to the corpus methodology. Specifically, this is because exmplification has been shown to be typically signalled by a set of lexical markers. Hyland (2007), for instance, explores academic writers' use of exemplification across disciplines by examining several exemplificatory markersuch as for example for instance, and such as. In a similar vein, other studies such as Paquot (2008, 2010) and Su and Zhang (2020) also start with such exemplificatory markers.

Moreover, Triki (2021, p. 3) points out that using an explicit indicator when exemplifying is the norm to guarantee unambiguous meaning of exemplification. Since the current investigation uses corpus methods to investigate Chinese English-major MA student writers use of exemplification in their academic writing, the observation that exemplification is typically signalled by lexical markers suggests that it is amenable to corpus search.

Notwithstanding its prominence in academic writing, exemplification has been largely neglected in EAP writing research (Siep. mann, 2005). Only a few studies have investigated exemplification in academic discourse so far. These include Hyland (2007) who explored how profesional academic writers use exemplification to construct and illustrat thir arguments, and Su and Zhang (2020) who attempted to document the lexicogrammatical resources available to perform exemplification by analysing academic texts produced by expert writers. Another recent study is that of Triki (2021) who presented a cross-disciplinary investigation into exemplfication across oft and hard disciplines. Nonetheless, investigation into exemplification in student or learner writing is even rarer. It seems, to date, that only Paquot (2008, 2010) has examined exemplification in English L2 learners academic writing and found, not surprisingly, that learners have a relatively limited repertoire of phraseologies available to perform exemplification.

Moreover, previous studies normall investigate exemplification by examining the use of exemplificatory markers. That is, they tend to expore exmplification from a lexicogrammatical perspective. This are f research, however, has rarely been examined from a functional or discourse-semantic perspective. At the same time, it is worth mentioning that some recent EAP studies haveatempted to analyse lexicogrammatical forms (e.g., lexical bundles, syntacticll complex sentences) in terms of the rhetorical functions they realise (e., Cortes, 2013; Le & Harrngton, 2015; Lu, Yoon, & Kisselev, 2021; Moreno & Swales, 2018). These studies have shown the importance of shifing the focus of examining lexicogrammatical features to a functional or discourse-semantic analysis f academic writing and further discussed the potential implications for EAP writing pedagogy. In particular, Lu, Casal, and Liu argue that,

.. systematic characterizations of the linguistic features associated with particular communicative functions may potentially deepen our understanding of disciplinary genre practices and provide insights and resources for EAP writing pedagogy. (Lu. Casal. & Liu. 2020. n. 1. n. 1)

In line with this body of research, the present study draws on a functional approach, i.e., local grammar (see Section 3), to investigate exemplification in Chinese English-major MA student writers and expert writers' academic writing. It willbe shown that local grammars allow us to explore the phraseological patternings of language use t the discourse-semantic level, which in turn offers some insights for future investigation into academic writers' performance of other discourse acts of importance in EAP writing research.

# 3. A local grammar approach to investigating discourse acts in academic writing

We illustrat our approach to investigating student writers' pragmatic performance of discourse acts by comparing their use of exemplification wth that of expert writers (e Section 4 for moredisussion about the data). As will be sen the current inestigation involves the quantification of the realisations of a given discourse act. To that end, we further draw on insights from local grammar research: a functional approach to linguistic analysis and explanation that seeks to acount for one meaning or function only (Hunston, 2002a). One of the defining features that distinguish local grammars from general grammars is that they use functionally transparent and context-specific teminologies to analyse instances realising the target discourse or communicative act see Banbrook and icla (2001) and Su et al. (2018) for more iscussion about local grammars and general grammars). In other words, local grammars attempt to account for the relationship between syntactic units by using functional terms rather than by using grammatical ones such as Subject, Object etc. For the purpose ofillustration, Table 1 presents examples of local grammar analyses of exemplification.

In the example . topics impose the ned for difent communicatie skill. For example, Pumps is an idel topic for teaching static and dynamic description , the discourse-semantic reationship between the two clauses is one of exemplification, with th second clause illustrating the preceding one. Thus, the semantics of the first clause is the thing being exemplified and that of the second i a specific example of the thing being exemplified; the marker for example indicaes that the act of exemplifying is being performed. From the perspective of local grammars, we can use terminologies such as Exemplified', Indicator, and Exemplification-sC to account for the relationship between these syntactic units. The point, then, is that each syntactic unit which has pragmatic meaning is analysed using a functional terminology that is directly related to its discoursal or pragmatic function in local grammar analysis. In the meantime it should also be noted that the syntactic unit realising given functional terminology may either be nominal or verbal phrae(s) or clause (s), as seen in Table 1.

Table 1 Local grammar analyses of exemplification (adapted from Su, Zhang, & Lu, 2021).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Exemplified</td><td>Indicator</td><td colspan="2">Exemplification-SCa</td></tr><tr><td>... topics impose the need for different communicative skills</td><td>For example</td><td colspan="2">Pumps&#x27; is an ideal topic for teaching static and dynamic description ...</td></tr><tr><td>Exemplified</td><td colspan="2">Indicator</td><td>Exemplification-RS</td></tr><tr><td>Outside the USA, there are also some studies on LI retention</td><td colspan="2">(for example</td><td>Hill and Hill 1977 on Aztec in Mexico; Campbell 1980 on Italian in Australia)</td></tr><tr><td>Exemplified</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Indicator</td><td>Exemplification-SC</td></tr><tr><td>... reporting verbs were taken from journals in diverse fields</td><td>(including</td><td>for example</td><td>Applied Linguistics, Geology, Public Administration, Engineering)</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Exemplification-sC isthe short form of Exemplificatin-Subcategory, which means that the act f exemplifying is ralised by presenting sub categories. ExemplficationR stads for Exemplification-Releant stud, which means that the act of xmplifying is realised by citing relevant studies (see Section 5 for more discussion about the terminologies).

While Table 1illustrates the maping of functional-pragmatic terms onto corresponding syntactic units, it also points to a chal. lenging issue involved in local grammar research, which relates to the identification of a set of appropriat functional-pragmatic terminologies for the subsequent local grammar analyses. It is challenging because the identification of such terminologies requires the analyst to interpret the discourse-semantic relations between the syntactic units of the target instances. o overcome this challenge, Su (2020a) suggests two guiding principles. One is termed the Principle of Transparency, meaning that the terminologies should be proposed within the specific context of the target pragmatic or discourse act and that the terminologies should explicitl reflect the discourse function of the syntactic unit being analysed. The other is termed the Principle of Economy, which requires the analyst to strike a balance between the specificity and the number of the terminologie identified. The two principles would, arguably, be useful to guide the identification of terminologies for local grammar research (see Su (2020a) for more discussion).

Currently, local grammars have been employed to account for discourse or communicative acts such as evaluation (Hunston & Sinclair, 200; Hunston & Su, 2019), definition (Barnbrook, 2002), disclaiming (Cheng & Ching, 2018), and exemplification (Su & Zhang, 2020). These studies show that local grammars can provide a more systematic and specialised description of the target discourse or communicative act, thereby contributing to the description of language use in general (see also Bednarek, 2008; Buter, 2004; Hunston & Sinclair, 2000; Su, 2017; Su & Wei, 2018). Furthermore, the resulting local grammar descriptions are more infor. mative for language teaching, because it would be more useul to know an element in terms of its discoural or communicative function than in grammatical ones seea Hunston, 2002b, p. 157). Indeed, rent reearch has further discused the pedgogical implications and applications of local grammar research, such as raising language learners awarenes of the patterned nature of language in use and that such research can be used to inform the design of English teaching materials (e.g., Hunston & Su, 2019; Su, 2020b; Su & Zhang, 2020; Zhang & Su, 2021).

Another notable strength of using a local grammar aproach to describe language use, which is of most relevance to the present study, is that the reulting local grammar descriptions ffer a way to quantify the relisations of a given discourse act. This is based on the observation that once the (local) grammar of a given discourse act is developed, realisations of that discourse act can be identified in a corpus and, accordingly, the frequency of instances realising a particular local grammar pattern can be calculated (Hunston, 2002a, pp. 180-181). This has been demonstrated by, for example, Bednarek (2007) who used a local grammar approach to compare evaluative language used in broadshet and tabloid, and found that differences between them are more likely to be revealed by the frequency of evaluative pattrns than the function of these patterns. Other studies which further explored the potential of local grammars in quantifying the realisations of a given pragmatic or discourse act include Su (2020a, 2021). Specifically, Su (2020a, 2021), examining the realisations of the speech act of apology, observed that instances containing the same ilocutionary force indicating device (hereafter IFID) may realis different discourse-semantic patterns and that different IFIDs may realise the same pattern. This in turn suggests that simply counting the occurrences of given lexical items or IFIDs may not be able to quantify relialy the ways in which a given speech act is performed. Su (2020a, 2021) therefore proposes and demonstrates a local grammar approach to contrastive speech act studies.

In the case of discourse acts in academic writing, Su et al. (2021) examined exemplification and found that the same exemplfi catory markr like the same IFID in speech act studies, may realise different discourse-semantic patterns and that one same pattern may be realised by different markers. The upshot of the discussion, then, is that simply counting the lexicogrammatical markers might not be areliable way o quantify how exmplificatin, and by extension other discourse acts, i used by different groups of writers. The local grammar approach, on the other hand, may be able to quantify more reliably the realisations of a given discourse act, because it captures the regularities of language use at both the lexicogrammatical and discourse-semantic levels. Seen in this light, local grammars could be a useful approach for contrastive discourse studies in general. In the present study we thus employ the local grammar approach to compare Chinese English-major MA student writers use of exemplification with that of expert writers, aiming to explore their performance of exemplification in academic writing. This comparison is of course not without limitations, which willbe further discussed later when we consider the implications of the current study for EAP writing research and pedagogy.

# 4. Corpora and data retrieval

For the current invesigation, two corpora were compiled of academic texts in the field of Applied Linguistics. Of the two corpora one was compiled of Chinese English-major MA students' degre dissertations (hereafter CEMAD) and the other of published research articles by expert writer (hereafter CORA). The MA dissertations were allfrom the Applie Linguistics programme of universties in mainland China. They were collected partly because disertations in this MA programme were required to be written in English (note that this requirement does not apply to other MA programmes at Chinese universties) and partl because writers in this discipline have been shown to employ relatively more exemplificatory resources than writers of other disciplines (Hland, 2007). In addition, we focus on the genre of MA dissertations because it is as Hyland (2004, p. 134) notes, a high stakes genre at the summit of a student's ac. ademic accomplishment'. The MA disertations would thus make rich data for the current investigation. Lastly, it i important to mention that Chinese MA students' disertations were uploaded to CNKI (China National Knowledge Infrastructure) afer their graduation, and are then made available to all ubscribing universties. This has facilitated the compilation of the first corpus ofthis study.

The other corpus is compiled from research articles published in Applied Lingustics (http://academic.oup.com/applij/). Published research artices were used as reference because they \*are commonly recognised as the model of academic writing" (Alangari, Jaworska, & Laws, 2020, p. 4) and \*represents the norm that advanced learner writers try to reach and their teachers try to promote"

Table 2 Meta-information of the two corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Corpora</td><td>No. of texts</td><td>No. of tokens</td><td>Average length</td></tr><tr><td>CORA</td><td>330</td><td>4,213,509</td><td>12,768.21</td></tr><tr><td>CEMAD</td><td>162</td><td>3,558,276</td><td>21,964.67</td></tr></table></body></html>

(Adel, 2006, p. 207).Moreover, Aplie ingusics has a relatively long history of publication (with the first isue published in 1980), covers a broad range of topics in Applied Linguistics, and is currently ranked as the top 1 journal in the category of Linguistics; these properties ensure that the reearch artices collected would be highly representative of advanced academic writing in the field. At this point, it should be mentioned that the English L1 status of the authors in the sampling process was not considered, because all published articles have undergone rigorous pr review and careful ditoril processng after accetance. This also means that we ignored the linguacultural backgrounds of the authors and just viewed the corpus as representing expert performance of academic writing in Linguistics.

Table 2 provides the meta-information of the two corpora.

The two corpora were uploaded to Sketch Engine (htps:/ap.sketchengine.eu/; Kilgarrff, Rychly, Smrz, & Tugwell, 2004) for data retrieval. As noted earlier exmplification is typicll sigalld by a set f lexical marker. Acordingly,daing on insights from previous studies, we identified eight markers and used them to search for instances of exemplification in our corpora (Table 3). As shown in Triki (2021), nearly $9 0 \%$ of instances of exemplification would co-occur with one of these markers. We are thus confident that searching these markers could yield a high hit rat of exemplification in a corpus, while in the meantime we acknowledge that a few instances of exemplification which do not co-occur with these markers have been left undetected.

A glimpse at Table 3 suggests that, overall, expert writers used more exemplificatory markers than Chinese English-major MA student writers did (2363.59 vs. 1947.02) and that the difference is statistically significant $( \mathrm { L L } = 1 5 5 . 1 5 $ $p < . 0 0 0 1 $ . With regard to individual markers, i is observed that while the two groups of writers use of for example i of similar frequency, Chinese English-major MA student writers used for instance significantly more frequently $( \mathrm { L L } = 1 8 . 2 3$ $p < . 0 0 0 1 $ . The reason for this may be that,

. instruction is most likely responsible for the massive overuse of for instance in EFL students. For example and for instance are often taught as two synonyms and as a result, learners use them interchangeably. Learners presumably write for instance instead of for example when they have already used for example in their essay and want to change for the sake of variety.

(Paquot, 2008, p. 110, p. 110)

It is also interesting to mention that Chinese English-major MA student writers used e.g. significantly les frequently but used such as significantly more frequently when performing exemplification. Aditionally, the student writers under examination also used the performatie verbs exemplify and illustrate les frequently, although only the dfference in the use of exemplify is significant $( \mathrm { L L } = 1 6 . 6 9 $ $p < . 0 0 0 1 $

Nevertheles, just loking at the occurrences of these markers may not allow us to draw a fl picture of how exemplification was used respectively by Chinese English-major MA student writers and expert writers. To remedy this problem, below we present a discourse-semantic analysis of their uses of exemplification from the perspective of local grammars and discuss the results and implications.

Table 3 Exemplificatory markers and their frequency in the two corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Corpora Markers</td><td colspan="2">CORA</td><td colspan="2">CEMAD</td><td>LLb</td><td>LRc</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Raw</td><td>Normeda</td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> for example</td><td>2363</td><td>560.82</td><td>1958</td><td>550.27</td><td>0.39</td><td>0.03</td></tr><tr><td> for instance</td><td>517</td><td>122.7</td><td>566</td><td>159.07</td><td>18.23**</td><td>0.37</td></tr><tr><td>e.g.</td><td>3142</td><td>745.7</td><td>683</td><td>191.95</td><td>1324.82**</td><td>1.96</td></tr><tr><td>such as</td><td>2716</td><td>644.59</td><td>2903</td><td>815.84</td><td>77.91**</td><td>0.34</td></tr><tr><td> an example of</td><td>170</td><td>40.35</td><td>64</td><td>17.99</td><td>33.56**</td><td>1.17</td></tr><tr><td> an instance of</td><td>36</td><td>8.54</td><td>12</td><td>3.37</td><td>8.84</td><td>1.34</td></tr><tr><td>exemplify</td><td>130</td><td>30.85</td><td>59</td><td>16.58</td><td>16.69**</td><td>0.90</td></tr><tr><td>illustrate</td><td>885</td><td>210.04</td><td>683</td><td>191.95</td><td>3.14</td><td>0.13</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>9959</td><td>2363.59</td><td>6928</td><td>1947.02</td><td>155.15**</td><td>0.28</td></tr></table></body></html>

a This refers to 'normalised frequency' which in the present study is normalised per million words. $\mathrm { L L } = \mathrm { l o g }$ likelihood ratio; \*\* denotes $p < . 0 0 0 1$ : \* denotes $p < . 0 0 1$ LR denote o rati or the binary o fthe ratio of eative frquencie, and was use in the preet study to measure the efect siz Hadie, 2014).

# 5. Data analyses, results, and discussion

As discussed in Section 3, local grammars use functional terminologies to analyse corresponding syntactic unit. The identification of aset of apropriate teminologies is thus crucial. For our purose we adapted the terminologies used in Su et al. (2021), as they have been shown to be useful for a local grammar analysis of exemplification. These terminologies are listed and explained in Table 4.

Because of space constraints and also given that previous studies have provided a good treatment and discussion of the local grammar analyses of exemplification (e.g., Su et al, 2021; Su & Zhang, 2020), we wil not discuss the analyses any further, but only present some examples to illustrate how we performed the analyses in Table 5.

Our analyses identified 39 local grammar patterns in the two corpora. To avoid untypical uses, our discussion focuses on those patterns which have more than 10 occurrences in either corpus, whereas the other relatively infrequent patterns are listed in the Appendix. An overview of these patterns, with an example given of each, is presented in Table 6.

Table 7 gives an overview of the distribution of these pattrns across the two corpora, providing the quantitative information for the subsequent discussion.

Based on the analyses, some observations can be tentatively drawn. First as with the analysis of exemplificatory markers in Section 4, the local grammar analyses confirm that, overall, expert writers performed the act of exemplifying more frequently than Chinese English-major MA student writers did (2265.57 vs. 1827.57) and that the difference between the two groups of writers was significant $( \mathrm { L L } = 1 8 0 . 6 4 $ $p < . 0 0 0 1 $ . We further compared the means across CORA $( \mathrm { m e a n } = 1 1 9 . 2 4 $ , standard deviation $= 3 2 3 . 2 3 $ ) and CEMAD $( \mathrm { m e a n } = 9 6 . 1 9 $ , standard deviation $= 3 4 7 . 1 4 $ ) in terms of the local grammar patterns, and the results of non-parametric T-test (MannWhitney) showed that there were statisticallysignificant differences between the two groups of writers' use of exemplification $\left( p = \right.$ $0 2 5 < 0 . 0 5$ . One explanation might be that the student writers were not fully aware of the importance of the use of exemplifications in academic writing, or that they were not familiar with the strategies to perform exemplification in academic writing. Either way, this points to the need for more explicit teaching of exemplification as wellas other discourse acts in EAP writing pedagogy, as wil be discussed in greater detail later.

Second, the most frequent pattern for both the expert and Chinese English-major MA student writers is PA1(Exemplified - Indicator - Exemplification-SC). In this patern, writers provide subcategories to ilustrate a superordinat category, making the general more specific (e., the tdtionl meths such s tchers instructio, clssom quesions, and ot of hmework. Hwer, the statistics shows that the student writers used (only) this pattern significantly more frequently than expert writers $( \mathrm { L L } = 1 6 . 1 0 , p < . 0 0 0 1 )$ . One possible explanation about this finding, together with the observation that the student writers underused the majorit of other patterns identified in the study, is as reported in previous research that student writers had a relatively limited repertoire of exemplifying phraseologie nd, consequenty, rlied heaviy upon ndoverusedthose highly frequent nes (Paquot, 2008). his can be intrretdas mainly that expert writers have greater experience than student writers in using a wide range of exemplifying patterns.

An alternative interpretation of the overuse of PA 1 relates to language transfer (see also De Cock, 2003; Paquot, 2008). That is because the typical sequence of exemplification in Chinese is also the one in which a writer presents the Exemplified, then Indicator, and finll the Exemplification (i.e., PA1), the oservation that PA 1 was most frequently used by Chinese English-major MA student writers may be accounted for by the fact that there is direct counterpart of the sequence in the two languages, thus resulting in positive transfer in language use (this explanation could also apply to other pattens such as PA 7 Exemplified - Indicator - xemplification-RS - Supporting statement). At the same time, there was also negative transfer. For example, the reason why the student writers underused patterns in which the Indicator occurs at the end f a sentence (e.g., A11 Exemplified - Exemplification-SC- Indicator) may be that in Chinee the Indicator rarel occurs at the final position of a sentence, and the reason why the students writer used much less frequently exemplificatory imperatives (e.g., PA 9 Initiator - Indicator - Exemplification-SC) and other pattens with Initiatr e.g, PA 16 Initiator - Exemplification-sc - Indicator - Exemplified') is likely that there is no direct counterpart of such realisations for exemplification in Chinese. In consequence, the student writers may feel ess certain about using such ways to perform the act of exemplifying.

Table 4 Terminologies for analysing exemplification (adapted from Su et al., 2021).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Terminology</td><td>Explanation</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Exemplified</td><td>The argument, viewpoint or superordinate category that is. being illustrated or specified..</td><td>There are various units of meter, or patterns, that a poet is likely to use, such as iambs, trochees, spondees ...</td></tr><tr><td>Exemplification-RS</td><td>One or more existing relevant studies that were used to specify. or illustrate an argument or viewpoint.</td><td>... actually involves complex mechanics. Schiffrin (1987: 24-8), for example, proposes a five-plane model which ...</td></tr><tr><td>Exemplification-SC</td><td>One or more subordinate categories that were used to specify a superordinate or abstract one.</td><td>The illocutionary act, i.e., the speaker&#x27;s intention realised in producing. an utterance, e.g., request, compliment ....</td></tr><tr><td>Indicator</td><td>Exemplificatory markers signalling the act of exemplifying.</td><td>... overshadowed by issues such as subject matter learning, personal ....</td></tr><tr><td>Initiator</td><td>Elements that introduce or initiate the act of exemplifying.</td><td>We did not, for example, search just for words and phrases related to ....</td></tr><tr><td> Researcher</td><td>The person who performs the act of exemplifying.</td><td>I will illustrate with examples how each strategy is employed.</td></tr><tr><td>Hinge</td><td>Elements that link different parts..</td><td>The haka is an example of a ritualized ..</td></tr><tr><td>Supporting</td><td>Elements that provide additional information to clarify or.</td><td>Similar findings were reported by some other SLA researchers. Ranta.</td></tr><tr><td>statement</td><td>support an argument, viewpoint, or a category</td><td>(2002), for instance, revealed that good language ...</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 Examples of local grammar analyses of Exemplification.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Exemplification-SC</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Indicator</td><td>Exemplified</td></tr><tr><td>Fig. 2</td><td>Is</td><td>an example of</td><td>a picture used for the gapless RC</td></tr><tr><td>Exemplified</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Indicator</td><td>Exemplification-SC</td></tr><tr><td>Some of these bundles</td><td>Are</td><td>illustrated</td><td>in the context in Extracts 8 and 9</td></tr><tr><td> Researcher</td><td> Indicator</td><td>Exemplified</td><td>Exemplification-SC</td></tr><tr><td>We</td><td>Illustrate</td><td>these issues</td><td>with two examples</td></tr><tr><td>Exemplified</td><td>Exemplification-RS</td><td>Indicator</td><td>Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td>... not always the case that &#x27;more is better&#x27;..</td><td>Sanell (2007)</td><td>for instance</td><td>Shows that Swedish learners of French as a foreign ..</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 An overview of the local grammar patterns identified in the two corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>No.</td><td colspan="4">Pattern</td></tr><tr><td>PA 1</td><td>Exemplified</td><td>Indicator</td><td colspan="2">Exemplification-SC</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>... different kinds of love</td><td>such as</td><td colspan="2">&quot;family love&quot;, &quot;friendship love&quot;, &quot;love between couples&quot; ...</td></tr><tr><td>PA 2</td><td>Exemplified</td><td>Indicator</td><td colspan="2">Exemplification-RS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Many language socialization studies therefore adopt an.</td><td>(e.g.</td><td colspan="2">DuFon 1999).</td></tr><tr><td>PA 3</td><td>ethnographic approach Exemplification-SC</td><td>Indicator</td><td colspan="2">Exemplified</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>The following examples</td><td>Ilustrate</td><td colspan="2">the semantic differences in the choice of research act RVs between</td></tr><tr><td>PA 4</td><td>Exemplified</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Chinese writers and native writers. Indicator</td><td>Exemplification-SC</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>The composition of the subjects</td><td></td><td>illustrated</td><td>in Table 5 below.</td></tr><tr><td>PA 5</td><td>Exemplified</td><td>is Exemplification-SC</td><td>Indicator</td><td>Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Some of these are created by traditional affixes.</td><td>Deshopper,</td><td> for example,</td><td>is derived by adding prefix de- (negative) to the root shopper ...</td></tr><tr><td>PA 6</td><td>Exemplified</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Indicator</td><td>Exemplification-RS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>The use of conversational data from radio programmes</td><td>is well</td><td>illustrated</td><td>in Drew and Heritage (1992).</td></tr><tr><td>PA 7</td><td>Exemplified</td><td>Indicator</td><td>Exemplification-RS</td><td>Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Some other people define writing from different.</td><td>For instance,</td><td>John F. Lyons (1999)</td><td>thinks that writing is as an art</td></tr><tr><td>PA 8</td><td>perspectives. Exemplified</td><td>Exemplification-RS</td><td>Indicator</td><td>and ... Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>This negotiation process actually involves complex</td><td>Schiffrin (1987: 24-8)</td><td>for example,</td><td>proposes a five-plane model which involves ...</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>mechanics.</td><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>PA 9</td><td>Initiator Take</td><td>Indicator for example,</td><td colspan="2">Exemplification-SC the proposition, &quot;This stove is black.&quot;</td></tr><tr><td>PA10</td><td>Exemplification-SC</td><td>Hinge</td><td colspan="2">Indicator</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>The following examples</td><td>may serve to</td><td>illustrate</td><td>some differences between optional complements and peripheral elements in the field of</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>PA11</td><td>Exemplified Consequently, there are lots of fields to be discovered,</td><td>Exemplification-SC parental praising in Chinese</td><td colspan="2">Indicator for example.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>families,</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>PA12</td><td> Initiator</td><td>Indicator illustrate</td><td>Exemplified</td><td colspan="2">Exemplification-SC let us consider the learning of ...</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>To</td><td></td><td>how this might affect L2 pronunciation,</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>PA13</td><td>Indicator</td><td>Exemplified</td><td>Hinge</td><td colspan="2">Exemplification-SC in turn 48 in Table 3.</td></tr><tr><td>PA14</td><td>An example of Indicator</td><td>high-level evaluation Exemplification-SC</td><td colspan="2">can be found Exemplified</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>As illustrated</td><td>in Figure 1,</td><td colspan="2">each picture contains two animate agents, one of which corresponds to</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">the subject of the matrix clause.</td></tr><tr><td>PA15</td><td>Researcher</td><td>Indicator</td><td>Exemplified</td><td colspan="2">Exemplification-SC through a contrastive analysis of</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>We</td><td>willillustrate</td><td>the above assertions</td><td colspan="2">microgenesis instances.</td></tr><tr><td>PA16</td><td> Initiator</td><td>Exemplification-SC</td><td>Indicator</td><td colspan="2">Exemplified the abstract nouns in the four</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>As</td><td>Table 1</td><td>illustrates</td><td colspan="2">categories differ in terms of their</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">use ... Exemplified</td></tr><tr><td>PA17</td><td>Researcher 1</td><td>Hinge use</td><td>Exemplification-SC the first two interactions</td><td colspan="2">Indicator to contingency in LS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">illustrate</td></tr><tr><td>PA18</td><td>Exemplification-RS</td><td>Indicator</td><td>Exemplified</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>illustrates</td><td>that the majority of negotiations are triggered by ...</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Pellttieri&#x27;s research (1999)</td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>PA19</td><td></td><td>Hinge</td><td>Exemplification-SC</td><td colspan="2">Indicator</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Exemplified Move 2 Step B would be used frequently to open the</td><td>(see</td><td>the second sample above,</td><td colspan="2"> for example).</td></tr></table></body></html>

Third, the observation is worth discussing that student writers used far less frequently PA 2, the other formulaic pattern of exemplification, than expert writers did. As shown in Table 7 PA 2 is five times s frequent in CORA as in CEMAD. Our data analyses suggest that this pattern is usually realised by instances co-occurring with e.g. and serves the function of citing relevant studies to support the argument or viewpoint presented in the preceding clause, as in Fomulaic language has ben defined in  number of ways (e.g, Wray 2002; 2008). As this is strategy that writers of published research articles normall use to make their argument more convincing and persuasive, the much higher frequency of PA 2 in CORA might be a consequence of a professinal or generic style which requires the use of the pattern a lot. From the Chinese English-major student writers perspective, one additional reason for this may be that the appropriate use f e.g has not been well taught in the classroom and, consequentl, resulting in thir les frequent use of e.g. (see Table 3) and PA 2. This points to the need to adequately describe the context in which e.g. can be used and to teach student writersthe important functions e.g. and the associated local grammar pattern can play in academic writing.

Table 7 Distribution of the local grammar patterns across the two corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">No.</td><td colspan="2">CORA</td><td colspan="2">CEMAD</td><td rowspan="2">LL</td><td rowspan="2">LR</td></tr><tr><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td></tr><tr><td>PA 1</td><td>5968</td><td>1416.40</td><td>5434</td><td>1527.14</td><td>16.10**</td><td>0.11</td></tr><tr><td>PA 2</td><td>1436</td><td>340.81</td><td>233</td><td>65.48</td><td>772.93**</td><td>2.38</td></tr><tr><td>PA 3</td><td>374</td><td>88.76</td><td>142</td><td>39.91</td><td>72.61**</td><td>1.15</td></tr><tr><td>PA 4</td><td>330</td><td>78.32</td><td>192</td><td>53.96</td><td>17.32**</td><td>0.54</td></tr><tr><td>PA 5</td><td>284</td><td>67.40</td><td>112</td><td>31.48</td><td>51.01**</td><td>1.10</td></tr><tr><td>PA6</td><td>221</td><td>52.45</td><td>4</td><td>1.12</td><td>236.68**</td><td>5.55</td></tr><tr><td>PA7</td><td>205</td><td>48.65</td><td>152</td><td>42.72</td><td>1.49</td><td>0.19</td></tr><tr><td>PA 8</td><td>175</td><td>41.53</td><td>9</td><td>2.53</td><td>156.46**</td><td>4.04</td></tr><tr><td>PA 9</td><td>167</td><td>39.63</td><td>25</td><td>7.03</td><td>95.01**</td><td>2.49</td></tr><tr><td>PA 10</td><td>129</td><td>30.62</td><td>112</td><td>31.48</td><td>0.05</td><td>0.04</td></tr><tr><td>PA 11</td><td>58</td><td>13.77</td><td>10</td><td>2.81</td><td>29.85**</td><td>2.29</td></tr><tr><td>PA 12</td><td>40</td><td>9.49</td><td>17</td><td>4.78</td><td>6.07</td><td>0.99</td></tr><tr><td>PA 13</td><td>36</td><td>8.54</td><td>:</td><td>2.25</td><td>14.85*</td><td>1.92</td></tr><tr><td>PA 14</td><td>31</td><td>7.36</td><td>27</td><td>7.59</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.04</td></tr><tr><td>PA 15</td><td>23</td><td>5.46</td><td>10</td><td>2.81</td><td>3.30</td><td>0.96</td></tr><tr><td>PA 16</td><td>23</td><td>5.46</td><td>4.</td><td>1.12</td><td>11.76*</td><td>2.29</td></tr><tr><td>PA 17</td><td>18</td><td>4.27</td><td>10</td><td>2.81</td><td>1.17</td><td>0.60</td></tr><tr><td>PA 18</td><td>15</td><td>3.56</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td><td>18.37**</td><td>/</td></tr><tr><td>PA 19</td><td>13</td><td>3.09</td><td>2</td><td>0.56</td><td>7.26</td><td>2.46</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>9546</td><td>2265.57</td><td>6503</td><td>1827.57</td><td>180.64**</td><td>0.31</td></tr></table></body></html>

A fourth observation is concerned with the use of performative verbs exemplify and llustrate. Paquot (2008) found that English L2 learners teded to undruse xemplify, hereas they underuse lstat inthe passive voice but overused it in the active altrnative. In our analysis peformative erbs usually occur in Patterns 3 (Exemplification-sC-Indicator - Exemplified) and 4 (Exemplification-SCHinge - Indicator - Exemplified) which, as shown in Table7, were both used significantly lesfrequentl by the Chinese English-major MA student writers. This may suggest that the student writers were not familiar enough with the use of performative verbs when exemplifying.

Fifth, as discussed in Su et al. (2021), one can exemplify by either presenting subcategories or by citing relevant studies, each of which has dfferent functions: we normally preent subcategories to llustrat or specify abstract concets or superordinat categories, and we cite relevant studies to ilstrat or support our argument or viewpoint It is therefore interesting to compare how the expert and student writers would use these two general strategies in their academic writing respectively. To that end, we examined the distribution of those pattrns with the label Exemplification-SC and Exemplification-RS across the two corpora. The results are presented in Table 8.

This examination shows that presenting subcategories or subtypes to specify those abstract superordinate categories or types is, on the one hand, the primary function of giving examples, which applies to both corpora. This is consistent with Hyland's (2007, p. 279) finding that the overwhelming majority of cases of exemplification is where a writer ofers an instance of a general category. On the other hand, the analysis shows that Chinese English-major MA student writers used significantly les frequently relevant studies to support or illustrate their argument or viewpoint than expert writers did $( \mathrm { L L } = 9 6 0 . 1 7 $ $p < . 0 0 0 1 $ . The reasons for this may be partly attributed to the fact that the student writers had not considered asuficint number of relevant studie in their field, or that the strategy of exemplification by citing relevant studies is something relatively foreign or unfamiliar to them.

To recapitulate, our findings show that although Chinese English-major MA student writers used exemplification as nearly frequently as the expert writrsto specify abstract superordinate categories, they underused exemplification in their academic writing with regard to aspects such as performative verbs, exemplificatory imperatives, and the strategy of exemplifying by citing relevant studies. Their preference to use those more frequent or typical pattens may be due to their aarent limited repertoire of exmplifing phraseology or, altenatiely, o their les familiarty with the use of those les frequent or typical patterns when performing exemplifications. Either possibility might be accounted for by their relative communicative experience in using those exemplifications in comparison with that of expert writers (Ellis & Wulff, 2020).

Table 8 Distribution of patterns with Exemplification-SC and those with Exemplification-RS across the two corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">CORA</td><td colspan="2">CEMAD</td><td>LL</td><td>LR</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Patterns with Exemplification-SC</td><td>7494</td><td>1778.57</td><td>6105</td><td>1715.73</td><td>4.36</td><td>0.05</td></tr><tr><td>Patterns with Exemplification-RS</td><td>2052</td><td>487.00</td><td>398</td><td>111.85</td><td>960.17**</td><td>2.12</td></tr></table></body></html>

The findings of our research could have potential implications for both EAP writing research and pedagogy. As discussed above, Chinese English-major MA student writers use of exemplification diffrs ignificantly from that of expert writers and they underused most of the exemplificatory markers and the ssociated local grammar pattens. Since it i unclar whether these observations may also hold true for student writers of other linguacultural backgrounds and, more importantly, whether student writers pragmatic performance of other discourse acts may show a similar pattern, we suggest that these would be directions that are worthy of future investigation in EAP writing research. More importantly, f similar findings were reported in future reearch, one implication would be that explicit teaching of discourse acts wil be an esential component of EAP writing pedagogy. Hence, we further discussbriefl the pedagogical implications of the kind of research reported in the present study.

It should be noted that the teaching of discourse or communicative acts has also been emphasised in many other studies or academic writing textbooks (e.g., Widdowson & Allen, 1985; Jordan, 199 [1st e. 1980];Kirszner & Mandel, 2017; Fang, 2021). We, however, propose a different approach, i., local grammar, to reearching and teaching such discourse or communicative acts. Spcificll, our argument is that findings of local grammar research can usefully inform the development of edagogical materials that could facilitate the teaching of discourse acts in EAP contexts. Onthe one hand, thi is based on the oservation that local grammar based investigation into student writers peformance f discourse acts revels the problems or dfficulties they have when performing such discourse acts in academic writing. On the other hand, local grammars document systematically the lexicogrammatical realisations, pared with the associated local gramar paterns, of a specifi discourse act, ffering an inentry of the stratgies availabl to formthat discourse act (as shown in Tables 3 and 6). This inventory can then be incorporated into EAP teaching material, as discussed in Su and Zhang (2020). Such material can not only make both the linguistic forms and their communicative function as obvious as possible (Widdowson & Allen, 1985), but oa e tiloredto student writers neds (i., wht problems or dificlties hey hae perfoming appropriately a given discourse act), therey facilitating the teching of discourse acts in EAP contexts. Finally a discourse acts have bee shown to e common and crucial, to arying degree, in all disciplinary acadmic writing ., Hyland, 2007), it isaguable that th local grammar approach discussed here could be applied to the teaching of discourse acts in other disciplines as well.

Before turning to the conclusion section of this paper, we must note that the use of student writers' and expert writers' texts as the data for comparison is not without limitations. For example, student writers' writing, in this case Chinese English-major MA students degree isrtations i inguisics, is stisticly different from that f expert writers published reearch articles ., issertations are longer and es dely writen; they are writen for different purposes and have a different radership). Meawhile, this stuy has not considered the linguacultural backgrounds of expert writer either. These may as well account for the difference in their language use. In addition, it i worth mentioning that current developments in other areas of research in Applied Lingustics such as multilingualism (e.g., Garcia, Johnson, Seltzer, & Valdes, 2017; Otheguy, Garcia, & Reid, 2019), Global Englishes (e.g., Galloway & Numajri, 2020; Smidt, Chau, Rinehimer, & Leever, 2021) and leaner corpus research (e.g., Man & Chau, 2019; Man, Lee, Chau, & Smidt, 2021) have highlighted the importance of reconsidering our conceptualization of students no longer as deficient learners but as respectable language user in their own right. Thus, future reearch will also need to consider how a different take on student writers language (e.g, to be studied in its own right and based on an internal comparison via a longitudinal design) might potentially contribute to a diferent set of findings and meaningfully inform EAP writing research and pedagogy.

# 6. Conclusion

This study presented a local grammar based contrastive investigation into Chinese English-major MA student writers' and expert writers' pragmatic performance of exemplification in academic writing. The investigation shows that while the student writers perform well the function of exemplification in specifying or clarifying abstract superordinate categories, they appear to use the function of exmplification in supporting or llustrating aruments or viewpoints significantly les frequently than expert writrs do. In terms of the strategies for exemplification, the student writers underuse performative verbs, exemplificatory imperatives, and the strategy of exemplifying by citing relevant studies, al of which may beattributable to their relative communicative experience in using exemplifications. These observations have implications for EAP writing research and pedagogy. We highlighted in particular the importance of further investigation into academic writers pragmatic performance of other discourse acts in EAP writig research and the necessity of teaching discourse acts in EAP pedagogy.

Methodologically, the study has shown that local grammars are useful for exploring academic writers' pragmatic performance of discourse acts in EAP writing research, thereby offering a viable method for future investigation into the pragmatic dimension of academic discourse. Moreover, the findings of such research could have potential implications for EAP teaching, as discussed above. Our overall argument, then, is that ocal grammar base investigation into academic discourse deserves more attention in, and could contribute to, EAP writing research and pedagogy.

# Author contributions

Hang Su: Conceptualization; Data analysis; Funding acquisition; Methodology; Project administration; Writing - original drafti Writing - review & editing. Yuqing Zhang: Data analysis; Writing - review & editing. Meng Huat Chau: Data analysis; Writing . review & editing.

H. Su et al.

# Funding

Hang Su received financial support from the China National Social Science Foundation (Grant No. 19cyy044).

# Author statement

We hereby state that this paper has not been submitted for publication in any other journals.

# Declaration of competing interest

None.

# Acknowledgement

We thank the reviewers for their constructive comments on earlier versions of this paper. We also thank Dr. Jian Xu and Ms. Ming Wu (both at Sichuan International Studies University, China) for their help on statistics.

# Appendix. Patterns with relatively low frequency in both corpora

<html><body><table><tr><td>No.</td><td>Pattern</td><td colspan="2">CORA</td><td colspan="2">CEMAD</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td></tr><tr><td>PA 20</td><td>Researcher - Hinge - Indicator - Exemplified - Exemplification-SC e.g., We can illustrate the first point using two classes of example.</td><td>8</td><td>1.90</td><td>4</td><td>1.12</td></tr><tr><td>PA 21</td><td>Researcher - Indicator - Exemplified e.g., We willillustrate the main effects and second the interactions.</td><td>7</td><td>1.66</td><td>6</td><td>1.69</td></tr><tr><td>PA 22</td><td>Initiator - Exemplified - Hinge - Indicator - Exemplification-RS e.g., For additional discussion of subcategorization frames, see, e.g., Hunston and Francis 1999.</td><td>7</td><td>1.66</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 23</td><td>Exemplified - Hinge - Exemplification-RS - Indicator e.g., It is clear that certain learner errors are the same in first and second language acquisition (cf. Dulay and Burt 1974; for example).</td><td>5</td><td>1.19</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 24</td><td>Exemplified - Indicator - Hinge - Exemplification-RS e.g., It seems likely to us, that, given the psycholinguistic realities (multi-competence, e.g. see Cook 2002) as the sensitivity of measuring instruments increases ...</td><td>5</td><td>1.19</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 25</td><td>Researcher - Hinge - Indicator - Exemplified e.g., We then draw specific attention to practices of writing and turn to an example of contemporary writing on the web.</td><td>4</td><td>0.95</td><td></td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 26</td><td>Initiator - Indicator - Exemplification-RS e.g., As has often been pointed out (e.g. Davies 1999) up to the mid-1980s applied linguistics was most closely associated with its educational branch ...</td><td>4</td><td>0.95</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 27</td><td>Initiator - Indicator - Exemplification-RS - Supporting Statement e.g., It should be mentioned that, for example, Verhallen and Schoonen (1993) also carried out a statistical analysis ...</td><td>4</td><td>0.95</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 28</td><td>Exemplification-RS - Hinge - Indicator - Exemplified e.g., Robinson (1996) serves as an example of the second ...</td><td>3</td><td>0.71</td><td>1</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><td>PA 29</td><td>Exemplified - Exemplification-RS - indicator e.g., It is shown that the creativity of hip-hop language may equally well be conceived in terms of divergent newness (Alim 2006; for example.)</td><td>2</td><td>0.47</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 30</td><td>Exemplified - Indicator - Hinge - Exemplification-SC e.g., Note also that the negative assessment is done without any delay, mitigation (for example, see stress and pitch raise in &#x27;wrong&#x27;).</td><td>2</td><td>0.47</td><td></td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 31</td><td>Exemplification-SC - Researcher - Hinge - Indicator - Exemplified e.g., In (27), we also have an instance of Delay (of course yeah I know well) in addition to Added support ....</td><td>2</td><td>0.47</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 32</td><td>Indicator - Exemplified - Exemplification-SC e.g., An example of part of speech: The achieve of, the mastery of the thing.</td><td>2</td><td>0.47</td><td>1</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><td>PA 33</td><td>Initiator - Indicator - Exemplified - Exemplification-RS e.g., As an example of the former, Moore et al. (2008) applied a categorization scheme to 974 articles on Islam in the British press ...</td><td>2</td><td>0.47</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 34</td><td>Initiator - Exemplification-RS - Indicator - Exemplified e.g., See Moerman 1988, for an example of a conversation analytic study that uses membership knowledge ...</td><td>2</td><td>0.47</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>PA 35</td><td>Exemplified - Hinge - Researcher - Indicator - Exemplification-SC e.g., The concept of &#x27;face&#x27; also</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td><td>1</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><td>PA 36</td><td>has a quite difference as we illustrated above. Researcher - Indicator - Exemplification-SC - Exemplified e.g., I willillustrate with examples how</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td><td>1</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><td>PA 37</td><td>each strategy is employed. Initiator - Indicator - Exemplification-SC - Exemplified e.g., As it is illustrated in the following</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td><td>1</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><td>PA 38</td><td>figure, the human body can stand and walk. Indicator - Exemplification-RS - Exemplified e.g., As illustrated by Dirk Geeraerts (2008), the three</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td><td>1</td><td>0.28</td></tr><tr><td>PA 39</td><td>fundamental sociosemantic forces are basic ones in terms .... Researcher - Hinge - Exemplification-RS - Indicator - Exemplified e.g., I want to mention loup</td><td>0</td><td></td><td>1</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Adel, A. (2uU6). Metadiscourse in L1 and L2 Englsn. Amsterdam: Jonn Benjamins.   
Alangari  Ja . s . 2020s a f l f ph in et a wtn i t i f usic. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 43, 1-13.   
Ansra  i  P 018  t in  wi  risos wen  s an writers in applied linguistics. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 31, 58-71.   
Barnbrook, G. (2002). Defining language: A local grammar of definition sentences. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Bbroo   1)    r. s    e , s  d ELT: Theory and practice (pp. 237-276). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
edarek,  07). ar d ste ion on h ad ad p r.   h, 1) 1-20.   
Bednarek, M. (2008). Emotion talk across corpora. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Butler, C. S. (2004). Corpus studies and functional linguistics theories. Functions of Language, 11(2), 147-186.   
Cheng, W., & Ching, T. (2018). Not a guarantee of future performance: The local grammar of discaimers. Applied Linguistic, 393), 263-301.   
Coltier, D. (1988). Introduction et gestion des exemples dans les textes a these. Pratiques, 58, 23-41.   
Cores, . 2004 exa de i ulished ad stt dcli witin mple r history and ooy. Eih for fic e, 23, 397-423.   
Core . 13   t  ea    ti  f s  e, 1, 33-43.   
Crossle, , . 1     in    t   l. ou of Second Language Writing, 36, 1-36.   
e ock     a Neuve: Universite catholique de Louvain. introduction (pp. 63-82). New York & London: Routledge.   
Fang, Z. H. (2021). Demystifying academic writing: Genres, moves, skills, and strategies. New York & London: Routledge.   
Flowerdew, J. (2006). Use of signalling nouns in a learner corpus. International Journal of Corpus Lingusics, 11(3), 345-362.   
Flowerdew, J. (2010). Use of igaling nouns acros L1 and L2 writer corpora. Intemational Jounal of Corpus Lingustis, 15(1), 36-55.   
Galloway, N., & Numajiri, T. (2020. Global Englishes language teaching: Botom-up curiculum implementation. Teol Quarterly, 54(1), 118-145.   
Garcia,   , r,  a 017).    i  g Phlh A: aslon.   
Hardie, A. (2014). Log Ratio: An informal inroduction. Available at: htt://cas.lancs.ac.uk/log-ratio-an-informal-introduction.   
Hinkel, E. (2004). Teaching academic ESL writing: Practical techniques i vocabulary and gramar. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assciates.   
ston,. ) r g, isti iati f ir rce i (Eds.), Using corpora to explore linguistic variation (pp. 167-183). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Hunston, S. (2002b). Corpora in applied linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
nston . ir .0  r f i.  . n .),     s discourse (pp. 74-101). Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Hunston, S., & Su, H (2019). Patterns, constructions and local grammar: A case study of evaluation. Aplid Linguistic, 40(4), 567-593.   
Hyland, K. (2004). Disciplinary interactions: Metadiscourse in L2 postgraduate writing. Joundl of Second Language Writig 13(2), 133-151.   
Hyland, K. (2007). Applying a gloss: Exemplifying and reformulating in academic discourse. Aplied Linguistics, 28(2), 266-285.   
Hyland, K. (2008). As can be seen: Lexical bundles and disciplinary variation. English for Specific Purposes, 27(1), 4-21.   
Jordan, R. R. (1980). Academic writing course ( $1 ^ { \mathrm { s t } }$ ed.). London: Collins.   
Jordan, R. R. (1999). Academic writing course: Study skills in English ( $3 ^ { \mathrm { r d } }$ ed.). Harlow: Longman. (pp. 105-116). Lorient: Universite de Bretagne Sud.   
Kirszner, L., & Mandell, s. R. (2017). Patterns for college writing: A rhetorical reader and guide $( 1 4 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ ed.). Boston/New York: Bedford/st Martin's.   
Larsson, T. (2016). The noctory it paer: Vriability explored in lmer and exert writing. Jounal f Engish for Acdmic pe, 2, 6479.   
Le.    t i Specific Purposes, 39, 45-61.   
Lu, . (20 ic ans f ytc cxt in nd  wig. io Jl f  sic, 154), 496. s/o./ 10.1075/ijcl.15.4.02lu for Academic Purposes, 44, 1-16. 63-83.   
Man, D.  Ch  019  th  ie  r s.  f h for  e, 37, 22-33.   
an .    1)    rs   ing International Journal of Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 11(2), 84-97.   
Moreno, AI, & wale, J.M. (2018. Stngthng moe analysis metloy ds briding uction-fo gap. Esh for Sific Pe, 50, 063.   
Olvra  01)iti n  t        35, 737-767.   
Ortega, L. (2015). Syntactic complexity in L2 writing: Progress and expansion. Jounal of Second Language Writing, 29, 82-94.   
Otheguy, R., Garcia, 0., & Rd, w. (2019). A transanguaging vi f the lingustic stem of bilinguals. Aplie ingusics Rview, 10(4), 625-651.   
Paqut (00n t  r  .)P   n n teaching (pp. 101-119). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Paquot, M. (2010). Academic vocabulary in learner writing: From extraction to analysis. London: Continuum. pedagogic lexicography. London & New York: Routledge.   
Smidt, E, Chau, M Rinehimer, , & Ler, P. (2021). Exporig engagment f uers of Gloal Englishes in a coty of iqur. Sstm, 98, 1-16.   
Su, H. (2017). Local grammars of speech acts: An exploratory study. Journal of Pragmatics, 111, 72-83.   
Su, H  t a     .    Pi, 21) 109-136.   
Su, H. (2020b). Patterns, local grammars, and the design of English teaching materials. ELT Journal, 74(1), 73-82.   
Su, H (2021). ng as of ay in sken Briish glish:  omar  onc intiio. ic cey, 123), 412-438.   
Su, H., & Wei, N. X. (2018). I'm really sorry about what I said": A local grammar of apology. Pragmatics, 28(3), 439-462. Academic Purposes, 43, 1-11.   
Su H n 1).g  t t    wneiation n Linguistics research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 63, 120-133.   
Todd R. . Thmpol, P, Kraong, . (204)Mng the cohee of wting using to-as alsis sn Wiing 9(2),5104   
Triki1     r 54, 1-13.   
Widdowson,   A . P. (1985). g h ntie e f Engish.  J  ),  i P: s d ee ok on t development of English for science and technology (pp. 69-89). Oxford: Pergamon Press.   
Zhang, L, & Su, H. (2021). Applying local grammars in EAP teaching. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 51, 1-7.

Hng u t Purposes, Pragmatics, and many others.

u  t working as a research assistant on the project 'Local Grammars and Academic Discourse Analysis'.