# Two-way immersion promotes additional language learning: performance of bilingual sixth-grade students in English as a third language

Sandra Preusler, Johanna Fleckenstein, Steffen Zitzmann, Jürgen Baumert & Jens Möller

To cite this article: Sandra Preusler, Johanna Fleckenstein, Steffen Zitzmann, Jürgen Baumert & Jens Möller (2024) Two-way immersion promotes additional language learning: performance of bilingual sixth-grade students in English as a third language, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:7, 910-922, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2024.2307436

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2024.2307436

# Two-way immersion promotes additional language learning: performance of bilingual sixth-grade students in English as a third language

Sandra Preusler $\textcircled{1}$ a , Johanna Fleckenstein $\textcircled{1}$ b , Steffen Zitzmann $\textcircled{1}$ c , Jürgen Baumert and Jens Möller $\circledcirc$

a Institute for Psychology of Learning and Instruction at Kiel University, Kiel, Germany; b Leibniz Institute for Science and Mathematics Education (IPN), Kiel, Germany; c Hector Research Institute of Education Sciences and Psychology at University of Tübingen, Tübungen, Germany; d Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany

# ABSTRACT

Multilingualism is often associated with advantages for acquiring additional languages. Theoretical approaches explain these advantages by assuming a Common Underlying Proficiency or a Metalinguistic Awareness. At the State Europe School in Berlin, students from different language backgrounds receive instruction in German and a partner language according to two-way immersion (TWI). It is unclear how this bilingual instruction affects the acquisition of a third language. We examined the English proficiency of $N = 6 5 6$ TWI sixth-grade students and $N = 7 3 9$ mainstream students via a C-test. Multiple regression analyses revealed that TWI students exhibited higher English proficiency than mainstream students despite having received less English instruction. The results showed additional effects of German- and partner-language reading skills. The findings support the assumption of TWI programs that the use of two languages of instruction fosters third language acquisition.

# ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 21 July 2022   
Accepted 28 December 2023

# KEYWORDS

Third-language acquisition; bilingualism; two-way immersion; foreign language learning; multilingualism

# Introduction

Due to increasing migration (McAuliffe and Triandafyllidou 2021), in many countries more and more bi- and multilingual students from different countries of origin attend schools together. School systems try to meet the challenges and opportunities associated with migration by an increasing number of different bilingual educational programs. Notable here are, for example, Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL; Coyle 2007), one-way immersion (Jared et al. 2011), and twoway immersion (TWI; Howard and Sugarman 2001). CLIL and one-way immersion involve instruction in the second language (L2), which is usually a global language such as English (Cenoz, Genesee, and Gorter 2014). In TWI, language majority and language minority students are taught together, and both languages are used as the languages of instruction in the classroom (Lindholm-Leary 2001). The positive effects of bilingual programs on learning an L2 are empirically well established (for an overview, see Baker 2011; Kim, Hutchison, and Winsler 2015). Positive effects on third language (L3) acquisition have been shown consistently for bilingual students in one-way immersion programs and in schools with two languages of instruction in bilingual areas (e.g. Abu-Rabia and Sanitsky 2010; Sanz 2000).

However, while several studies have been conducted on other bilingual programs and L3 acquisition, to the best of our knowledge, only one study focused on a TWI program and L3 acquisition in secondary school (Fleckenstein, Möller, and Baumert 2018; see below). Therefore, we examined the L3 English performance of sixth-grade students in a Berlin-based TWI program in an elementary school, where instruction takes place in German alongside one of nine partner languages. The TWI program provides English instruction using the same conventional foreign language teaching approach as mainstream schools. This allowed us to compare the English performance with that of students with different language backgrounds at mainstream schools. Our study aims to investigate whether the bilingual instructional setting serves as a valuable resource that benefits TWI students despite the later introduction of English instruction. Additionally, we seek to explore the relationship of students’ first language (L1) and second language (L2) proficiency on their performance in L3 English. This study contributes not only to a better understanding of the L3 proficiency of students in TWI programs, but also extends research on students with a minority language as their first language (L1) in mainstream schools. Before explicitly outlining our hypotheses, we first explain the theoretical foundations of the benefits we suppose bilingual school programs should reveal. Second, we summarize the existing empirical findings on third-language (L3) acquisition for multilinguals in more detail.

# Research on third-language acquisition of bilinguals and multilinguals

Several theories explain the possible advantages of bilinguals or multilinguals in learning another language (for an overview, see Hirosh and Degani 2018). One theoretical basis is the notion of a common underlying proficiency (CUP, Cummins 1981). Cummins (1981) illustrates CUP with the image of a double iceberg: the linguistic abilities in each language show on the surface. Below the surface, the two languages have a common basis. Related to the assumption of the existence of a CUP is Cummins’ interdependence hypothesis (1979; 1984), according to which language abilities are interdependent. Thus, positive development in one language positively affects the abilities in the other language(s). Due to their already acquired linguistic skills in the L1 and L2, bilinguals have a CUP that they can use to acquire an L3. Analogous to the two-iceberg analogy, for the L3, the proficiencies should appear on the surface like a third iceberg and share a common base with the other languages below the surface.

The theoretical basis supports the assumption that multilingual students have advantages in L3 acquisition. Third or additional language acquisition refers to the acquisition of an additional language beyond the L2 (de Angelis 2007). For some students, this means acquiring an L3; for others, it means acquiring a fourth or fifth language (and so on). For reasons of simplicity, we use the term L3 for language acquisition beyond L2. Numerous studies illustrate the L3 learning benefits of bilingual students attending bilingual school programs (e.g. Abu-Rabia and Sanitsky 2010; Brohy 2001; for a review, see Cenoz 2013). These studies were predominantly conducted in secondary schools in bilingual areas, for example, in Catalonia in Spain, where Catalan is used as the language of instruction in the school alongside Spanish (see Sanz 2000).

Looking at the studies on bilingual students without bilingual instruction, namely minority language students in mainstream schools, the findings are mixed. It is unclear whether these bilinguals have an advantage over monolinguals and under what conditions this might be the case. In a study of 10th-grade students with a minority language as their L1, Edele, Kempert, and Schotte (2018) found that L1 minority speakers with high levels of L2 majority language proficiency performed better in L3 English than the average L1 majority language student. In contrast, L1 minority speakers with low levels of L2 proficiency showed below-average performance in L3 English. Performance in English as L3 was determined solely by the students’ proficiency in the majority language (their L2, German) and not their L1 proficiency. Another study of eighth and ninth graders showed advantages for certain bilinguals in L3 English (listening and reading) when controlling for socioeconomic status (SES; Maluch and Kempert 2017). Specifically, those whose two first languages were formally learned outside of school were superior to monolinguals and to those bilinguals who learned the minority language only in the family. In addition, advantages were shown for the group of simultaneous bilinguals who had learned both languages within the first three years of life compared to monolinguals or bilinguals who had learned the L2 after the age of three.

Other studies showed no advantages for bilingual students. Lorenz et al. (2020) compared the English achievement of monolingual and bilingual German-speaking seventh and ninth graders and found no advantages for the bilingual students. In the study by Maurer et al. (2021), reading performance in German showed a significant positive relationship with performance in English as a foreign language in third grade, while language background (bilingual vs. monolingual) did not.

# Language proficiency in TWI

TWI, also known as dual language education or bilingual immersion, is a type of bilingual education in which language majority students and language minority students are taught together, and both languages are used for instruction (Lindholm-Leary 2001). Both languages are normally used equally as languages of instruction, although in some programs, the minority language predominates in the early years (Lindholm-Leary 2001; 2016). Regarding student composition, the unique feature of TWI programs is that the students speak one or both of the two languages of instruction as their L1, so that competent language role models are available both inside and outside the classroom at all times (Christian, Howard, and Loeb 2000; Lindholm-Leary 2001). These fundamental principles provide particularly favorable conditions for the acquisition of language proficiency. This is evident in numerous studies in which students in TWI programs perform better or equally well in terms of their language skills in the majority language as conventionally taught students (Lindholm-Leary 2011; Marian, Shook, and Schroeder 2013; Preusler et al. 2022; Steele et al. 2017). However, differences between the language groups were shown in TWI: Students with the test language as their L1 outperformed students who had learned the test language as an L2, as well as students who had grown up simultaneously bilingual with the test language and another language (Preusler et al. 2019).

Regarding L3 acquisition, positive effects of bilingual instruction were found for students in oneway immersion programs (e.g. Swain et al. 1990). However, there are few study results to date on L3 acquisition in TWI programs. Fleckenstein, Möller, and Baumert (2018) addressed this gap by examining ninth graders attending the State Europe School in Berlin (SESB), highlighting the advantages of immersion instruction over mainstream schools. This study bridges this gap by focusing on sixthgrade English proficiency, comparing TWI students and mainstream students while controlling for background variables and German reading achievement. Our aim is to explore whether the dual language context within TWI programs influences English proficiency, considering the significant global importance of English. Given that the transition to secondary school usually occurs after the sixth grade in Berlin, it seems particularly relevant to examine English performance at this stage.

In Berlin, English instruction regularly begins in the third grade in mainstream schools. In the SESB, English instruction starts two years later. This means that the mainstream students had about 160 more lessons of English instruction than the students in the TWI program. The question, then, arises as to whether the TWI students can catch up despite the later onset of English instruction. However, studies that examined early and late start in English instruction showed heterogeneous results regarding the question whether students who start early learn more (Jaekel et al. 2017; Pfenninger and Singleton 2019; for a review, see Baumert et al. 2020). Moreover, TWI programs are characterized by utilizing both the students’ L1 and their L2 as languages of instruction. This unique approach ensures consistent exposure to and use of these two languages. Previous studies on other bilingual programs have shown advantages for bilingual students in L3 learning, and we anticipate that this intensive promotion of L1 and L2 in TWI programs will contribute to comparatively good performance in L3 English. Therefore, TWI students are expected to outperform the comparison group of monolingual taught students at mainstream schools in English reading comprehension even after controlling for background characteristics such as SES and cognitive abilities (Hypothesis 1). In addition, we will examine how competencies in the two languages of instruction may explain the expected advantages of the students in the TWI program. Since all TWI students are bilingual and have been supported in acquiring their L1 and L2 through bilingual instruction, they should have a CUP reflected in their L3 performance. Therefore, reading comprehension in German and reading comprehension in the partner language are expected to have a significant positive impact on reading comprehension in English (Hypothesis 2).

# Methods

# The State Europe school of Berlin

At the State European School of Berlin (SESB), students with different L1s receive instruction in two language from first grade through graduation. The SESB follows the concept of TWI: Instruction is provided in German together with one of nine partner languages (English, French, Greek, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, or Turkish). Approximately half of the subjects are taught in German and the other half in the partner language. Teachers at SESB use their respective L1 as the language of instruction. Conceptually, classes are composed of one third each: students with German as their L1, students with the partner language as their L1, and students with both languages as their L1s (Senatsverwaltung für Bildung, Jugend und Familie 2018). Application for SESB is possible for all children with a sufficient level of German or the partner language proficiency shown in a language test given by the SESB. In language lessons (in German and the partner language), the classes are divided into two groups depending on the (more dominant) L1 from first to eighth grade. They are taught as a mixed-language group in all other subjects and after the eighth grade (Möller et al. 2017).

English instruction begins in third grade at $^ { 2 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ per week at mainstream schools and increases by one hour per week each year (Grundschulverordnung 2005/2021). At TWI, English instruction (or French in the German-English schools) as a third or additional language starts in fifth grade at $5 \mathsf { h }$ per week (Senatsverwaltung für Bildung, Jugend und Familie 2018). English is taught in the form of conventional foreign language instruction (i.e. not immersive, see Möller et al. 2018). In the sixth grade, $5 \mathfrak { h }$ of English per week are offered at both types of schools. Thus, mainstream school students received 160 lessons more than SESB students did.

The State of Berlin, represented by the Senator for Education, commissioned and approved a longitudinal evaluation with comprehensive student, parent, and teacher surveys to establish SESB as a school with special educational character. This study is part of that evaluation (Fleckenstein, Möller, and Baumert 2018; Möller et al. 2017; Preusler et al. 2019; Preusler et al. 2022).

# Participants

The participant demographics can be found in Table 1. The TWI sample was a full survey of all SESB sixth graders in 2016 from school sites where French, Greek, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, or Spanish, alongside German, are used as languages of instruction. Students with English as their partner language (at German-English school sites) were excluded from the analysis to ensure a fair comparison since, for them, English serves as L1 or L2. The sample was supplemented by a follow-up survey in the following school year of sites offering language combinations with lower student numbers. We selected schools of maximum similarity for the comparison sample. These were schools nearby and regular classes from the sites where TWI and mainstream schooling are offered. In total, the sample of this study was composed of $N = 6 5 6$ TWI students from 38 school classes and $N = 7 3 9$ students in regular instruction from 42 school classes.

The survey took place at the end of sixth grade, May through July 2016 and 2017. According to the Berlin School Law, participation in the study was mandatory for the students (except for a voluntary part). The voluntary part, for which parental consent was required, included information about the family, such as parents’ occupation and language background. For the voluntary part and the parent questionnaire, parents received a cover letter containing comprehensive information about the study, data protection, and confidential treatment of the responses. Trained test administrators conducted the survey with the entire class.

Table 1. Participant demographics.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>TWI group</td><td>Regular instruction</td></tr><tr><td>Gender (female)</td><td>54.7%</td><td>48.9%</td></tr><tr><td>Language background</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>L1 German</td><td>17.0%</td><td>53.3%</td></tr><tr><td>Simultaneous bilinguals</td><td>41.3%</td><td>18.5%</td></tr><tr><td>L1 partner language</td><td>41.6%</td><td>28.2%</td></tr><tr><td>Partner Language at school site</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>French</td><td>18.29%</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Greek</td><td>11.74%</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Italian</td><td>9.76%</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Polish</td><td>11.59%</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Portuguese</td><td>10.06%</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Russian</td><td>9.45%</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Spanish</td><td>14.94%</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Parents&#x27; SES [M (SD)]</td><td>58.38 (21.49)</td><td>51.63 (22.26)</td></tr><tr><td>Age [M (SD)]</td><td>12.21 (0.48)</td><td>12.31 (0.57)</td></tr><tr><td>Cognitive abilities [M (SD)]</td><td>32.71 (7.51)</td><td>32.05 (7.33)</td></tr><tr><td>Total N</td><td>656</td><td>739</td></tr></table></body></html>

In order to examine English performance for different language backgrounds, both the parent and student questionnaires asked about L1(s). This resulted in three language groups: students with German as their L1 (L1 German speakers), students with a partner language as their L1 (L1 partner language speakers), and students who grew up with German and the partner language as their L1s (simultaneous bilinguals). Partner language in the TWI group refers to the language of instruction in addition to German. In the regular instruction group, partner language includes any language other than German. As can be seen in Table 1, noticeably more children in the TWI group were simultaneously bilingual or grew up with a non-German language as their L1.

Table 1 also shows a positive selection bias for the children in the TWI group regarding SES; however, they were comparable to those in the mainstream school for cognitive abilities.

# Variables

# Individual and background characteristics

Socioeconomic status. The family’s SES was operationalized using the International Socioeconomic Index of occupational status (ISEI; Ganzeboom and Treiman 1996). For this purpose, the ISEI was formed from the occupational information provided by the parents. The higher value was used if the ISEI scores of the parents differed (HISEI $=$ highest ISEI).

Gender. Information on children’s gender came from school records and was coded as $0 =$ male and $1 =$ female.

Cognitive abilities. As an indicator of intelligence, cognitive abilities were assessed using the Test of Cognitive Abilities (KFT; Heller and Perleth 2000), the German version of the Cognitive Abilities Test (Thorndike and Hagen 1971). The test consisted of 45 items and had very good internal consistency (Cronbach’s $\mathtt { a } = 0 . 9 1$ for TWI students, Cronbach’s $\mathtt { a } = 0 . 9 0$ for regular instruction students).

Achievement tests. English proficiency was assessed using a C-test. C-Tests are designed to measure general language proficiency and are widely used in the context of language testing (Eckes and

Grotjahn 2006). They consist of four to six short, self-contained texts in which the second half of the letters have been removed from every second to third word, starting with the second sentence (Klein-Braley 1997). Four texts with gaps were used for this study, originally from the LAU study (Behörde für Schule und Berufsbildung 2011). The texts each contained 21–24 gaps. There were a total of 91 items. For each student, a WLE based on an IRT model was obtained, which had a reliability of $r _ { \mathsf { W L E } } = 0 . 9 6$ .

The German reading test $( r _ { \mathsf { W L E } } = 0 . 8 2$ ) was also taken from the LAU study. It consisted of three short stories and one non-literary text with 24 corresponding multiple-choice questions.

Partner language reading proficiency was assessed with tests originally used in the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS). They consisted of two short stories, each followed by open-ended and multiple-choice questions. The French, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, and Spanish tests were taken from PIRLS 2011 (Mullis et al. 2012) and contained 33 items. The tests for Greek and Turkish were originally used in PIRLS 2001 (Mullis et al. 2003) and had 27 items. The partner language reading test’s reliability was good $( r _ { \mathsf { W L E } } = 0 . 8 5 )$ ). Only TWI students worked on partner-language tests.

For all tests, scaling was performed using a Rasch model and was conducted in R (R Core Team 2021) with the package TAM (Robitzsch, Kiefer, and Wu 2021). We calculated Weighted Likelihood Estimates (WLEs; Warm 1989) as estimates of individual performance. The WLEs for the English test and the German and the partner language reading tests were each transformed to a metric with a mean of $M = 1 0 0$ and a standard deviation of $S D = 3 0$ to facilitate the interpretation of the results.

Treatment of missing values and hierarchical data structure. Multiple imputation was performed to treat missing values in order to obtain complete data and avoid bias. The general idea of multiple imputation is to estimate missing values based on existing background information (Schafer 1999; Schafer and Graham 2002). Estimating missing data via multiple imputation was possible in this study because mandatory participation and information from school records made several important background variables available for all students. For this purpose, we specified a comprehensive background model that included students’ class, age and gender, language and migration background, parental SES, cognitive abilities scores, school grades, and test scores from other domains of the study (science, German vocabulary, reading in German and the partner language, mathematics). Scores and grades obtained in Grades 4–6 were included. Using the R package mice (R Core Team 2021; van Buuren and Groothuis-Oudshoorn 2011), 65 imputed data sets were generated and then combined according to the rules of Rubin (1987). For the test scores from other domains, we used the imputation method ‘2 l.pan’ from the R package ‘pan’ (Zhao and Schafer 2018) to account for the hierarchical data structure.

Statistical analyses. We conducted multiple regression analyses to compare the English achievement of TWI students with that of students in mainstream schools. These analyses allowed us to calculate the impact of TWI on English achievement, holding constant the German language reading test as an indicator of proficiency in the majority language, cognitive background, and socioeconomic background. In this process, the multiple regression analyses were created hierarchically by entering the predictors consecutively. We used a dummy variable for TWI status, with the regular school group as the reference group. For the language background, we used two dummy variables coding students’ language group membership (Simultaneous Bilinguals $= { \mathsf { S B } }$ , L1 Partner Language Speakers $= \mathsf { L } 1 mathsf { P } \mathsf { L } S _ { \mathsf { \Pi } }$ , using L1 German speakers as the reference group. Interaction terms were formed to examine relationships between language groups and TWI. Subsequently, some regression analyses were repeated for the TWI student group only, with partner language reading performance included in the regression. All analyses were conducted in Mplus 8.4 (Muthén and Muthén 1998- 2017). Since students were nested in classes, we estimated cluster-robust standard errors using the TYPE $=$ COMPLEX option.

# Results

# Descriptive findings

The descriptive findings can be found in Table 2. The English proficiency is significantly higher in the TWI group compared to the regular instruction group. However, there is also a significant difference in terms of SES. English performance was significantly correlated with reading performance in German and with the covariates cognitive abilities and SES in both groups.

# Results of the regression analyses

The results of the regression analyses are presented in Table 3. As can be seen from Model 1, the TWI students scored significantly higher on the English test than the students in regular instruction, with $b = 9 . 4 4$ $( p = . 0 0 3 )$ and $d = 0 . 3 2$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [0.11, 0.52]. Even when controlling for the language background that was included in Model 2, TWI students showed advantages in terms of English performance, with $b = 1 1 . 1 5$ $( p = . 0 0 4 )$ and $d = 0 . 3 7$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [0.06, 0.31]. This finding persisted when reading comprehension in German was included in the regression (see Model 3). Thus, given the same reading scores in German, the TWI students performed better in English, with $b = 7 . 3 1$ $( p = . 0 1 )$ and $d = 0 . 2 4$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [0.05, 0.44]. At the same time, it appears that German reading comprehension played an important role in predicting English performance for the TWI group and the mainstream students, with $b = 1 7 . 2 8$ $( p < . 0 0 1 )$ and $d = 0 . 5 8$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [0.52, 0.63]. Finally, Model 4 showed better English performance in the TWI group, regardless of language background, even when controlling for reading performance in German and socioeconomic and cognitive background, with $b = 6 . 9 4$ $( p$ $= . 0 1$ ) and $d = 0 . 2 3$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [0.05, 0.42]. This indicates support for Hypothesis 1, according to which TWI students should outperform the mainstream students in English reading comprehension even after controlling for background characteristics. According to the findings of Brunner, Stallasch, and Lüdtke (2022), who documented empirical benchmarks based on results of standardized test examinations in various subjects in Germany, the TWI effect of a quarter standard deviation corresponds to an achievement advantage of about one school year in English as a second language between the fifth and ninth grade. Model 4 also showed a large, positive association with German reading comprehension for students from both types of schools, with $b = 1 3 . 8 6$ $( p < . 0 0 1 )$ and $d = 0 . 4 6 ,$ $9 5 \%$ CI [0.40, 0.53]. When controlling for the German reading test and background variables, the TWI and mainstream group showed an advantage for simultaneous bilinguals over those who grew up speaking German monolingually. Furthermore, students of the female gender, with higher SES, or better cognitive abilities, showed better English performance.

Subsequently, we ran the regressions for the TWI students exclusively in order to be able to calculate the impact of the reading comprehension proficiency in the partner language on English performance. The results of these analyses are shown in Table 4. As can be seen in Model 1, reading comprehension tests had an impact on English performance in the TWI group, as expected. The effect of the German reading test, with $b = 1 2 . 4 6$ $( p < . 0 0 1 )$ and $d = 0 . 4 2$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [0.50, 0.33], was slightly higher than that of the partner-language reading test, with $b = 1 0 . 1 7 \ ( p < . 0 0 1 )$ and $d = 0 . 3 4$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [0.41, 0.27]. In Model 2, the language background was also included in the regression. Here we find that L1 German speakers and simultaneous bilinguals showed similar performance in English when controlling for German and partner language performance. Students who grew up with a partner language as their L1 showed English performance significantly below that of students who grew up with German as their L1. In Model 3, these analyses were repeated with controls for the background variables gender, SES, and cognitive background. As predicted in Hypothesis 2, we found significant relations between the German- and partner-language reading competencies and English performance. Here, the effect of the German reading test, with $b = 8 . 4 8$ $( p < . 0 0 1 )$ and $d = 0 . 2 8$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [0.18, 0.38], was slightly lower than that of the partner-language reading test, with $b = 1 0 . 3 3$ $( p < . 0 0 1 )$ ) and $d = 0 . 3 5$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [0.28, 0.41]. The disadvantage for L1 partner language learners remained when controlling for the background variables. In Model 4, the interaction of the German reading test with the partner language reading test showed no significant effect on English performance $\langle b = - 0 . 5 5 ,$ , $9 5 \%$ CI [−2.90, 1.81]). This suggests additive effects of the German and partner language reading tests.

Table 2. Non-adjusted means (M), standard deviations (SD), group differences, and correlations of the variables based on the imputed data (above the diagonal for TWI students, below the diagonal for comparison students)   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">Variable</td><td colspan="2">TWI</td><td colspan="2">Regular instruction</td><td colspan="2">Group differences</td><td colspan="5"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">M</td><td colspan="2">M</td><td colspan="2">+</td><td colspan="7">(1)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SD</td><td></td><td>SD</td><td></td><td></td><td>p</td><td></td><td>(2)</td><td>(3)</td><td>(4)</td><td>(5)</td></tr><tr><td>(1) English Test</td><td>105.00</td><td>28.21</td><td>95.56</td><td>30.81</td><td>5.94</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>0.54</td><td>0.49</td><td>0.44</td><td>0.22</td></tr><tr><td>(2) German Reading</td><td>100.70</td><td>30.80</td><td>99.38</td><td>29.24</td><td>0.83</td><td></td><td>0.41</td><td>0.61</td><td>-</td><td>0.36</td><td>0.56</td><td>0.29</td></tr><tr><td>(3) Partner language reading</td><td>0.65</td><td>1.33</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>0.24</td><td>0.14</td></tr><tr><td>(4) Cognitive abilities</td><td>32.71</td><td>7.51</td><td>32.05</td><td>7.33</td><td>1.68</td><td></td><td>0.09</td><td>0.44</td><td>0.54</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>0.30</td></tr><tr><td>(5) Parents&#x27; SES</td><td>58.38</td><td>21.49</td><td>51.63</td><td>22.26</td><td>5.00</td><td></td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>0.29</td><td>0.35</td><td>-</td><td>0.28</td><td>-</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: Correlations significantly different from 0 $\left( p < . 0 1 \right)$ are printed in bold.

Table 3. Results of the regression of English proficiency on the type of schooling, language background, and reading comprehension in German, with and without control for background variables (Unstandardized regression coefficients, robust standard errors in parentheses)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Model 1 Par. (SE)</td><td>Model 2 Par. (SE)</td><td>Model 3 Par. (SE)</td><td>Model 4 Par. (SE)</td></tr><tr><td>Intercept</td><td>95.56 (2.34)***</td><td>99.35 (2.64)***</td><td>94.94 (1.78)***</td><td>92.75 (1.97)*</td></tr><tr><td>Slopes</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>TWi</td><td>9.44 (3.18)**</td><td>11.15 (3.88)**</td><td>7.31 (2.92)*</td><td>6.94 (2.82)*</td></tr><tr><td>SB</td><td>-</td><td>4.65 (3.35)</td><td>3.17 (2.86)</td><td>6.10 (2.71)*</td></tr><tr><td>L1PLS</td><td>-</td><td>10.38 (3.27)**</td><td>1.40 (2.34)</td><td>4.27 (2.28)</td></tr><tr><td>TWI x SB</td><td>-</td><td>2.23 (3.88)</td><td>0.01 (3.68)</td><td>3.01 (3.42)</td></tr><tr><td>TWI x L1PLS</td><td>-</td><td>0.41 (4.79)</td><td>1.08 (3.73)</td><td>0.47 (3.64)</td></tr><tr><td>German Readinga</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>17.28 (0.99)***</td><td>13.86 (1.12)***</td></tr><tr><td>Gender (1 = female)</td><td>-</td><td>11</td><td></td><td>2.72 (1.32)*</td></tr><tr><td>Parents&#x27; SESa</td><td></td><td>-</td><td></td><td>2.45 (0.84)**</td></tr><tr><td>Cognitive abilitiesa</td><td></td><td>/</td><td></td><td>5.03 (0.93)***</td></tr><tr><td>R2</td><td>0.03 (0.02)</td><td>0.05 (0.02)**</td><td>0.35 (0.03)***</td><td>0.38 (0.03)***</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. TWI $=$ Two-way immersion; $\mathsf { S B = }$ simultaneous bilinguals; $\mathsf { L } 1 mathsf { P } \mathsf { L } \mathsf { S } = \mathsf { L } 1$ Partner language speakers. a standardized. $^ { * } p < . 0 5 ,$ , $^ { * * } p < . 0 1$ , $^ { \ast \ast \ast } p < . 0 0 1$ .

Table 4. Results of the regression of English proficiency of TWI students $( N = 6 5 6 )$ on language background and reading comprehension in German and a partner language, with and without control for background variables (Unstandardized regression coefficients, robust standard errors in parentheses)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Model 1 Par. (SE)</td><td>Model 2 Par. (SE)</td><td>Model 3 Par. (SE)</td><td>Model 4 Par. (SE)</td></tr><tr><td>Intercept</td><td>100.00</td><td>104.12</td><td>102.47 (3.00)***</td><td>102.60 (3.02)***</td></tr><tr><td>Slopes</td><td>(1.55)***</td><td>(2.76)***</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>German Reading Testae</td><td>12.46 (1.53)***</td><td>11.38 (1.48)***</td><td>8.48 (1.60)***</td><td>8.50 (1.59)***</td></tr><tr><td> Partner Language Reading Testae</td><td>10.17 (1.09)***</td><td>10.92 (1.09)***</td><td>10.33 (1.18)***</td><td>10.30 (1.16)***</td></tr><tr><td>German Reading Test x Partner Language Reading</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>0.55 (1.20)</td></tr><tr><td>Test SB</td><td>-</td><td>2.45 (2.49)</td><td>2.07 (2.23)</td><td>1.93 (2.28)</td></tr><tr><td>L1PLS</td><td>-</td><td>7.47 (3.10)*</td><td>6.15 (2.99)*</td><td>6.06 (3.00)*</td></tr><tr><td>Gender (1 = female)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>1.70 (2.05)</td><td>1.66 (2.08)</td></tr><tr><td>Parents&#x27; SESa</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.61 (1.20)</td><td>0.61 (1.20)</td></tr><tr><td>Cognitive abilitiesa</td><td>11</td><td></td><td>5.32 (1.34)***</td><td>5.31 (1.33)***</td></tr><tr><td>R2</td><td>0.39 (0.04)***</td><td>0.40 (0.04)***</td><td>0.42 (0.04)***</td><td>0.42 (0.04)***</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. TWI $=$ Two-way immersion; $\mathsf { S B = }$ simultaneous bilinguals; $\mathsf { L } 1 mathsf { P } \mathsf { L } \mathsf { S } = \mathsf { L } 1$ Partner language speakers. a standardized. $^ { * } p < . 0 5 ,$ , $^ { * * } p < . 0 1$ , $^ { \ast \ast \ast } p < . 0 0 1$ .

# Discussion

Although several studies indicate a positive relationship between bilingual instruction and L3 acquisition, there is little data on L3 acquisition in TWI programs. Our study examined L3 acquisition in English in sixth-grade TWI students compared to mainstream students. Studies on other bilingual programs have shown the advantages of bilingual students in L3 learning. Moreover, TWI students’ L1 and L2 are particularly supported by bilingual instruction. Therefore, we expected that the TWI students would outperform the comparison group in English reading comprehension even after controlling for background characteristics such as SES and cognitive ability. Consistent with our hypothesis, the results of multiple regression analyses showed an advantage for the TWI group, even when controlling for the cognitive and socioeconomic background. The effect size of TWI – based on the German students’ mean annual academic growth in English as a second language in Grades 5–9 (Brunner, Stallasch, and Lüdtke 2022) – corresponds to approximately one school year. Our results also support our hypothesis regarding the impact of reading comprehension in the two languages of instruction: German and partner language reading comprehension significantly affected TWI students’ English performance, even when controlling for background variables. Our findings for TWI sixth graders in elementary school are consistent with Fleckenstein, Möller, and Baumert (2018), who found advantages for TWI ninth graders in secondary school in English as an L3 compared to mainstream students. The gain in English proficiency is even more notable because students at SESB had approximately 160 fewer hours of English instruction. Our analysis further supports the assumption that bilingual instruction leads to a common underlying proficiency (Cummins 1981), which positively affects performance in another language.

Considering the English proficiency of the mainstream students, our results are in line with those of Maurer et al. (2021): English performance was found to be related to reading performance in German, whereas the presence of another L1 was not negatively associated with the English performance. Similar to Maluch and Kempert (2017), our analyses found an advantage for simultaneous bilinguals over those who grew up speaking German only when background variables were controlled. Our results showed no advantages for those bilingual mainstream students with a minority language as their L1 over those who grew up monolingual with the majority language. Thus, for children with a minority language as L1, the results suggest that L1 instruction is recommended for these children, or that the level of proficiency in the L1 seems to play a role for additional language learning.

Based on previous empirical findings (e.g. Edele, Kempert, and Schotte 2018; Maurer et al. 2021), a positive effect of the proficiency in the majority language on L3 learning was expected. In support of this assumption, our results also highlight the importance of the majority language for both mainstream students and students in TWI. The effect of the proficiency in the majority language, German, on English achievement was equivalent to the average annual gain of about two school years (Brunner, Stallasch, and Lüdtke 2022). In addition, our analyses of TWI students also show the importance of skills in the minority language, which serves as a second language of instruction in TWI. Thus, the results of our study suggest that promoting minority language proficiency through bilingual instruction may provide an advantage in learning a third language. Our findings join the ongoing discourse on the potential benefits of bilingual instruction for language minority students (e.g. Serafini, Rozell, and Winsler 2020). Our study extends this discussion by shedding light on the potential benefits in the area of additional language learning.

There are some limitations to be considered in the interpretation of our results. First, as with all quasi-experimental studies, causal inferences should be drawn with caution from the analyses presented in this paper. Random assignment of students to the TWI or regular instruction group was impossible. Therefore, we used numerous background variables in the analyses to avoid potential biases arising from a nonrandom assignment. Furthermore, we did not distinguish between the different partner languages of the school sites in the analyses because the sample sizes of the subgroups would have been too small. Thus, we did not examine whether there were differences between the school locations.

Unfortunately, it was impossible to find a sufficient number of students with the respective partner languages as L1 or L2 in the mainstream schools. Therefore, in the present study, we could only assess the partner language skills of TWI students, so it was impossible to conclude the impact of minority language skills on English achievement for mainstream students. Hence, future studies should survey language competencies in both the majority and the respective minority languages of all students in order to be able to investigate the influence of school and outof-school language acquisition.

Furthermore, the cross-sectional design of our study does not allow us to draw causal conclusions about L3 skill development. We know from the similar findings from Fleckenstein, Möller, and Baumert (2018) for secondary school students that TWI students still show significantly better English performance in ninth grade. However, longitudinal studies would be desirable here, in which the performance in the first, second, and L3 is surveyed over time to analyze reciprocal transfer effects between the language proficiencies as Preusler et al. (2022) showed.

Beyond its immediate scope, our study may have implications for research, policy, and educational practice. In research, our findings underscore the importance of promoting L1 proficiency to acquire additional languages. The advantage in English reading comprehension that was observed for students in the TWI program motivates research on the effects of targeted L1 support, particularly for minority language students, on later language acquisition. One idea could be intervention studies that offer minority language instruction to mainstream students or deliberately teach strategies to promote language awareness. This would allow utilizing the language potential of bilingual students. From a policy perspective, this study argues for a comprehensive approach to language education. The benefits of promoting L1 and L2 proficiency in the TWI program should encourage policymakers to provide more bilingual instruction, including instruction in the L1 of minority language students. In practice, our findings argue for recognizing the L1 as a fundamental element of language instruction. Educators can use our findings to create environments that prioritize and promote L1 skills to take advantage of students’ multilingual abilities.

In summary, our study emphasizes the importance of L1 and L2 proficiency for further language learning and provides researchers, policy makers, and educators with evidence for optimizing language learning outcomes. In addition, the results show that positive effects on L3 acquisition are already evident after a few years in TWI. The findings support the expansion of TWI programs, as the use of two languages of instruction promotes L3 acquisition.

# Acknowledgments

We have no conflicts of interest to disclose. This study is a part of the ‘Europe study’, funded by the Senate of Berlin and the Stiftung Mercator.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

# Funding

This work was supported by the Senate of Berlin and the Stiftung Mercator.

# Notes on contributors

Sandra Preusler is a postdoctoral researcher interested in bilingual education, language proficiency, and assessing student achievement. She is currently working on the EUROPE study, the evaluation of a two-way immersive school in Berlin.

Johanna Fleckenstein is an assistant professor interested in adaptivity and feedback.

Steffen Zitzmann is an assistant professor interested in Bayesian statistics, multilevel analysis, structural equation modeling, meta-analysis, and the analysis of quasi-experiments.

Jürgen Baumert is Director Emeritus at the Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, and an honorary professor. His research interests are individual development in institutional contexts, teaching and learning, and pedagogical professionalism.

Jens Möller is a professor of psychology. His research focuses on motivational psychology, bilingual learning, and the professional competencies of teachers and student teachers.

# ORCID

Sandra Preusler $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2640-1940   
Johanna Fleckenstein $\circledcirc$ http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4488-1455   
Steffen Zitzmann $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7595-4736   
Jürgen Baumert $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9839-9395   
Jens Möller $\textcircled { 1 0 }$ http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1767-5859

# References

Abu-Rabia, S., and E. Sanitsky. 2010. “Advantages of Bilinguals Over Monolinguals in Learning a Third Language.” Bilingual Research Journal 33 (2): 173–199. https://doi.org/10.1080/15235882.2010.502797.   
Baker, C. 2011. Foundations of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism (5th ed.). Bilingual Education & Bilingualism: Vol. 79. Multilingual Matters.   
Baumert, J., J. Fleckenstein, M. Leucht, O. Köller, and J. Möller. 2020. “The Long-Term Proficiency of Early, Middle, and Late Starters Learning English as a Foreign Language at School: A Narrative Review and Empirical Study.” Language Learning 70 (4): 1091–1135. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12414.   
Behörde für Schule und Berufsbildung. 2011. LAU – Aspekte der Lernausgangslage und der Lernentwicklung. Klassenstufen 5, 7 und 9 [LAU – aspects of the initial learning situation and learning development. Grades 5, 7 and 9] (Hamburger Schriften zur Qualität im Bildungswesen No. 8). Münster.   
Brohy, C. 2001. “Generic and/or Specific Advantages of Bilingualism in a Dynamic Plurilingual Situation: The Case of French as Official L3 in the School of Samedan (Switzerland).” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 4 (1): 38–49. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050108667717.   
Brunner, M., S. E. Stallasch, and O. Lüdtke. 2022. Empirical Benchmarks to Interpret Intervention Effects on Student Achievement in Elementary and Secondary School: Meta-Analytic Results from Germany. EdArXiv. https://doi.org/10. 35542/osf.io/39gbq.   
Cenoz, J. 2013. “The Influence of Bilingualism on Third Language Acquisition: Focus on Multilingualism.” Language Teaching 46 (1): 71–86. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444811000218.   
Cenoz, J., F. Genesee, and D. Gorter. 2014. “Critical Analysis of CLIL: Taking Stock and Looking Forward.” Applied Linguistics 35 (3): 243–262. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amt011.   
Christian, D., E. R. Howard, and M. I. Loeb. 2000. “Bilingualism for all: Two-way Immersion Education in the United States.” Theory Into Practice 39 (4): 258–266. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15430421tip3904_9.   
Coyle, D. 2007. “Content and Language Integrated Learning: Towards a Connected Research Agenda for CLIL Pedagogies.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 10 (5): 543–562. https://doi.org/10.2167/ beb459.0.   
Cummins, J. 1979. “Linguistic Interdependence and the Educational Development of Bilingual Children.” Review of Educational Research 49 (2): 222–251. https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543049002222.   
Cummins, J. 1981. “The Role of Primary Language Development in Promoting Educational Success for Language Minority Students.” In Schooling and Language Minority Students: A Theoretical Framework, edited by California State Department of Education, 3–49. Evaluation, Dissemination, and Assessment Center, California State University. https://doi.org/10.13140/2.1.1334.9449   
Cummins, J. 1984. Bilingualism and Special Education: Issues in Assessment and Pedagogy. Multilingual Matters.   
de Angelis, G. 2007. Third or Additional Language Acquisition. Multilingual Matters.   
Eckes, T., and R. Grotjahn. 2006. “A Closer Look at the Construct Validity of C-Tests.” Language Testing 23 (3): 290–325. https://doi.org/10.1191/0265532206lt330oa.   
Edele, A., S. Kempert, and K. Schotte. 2018. “Does Competent Bilingualism Entail Advantages for the Third Language Learning of Immigrant Students?” Learning and Instruction 58: 232–244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc. 2018.07.002.   
Fleckenstein, J., J. Möller, and J. Baumert. 2018. “Mehrsprachigkeit als Ressource: Kompetenzen dual-immersiv unterrichteter Schülerinnen und Schüler in der Drittsprache Englisch.” Zeitschrift Für Erziehungswissenschaft 21 (1): 97– 120. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11618-017-0792-9. International Standard Classification of Occupations.” Social Science Research 25 (3): 201–239. https://doi.org/10. 1006/ssre.1996.0010.   
Heller, K. A., and C. Perleth. 2000. Kognitiver Fähigkeitstest für 4. bis 12. Klassen, Revision (KFT 4- $1 2 + R )$ [Cognitive Abilities Test for Grades 4 to 12, Revision (KFT 4- $\cdot 1 2 + R ) ]$ . Hogrefe.   
Hirosh, Z., and T. Degani. 2018. “Direct and Indirect Effects of Multilingualism on Novel Language Learning: An Integrative Review.” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 25 (3): 892–916. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-017-1315-7.   
Howard, E. R., K. Lindholm-Leary, D. Rogers, N. Olague, J. Medina, B. Kennedy, J. Sugarman, and D. Christian. 2018. Guiding Principles for Dual Language Education (3rd ed.). Center for Applied Linguistics.   
Howard, E. R., and J. Sugarman. 2001. Two-way Immersion Programs: Features and Statistics. ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics. https://www.cal.org/content/download/1577/16838/file/TwoWayImmersionPrograms. pdf.   
Jaekel, N., M. Schurig, M. Florian, and M. Ritter. 2017. “From Early Starters to Late Finishers? A Longitudinal Study of Early Foreign Language Learning in School.” Language Learning 67: 631. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12242.   
Jared, D., P. Cormier, B. A. Levy, and L. Wade-Woolley. 2011. “Early Predictors of Biliteracy Development in Children in French Immersion: A 4-Year Longitudinal Study.” Journal of Educational Psychology 103 (1): 119–139. https://doi.org/ 10.1037/a0021284.   
Kim, Y. K., L. A. Hutchison, and A. Winsler. 2015. “Bilingual Education in the United States: An Historical Overview and Examination of two-way Immersion.” Educational Review 67 (2): 236–252. https://doi.org/10.1080/00131911.2013. 865593.   
Klein-Braley, C. 1997. “C-Tests in the Context of Reduced Redundancy Testing: An Appraisal.” Language Testing 14 (1): 47–84. https://doi.org/10.1177/026553229701400104.   
Lindholm-Leary, K. 2001. Dual Language Education. Bilingual Education and Bilingualism: Vol. 28. Multilingual Matters.   
Lindholm-Leary, K. 2011. “Student Outcomes in Chinese two-way Immersion Programs: Language Proficiency, Academic Achievement and Student Attitudes.” In Immersion Education: Practices, Policies, Possibilities, edited by D. J. Tedick, D. Christian, and T. W. Fortune, 81–103. Multilingual Matters.   
Lindholm-Leary, K. 2016. “Bilingualism and Academic Achievement in Children in Dual Language Programs.” In Bilingualism Across the Lifespan: Factors Moderating Language Proficiency, edited by E. Nicoladis, and S. Montanari, 203–223. American Psychological Association. https://doi.org/10.1037/14939-012   
Lorenz, E., S. Rahbari, U. Schackow, and P. Siemund. 2020. “Does Bilingualism Correlate with or Predict Higher Proficiency in L3 English? A Contrastive Study of Monolingual and Bilingual Learners.” Journal of Multilingual Theories and Practices 1 (2): 185–217. https://doi.org/10.1558/jmtp.15517.   
Maluch, J. T., and S. Kempert. 2017. “Bilingual Profiles and Third Language Learning: The Effects of the Manner of Learning, Sequence of Bilingual Acquisition, and Language use Practices.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2017.1322036.   
Marian, V., A. Shook, and S. R. Schroeder. 2013. “Bilingual two-way Immersion Programs Benefit Academic Achievement.” Bilingual Research Journal 36 (2), https://doi.org/10.1080/15235882.2013.818075.   
Maurer, U., L. B. Jost, S. E. Pfenninger, and A. K. Eberhard-Moscicka. 2021. “Effects of German Reading Skills and Bilingualism on Early Learning of English as a Foreign Language in Primary School Children.” Reading and Writing 34 (10): 2673–2689. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-021-10166-1.   
McAuliffe, M., and A. Triandafyllidou eds. 2021. World Migration Report 2022. https://publications.iom.int/books/worldmigration-report-2022.   
Möller, J., J. Fleckenstein, F. Hohenstein, I. Paulick, S. Preusler, and J. Baumert. 2018. “Varianten und Effekte Bilingualen Lernens in der Schule.” Zeitschrift Für Erziehungswissenschaft 21 (1): 4–28. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11618-017-0791-x.   
Möller, J., F. Hohenstein, J. Fleckenstein, O. Köller, and J. Baumert eds. 2017. Erfolgreich Integrieren - die Staatliche EuropaSchule Berlin [Successful Integration – the State Europe School Berlin]. Waxmann.   
Mullis, I. V. S., M. O. Martin, P. Foy, and K. T. Drucker. 2012. PIRLS 2011 International Results in Reading. TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center.   
Mullis, I. V. S., M. O. Martin, E. J. Gonzalez, and A. M. Kennedy. 2003. PIRLS 2001 International Report: IEA’s Study of Reading Literacy Achievement in Primary School in 35 Countries. International Study Center.   
Muthén, L. K., and B. O. Muthén. 1998-2017. Mplus User’s Guide. 8th ed. Muthén & Muthén.   
Pfenninger, S. E., and D. Singleton. 2019. “Starting Age Overshadowed: The Primacy of Differential Environmental and Family Support Effects on Second Language Attainment in an Instructional Context.” Language Learning 69: 207–234. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12318.   
Preusler, S., S. Zitzmann, J. Baumert, and J. Möller. 2022. “Development of German Reading Comprehension in two-way Immersive Primary Schools.” Learning and Instruction 79: 101598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2022.101598.   
Preusler, S., S. Zitzmann, I. Paulick, J. Baumert, and J. Möller. 2019. “Ready to Read in two Languages? Testing the Native Language Hypothesis and the Majority Language Hypothesis in two-way Immersion Students.” Learning and Instruction 64: 101247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2019.101247.   
R Core Team. 2021. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. https://www.R-project.org/.   
Robitzsch, A., T. Kiefer, and M. L. Wu. 2021. TAM: Test Analysis Modules [R package Version 3.7-16]. https://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=TAM.   
Rubin, D. B. 1987. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470316696   
Sanz, C. 2000. “Bilingual Education Enhances Third Language Acquisition: Evidence from Catalonia.” Applied Psycholinguistics 21 (1): 23–44. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716400001028.   
Schafer, J. L. 1999. “Multiple Imputation: A Primer.” Statistical Methods in Medical Research 8 (1): 3–15. https://doi.org/10. 1177/096228029900800102.   
Schafer, J. L., and J. W. Graham. 2002. “Missing Data: Our View of the State of the Art.” Psychological Methods 7 (2): 147– 177. https://doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.7.2.147.   
Senatsverwaltung für Bildung, Jugend und Familie. 2018. Rahmenvorgaben der Staatlichen Europa-Schule Berlin (SESB) als Schule Besonderer Pädagogischer Prägung [Framework of the Staatliche Europa-Schule Berlin (SESB) as a School with a Special Pedagogical Character]. Berlin.   
Serafini, E. J., N. Rozell, and A. Winsler. 2020. “Academic and English Language Outcomes for DLLs as a Function of School Bilingual Education Model. The Role of two-way Immersion and Home Language Support.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 12 (1): 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2019.1707477.   
Steele, J. L., R. O. Slater, G. Zamarro, T. Miller, J. Li, S. Burkhauser, and M. Bacon. 2017. “Effects of Dual-Language Immersion Programs on Student Achievement.” American Educational Research Journal 54 (1S): 282S–306S. https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831216634463.   
Swain, M., S. Lapkin, N. Rowen, and D. Hart. 1990. “The Role of Mother Tongue Literacy in Third Language Learning.” Language, Culture and Curriculum 3 (1): 65–81. https://doi.org/10.1080/07908319009525073.   
Thorndike, R. L., and E. Hagen. 1971. Cognitive Abilities Test. Houghton Mifflin.   
van Buuren, S., and K. Groothuis-Oudshoorn. 2011. “Mice: Multivariate Imputation by Chained Equations in R.” Journal of Statistical Software 45 (3): 1–67. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v045.i03.   
Verordnung über den Bildungsgang der Grundschule (Grundschulverordnung) [Primary school regulation], Anlage 1. 2005. & rev. 2021.   
Warm, T. A. 1989. “Weighted Likelihood Estimation of Ability in Item Response Theory.” Psychometrika 54 (3): 427–450. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02294627.   
Zhao, J. H., and J. L. Schafer. 2018. pan: Multiple imputation for multivariate panel or clustered data.