# Only a cog in a machine?: Reappraising institutionalized EAP teacher identities in a transnational context

Mian Hua, Seyyed-Abdolhamid Mirhosseinia,\*, Anna Mendozab

a The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong b The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Handling Editor: Guangwei Hu

Keywords:   
EAP teacher identity   
English language ideologies   
Institutional language policies   
Transnational university   
EAP in China

Language teacher identity (LTI) research, critical approaches to language education, and English for Academic Purposes (EAP), have each grown into considerable areas of scholarship. However, not many studies have addressed topics at the intersection of these triple areas. Therefore, adopting a critical perspective on LTI construction within predominant language ideologies, this study aimed to investigate EAP teachers' professional identity formation in response to institutional policies in a Sino-British university in China. As part of a larger project, data bodies were collected through a narrative survey completed by 77 faculty members and semi-structured interviews with 36 of them at this transnational English-medium university. The analysis of narratives and interview transcripts through qualitative coding procedures revealed three major aspects of the participants' institutionalized identities: The EAP teacher' (comprising three roles: a cog in a machine, a British acculturation agent, and a mock monolingual role model); The safe researcher' of trendy topics; and The service provider' seeking promotion. The findings contribute insights into EAP LTI from a critical perspective by documenting how EAP teachers (are obliged to) construct institutionalized identities in relation to language ideologies and educational policies in a transnational higher education context.

# 1. Introduction

Language teacher identity (LTI research has gained momentum over the past two decades based on an understanding of identity as shaping and being shaped by macro-level ideological tructures, meso-level institional practce, and micro-level classroom activities (Douglas Fir Group, 2016). This understanding can foster a critical sociocultural view of the notion of identity conceptualized as how people understand their contextual relationship to the world and their power-implicated current and future possbilities (Norton, 2010, 2013). Although such a critical perspective has been increasingly adopted in LTI studie (e.g., Abednia, 2012; Shin & Rubio, 2022; Tashma Baum, 2014; Trent, 2012; Wang et al., 2023; Weng, 2023; Yazan, 2019), research on English for Academic Purposes (EAP) has not extensively embraced it and has largely remained pragmatic in nature (Benesch, 2001), ., focused on socializing students into academic discourses and equipping them with skillsto succeed in a global' university, while the effects from wider sociocultural dynamics of institutions on EAP teachers have been lessconsidered (Ding & Bruce, 2017). Recognizing the influence of these dynamics, areflexive understanding of EAP being shaped by ideological and structural fores can be more firmly advocated (Ding & Evans, 2022; Ding & Monbec, 2024).

To explore aspects of this uncharted area and examine how EAP teachers construct identities against institutional policies and discourses the current study focuses on EAP teacher identity construction in a Sino-British university in China. Within the domain of so-called internationalized of higher education, neoliberal ideologies have been influential in exploiting the commercial value of English and the concept of international (Chowdhury & Le Ha, 2014). These ideologies can then penetrate policies, curricula, and pedagogical practices (Phan & Barnawi, 2015). How EAP teacher identity construction is subected to larger structural inluences in internationalized higher education remains unclear. Against this background, this study aims to examine EAP teachers identity construction from a critical sociocultural perspective in a transnational context.

# 2. EAP teacher identity; A critical view

Over the past four decades, EAP has transitioned from a peripheral aspect of English for Specific Purposes' to a prominent area within English language education, and this transition has been evident in the growth of EAP research. This expansion has been attrbuted to two crucial factors: the increasing diversty and complexity of EAP contexts worldwide, and the aspiration to professionalize EAP as an academic field (Hyland & Jiang, 2021). Consequently, researchers have explored various topics, such as EAP teaching approaches (e.g., Ecstein et al., 2011; Jou, 2019; Querol-Julia, 2023; Zare & Keivanloo-Shahrestanaki, 2017), analysis of EAP discourse (e., gee al., 202; Lim, 2019; Thompson, 2003), AP teaching materials (.g., Jffrey, 2015; Nekrasova-Beker, 019; Skoufaki & Petric, 2021; Walkova, 2020), and EAP asessment challenges (e.g., Asoodar et al., 2014; Read, 2002; Uludag & McDo nough, 2022; Westbrook, 2023).

Within this research landscape, only a minor stream of EAP research has been influenced by sociocultural or critical perspectives. From a critical sociocultural lens, language is not merely a tool for communication but a practice that both shapes and is shaped by Ianguage learners' understanding of themselves, their sociocultural contexts, and their past and future (Norton & Toohey, 2004. Instead of focusing solely on lingustic knowledge or practical teaching techniques, researchers in this stream are more interested in exploring how language practices form social relationships and addressing power dynamics in language education. Within EAP, a critical turn is marked by the work of Pennycook (1997), Benesch (1996, 2001), and Ding and Bruce (2017). Since then, some EAP researchers have adopted critical sociocultural perspectives to examine topics including learner beliefs and perceptions (Basturkmen & Lewis, 2002; Li & Ruan, 2015), ideologies in EAP education (e.g., Chun, 2009, 2016), issues of sylabus design (Benesch, 1996; Morgan, 2009), and educational policies nd practices related to EAP (Harwood & Hadley, 2004; Tavakoli & Tavakol, 2018). Together, these studies reflect a growing interest in critically analyzing topics related to the power dimensions f language learning and teaching within EAP.

Identity is one such topic explored through critical sociocultural perspectives. The emphasis on the topic in the field of applied linguistics is marked by Norton's seminal works to critique second language acquisition research for failing to develop a theory of social identit and power to understand the process of second language learning (Norton Peirce, 1995). Identity has gradually become a well-etablished key construct in the field (Norton, 2010, 2013). Within EAP, there has been a growing but small number of studies on identity. For instance, viewing AP learning and teaching as a social practice, some researchers have explored learner identit (e., Abasi et al., 2006; Bhowmik, 2016; Chen et al., 2022; Galante, 2020; Soltani & Tran, 2023) and, les frequently, EAP teacher identity (e.g., Atai & Khazaee, 2014; Nazari  Karimpour, 2022; Yan & Zhang, 2021) as well as how identities are negotiated in teacher-student interaction (e.g., Jain, 2022).

Increasing attention has been given to EAP teacher identity formation, although critical perspectives are still not focal in con. ceptions of identity in this area. In the context of China, Tao and Gao (2018) conducted if history interviews with eight EAP teachers to explore ther identity construction. Their participants expressed a sense f fulfilment as ESP tachers but also uncertainty regarding the professional status of ESP within the instution. Later, in a three-year case study, Gao and Cui (2021) traced one EAP teacher's personal journey of identity expansion and illustrated that EAP teacher identity can emerge through self-perception and instutional reforms and between teacher emotions and agentive actions. More recently, and in a different context,Atai et al. (2022) focused on the identity of a novice EAP teacher in Iran and identified several conflicts in their participants' identity construction, including struggles with content-language integration, and the undervalued status of the EAP profession.

Such studies primarily investigate how EAP teachers construct their identities while transitioning from teaching general English to academic English, facing challenges related to unfamiliar genre, subject-specific ocabulary, collaborating with content tachers, and how EAP teachers draw from prior experiences of teaching general English and undergo professional development in their teaching practices and interactions with students and content teachers. However, these perspectives tend to remain confined to practical isues in the immediate context. Broader sociocultural influences on teacher identities beyond institutional reforms or programme changes have not been thoroughly considered. These broader ssues can include questions about why English s taught in the first place, what kind of English is taught, and with what ideological approaches English is taught. To develop a more comprehensive understanding of EAP teacher identity formation, i i essential to explore such questions within the broader sociocultural landscape in which EAP operates.

Beyond EAP, there are studies in the broader field of language education that have incorporated such conceptions of II. For example, Yazan (2019) examined how a language teacher candidate approached and analyzed language ideologies and was able to destabilize ideological binaries while constructing her teacher identity positions in an autoethnography. This study highlighted the situatednes of language and language ideologies in the teaching context and the impacts on LI construction. As another instance, facing neoliberalism, Guerrero-Nieto and Castaneda-Trujilo (2023) explored how two English language teachers aserted their critical identities. They discussed how neoliberal practices exploit and discredit language teachers, and how teachers overcame fears and aligned their practice with research-based knowledge from their master's studies.

Also exploring ideologies, Shin and Rubio (2022) examined how critical teacher identity interacts with neoliberal ideologies. In their study, an ESL teacher reflected on the issue of historicity in his teaching, but experienced struggles due to tensions between his idealized way of teaching and neoliberal educational policies plus disinterested students. Their research shed light on the interplay between educational policies/ideologies and LTI. As another example, Uzum et al. (2022) analyzed interviews with monolingual language teacher candidates teaching emergent bilingual leaners. The findings illutrated the challenges teachers faced, such as a language barrier' when not sharing the first language with learners, and tensions in relation to identities, ideologies, and students. Overall such studies move beyond a narrow focus on LT formation solely within immediate practical context of teaching the target language or sills and delve into language and educational ideologies, thus addressing power dynamics in language education. They raise isues of access equality, and justice as esential aspect of EAP research with potential for cosing the gaps of inequalities in language education.

Inspired by these studies outside the realm of EAP, the current research project aims to adopt a critical perspective on identity to examine EAP teacher identity formation. It is based on an understanding of identity as being created and recreated in the engagement with practices of power and games of truth (Foucault, 197). On this basis,  formation is tobe understood as unavoidable responses to the dominant sociocultural discourses (Miler et al., 2017) surrounding English language education. Investigating LTI formation with an understanding of marginalizations resulting from unequal resource distribution and the agency exercised in vindicating ones ideologies and practices (Nazari t al., 2023; Yazan & Rudolph, 2018), thi study views EAP teacher identity formation in relation to its institutional educational policies in a Chinese transnational higher education (TNHE) context.

Driven by neoliberal ideologies to maximize financial interests, many universities are seeking to become intenational universities to participate competitively in global knowledge production (Bamberger et al., 2019; De Costa, Green-Eneix, & Li, 2022; Phan & Barnawi, 2015), and China is not an exception. However, existing research on Chinese transnational education primarily focuses on structural and managerial aspects (e.g., Han, 2017; Hayhoe & Pan, 2015; Huang, 2016) or the persectives of learners (e.g., Ou & Gu, 2021). Little is known about how university language instructors negotiate their identities in response to intitutional ideologies, discourses, policies within this emerging context (Huang & Varghese, 2015), i.e, how they encounter the institutional language ideology/policy that favors English as the medium of instruction, and how they respond to the emphasis on the so-called internationalization of teaching and learning styles.

# 3. Method

This study forms part of a larger ethnographic project aimed at delving into EAP teacher identity construction from a critical sociocultural perspective at a Chinese TNHE context. Drawing on data from narrative survey responses and in-depth interviews with EAP teachers, in this article we investigate how EAP teachers struggle to (re)construct their identities in a Sino-British university located in China. Specificall, the present study aims to address the fllowing question: How do EAP teachers in  THE context in China perceive and position themselves in the context of their institutional language-related ideologies/policies?

# 3.1. Research context

he context of our research was the English Language Center of a Sino-British university in Eastern China on track to become a   
Table 1 Demographics of the survey participants.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Categories</td><td>Sub-categories</td><td>N</td></tr><tr><td>Gender</td><td>Male</td><td>35</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Female</td><td>42</td></tr><tr><td>Age range</td><td>Below 30</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>30-35</td><td>19</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>35-40</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Over 40</td><td>35</td></tr><tr><td>National origin</td><td>China</td><td>42</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Inner Circle English-speaking countries</td><td>35</td></tr><tr><td>Degree</td><td>Masters</td><td>72</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PhD</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Degree field</td><td>Language-related fields</td><td>67</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Other fields with language teaching certificates</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Degrees in other fields</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Place of education</td><td> Inner Circle English speaking countries</td><td>68</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Chinese local universities</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Transnational universities in China</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Others</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Years of teaching</td><td>Below 5 years</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> 5-10 years</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> 10-15 years</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> 15-20 years</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Over 20 years</td><td>7</td></tr></table></body></html>

comprehensive research-led university, which we refer to as United East-West Universty (UEwU, pseudonym). The teaching and assesment at this universty are rigorously monitored based on a British higher education quality assurance system. It offers un. dergraduate and graduate degrees in the fields f Sciences, Engineering, Business Finance, Archtecture, Urban Planning, and Language and Culture. UwU adopts an explicit language policy, a all degree programs are sated to be taught 100 percent in English'. There are over 200 EAP teachers, including Assistant Lecturers, Assciate Lecturers, Lectrers, Senior Lecturers, and Principal Lec turers. These lecturers are primarily responsible for delivering EAP lessons to both undergraduate and postgraduate students, with a workload of up to 20 teaching hours per week. A majority of these teachers are either from English-speaking nations or Chinese teachers holding degrees from English-speaking countries. The EAP program at UEWU spans two years and caters to over $8 7 0 0 ~ \mathrm { u n } .$ dergraduates (Years 1 and 2), with $5 5 \%$ of them subsequently pursuing their degrees in the UK. These EAP teachers are categorized as academic staff and typically hold master's degrees, possess language teaching qualifications, and boast several years of teaching experience. Following two fixed-term contracts, they are offred permanent employment at UEwU. They are expected to actively engage in scholarly activities i.., presenting at academic conferences and publishing research articles) and provide additional services (i.e., serving as managers, module conveners, and asessment moderators) alongside their teaching responsibilities.

# 3.2. Participants

The study involved 77 EAP teachers who participated in a narratie survey (Table 1). Later, 36 of them took part in follow-up semistructured interviews. Most f these teachers have been engaged in teaching English for five to fifeen years. Many of them possess degree relatedo languag teching, inguistics, literture, or translation. hose with eational backrounds in othr fies typically hold certificates in teaching English or have accumulated several years of language teaching experience. Regarding nationality, the participating EAP teachers are primaril Chinese or expatriates from English-speaking countries. Only two teachers are originally from non-English speaking countries but later migrated to the UK. None of the teachers are from Outer or Expanding Circle English-speaking countries, apart from local Chinese teachers. In terms of their educational backgrounds, the majority studied in the UK $\left( \mathrm { N } = 4 5 \right)$ , while a smaller number received their education in the US $( \Nu = 1 0$ ) and Australia and New Zealand $( \mathrm { N } = 1 0 )$ . Only a few teachers received degrees from local institutions $\left( \mathrm { N } = 4 \right)$ , Hong Kong $( \mathrm { N } = 2 )$ , the Netherlands $( \Nu = 1 )$ , or TNHE institutes in China $( \mathrm { N } = 2 )$ . The exclusion of teacher groups beyond those from China and English-speaking countries may be atributed to the Chinese work permit policy, which allows only expatriate English teachers from English-speaking countrie to work and teach English in China (Xinhua News, 2017).

# 3.3. Data collection

As part of a larger project, two bodies of data were collected in the current study: a narrative survey and semi-structed interviews. The first set of data was collected through narrative frames that are known to be useful in providing support and guidance in terms of the content and structure of narratie (Barkhuizen & Wette 208). Based on the idea of narrative frame, a thre-ection survey was developed: the introductory part aimed to gather the demographic information; the second one asked the participants to select their perceived instittional roles and responsibilities, which ims toundertand teacher identity in relation to obligations in the mmediate context; and the third part a the main narrative section of the survey consste f sevenstatement starters to guide the participants to reflect on their professional identity. This ltter part was amed to help the participants view themselves from a broader perspective . e., how they pecive the field f AP, how multifacete their entitie ae, and how ther identities eolve before and after oming to the research context. All EAP teachers from UEWU were invited to participate in the survey and were asked about their willingness for the post-survey interview. In total, 77 EAP teachers responded to the survey. Among them, 36 teachers expressed their interest in further participation in the interview.

As for the second body of data, these 36 EAP teachers, aged between 27 and 55 (14 from China and 22 from English-speaking countries), agreed to take part in semi-structured interviews reported in this study. The interviews consisted of two sections: the first explored the participants top three elf-perceived role as EAP teachers with  focus on the influences from the immediat context on their prfsiona idnttie, andhe od ourgd urthr explantiof thr potions onrfesiona idntty as rflected in the narrative survey responses. The unstructured design in the second section allowed open discussion on their identit i relation to various aspects of EAP teaching and learning, i.e., language of instruction used in EAP, EAP teaching materials provided by the institution, teaching styles employed by teachers, educational values within EAP, etc. The interviews were conducted with each teacher individuall, lasting approximately 50 minutes, and took place in participants offices, meting rooms, or cafes, ased on their convenience. The interviews were conducted in English or Chinese, and the Chinese participants could switch between Chinese and English during the interviews. For ethical concerns, codes were used for all participants. For example, Teacher12 China means participant number 12, who is from China.

# 3.4. Data analysis

The first section of the narrative survey provided the demographic information of EAP teachers, serving two purposes: to offer an overview of the EAP teacher community, and to be triangulated with the themes identified from narraties and interview responses later. Additionally, the narrative frames and transcripts of interview recordings were read and reread to gain a dep contextual un. derstanding of the data. Then the data sets were coded through open, focused, and axial coding procedures (Mirhosseini, 2020). The initial coding involved spotting and marking words or phrases that can possibly answer the research question, focusing on teachers perceptions of their identities and any influences from university or school polie.Later, focused coding was conducted to lok for patterns of similarities or relationships among the marked codes in the intial coding. In axial coding, major categories of the par ticipants response related to EAP teacher identity were organized and rerganized in several rounds. This led to the emergence ofthe main themes and subthemes presented in the next section. Finly, at the theoretical coding stage of the study, theemerging ideas were interconnected and interpreted in relation to the research question.

# 4. Findings

Three major instttional role ientities were identified among the AP teachers, that is three broad aspects of how the participants perceive and position themselves teacher, reearcher, and service-provider. Most of them considered their role as a teacher to be the most crucial (22 participants), viewing teaching as their primary duty, which they appeared to conceptualize in three ways s illus trated in the coming sections. Others prioritized their researcher role as the most significant (6 participant),seeing research as the primary feature for academic staf in higher education. A few other EAP teachers viewed themselves as service-providers (7 participants) due to their crrent administrative positions - an interal part of ther service responsibilitie. Thee rles align with the primary job responsibilities assigned by the School of Languages at UEWU, which emphasize teaching, research, and service. To gain a more comprehensive understanding of these EAP teachers identity perceptions, the following sections delve into the finding from narrative frames and interviews, elaborating on the three main identity categories chosen by the participants, including the three subcategories of their teaching identity. The italicized parts of the text are quotes from the participants' narrtive survey or interview responses, accompanied by our analysis and interpretations.

# 4.1. The EAP teacher

The narrative survey guided the participants o reflect on their professional identity using provided statement starters such as I chose to be an EAP teacher because .. The most prevalent view among participants was that EAP teaching aims to fcilitatestudents study at the university, serving as a means to help them cope with English-medium instruction. Most teachers placed a stronger emphasis on the language aspect of EAP, highlighting it role in enhancing students' language skills and facilitating language proficiency development. One exceptional response described the purpose of EAP as sharing and inspiring students rather than traditional teaching. Overall, the EAP teachers at UWEU predominantly appeared to perceive EAP as a merely technical language practice, focusing on enhancing students language proficiency and facilitating their adaptation to an all-English teaching and learning envi. ronment in the academic community. More specificall, concerning the teaching role of EAP teachers, three facets of EAP teaching identity emerged from their narratives and interview responses with EAP teachers at UEwU: A cog in a machine; A British acculturation agent; A mock monolingual role model.

# 4.1.1. A cog in a machine

The word, cog (Teacher 6_China) is used as an indicator of EAP teachers' professional identity in relation to agency and autonomy in curriculum design. According to the participants, the overall curriculum for a module i jointly agreed upon by the module leader and divisional heads, with approvals from both the universty and the British partner institution. Detailed worksheets, answer keys, and PowerPoint slides are provided to teachers in advance, leading them to fel obligated to deliver ready-made materials, limiting opportunitie for alternative teaching approaches. As Teacher 18 China mentioned, he always tries to catch up but has 'no way to integrate some of his own unique designs into it because the time is used up in delivering the given teaching materials. Furthermore. according tothe participants, the materials were put together without coherence and pedagogical guideline. Teacher 10NZ described the materialsas confined to a restricted vision of the curiculum' because teachers work independently on weekly materil. Teacher 21 China also stated: We willdoa litle it of this today and a litl bit of that tomorrow. It was pointed ot that the curriculum hardy reflected applied linguistics or EAP pedagogy. An example he provided is rule-based content, which focuses on breaking sentence structures into individual grammatical elements. This approach enables leaners to write grammatically correct sentences but fails to foster comprehension of the meaning conveyed.

Although issues have ben identified by teachers regarding the teaching materials in terms of space, coherence, and pedagogy, Teacher 6China expressed frustration because they don't reflect on this matter. They have been doing th same thing, as the organ. zational structure is restrictive' and 'top-down' (Teacher 30_UK), hindering teachers from proposing alternative practices and imple menting changes. EAP managers like Teacher 28 UK mentioned that even if problems are recognized, teachers or managers might not be able to change these because they could not make executive decisions, as it allhas to go through the policies and go through the commitees, particularly i a transnational universty where aprovals may be needed from both sides. Without supportive conditions teachers may graduall loe interest in proposing changes. As Teacher 6China mentioned, some teachers are of the attitude that 'I am here for the money, I don't care. You can let me teach whatever you want'. Others, like the two teachers quoted below, may be afraid of deviating from the provided materials and followed the exact curriculum design:

Teacher 1 UK: I have to teach this content If I dont then stdents ill compli ..I ae to acet.. students will demerit me. They may put me down: Teacher didn't do this; teacher didn't get through the curriculum.'

Teacher 21 China: Everyone will do this [material]. I don't dare to not cover it. I don't dare.

The teaching materials at UEWU are detailed but provide limited room for teachers to shape the curriculum. Despite concerns about material coherence and potential pedagogical issues, teachers face obstacles in making changes due to the unsupportive top-down organizational structure. The lack of agency to implement updated theoretical and practical developments from language teaching research results in passive conformity to established materials and practices. EAP teachers, thus, tend to assume themselves as $\cdot _ { a }$ cog' that just delivers the provided materials as instructed by the organizational machine.

# 4.1.2. A British acculturation agent

During the first week of EAP at UEwU, a transition program called Acculturation and Transition for Language and Academic Succes'is conducted. The transition program is designed by an EAP module convenor and approved by the universty commitees. Once finalized, the materials are provided to over 100 teachers one week before teaching sarts. The purpose of the program is said to be facilitating Year-one students adaptation to UEwU's learning environment. Due to time constraints, teachers do not seem to have much space to propose changes to the teaching materials. In this phase, EAP teachers (both Chinese and non-Chinese) act as acculturation agents, assisting students in transitioning to the new educational system.

Although UEwU claims to integrate the cultural and educational essence of the East and the West', it is positioned by many EAP teachers as $\cdot _ { a }$ British university' (Teacher 4_USA) or $\cdot _ { a }$ British university campus' (Teacher 19_UK), and EAP teachers are expected to 'enable students o understand Westem education and Britsh teaching syles (Teacher 24China). From such a perspective, an assumed dichotomy is formed by the teachers about teaching styles of this Brtish univrsty' and the traditional local teaching style (Teacher 4_USA). That is, the teacher-centered, grammar-focused way of teaching is contrasted to student-centered' (Teacher 15_China), communicative (Teacher 36_UK) way. Below are two quotes from EAP teachers about their impressions on the two teaching styles:

Teacher 29_USA: [The local teaching style is] .. sotraditiondl teaching method, you know, teacher cantered .. Here's what you do You guys don't really need to talk to each other. You just need to get the right answers on the grammar thin...

Teacher 24 China: Now we gradually help students to learn this culture. I project topics on the screen, and students wil have to participate in discussion activities and share their ideas to members.

This new teaching style with a focus on communication at Uwu is viewed as a more effective way of teaching, especill for EAP, as students who study in very traditional Chinese universty will have a very simple dea' (Teacher 24 China) about academic English compared to UEWU students. Accordingly, the language center at UEWU advocates the use of the communicative approach for language teaching. Communicative language teaching in this context indicates an imagined better educational model' It is more of a vague reference that teachers associated with English-speaking countries and their supposedly better teaching methods and better educational values. Teacher 29_USA is an enthusiastic advocate for so-called communicative teaching as a more progressive approach, emphasizing grammar improvement through extensive speaking practice rather than rote memorization of rules. Teacher 23_UK perceived role-play activities as a useful tool to make shy students speak when they hide behind a role, while Teacher 15_China reshuffled groups constantly to create interactions among quieter students.

A further dichotomy was made about the educational values of Chinese and British education, as UEwU claims to adopt UK teaching, learning, and assessment procedures as a university based in China. In the following interview extract, Teacher 1_UK highlights the contrasts between British education, which he perceives as promoting holistic and behavioral values, with Chinese education, that he believes emphasizes shaping individuals to be obedient citizens of the government. Acording to Teacher 1_UK, education from the UK equips students with qualities such as critical thinking, autonomy, and comfort with uncertainties, which he considers as true education. In contrast, he implies that Chinese education lacks genuineness in fostering these qualities:

Teacher 1_UK: The graduate atributes that you have in the UK are very directly linked to education itself. So, you'l fel comfortable with doubts, critical thinking, autonomy, all of these sorts of academic values. Thats what education is. But here, they also got other more holistic, behavioral values ... You can get those from the British side. They'll give you all of those.

Interviewer: What can the Chinese side offer?

Teacher 1_UK: The harmony. They can offer you how to be a good citizen of the country. Citizenship.

Among the qualities that can be provided by the UK system, critical thinking emerged as afrequently mentioned and valued notion by both Chinese and non-Chinese participants. It was viewed as 'one important focus of acculturation (Teacher 15China). When asked to elaborate on the concept of critical thinking, Teacher 33 China expresed uncertainty ut identified it as the ability to make mature judgment . ndeendently think about  topic. o produce persuasive ideas. Teacer 36UK also found critical thinking chllenging to define precisely. She believed that everyone posses some degree f citical thinking from birth, but some cultures might possess ess critical thinking than others. For instance, she noted that Chinese students may be lessinclined to challenge authorit figures like their parents, whereas British children are encouraged to do so. This is echoed by Teacher 15_China: They [Westerners] are inded critical, more critical than us. Although there are exceptions, Chinese people generally have a more smooth life and lesscritical thinking.

The dichotomies between traditional Chinese teaching and new methods, and between true education' and 'not genuine education, highlight the cultural transition that students are expected to undergo when entering the EAP program. EAP teachers play a crucial role in facilitating this transition due to students educational background not aligning with the new system. eacher 24 China, who received education in an English-speaking country, feels responsible for highlighting the academic and cultural differences between traditional Chinese and British education. In the following extract, he keeps mentioning the word difference or different to dichotomize Chinese and British education systems and emphasize the need to for learners to change their minds for the new system:

Teacher 24China: My roleis to explain the difference in leaming to the students first I want to change their mind tell them that they hae no time to waste, diffeent fromthe students from  ol univerity, or ther tadtional Chine univerities. The stdy here is ste by-step. It' not just as simple as they as that exam once .. Instead, they must get, for example, the GPA, once they want to apl for higher univeritie . It' diffen ystem . If they follow the ritish education contest, of course, they [must] have a much higher GPA, right? But in China, they only nedto pass the examnatin.. Her is iferet... [As] n Eglish teacher, I eed to explain hee to them.

UEWU presents itelfas a university with a British orientation, expecting students to adopt the British educational stle and values, as their pror ecation dos not alig with the tar sstm. A tchers, n reonse, wth ttl rstanceohis orittio, adopt an acculturation agent identit to aid students in this transition. They explicitly communicate the expectations and impart British educational values using what teacher respondents describe as communicative language teaching' (even though it does not often apply to teaching English at an 'academic' level) rather than the 'traditional' Chinese teaching approach.

# 4.1.3. A mock monolingual role model

With the university adopting an English-only policy for all degree programs, EAP modules are also taught in $\mathbf { \tilde { \rho } } _ { 1 0 0 \% }$ English'. The survey responses show that the majorit of EAP teachers are bilingual or multilingual- only 11 out of 77 teachers speak English only. However, the bilingual or multilingual AP teachers should sillassume a monolingual identit inclassooms where students are not monolingual either. Maintaning an all-English environment is considered esential for efective teaching at UEwU. EAP teachers like Teacher 33_China, view using English as much as possble s stting an example for students that they should be ableto learn in an all English environment beause vntually they willgo to English-speaking countrie for urther sudy. Within thisall-English environment, there is a preference for the so-called native standard English. Teacher 33 China rerred to native speaker acents as \* Jaccent (accents that sound comfortable) and nonnative accents such as Indian English as  (accents that sound strange). Therefore, EAP teachers tend to select materials with native English accents to help students acquire standard pronunciation? (Teacher 33China). This is echoed by Teacher 21 China, who thinks that teaching English in Chinese is not professional in this inter. national university. She avoided using Chinese herself and was also concerned about the fact that some students used Chinese in her classroom:

Teacher 21 China. . another group i not that good. They won't do what isinstructed. was thinking, why? Maybe it was te firt lesson .. eft an impression that it was fin to speak in Chinese . If I had tod them in the beining that it was not fine, they could hae behaved better.

She referred to one EAP class as well-ehaved and using English for communication, and the other class as not good', not well behaved', and using Chinese to tal. The avoidance of Chinese outside the classroom was also mentioned by Teacher 21_China. She sometimes received students' email inquiries in Chinese. Her initial thought was to ignore these emails. Thinking the act might be too cruel, she replied in English and reminded students of writing emails to her in English instead of Chinese. Similarly, Teacher 15_China was also very concerned about limiting the use of Chinese and said she never used any Chinese in or outside classooms with students. Furthermore, Teacher 36_UK mentioned that she was shocked to see one EAP teacher use Chinese in the EAP classrom. For other teachers, thir attitude was more tolerant but stil quite defensive, for instance, allowing Chinese in the beginning to help learners gradually adapt to the allEnglish environment (Teacher 35_Ns) or when abstract concepts were too difficult to explain (Teacher 5_China, Teacher 24_China). Whil some teachers were more tolerant and allowed occasional us of Chinese in specific situations, they still maintained a defensive stance towards its use. verall, the EAP teachers aim to establish themselves as role models, projecting an English-only image to encourage students to use English as much as possible, aligning with the university's language policy.

# 4.2. The 'safe' researcher

Among the EAP teachers, engaging in reearch activities is encouraged by the institution, and scholarship engagement is evaluated in the teacher appraisal, although not ful embraced by all EAP teachers. Six participants (Ts 15, 23, 25, 26, 28, 30) do not consider themselve esearchers. Time constraint is the most important reason for disengagement in research (Teacher 23_UK). Doing research is also seen as a top-down push rather than an intrinsic desire (Teacher 28_UK). Moreover, concerns about research approvals and ethical applications create hesitancy. Teacher 5_China had to abandon a research plan afer facing rejection for not seeing prior approvals from line managers and target participants.

For those who do research, most research projects can be described as 'safe research' (Teacher 2_China) as the focus is not necessarily on genuine interests but on topics that are institutionally and personally convenient. Consequentl, an overemphasis on topics like atificia ntlligence or technology-assised language teaching prevail n th chool of Languages, sidlining other valuable research topics. For instance, Teacher 15China's research on the impact of EAP learning on students' discipline of study revealed the benefits of EAP learning along with the difficulties students faced in understanding their subject lecturers due to diverse acents. However, the accents adopted in the EAP materials are standard British or American English. She made arecommendation to inroduce various accents to the curriculum. When asked if more accents have been inroduced to the currculum after she shared the findings, he replied, no, it i not that powerful, suggesting that her reearch has very limited influence on the curriculum. In addition, she was reluctant to share this piece of finding on acents because she thought such an action was creating trouble for herself:

Teacher 15_China: I mainly present the positive efects of the EAP courses, which can advertise our university. How excellent our EAP programmes are! Int it? Do not dig a hole for yourself. Just prove that the EAP teaching isbeneficial for students. For their critical thinking, and many other benefits.

EAP teachers have developed a dichotomy between safe and disruptive research concepts. Safe research refers to studies that do not challenge the current practices or the universit's mage, as teachers are expected to diseminate their findings extenally through publications or conferences. On the other hand, disruptive research topics may question the existing practices and embedded values. Although there are no formal policies guiding research types, managers evaluate teachers' research plans before seeking ethical approval. As a result, some teachers disengage due to the surveillance of their research (e.g., Teacher 32 China) whil others strategically chose research topics that are more likely to align with the institution's preferences. Technology-related research has emerged as the epitome of safe research, showcasing advancements in technology-powered language education and contributing to the institution's unquestionable objectives. Converel, research with the potential to challenge current practices is perceived as disruptive. EAP teachers who engage in research tend to position themselves as safe researchers, ften overlooking opportunitie for research-informed teaching and critical reflection. As a consequence, the incorporation of reearch to inform and improve teaching practices remains limited.

# 4.3. The service provider

In addition to teaching and research, the participants also have service responsibilities, which can be categorized into general service and administrative service. General service involves activitiesuch as academic advising, atending meetings, and contributing to divisional poject, and it is expected that al teachers participate in these activitie. Adminstrative service is for teachers who take on managerial roles, such as internal moderators, committe members, module convenors, or heads of division. Among these, administrative service appears to be given more priorit. According to Teacher 5_China, service is primarily associated with administrative tass rather than providing consultations or ssistance to students. However, he saw value in dedicaing his time and energy to developing materials and teaching pedagogy rather than focusing on administrative responsibilities.

Among the professional roles of EAP teachers, administrative service involvement holds significant importance for promotion opportunities offering more chances than teaching. According to Teacher 35_NZ who joined UwU recently, he was told by other experienced EAP teachers that if you want to get promoted here, you should not focus on teaching. Teaching is not important for getting promoted.' Although the official policy suggests a balanced ratio of teaching, research, and service $6 0 \%$ $2 0 \%$ $2 0 \%$ respectively), in practice, administrative service often takes up more time and effort. The complex and time-consuming nature f administrativ tasks such as moderating procedure, can be surprising for teachers with experience in British universities with established moderation procedures. Despite the preference for focusing on teaching pedagogy and materials development, Teacher 36_UK stil had to tick the box, the service box' so that she could show her service involvement when being evaluated by the universty.Similarly, although Teacher 35N thought it was a major flaw to put administrative tasks over effctive teaching, he stil chose to apply to be an internal moderator because he was aware of the importance of doing administrative jobs for his promotion. The institutional performance evaluation places significant emphasis on administrative service, which may overshadow teaching responsibilities. While some teachers resist this institutional strategy, prioritizing teaching development instead, others, recognizing the importance of administrative service for promotion, choose to position themselves as administrative service providers despite perceiving the institutional design as flawed.

# 5. Discussion and conclusion

The current study examined EAP teacher identity at a transnational university in China in addressing the question of how they perceive and position their roles within institutional language-related ideologies/policies. The identit of a cog in a machine has ben formed by some EAP teachers in their teaching practice when they fee they can hardly own autonomy in determining what to teach. Moreover, they take an acculturation agent identity to help students' transition to the British educational system and learning styles while teaching in this Sino-British institution, and an identit of a mock monolingual role model in classrooms as regulated by the institutional language policy. Admitedly, the dichotomy between China and the West and the all-English' teaching environment are discursive constructions rather than realitie, but they are nevertheles powerful talking points that ffect daily teaching and learning. In terms of research engagement, some teachers form an identity of safe researchers as they are aware of the survellnce on their research plan and desig, and they tend to avoid controversial topics that may pose challenges to the current practice. Lastl, with administrative service being more influential in determining their promotion opportunities, some EAP teachers prioritize doing administrative service and position themselves as service providers to the university.

Among the multiple institutionalized identities of EAP teachers it seems that the top-down institutional hierarchy has been influential in shaping their professional identities in various ways. As noted by Sherman and Teemant (2022), teachers tend to internalize power as a mechanism for guiding their agentive and autonomous practices. Such power is observed in this study in EAP teachers teaching, research, and service responsibilities. Regarding teaching content, institutional control over curriculum has been seen as the authority, while teachers find limited opportunities to exercise agency in deciding what to teach. As for conducting research, many of these teachers see being a researcher or scholar more as a top-down pressure in teacher appraisal rather than pursuing their nuine rearch intests. Thrfore, they priritie instittional preference in their rearch. Furhemore, among he three institutional role identities, some teachers strongly identify as administrative service providers. By assuming administrative roles, EAP teachers may inadvertently sustain and reinforce the organizational structure. This finding is consistent with Nazari et al. s (2023) study, which revealed that institutional power played a significant role in English language teachers' identity construction. Moreover, the theme of EAP teacher as service provider also indicates that EAP teachers in this study can potentially, inturn, shape institutional power by shifting their rol from EAP teachers to university administrators and becoming part f the governing force.

EAP teacher identities also appear to be shaped in response to dominant values and ideologies in this institution, and neoliberal notions are one strong force. The identity of a cog in a machine llustrates that EAP teachers seem to be subjected to influences of neoliberal notions. It has been argued that, driven by neoliberal notions in intenationalization of higher education (Bamberger et al., 2019), institutions and programmes tend to hold a transactional view and aim at improving financial prospects, and EAP units in these institutions are likely to be perceived as cost centers to produce surpluses (Ding & Bruce, 2017). As a result, EAP teachers within these units, such as those participating in this study, are expected to provide standardized and homogeneous educational services to students. Rather than resisting this homogeneity and standardization or sruggling with the tensions between thir current situation and idealized way of teaching (hin & Rubio, 2022), AP teachers in this contex tend to accept these institutional expectations and take on the role of a cog within the univerity system. This aligns with the findings of Bori's (2021) critical ethnography, which indicates that teachers generall conform to neoliberal norms rather than challenging them. Moreover, the identit f th safe researcher ilustrates how neoliberal fores manifest in the research work of EAP teachers. The intenationalization of higher education can be motivated not only by financial factors but also research-oriented objectives (Paul & Long, 2016). China, as one instance, views international standards as a mastery of the latest achievements rather than just Western standards, positioning internationalization as world-leading research (Yang, 2002; Zha et al., 2019). However, the focus on research is primarily aimed at enhancing the intenational rankings of Chinese universtie. These explotative pressures result in AP teachers engagig in resarch for extrinsic reasons, rather than actively challenging the unquestioned values embedded within institutions (Crookes, 1993; Wright, 2020).

Within the neoliberal intitutional structure, the desire for Englishization and internationalization has also influenced EAP teacher identity formation. Language policies in transnational universities like the one explored in this study appear to be grounded in monolingual and native speakerist ideologies that prioritize English-only practices at the expense of undermining the significance of additional linguistic resource (e.g., Baker & Hitner, 2018; Chang, 2019;, Glloway et al., 2020). Thus, EAP teachers may assume it is professional to align with the institutional policy by using English only. They also appear to unwittingly act as role models for their students by using English exclusively, inadvertently reinforcing the English-only mentality and contibuting to linguistic (neo) imperialism (Phillipson, 2016). Furthermore, despite the stated goal of intenationalization to integrate diverse educational models - such as the one adopted by UEwU in this study that aims to combine Chinese and British educational models, - the dominant assumption is the equivalence of internationalization and Westernization by distrbuting knowledge from universities in centre countrie (e.g., the UK) to periphery (e.g., China). Respect for local methods and alternative knowledge in other languages can be missing from the context. At UEwU where the teaching and assessment align with UK procedures, EAP teachers tend to dichotomize the local and Western educational systems, as Western education is perceived as globall superior (Jonstone & Le, 2022), embracing the more 'advanced' teaching methods and trendy' research topics. EAP teachers in this context seem to perceive the transnational institution as a British/Western educational organzation. This finding is consistent with previous rearch that hghlights how Chinese students in transnational programs equate intenationalization with Westernization (Guo et al., 2022). Therefore, the intenalization of higher education mediated by EAP teachers may contribute to epistemic erasure through academic colonialism.

This study highlights that EAP teacher identities are shaped in response to dominant values and ideologies within a specific sociopolitical context. Ignoring the power dynamics surrounding English and ELT may perpetuate the perception of EAP as merely teaching neutral ademic language and skills and Westrn norms with regard to schooling and research, rather than teaching how to engage critically with knowledge and realit. Despite the pervasive nluence of the market value of English and internationalization in various aspects of their professional lives, EAP teachers can largely remain unaware of these influences and may not actively resist them whil shaping ther identitie. This study indicates that teacher training programs should raise teachers awarenessof issues of dominance and marginalization surrounding English language education, and develop teachers neoliberal literacy (Loh & Hu, 2014) to enable them to aser critical identities within neoliberal institutional systems (Guerrero-Nieto & Castaneda-Trujilo, 2023), thus dealing with power issues. Neoliberal ideologies can mold EAP into a quantifiable product for consumption and position EAP teachers as unquestioning language service providers. This separation of EAP practice from an awareness of the impacts of Englishization and internationalization serves to sustain these influential forces, thereby perpetuating monolingual language ideologies and epistemological racism (Kubota, 2020) under the guise of professonalism. Consequently, practitioners may embrace institutional expectations across teaching practice, research activities, and service involvements, sustaining dominant ideologies and discourses. While the current study primarily relied on teachers narratives to explore how EAP teacher identit is constructed in relation to the sociocultural ideologies embedded within their intution'sculture and policies, to gain a deeper understanding, future research should adopt more in-depth ethnographic approaches to reveal the complex relationships between such ideologies and EAP teacher identity.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Mian Hu: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. SeyyedAbdolhamid Mirhosseini: Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Anna Mendoza: Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j jeap.2024.101427.

# References

school. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15(2), 102-117. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2006.05.001   
Abei,     i ai    ci , 706-717. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2012.02.005   
Asooar,  i,    014 ft   f i h r a  (P) assessment in virtual classes. Computers & Education, 70, 291-300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2013.08.016   
Atai, M014)  rs    h t   hg 1) 35-1.   
Atai, M i, .  ti     s or  59, Article 101162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101162   
Baker, .  He, . 018). We ae t th aag olice omari min  rmes in oe adsia.ntio  of Aplied Linguistics, 29, 78-94. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijal.12246   
er, ris  019 i  etio i  tie Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 40(2), 203-216. https://doi.org/10.1080/01596306.2019.1569879   
Bark te, (200 rrtie   iti the rf a tc t (, 372-87 /.g/0.16/. system.2008.02.002   
ask  ,00 r ti f    win  1 314. /./.101105-2935 (02)00032-6   
ech  (9. ai   of r, 3373./0.2307 3587931   
Benesch, s. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes: Theory, politics, and practice. Lawrence Erlbaum.   
hi,  016, it    wn h  th , 75308. /g/0.1558 wap.26864   
Bori . 1.h  13-19. https://doi.org/10.1080/07908318.2020.1797082   
Chang, . 2019. yo the gish ox: sting and nig kwee thohil ptice  th hghr i anish Teaching & Learning, 44, 23-40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42321-018-0014-4   
Chen . a J e J 202). ping  t in th d ng on  dy f cativ wtin  108, ile 102841. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2022.102841   
Chowdhury, R., & Le Ha, P. (2014). Desiring TES0L and international education: Markt abuse and exploitation. Multiligual Matters. org/10.1016/j.jeap.2008.09.005   
Chun, . 016.dsin clid mil   nAP xbookrkn a a criica s prc. l Qurrly, 501) 109-131. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.216   
Crooe 199n  r s t   tr r.sic, 1 014. /0.1093 applin/14.2.130   
De Costa, ., Gr-ix, . , i, . (202). Polematizing  langage policy i anstional : hns ey int the goal higr cation market. English Today, 38(2), 80-87. https://doi.org/10.1017/S026607842000005X   
Ding, A., & Bruce, I. (2017). The English for academic purposes practitioner. Palgrave Macmillan.   
Ding, A., & Evans, M. (Eds.). (2022). Social theory for English for academic purposes: Foundations and perspective. Bloomsbury.   
Ding, A., & Monbec, L. (Eds.). (2024). Practitioner agency and identity in English for academic purposes. Bloomsbury.   
Douglas Fir Gup. 2016. adciy frmrk for L  i . he o ol, 101) 1947 htp/i./10.111 modl.12301   
Ecstein, ., io, J. cll . (2011 tidt comin An iteraive d for acadic me witin dl of ish for Acadm Purposes, 10(3), 162-172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2011.05.004   
Ege  uel,  le, . 2. - as of r sr use  ish tionit r in rky. English for Academic Purposes, 58, Article 101125. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101125   
Foucault, M. (1997). The ethics of the conce of the ef, ethics subjectivity and tuth Th essnl work of foucault 19541984. The Nw Pres.   
Galante, 0.   m in   ci  P  t. sis Review, 11(4), 551-580. https:/doi.org/10.1515/applirev-2018-0116   
Galloway, , ri, , , . (2020. he ntotion r isstion f hihr io in t sia. ghetio, 3), 3954. https:/doi.org/10.1007/s10734-019-00486-1   
Gao , . 201). riw   mi s  t ch   co 04 tie 103374. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2021.103374   
Gerer - . 22. ng lii i t h  c r ciiais. OL Journal, e785. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesj.785   
G     64) 436-453. https://doi.org/10.1177/1028315321990745   
Han  (017).h h  it o  hhr   s f if oonii  h . . .) University-community engagement in the asia pacific (pp. 41-55). Palgrave Macmillan. 355-377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2003.08.001   
Hayhe,   . 15. -ti i h i   ri  io, 81), 2526./o. 10.6017/ihe.2015.81.8741   
Hn, F.16)   , s     a), and teaching in Asia-Pacific universities (pp. 29-46). Springer.   
Hg,  5   i programs. Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 12(1), 51-76. https://doi.org/10.1080/15427587.2015.997651   
Hyland,K Jia, 021)biricstdy f AP ch:  i  wht, h nd wh  f gis fr A e, 49 Artie 100929. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100929   
Jain,2ilt P ll o iie it  t i e in EAP classrooms. TEs0L Journal, 13(3), e666. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesj.666   
Jeffre, . 215. sng fck cnts to eelo  ratig sale o a wen crk a l of Eish for d e, 18, 51-63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2015.03.002 international education policy in Canada. Whitenes and Education, 7(1), 1-17. htts://doi.org/10.1080/23793406.2020.1784038   
Jou, . 20. fn 2 wies ie a  ie   tf FL-a  of gish or dmc Purposes, 41, Article 100770. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2019.100770   
a   isc 2732. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amz033   
Li, C. 15. g  e at    i n  ecti. System, 55, 43-52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2015.08.010   
Lim J. 019.pici d ici uiicati f exril pore in aao: l imicain of ng et wters communicative resources. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 37, 34-51. https://doi.org/10.1016/jjeap.2018.10.006   
Loh, .,  14   th te  the  .  chio, 41, 13-1. /.g/0.1016/. tate.2014.03.005   
Mile,   2017.i   it k afhe   1), 91-10. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12371   
Mirhosseini, S. A. (2020). Doing qualitative research in language education. Palgrave Macmillan.   
rgan,  009io cr    r  6/ doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2008.09.001   
azari,   sta, . imr . 2023). The olf intiiol oic ngish anac o, ay, and idtty ral perspective. Language Teaching Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688221143476   
ari,  . 02h a nis  it i  h eti t 0 tie 102811. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2022.102811   
eoa-ker, 019n uf  i e riso l  mtril.  of gis r Academic Purposes, 41, Article 100774. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2019.100774   
oton, B. 2010).  ad dit. In  Hrr, & . cKy (.), custic and  dcion . 349-369).ulinMar.   
Norton, B. (2013). Identity and language learning: Extending the conversation. In Multilingual Matters (2nd ed.).   
Norton Peirce, B. (1995). Social identity, invetment, and language lening. Tesol Quarterl, 29(1), 9-31. htps:/doi.org/10.2307/3587803   
Norton, B., & Toohey, K. (Eds.). (2004). Critical pedagogies and language learning. Cambridge University Press   
Ou, W. &  021. g ion d t  il cti pf i  io isit n China. International Jounal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 24(3), 419-434. https:/doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2018.1472207   
Paul, M ong, . 2016). nc srae uid wd-s h sie i i mpct ongoal fows. M   ola, . Pietsch (Eds.), The transnational politics of higher education (pp. 142-167). Routledge.   
Peok 1997.ar i crii pis, ah or i , 16(4, 23269. /./0.1016/894906(97) 00019-7   
Phan, L H   015h, iai ie anion alive a kickig hr io in  a toy. Language and Education, 29(6), 545-565. https:/doi.org/10.1080/09500782.2015.1059436   
Phillipon 016 igis. nP e  ho,  ., in th  p. 35-46). Multilingual Matters.   
Quel-Julia 03)tins- ntio   r  and t iit  ie ie lecture? Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 61, Article 101207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101207   
Red .002  o itiv   A is f s fr c e, (, 105-11. /.0.1016/147- 1585(02)00018-8   
Shan, , , r   i   r i.h , 4, 467. doi.org/10.1080/00131857.2021.1929174   
Shi, .  . . 2 r   t i,  , 7 91. org/10.1002/tesq.3133   
oufaki  ri  01)y  theal ist    h r   4 il 101038. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.101038   
Soani,   3).   sie, d   liztiof an tion in th A d mtr r Quarterly, 57(2), 480-510. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.3164   
Ta, .     018. t ti f  cr  . h for i e, 49 1. /.g/0.1016/. esp.2017.09.003   
ha      4) 407-422. https://doi.org/10.1080/14708477.2014.934379   
Taakli,  a018i rri t  il, . English for Academic Purposes, 31, 28-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2017.12.007   
mson 3 r      es (1), 5-20. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1475-1585(02)00036-X 39, 363-383. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13384-012-0067-7 10.1016/j.asw.2022.100609   
zu,    ri,. (22  cf t in  l d     ech. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688221127646   
lkoa, 00im  P x  of gs f e,6, il 0087. /i..01/j.00.100874   
Wang,  un,  e,  2023) pin oactin-drive ge chr intt tfomtion drin rim eoms:  hitl eol Quarterly. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.3294   
g, 2tn n  h  . /.1177 13621688231205095   
roo. 23   f  isni a  h for , 1til 101190. https://doi.org/10.1016/jjeap.2022.101190   
ight . 0  i   h.  f  83 3-338 h. 10.14324/LRE.18.3.01   
Xinhua News. (2017). The unqualifie foreign teachers. Retrieved from htp://ww.xinuanet.om/politics/2017-11/22/c1121991179.htm.   
Yan, .,  2)  it otionf t A r u   . hn and researching Chinese EFL/ESL learners in higher education (pp. 169-187). Routledge.   
Yang, R. (2002). Third delight: Internationalization of higher education in China. Routledge.   
Yan . 019 e     r d a: k nf std xri 0l, 04), tie e500. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesj.500   
Yazan, B., & Rudolph, N. (Eds.). (2018). Criticality, teacher identity, and (in)equity in English language teaching. Springer.   
Zare J ki017 a     .  i for Academic Purposes, 27, 31-41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2017.03.001   
Zha Q    019.   tie  iliztio h  on, 7869686. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-019-00364-w

Min  i a h dt a t   i o tf  o  h   sic  ty ethnography, and English for Academic Purposes.

Sye- ar t      t te ,   .   i d 2