# Book review

# Introducing English for Research Publication Purposes, John Flowerdew, Pejman Habibie. Routledge, New York (2022). pp. 156, \$39.16, E-Book, ISBN: 9780367330583

The present publish-or-perish culture dominating academia pressures academics to publish as many papers as possible in top-tier journals. Given the dominance of English as the global lingua franca of scientific publication, most such journals publish in English. Therefore, as worldwide recognition, graduation, employment, tenure, promotion, financial eminence, and academic success in this English-only research world rely heavily on publication track record (Zare et al., 2017), academics are forced into a publish-or-perish-in-English situation. In response to this pressing need, the field of English for Research Publication Purposes (ERPP) emerged initially to help both novice and established scholars, whether English is their first, second, or foreign language, to publish. After more than three decades of vibrant research, the field has expanded its scope. Therefore, it is necessary to provide a comprehensive overview of what it encompasses as a scholarly field. Driven by this vital need, John Flowerdew and Pejman Habibie highlight the development of ERPP, demystify its scope, and provide a state-ofthe-art review of the research within ERPP in their invaluable monograph, Introducing English for Research Publication Purposes. The book is well-structured and takes a multi-faceted approach with an interdisciplinary perspective, making it an excellent introductory volume to the field. At the same time, its comprehensive coverage of the theory, research, and practice in ERPP makes it a valuable asset for academics in general, applied linguistics and EAP scholars, academic writing and EAP practitioners, and materials developers in particular.

Structurally, this opportune volume consists of 10 chapters. Chapter 1, Introduction, aptly defines ERPP and expands its scope to include both anglophone and English as an additional language (EAL) scholars. Taking a neutral yet critical position, it convincingly establishes the need for a comprehensive overview of the field and delineates the intended theoretical and pedagogical readership of the volume. As an academic field, ERPP deals with the needs and concerns of scholars who use English for research and publication purposes. The chapter brings together the two theoretical approaches underpinning ERPP, namely genre analysis and social constructivism, and establishes a link between them through the concept of ERPP pedagogy, which deals with how to teach ERPP. In chapter 2, The Background to ERPP, the authors map out the growing need and pressure to publish in mainstream English journals as the rationale behind the rise of ERPP. Furthermore, the authors highlight the positive and negative effects of the publish-or-perish culture as areas for further investigation. Turning to the confluence of global socio-political and socio-economic factors that have contributed to the current publish-or-perish in English situation, they explore how globalization and neoliberalism as two important factors underpinning the current administration of universities, have resulted in the expansion, internationalization, massification, and marketization of universities and higher education; leading to the importance of the ERPP field. Lastly, the chapter discusses the challenges faced by EAL scholars as “off-network” researchers (Swales, 1987, p. 43) and how the less advantaged status of their L1s makes scholarly participation difficult.

Shifting to a historical perspective, in chapter 3, From the Scientific Enlightenment to Publish or Perish, the authors explain how empirical science and scientific communication have given rise to the present-day publish-or-perish culture. They also delve into the emergence and evolution of the research article (RA) as the primary medium for disseminating research findings. Additionally, they shed light on rhetorical techniques, such as boosters and hedges that are still used in modern RAs to emphasize or downplay force, commitment, and conviction in a statement, similar to early essays. Additionally, they sketch a brief historical image of the structural, discursive, rhetorical, and linguistic features of RAs. They also explore how peer review became the chief adjudication and certification method in scholarly publishing. Finally, they evaluate scientometric indexes for journals and scholars, including impact factor and h-index. Interestingly, all these issues are discussed from both historical and critical perspectives. Yet, what this and previous chapters seem to lack is an exploration of how these ideas can be utilized for further research.

Chapter 4, Discourses and Perspectives on English, contrasts two important perspectives on English as a Global Language, namely laissez-faire liberalism and linguistic imperialism, and their implications for ERPP. Whereas laissez-faire liberalism sees English as a neutral all-beneficial and widely accepted language that bridges communication gaps between diverse communities, linguistic imperialism assumes a hegemonic status for English and highlights the underlying socio-political, economic, cultural, and ideological motives behind its global spread and dominant power. The chapter explores a possible middle ground between the two contrasting discourses. Next, domain loss (or the loss of the academic genres of other languages due to the rise of English as the dominant language of research and publication) is argued with regard to ERPP and the difficulties it brings to EAL scholars. Later, linguistic injustice or how the dominant status of English as the global lingua franca of research and publication disadvantages EAL scholars is mapped out with a review of relevant ERPP research. Nevertheless, some believe that writing for publication is equally challenging for both anglophone and EAL scholars, as “academic English is no one’s first language” (Hyland, 2016, p. 57). This chapter concludes by discussing how World Englishes (WE) and English as a Lingua Franca (ELF) may affect the lexical, syntactic, and rhetorical features of the English used for research publication. What seems to be missing here is how the delineated perspectives can frame future research and practice in ERPP.

Turning to a theoretical perspective, chapter 5, Theoretical Orientations in ERPP, the authors skillfully outline the various theoretical approaches that have guided research in ERPP, including genre theory, social constructivism, and world systems theory. Among these, genre theory is useful in exploring the challenges that scholars face when writing for publication. It helps scholars analyze the discursive and generic features of different academic genres, which in turn can provide a foundation for ERPP pedagogy. Social constructivism has two related approaches. The academic literacies approach considers reading and writing as social practices that need to be studied in their context of use. Ethnographic methods, like interviews, can be used to understand how people go about writing in their academic communities. The situated learning approach takes an apprenticeship perspective and considers learning to write for publication as a form of apprenticeship situated in an academic community. This approach can help interpret how novice scholars develop into professionals. Finally, world systems theory presents the concepts of core and (semi)periphery countries and regions to understand the global knowledge economy. In this respect, ERPP research shows that (semi)peripheral EAL scholars, with limited resources, face greater challenges in accessing international publications.

In chapter 6, Research Approaches in ERPP, the authors adroitly outline the two empirical approaches that have framed ERPP research: genre analysis and naturalistic approaches. Both approaches focus on investigating text in context, with genre analysis emphasizing the formal and rhetorical structure of scholarly genres, while naturalistic approaches focus more on the practices surrounding text. Genre analysis can be useful in developing pedagogical interventions and materials needed for ERPP education, as it provides descriptions of discipline-specific rhetorical structures and formal features of scholarly genres. On the other hand, naturalistic approaches provide insights into how scholars write and interact with other stakeholders. This can help in identifying the challenges that scholars face and the strategies they use to overcome them, which can inform the development of institutional policies for ERPP training. Later, in chapter 7, Gatekeeping and Peer Review, the authors explore how peer review serves as a mechanism for quality control and gatekeeping in the distribution of knowledge and scholarship. Here, they review scholarship on the views of editors and reviewers on effective writing and publishing, examine the characteristics of good review reports, investigate the experiences of editors and reviewers in the gatekeeping process, and discuss editorial bias. They also present a review of genre analysis and naturalistic approach studies of the peer-review genre which can help both anglophone and EAL scholars successfully navigate the peer-review process.

As a pressing present-day need, in chapter 8, ERPP and the Digital Age, the authors explore how digitalization has transformed the global scholarly environment and culture. They examine the new ways in which scholarship is created and communicated, how academic communities connect and share knowledge, the way identities are co-constructed and projected in the digital world, and how the digitalization of scholarship presents both opportunities and challenges to the scholarly community. They highlight the changes brought about by digitalization under four different frameworks. Ethnoscape highlights how digitalization has blurred the traditional boundaries between academic discourse communities. Epistemoscape addresses the impact of digital technologies on the global knowledge economy, including how they provide new opportunities for access to, distribution, and management of knowledge and scholarship. Genrescape explains how digitalization has led to the emergence of hypertextual and multimodal genres for creating and sharing scholarship. Finally, pedagoscape deals with the implications of digitalization for teaching and learning in ERPP and how digital technologies can help scholars gain insights into the publication system and participate more effectively. The chapter ends with a summary of the downsides of new technologies in the production and dissemination of scholarship.

Concentrating on ERPP pedagogy, in the penultimate chapter, ERPP Pedagogy, the authors highlight various pedagogical approaches and delivery modes for ERPP. Here, the authors propose a pedagogical framework based on Kwan’s (2010) competencies taxonomy, including “communicating one’s research through an RA,” “communicating with gate-keepers about the RA,” “strategic research conception,” and “strategic management of research and publishing” (p. 57). The proposed framework can be utilized in ERPP courses to cultivate the essential literacies for scholarly writing. However, it lacks clarity on how the framework can be employed to structure a pedagogical task in ERPP. Therefore, it would have been helpful to provide a concrete example of the framework being utilized in a pedagogical task. The chapter also reviews various delivery modes for ERPP pedagogy, such as supervisory mentorship, self-help manuals, coursebooks, workshops, courses, writing groups, and writing retreats. Additionally, it delves into different methodological approaches, including task- and genre based pedagogy, corpus-based approaches, and critical-pragmatic approaches. The chapter concludes by highlighting the need for more attention to teacher education in ERPP. Finally, in chapter 10, Conclusion, the authors provide a reflection on the advancements of ERPP over the past 25 years. Additionally, they identify the specific aspects within the field of ERPP that require more attention in both research and practice. Next, the role of ERPP in modern universities, both in terms of policy and practice, is discussed, followed by speculations about the future of ERPP.

Overall, this valuable resource has different merits worth mentioning. First, its multi-faceted approach and interdisciplinary perspective have resulted in a comprehensive coverage of ERPP, making it a valuable resource for theory, research, and practice in ERPP. Second, the authors come from both anglophone and EAL discourse communities, leading to a detailed exploration of the concerns of both groups in ERPP. This diversity is reflected in the variety of studies that have been covered, reporting research on ERPP practices of scholars from different academic cultures and geographical regions. Cohesiveness is another strength of this monograph. While the book adopts an interdisciplinary perspective and borrows ideas from different disciplines, including but not limited to education, anthropology, linguistics, economy, politics, information technology, psychology, sociology, rhetoric, and applied linguistics, in exploring ERPP, it is a unified whole. As a downside, as acknowledged by the authors, it is unfortunate that not adequate (if any) space is given to the exploration of other modes of scientific dissemination, such as book reviews, review articles, short communications, PhD/MA theses, and conference presentations. This is even reflected in the title of the field, namely English for RESEARCH Publication Purposes, as an unfair advantage seems to be given to RAs. As such, broadening the title to English for Academic/Scientific Production and Dissemination purposes may be beneficial. Additionally, for new editions of the book to provide a comprehensive overview of the field, it would be helpful to dedicate a chapter to the analysis of these genres. The chapter could include a review of the recent research on their formal and rhetorical features from a genre analysis perspective. Moreover, it could address the challenges that scholars face and overcome when writing them, from a naturalistic perspective.

What also seems to have been treated marginally, is an exploration of the kind of instructional materials and teaching methodologies that have been used in pedagogical ERPP research and practice. A pure genre analysis or naturalistic approach to ERPP pedagogy is unlikely to result in effective interventions. The approach needs to be enhanced with views of teaching methodology and materials development. In this respect, it may be noted that most ERPP studies have primarily taken a product-oriented approach to ERPP. Although naturalistic ERPP studies delve into the struggles of scholars in learning to write for publication, a more process-oriented approach concentrating on the teaching and learning process could enhance their effectiveness. Therefore, it seems relevant to borrow ideas from neighboring fields in applied linguistics and TESOL, such as syllabus design & materials development and task-based language teaching. Incorporating ideas from syllabus design & materials development into the field, such as taking an analytic approach to developing specific genre-related materials, could add more sophistication to task development and result in developing more effective ERPP tasks. Recent findings in task-based language teaching could also inform practical considerations of ERPP pedagogy.

Altogether, the unique value of this volume is that it is more than an introductory volume. Its thorough coverage, reinforced with a robust conceptual framework and a review of both linguistic and ethnographic studies, stimulates plenty of ideas for research and practice in ERPP, making it a valuable asset for various readers, including but not limited to applied linguistics and EAP scholars, academic writing and EAP practitioners, and materials developers.

# Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

# Declaration of competing interest

None.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Javad Zare: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Ahmad Al-Issa: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

# References

Hyland, K. (2016). Academic publishing and the myth of linguistic injustice. J Second Language Writing., 31, 58-69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2016.01.005. Kwan, B. (2010). An investigation of instruction in research publishing offered in doctoral programs: the Hong Kong case. Higher Educat., 59, 55-68. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s10734-009-9233- $\mathbf { \partial } \cdot \mathbf { X } ,$ .   
Swales, J. M. (1987). Utilizing the literatures in teaching the research paper. Tesol Quarter., 21, 41-68. https://doi.org/10.2307/3586354.   
Zare, J., Mahmoudi-Gahroueie, V., Ketabi, S., & Keivanloo-Shahrestanaki, Z. (2017). English for research publication purposes: the case of scholarly peer review comments. Iberica, 32, 153-178.   
Javad Zare is Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics at Kosar University of Bojnord, Bojnord, Iran. His most recent publications have appeared in Applied Linguistics, System, Computer Assisted Language Learning, Journal of Second Language Writing, Language Teaching Research, Frontiers in Psychology, Educational Review, British Journal of Educational Studies, International Journal of Applied Linguistics, Current Psychology, Brain Sciences, Journal of Pragmatics, Lingua, English for Specific Purposes, Journal of English for Academic Purposes, Discourse Processes, and Text & Talk. His research areas of interest include positive psychology, computer assisted language learning, task-based language teaching, corpus linguistics, and English for academic purposes.