# What develops along with the development of second language writing? Exploring the ‘‘by-products’’\$

Helen Katznelsona , Hadara Perpignanb , Bella Rubinc,\*

a English Department, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel b EFL Unit, Department of English, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel c Division of Foreign Languages, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

# Abstract

The intuitive notion that students undergo unexpected yet profound changes as participants in writing courses has been shared by many writing teachers but, to our knowledge, has not been systematically examined. This exploratory study investigates predicted and unpredicted changes that learners undergo as they develop writing skills in EFL Academic Writing courses. These changes — considered to develop along with the writing skills — were examined quantitatively and qualitatively in an earlier study (Katznelson, Perpignan, & Rubin, 1999). Writing courses as agents of transformation: an exploratory study [CD-ROM]. Proceedings of the TDTR4 IATEFL Conference, Leuven, Belgium.]. In the present study, we report on the qualitative data elicited from learners’ self-reports which yielded three perceived categories of changes: outcomes in writing in English, outcomes in writing in general, and our major category — ‘‘by-products’’ of writing courses, some of which expressed learners’ perceptions of intrapersonal and interpersonal development. Many of these perceived outcomes corresponded to the highest of six levels of learning outcomes defined by Marton, Dall’Alba, and Beaty (1989) as ‘‘changing as a person.’’ These findings may lead to a better understanding of the nature and range of changes learners undergo in Academic Writing courses, providing a basis for reviewing the aims of such courses and leading us to reexamine the overall educational value of the teaching of Academic Writing to university students. $©$ 2001 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Academic writing; By-products; Along with; Change; Perceived outcomes . . .[It’s] naive to expect a one-to-one relationship between the learning opportunities we provide and the things our learners take with them from our classrooms. [In addition], and probably more importantly, we can and we do make a difference to the lives of the people we teach, often in unexpected and sometimes even profound, ways. . ..

(Nunan, 1999, p. 3)

# Introduction

For many years, we have shared with our fellow teachers of Academic Writing in English as a Foreign Language the notion that, by the end of the writing courses, certain changes have occurred in our students that are more farreaching than the predicted outcomes described in our syllabi. These changes seem to occur across the board, independently of the specific objectives spelled out for specific courses. Concerning expected changes, there is a feeling that some aspects of the students’ writing do undergo varying degrees of change during writing courses, some gratifying, some disappointing. Indeed, many researchers in both L1 and L2 have dedicated much effort to evaluating the writing outcomes of writing instruction from various theoretical points of view and with varying results (Hillocks, 1986; Krashen, 1984; Norris, 1995; Shaw, 1996). In L2, Shaw and Ting-Kun Liu (1997) describe the specific aspects of writing which, in their view, indeed do get developed in Academic Writing courses. However, we suggest that other changes, which are not strictly in writing, get developed along with these writing outcomes. We have termed these other changes ‘‘by-products’’ of writing courses and contend that, within the students’ general educational context, they are equally worthy of attention, although to our knowledge they have not received it.

By ‘‘by-product’’ we mean any outcome of the EFL writing courses, including a change in the students’ perceived attitudes or behaviors, which may have an impact on aspects of their lives other than their writing in English. Although we use the word ‘‘outcome,’’ we do not use it as it has been used by behavioral scientists but rather as a term that describes the learning that we suspect ‘‘comes out’’ of our courses, insofar as we see learning as an ongoing, continuous process (Kolb, 1984). We are aware that some of the changes overlap with a reduction in writing apprehension, a phenomenon extensively studied in L1 (Daly & Miller, 1975a, 1975b; Daly & Witte, 1982; Faigley, Daly, & Witte, 1981; Madigan, Linton, & Johnson, 1996; Rose, 1985; Shaver, 1990) and more recently in L2 (Katznelson & Rubin, 1998).

# Learning as change

Our view of outcomes of writing courses is based on a view of learning that includes affective and social changes as well as cognitive ones, as expressed by learning theorists such as Hilgard (1948), Lewin (1964), and Rogers (1969). According to Lewin, changes in the cognitive structures of learners can be due to two different types of forces: ‘‘one resulting from the structure of the cognitive field itself, and the other from certain valences (needs and motivations)’’ (p. 83). The recognition of these two types of forces leading to change drew attention to the intrapersonal aspect of learning. In turn, Rogers recognized and promoted the interpersonal (or social) forces and their interaction with the intrapersonal. According to him, through the facilitating social conditions of ‘‘realness, prizing, and empathy’’ and through constructive trust among all the participants in the learning situation, ‘‘The student is on his [sic] way. . .to becoming a learning, changing, being’’ (p. 115). We believe that it is precisely changes in the students’ ‘‘being’’ which are among the most interesting changes observed over a semester of writing instruction.

Since such changes, serving as fertile ground for cognitive gains to develop, are difficult to observe from an outsider’s perspective, we looked for a definition of learning from the point of view of the learner. Such a perspective has its precedent in studies of adult learners by the Goteborg Group (see Gibbs, Morgan, & Taylor, 1982 for a review), specifically one study by Marton, Dall’Alba, and Beaty (1989). These researchers were able to identify six different categories within the students’ own perceptions of learning. Among these, the most complex and most rare was ‘‘changing as a person’’ (pp. 283 –284), which was defined by the students themselves as ‘‘seeing something in a different way’’ or ‘‘[seeing] oneself as a more capable person.’’ We linked this category to the nonwriting outcomes of academic writing courses, related to personal growth and social development, which we had identified in our past experience as writing teachers. Marton et al. suggest further that ‘‘regarding oneself as a more capable person implies a fundamental change from seeing oneself as an object of what is happening. . .to seeing oneself as an agent of what is happening’’ (p. 293).

# Learning an L2 and change

The views expressed by Marton, Dall’Alba, and Beaty are in tandem with the beliefs about learning and agency put forth by Paulo Freire (1972) in his work on critical pedagogy. Relating critical pedagogy to the L2 classroom, Graman (1988) argues that second language learning ‘‘can be both transformative and genuinely educative’’ (p. 433). He describes the use of critical pedagogy in ESL as a means of supporting the growth of his ESL students and argues that both teachers and their students ‘‘can win the freedom to think and act as critically conscious beings. . .[which is] the humanizing purpose of education’’ (p. 448). Likewise, Pennycook (1990) assigns a transformative role to the teaching and learning of an EFL. It is thus not surprising that some of the outcomes that we have defined as ‘‘by-products’’ of Academic Writing courses for L2 students are seen as changes in the being of the students, reflecting on their intrapersonal and interpersonal behaviors and attitudes, even beyond the writing classroom.

# Writing and change

Research in composing in L1 has shown that the writing process is an extremely complex one, involving not only cognitive factors (Flower & Hayes, 1981), but social factors as well (Bizzell, 1992). In addition, the affective factors have been emphasized by researchers such as Brand (1987), Daly (1985), Daly and Miller (1975a), and McLeod (1987). Brand summarized the different points of view taken by the research on writing and the writing process as follows:

Historically, the field of composition looked first at the what of writing, the product. Over the last two decades, it has added the how of the writing process. It follows that the field look next at the why of writing, affective content and motivation. Understanding the collaboration of emotion and cognition in writing is both fundamental and far-reaching. It is in cognition that ideas make sense. But it is in emotion that this sense finds value. (p. 442)

This view points out the complexity of the processes involved in learning to write in a native language, and insights such as these have undoubtedly been invaluable to researchers in writing in a second or other language (Cumming, 1998; Silva, Leki, & Carson, 1997).

Insights into affective factors and their relation to learning outcomes have been given considerable attention by researchers in Second Language Acquisition such as Bailey, Daley, and Onwuegbuzie (1999), Horwitz, Horwitz, and Cope (1986), and Schumann (1998). In addition, Ehrman (1996) has described and illustrated in detail the learning conditions, such as cognitive learning styles, personality models, biographical background, and emotions, with which second language learners have to cope, and which are bound to influence the acquisition of new linguistic forms. In the case of the students in EFL Academic Writing courses, the complexity of the writing process itself is thus compounded by the complexity of acquiring proficiency in a foreign language (Widdowson, 1983). Given the recognition of such varied aspects of the writing process and of foreign language acquisition, it is perhaps not surprising that a wide range of changes in the writer should be perceived, along with changes in the writing.

Range of ‘‘by-products’’

For the purpose of this study, we have adopted a perspective on the ‘‘byproducts’’ of writing courses that takes account of a range of perceptions of change, which students had reported spontaneously to us during our teaching experience: At one extreme we have placed change in knowledge and ability (e.g., learning the structure of a scientific text, learning how to summarize); at the other ‘‘change as a person,’’ or ‘‘growth in being’’ (e.g., increased self-control and patience toward others, becoming more creative in other areas of my life). Between these two extremes, other changes can be imagined as different points on a continuum. Even though we have found ‘‘changing as a person’’ to be a particularly intriguing outcome of our writing courses, we have allowed ourselves to explore the full range of ‘‘by-products.’’

# The study

This paper reports on one aspect of an exploratory study conducted by the three authors (Katznelson, Perpignan, & Rubin, 1999) which was a participant observation study, conducted in a natural setting, of the perception of learning outcomes of 72 students in EFL Academic Writing courses, with both qualitative and quantitative data interpretation. That study included a quantitative evaluation of student performance using a timed essay and a pretest – posttest design, as well as the measurement of one aspect of a specific social and affective variable in writing, Writing Apprehension, using a validated measuring instrument (Daly & Miller, 1975a). These two quantitative measures were used for triangulation with the data from learners’ and teachers’ perceptions. It is these perceptions of outcomes of writing courses, or ‘‘by-products,’’ as yielded by the qualitative data, that we aim to explore and document in this study.

# Research questions

1. What changes in writing in English are perceived by students as being outcomes of the writing courses?   
2. (a) Do the students perceive any additional changes, besides changes in writing in English, which can be considered ‘‘by-products’’ of the writing courses? (b) If they do perceive such changes, what is the nature of these changes?   
3. Do teachers’ perceptions of their students’ changes corroborate students’ perceptions of their own changes?

Although the exploratory nature of this study does not allow for theorybuilding concerning the causes of the changes which emerged, our description and initial interpretation of these ‘‘by-products’’ may represent a ‘‘conceptualization of the reality’’ (Strauss & Corbin, 1990, p. 22), which can lay the groundwork for future studies and can lead to both theoretical and pedagogical implications.

# Method

The qualitative approach we employed enabled us to glean a wealth of information about: (1) student perceptions of their development in writing in English, (2) student perceptions of other outcomes or ‘‘by-products’’ not in English writing but related to course participation, and (3) teacher observations of changes in students during the writing courses.

# The sample

There were 72 undergraduate and graduate students in the study, all participants in various Writing for Academic Purposes courses (see brief description of courses below) taught by the researchers at two Israeli universities. The students belonged to three groups — each taught by one of the researchers: Group 1 $( n = 1 9 )$ ), Group 2 $( n = 2 8 )$ ), and Group 3 $( n = 2 5 )$ ). Group 1 consisted of MA students from various disciplines enrolled in required writing courses in an English as a Foreign Language Department. Group 2 was made up of PhD students from various disciplines participating in Academic Writing in English for Graduate Students courses, about half of whom were required to take these courses.1 Group 3 consisted of undergraduates majoring in English Literature enrolled in two required courses in the Writing Program of a Department of English.

The common goal of all the writing courses included in this study was to develop students’ academic writing skills in English. To achieve this goal, all the teachers had adopted a process approach through which students learned appropriate strategies for planning, composing, revising, editing, and using bibliographical and technical resources for producing their papers. Writing skills were integrated with reading and speaking. All courses also fostered a teacher– student dialogue and used portfolio and self-assessment as an integral part of the writing process. All courses were one semester long, with between two and four hours of instruction per week.

However, the specific objectives of each course did vary. In the MA and PhD courses (Groups 1 and 2), for example, students learned to write in a variety of genres (e.g., abstracts, grant proposals, dissertation chapters) and worked on realworld tasks such as abstracts for conferences, literature reviews, and research reports for publication. In the undergraduate composition courses (Group 3), on the other hand, students learned critical reading skills, defining and defending an issue for a paper, and the responsible use of secondary sources and documentation skills, and were required to write critical essays and research papers based on reading in a variety of literary genres. In addition, the graduate students were all EFL students from a wide range of disciplines (e.g., microbiology, law, political science, physics) who often used authentic data from their own research as a basis for their papers in the English course, whereas the undergraduate English majors, a few of whom were native speakers of English, were being trained to become critical readers and writers in the discipline of English Literature. Conferencing with students was an integral part of the PhD and undergraduate writing courses but not an integral part of the MA course because of scheduling constraints. Finally, it is important to note the many levels of writing competency among students in the three groups, ranging from basic to advanced. Thus, despite the overall common goal and similar pedagogical approach, the course syllabi were quite distinct, each reflecting the special needs of a specific population.

# Data collection

# The open-ended questions

To explore developmental changes in writing in English and, more importantly, perceived outcomes or changes not related to writing in English, we designed an instrument consisting of two open-ended questions, previously piloted on an equivalent population, designed to foster students’ reflection on their learning:

1. What areas of writing in English do you feel you have made progress in? 2. Are you aware of any other outcomes related to your participation in this course (aside from your development in writing in English)? YES/NO Whatever your response, please explain.

The open-ended questions were administered at the close of the spring semester in all the groups $( n = 7 2$ ). Students were given the option of responding in Hebrew but the questions were presented in English. This procedure was adopted because the students’ reading comprehension in English is at a very high level as required by Israeli universities, whereas their writing proficiency might not be sufficient to express themselves freely. All the students in the sample were consenting participants in the study, but in order to elicit responses unbiased by leading questions, we did not inform them of the exact purpose of the research.

# The student interviews

To elicit students’ in-depth reflection on changes they might have undergone along with the changes in writing, interviews were conducted with 10 students, selected on the basis of their responses to Question 2, related to ‘‘other outcomes.’’ For the interviews, students might have been aware of the purpose of the research, as they were asked to probe further into some of the responses they had given in writing. Each researcher interviewed her own students in order to take advantage of the rapport already established with these students during the semester course. This participant observation approach was adopted, in spite of the possible bias of the student responses, because it was decided to forego objectivity in favor of depth of understanding (Allwright, 1992; Ball, 1988; Freeman, 1998).

# The teachers’ reflective journals

An integral part of the study were the reflective journals kept by the teacher– researchers, in which interactions in classes and conferences were candidly noted, observed, and reflected on.

# Data analysis

# The open-ended questions

A content analysis was performed on the responses to the open-ended questions. First the responses were read, translated from Hebrew (when necessary), and analyzed into units according to their content: Each outcome was considered a unit. This procedure yielded, by consensus of the three researchers, a total of 405 response units, which were classified after data reduction, into 125 descriptors (44 derived from open-ended question 1 and 81 derived from open-ended question 2), which were then clustered into categories and subcategories of change. The fact that most responses yielded more than one response unit as an answer to each question explains the higher number of descriptors than that of respondents. It is also important to note that, since the analysis included in some cases reconceptualization of data supplied by self-report, the data presented possible overlap, as, for example, between student awareness of an outcome in writing and actual increased competence in that area. All subcategories were given equal consideration in our analysis, even if derived from very few responses. In fact, if an aspect of change was expressed by only one respondent, it was considered a finding from a qualitative perspective. In addition, the responses were counted separately for each of the three groups of students in the study (see Section 2.1 for description of groups), in order to observe (1) the proportion of responses in each subcategory and (2) the distribution of the items in each subcategory for each group, although only the totals will be reported on here.

# Student interviews

Student interviews were tape-recorded and transcribed and their content was analyzed for corroboration with written responses.

# Teachers’ reflective journals

The contents of the journals were shared and discussed by the three researchers periodically during the semester and thereafter for possible additional insights into the development of outcomes other than writing.

# Findings

# Student perceptions

In response to open-ended question 1 — What areas of Writing in English, if any, do you feel you have made progress in? — all students described their progress as they perceived it. The response to Question 2 — Are you aware of any other outcomes related to your participation in this course (aside from your development in writing in English)? — revealed a very high number of positive responses; only 3 students out of the total of 72 answered in the negative. When probed about the nature of these outcomes (Whatever your response, please explain), our subjects revealed a wide variety of perceived areas of change.

# The categories of change

Data reduction and sorting yielded three main categories of change. Initially, we had classified our findings into two major categories: ‘‘Perceived Outcomes in Writing in English’’ and ‘‘Perceived Non-Writing-in-English Outcomes’’ (‘‘By-Products’’), which reflected the responses to the two open-ended questions, respectively. However, a number of responses to the question about their own writing in English (open-ended question 1) indicated that some students, not surprisingly, found it difficult to draw a distinct line between what they perceived to have learned about writing in English from what they perceived to have learned about writing in general. Similarly, some responses to the question about the other outcomes of writing courses, the ‘‘by-products’’ (open-ended question 2), could be interpreted as outcomes in ‘‘writing in general,’’ perhaps because some of our students are developing writers in their native language as well as in English, and thus cannot distinguish the skills. This lack of discrimination in student perceptions of their development as writers in L1 and writers in L2 is linked to the yet unresolved issue of transfer of writing expertise (Berman, 1994; Connor & Kramer, 1995; Cumming, 1989). We do not intend to address this issue here, but, in order to account for student perceptions of such transfer in our analysis, we created the additional category ‘‘Perceived Outcomes in Writing in General,’’ that is, perceived changes that seem to have crossed language barriers. The three categories of perceived outcomes were thus conceptualized as ‘‘Perceived Outcomes in Writing in English,’’ ‘‘Perceived Outcomes in Writing in General,’’ and ‘‘Perceived ‘ByProducts’ of Writing Courses.’’

# The subcategories of change

Each of these main categories revealed clusters of changes for which subcategories were created. It is interesting to note that the subcategories consisting of a relatively high number of responses came from all three groups, indicating that there were similar perceptions of change, despite the differences between them in population, course contents, and methodology. Space does not permit any more than mere mention of this fact, although an analysis of the data for comparative findings among the groups is clearly an interesting path to pursue.

Figs. 1 – 3 present all the subcategories yielded by the clustering of the student responses. They also show representative responses, in some cases translated or with minimal changes in grammar, in other cases, reproduced verbatim. The numbers in parentheses represent the actual number of student responses in each category.

Perceived outcomes in writing in English. The subcategories for outcomes in writing in English and representative responses can be seen in Fig. 1. We noted that the largest number of responses (48) was in the category we called ‘‘Grammar,’’ which shows that students did perceive changes in writing in English. This finding was not necessarily reflected in the teachers’ evaluations of their students’ written work as described in their journals or in the pre/ posttest writing sample reported on in a previous study (Katznelson et al., 1999). This finding has two related explanations: First, students’ previous experience with learning English likely placed emphasis on this aspect of their learning to write, so they would be expected to have acquired a greater awareness of it; at the same time, students have acquired the metalanguage with which to express grammatical concepts, which may not be the case for other aspects of their writing.

Almost equal in size is the category ‘‘Academic Writing’’ (41). It seems that many of our students have perceived changes in their handling of style, audience awareness, and genre, which shows an understanding that academic writing has specific discourse features different from those of other discourse. The subcategory ‘‘Making Connections,’’ which refers to the ability to connect effectively between words, sentences, and ideas, although listed by relatively few respondents (14), was one about which students expressed strong feelings in their postcourse interviews.

Fig. 1. Perceived outcomes in writing in English.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Subcategoriese (Total: 146)</td><td>Representative Student Responses</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar (morphology and Syntax) (48)</td><td>varied and suitable verb tenses improved sentence structure</td></tr><tr><td>Academic Writing (41)</td><td>using different tone and hedging. awareness of audience style of argumentation</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary Development (22)</td><td>distinguishing between academic and personal writing awareness of the power of each word</td></tr><tr><td>Making Connections (14)</td><td>connecting sentences correctly more varied connections between words.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Perceived outcomes in writing in general. The subcategories for outcomes in writing in general and representative responses can be seen in Fig. 2.

As noted before, these perceived outcomes were intriguing in that they crossed the line we had initially drawn between responses to ‘‘changes in writing in English’’ (Question 1) and responses to ‘‘other changes’’ (Question 2), illustrating that students were not always sure whether these changes related only to their writing in English or to their writing in general. The large number of responses in the ‘‘Content and Structure’’ subcategory (67) shows many students having acquired knowledge about the form and content of written texts that they felt was applicable both to their writing in English and to their writing in another language.

One interesting subcategory is ‘‘Expressing Ideas Coherently.’’ Students reported in their interviews that training in expressing their ideas coherently in English assisted them in adopting a logical line of thinking in writing in other languages and in other disciplines. Another thought– provoking subcategory is ‘‘Awareness of Self in the Writing Process,’’ a subcategory that was generated from virtually the same number of responses as the subcategory ‘‘Learning to Write.’’ This shows that some students began to see that academic writing does not occur spontaneously, but rather that it consists of developing a consciousness of the process, in addition to the implementation of writing strategies. The fact that this subcategory appears within ‘‘Perceived Outcomes in Writing in General’’ expresses the students’ recognition of the transferability of such awareness to other writing contexts.

Fig. 2. Perceived outcomes in writing in general.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Subcategories (Total: 141)</td><td>Representative Student Responses</td></tr><tr><td>Content and Structure (67)</td><td>writing an abstract paragraph construction constructing a thesis/defining an issue transfer of knowledge of structure of articles to Hebrew writing</td></tr><tr><td>Learning to Write (process) (17)</td><td>Revision: not to be satisfied with the first draft Planning: self-confidence in controlling own writing using discipline rather than intuition for writing. Monitoring: using suitable rules</td></tr><tr><td>Awareness of Self in the Writing Process (15)</td><td>critical reading of own writing taking responsibility for what you write</td></tr><tr><td>Expressing Ideas Coherently (16)</td><td>expressing ideas logically</td></tr><tr><td>General Writing Skills (19)</td><td>transfer of writing skills from one assignment to</td></tr><tr><td>Acquiring a Voice (7)</td><td>another positioning self vis-a-vis other writers developing an authoritative personal voice</td></tr></table></body></html>

Fig. 3. Perceived ‘‘by-products’’ of writing courses.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Subcategories (Total: 127)</td><td>Representative Student Responses</td></tr><tr><td>Other Skills (57)</td><td>oral presentation techniques. analyzing scientific papers use of a specific on-line internet writing tool</td></tr><tr><td>Affective Outcomes (19)</td><td>overcoming fear of speaking. starting to like the English language.</td></tr><tr><td>Teamwork (14)</td><td>increased self-esteem generating ideas through group work</td></tr><tr><td>Learning the Meaning of Learning (10)</td><td>feeling of belonging to academic community feeling committed/dedicated to own work paying attention to the writing and not to the grade</td></tr><tr><td>Listening to Others (8) Increased Genre/Discipline/Media</td><td>accepting positive criticism</td></tr><tr><td>Knowledge (7)</td><td>encountering different genres of writing from different disciplines comparing language of literature to language of film</td></tr><tr><td>Critical Thinking (6)</td><td>achieving a critical perspective</td></tr><tr><td>Broadening of Knowledge Base (6)</td><td>using opportunity to learn about work of other students</td></tr></table></body></html>

Perceived ‘‘by-products’’ of writing courses. The subcategories of our major category of findings, the perceived nonwriting outcomes of writing courses that we have called the ‘‘by-products,’’ and representative responses can be seen in Fig. 3.

The largest category of findings, in terms of number of responses, referred, as might be expected, to the acquisition of skills in areas other than writing, such as reading, speaking, thinking, or even the use of technology. For instance, several students later reported in their interviews that the writing course prompted them to become computer literate: ‘‘If I’ll have to every time rewrite it [by hand], all the essay, it’s too much work, so I understood I have to work with a computer’’ (Rima2 ) We suggest that there are several reasons for this finding. Firstly, in a course designed to develop skills, it is likely that skills will interact with each other to produce results (e.g., reading impacts writing and vice versa). Secondly, it may be that students will more easily acknowledge learning skills in a course that is designed as a skills course rather than acknowledge affective or behavioral changes in that course.

In addition to the large number and great diversity of responses in this subcategory consisting of skills, many students also perceived and reported on ‘‘changes in their being,’’ which we had placed at the other end of the spectrum of nonwriting outcomes, based on Marton et al. (1989). Indeed many different affective and social changes were perceived and classified under such headings as ‘‘Affective Outcomes,’’ ‘‘Listening to Others,’’ and ‘‘Learning the Meaning of Learning,’’ as illustrated in the words of the students in the examples below.

Zev, an undergraduate student in the English Department and a TA in the Psychology Department declared in his postcourse oral interview: ‘‘Another thing I learned [in the course] was how to relate to my students. I am a tutor for academic writing (in Hebrew) to Psychology students. I used to say to them: ‘Hey, I did it so you can do it too!’ I learned that this was the wrong attitude for an instructor to have. It was not empowering for the students to hear about my accomplishments. The course taught me to be a better instructor for my own students. I learned how to empower and support them.’’ To his mind, Zev had a change in attitude vis-a\`-vis his students that was effected by an intrapersonal change, a greater awareness of himself as an instructor.

Another student, Lora, an immigrant to Israel from South America, shared with her teacher–interviewer that ‘‘One of the major outcomes was studying with PhD students which [sic] function as support and advice group.’’ We placed Lora’s comment in the subcategory ‘‘Listening to Others,’’ a subcategory expressing interpersonal development. The responses from other students constituting the remaining subcategories, e.g., ‘‘Teamwork,’’ ‘‘Learning the Meaning of Learning,’’ ‘‘Critical Thinking,’’ revealed rich diversity, which confirmed our intuitive knowledge that different students perceive different outcomes from academic writing courses.

# Teacher perceptions

In analyzing the data in the journals, which included reconstructed conversations from conferences, we were attentive to whether the data could be interpreted as pertaining to the same three categories that had emerged from the content analysis of the students’ responses. Due to limited space, we report here on only a few examples of the interface between student perception and teacher observation of student changes, drawn from teachers’ journal entries and student interviews.

One teacher observed in her journal that Dora, a PhD candidate in Education, was handling her writing tasks more competently after a month in the course. The teacher also noticed that the ideas in Dora’s writing had more connections, and that she had begun defining her terms with her reader in mind. Moreover, her teacher observed that there had been a fundamental change in Dora’s attitude toward her own writing: ‘‘After two revisions of the abstract of her thesis [Dora remarked]: ‘It’s easier to read; it reads smoothly — it’s cohesive; I like it better!’’’ At the beginning of the course this student had been quite negative about learning to write in English. Her teacher noted in the journal: ‘‘. . .Dora told me that she had experienced not only a cognitive change but a change in attitude since at the beginning of the course she had felt rather negative about her own writing.’’ Perhaps more importantly, towards the end of the semester Dora herself noted a change in how she felt about her writing: ‘‘I’m really enjoying the process,’’ she reported, confirming her teacher’s report that both her writing and her attitude toward writing had changed.

In another instance, the teacher observed that there had been a change in Tania, a PhD candidate in Musicology and an immigrant from Russia, from the time she had first entered the class, which was dramatically visible to the teacher: ‘‘At the start of the course her whole body language and facial expression were telling me she was terrified. Two-thirds of the way through the semester, she came into the classroom one evening with her first smile.’’ Tania reported in an interview at the end of the semester that she had disliked English all her life and had never invested much effort in learning it but that this had changed: ‘‘I began to actually write, because I made an effort, and I began to get into the business of writing in English and I began to like it; perhaps because I got to know it better.’’ Thus both the teacher and the student had reported on a range of changes, including both skills and ‘‘growth in being.’’

In the following segment taken from a teacher journal, the student reveals during an exchange with her teacher in a conference a process of change in her self-confidence. According to the journal, toward the end of the semester, Chana, a PhD student in Education, said:

Chana: First, thank you for the course. I feel that if you check, you’ll see that my writing is not the same now as in the beginning. It’s changed a lot.   
Teacher: Even after only one conference?   
Chana: Oh, yes! The course helped me change. I have more confidence. It’s not enough just to read. You really have to write.

In another exchange described in a journal, we see that Ellie, also a PhD student in Education, first expresses an awareness of her writing process, and later on during the same conference session with her teacher links her writing problem to her intrapersonal development. Her teacher recalled that Ellie had initiated the following discussion in a conference:

Ellie: I have always had a problem with expanding on what I mean. I usually just say it directly, one thing after another. I need you to see if there are connections between the different parts of the introduction section and where I have to elaborate. Teacher: [To help her make connections in her text, I asked several leading questions.] Okay! Where and how have you prepared your readers for what you are focusing on in this study?

The teacher then went on to describe another exchange with Ellie where she shared with her teacher her willingness to accept feedback: ‘‘Ellie told me that she wants to be open to my suggestions and welcomes all comments. She described herself as someone who was brought up in a super critical atmosphere.’’

Ellie: My mother was very critical of me. Nothing was good enough! Teacher: But you are such an open and accepting person! How did you develop into being this way under such difficult conditions? Ellie: It was very difficult. I worked very hard to become this way and to be open with my children.

Teacher: Do you think that you can use writing as a vehicle for continuing this process of opening up?

Ellie: I now want to share my writing with others, to go through a process of changing my way of expressing myself.

This reconstructed conference excerpt illustrates the student experiencing cognitive, affective, and social aspects of learning. In many more instances still, it was found that the same issues that students had engaged in their conferences, self-reports, and interviews had also been reported in the teacher– researcher journals.

Among the subcategories described above, there were a few responses that we originally interpreted as negative outcomes. The following four responses to Question 2 constitute not only unpredicted but possibly undesirable outcomes of our courses:

Negative outcomes (4)

the sad realization of how much more needs to be learned   
fear of changing habits   
awareness of lack of enjoyment in writing   
 loss of self-confidence

It was satisfying to note that no more than four out of the total number of students in all three groups perceived ‘‘negative’’ nonwriting outcomes from their writing courses, and that those four did not all come from the same group. After reflecting on these outcomes, within their overall context, we judged that the first three were not necessarily negative, since any added awareness either of ability or of ‘‘being’’ might be considered a positive step in the learning process.

# Discussion

The ‘‘by-products’’ revealed by the students’ responses to our questionnaire represent a wide range of aspects of the students’ knowledge, behavior, and what we have called ‘‘being.’’ The results lead us to the general conclusion that the larger subcategories of the ‘‘by-products’’ (i.e., Other Skills and Affective Outcomes) were not course-specific and were generated from responses coming from all three very diverse groups. On the other hand, several ‘‘by-products’’ which did seem to be course-specific (i.e., Teamwork or Broadening of Knowledge Base in Other Fields) could be attributed to specific elements of class practice or circumstance. Although it is beyond the scope of this study to determine which specific aspects of the writing courses might yield ‘‘byproducts,’’ our findings indicate that these courses may be catalyzing affective and behavioral processes, in addition to cognitive ones.

All the students who participated in the study did, in fact, report on perceived improvement in some aspect of their writing. This declared success might have, in some cases, been due to a desire to please the teacher, in order to show that her efforts were appreciated; or it might have been, as mentioned previously, due to an acquired ability to express achievement in the terms taught in the course (e.g., improved organization of ideas, constructing a thesis, coherence). These terms were likely to be more accessible to our students than the terms related to ‘‘by-products,’’ which perhaps explains why they were more frequently used in the responses.

Even so, students recognized that many additional outcomes had impacted other aspects of their academic lives. This gave them a feeling of satisfaction, which might have led to the perceived increase in self-esteem students reported. One aspect in the design of the study that may have triggered students’ attention to their personal growth was the self-reporting instrument. This instrument may have been the factor that allowed students to focus on outcomes such as ‘‘growth in being.’’

In addition, we would like to underline the effectiveness of our multimodal method of data collection. Asking the students a direct question and eliciting straightforward responses (e.g., I enjoy writing; I am no longer afraid of writing) in the self-reports gave us the students’ perspective, the interviews with students gave us more in-depth data, while the teacher journals gave the teachers’ perspective.

Moreover, this study has opened the door to an in-depth case study of a number of our subjects (Katznelson, Perpignan, & Rubin, 2000), where interesting correlations between writing ability, writing apprehension, and the impact of the ‘‘by-products’’ on individual learners are revealed. As for teachers’ perceptions of the outcomes perceived by the students, here too, we have only begun to explore the relationship between students’ perceptions and teachers’ perceptions of student growth and development. There are, for example, some surprising entries in teachers’ journals which suggest that students’ perceptions of the changes they undergo combined with teachers’ perceptions of these changes may play a part in changing the ‘‘being’’ of teachers.

# Conclusion

In the present study we have reported on data gathered in a variety of ways, each instrument contributing to the picture we have tried to compose of the multifaceted and sometimes unpredicted outcomes of academic writing courses. By taking a step back and observing this picture from a distance and in context, we may be able to better understand the outcomes of academic writing courses, primarily from the student’s perspective. We have also become intrigued by the possibilities for inquiry that have been opened up by this data, an avenue of investigation that examines the overall educational value of the teaching of writing to university students.

From the educational point of view, we have linked a number of ‘‘byproducts’’ of writing courses to ‘‘changes in being,’’ the highest level in the hierarchy of learning outcomes as defined by Marton et al. (1989). When students themselves declare perceived outcomes such as overcoming their fears about writing, an increase of enjoyment in writing, or increased self-esteem, we view their ability to discern these changes in themselves as evidence of ‘‘growth in being,’’ which has generally recognized educational value. To those who might challenge whether such learning has its place in courses that are designed primarily to improve reading and writing skills, we would answer that we need to use every opportunity to develop our students’ learning capacity; ‘‘byproducts’’ such as the ones we have described here may facilitate the conditions for developing such learning. Ironically, it is also beyond our means to stop this learning. These ‘‘by-products’’ were not planned by any of the course syllabi, and yet they consistently reappeared. This only attests to the fact that planning what to teach is always possible but predicting what gets learned is not.

We also believe that what we have called ‘‘growth in being’’ is a possible educational outcome of any number of areas of study — although it is perhaps less expected in foreign language courses in which the focus is on the acquisition of skills. We must, however, acknowledge the existence of such growth and also recognize that we need to know more about it in order to allow our students to develop this potential. In addition to the areas left open to analysis by our own data, variables such as teachers’ beliefs, course content, and teaching approach need to be considered to determine whether causal relationships might exist between these and the potential for growth.

In this regard, student–teacher corroboration as to what is learned along with the writing skills in a writing course seems to us a worthwhile area of research to pursue. Indeed, it is a line of investigation that may perhaps lead to an innovative pedagogy of writing which integrates the process, the products, and the ‘‘by-products’’ for the greater benefit of developing writers and perhaps also their teachers.

# Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Itzhak Gilat for his input concerning the design of this study. We would also like to thank Marcia Pally, the JSLW editors, and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on an earlier version of this article. The authors are listed in alphabetical order.

# References

Allwright, D. (1992). Integrating ‘‘research’’ and ‘‘pedagogy’’: appropriate criteria and practical possibilities. Working Paper Series, Centre for Research in Language Education, Department of Linguistics, Lancaster University.

Bailey, P., Daley, C. E., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (1999). Foreign language anxiety and learning style. Foreign Language Annals, 32 (1), 63 – 76.   
Ball, S. J. (1988). Participant observation. In J. P. Keeves (Ed.), Educational research, methodology, and measurement: An international handbook ( pp. 507 – 510). Oxford: Pergamon.   
Berman, R. (1994). Learners’ transfer of writing skills between languages. TESOL Canada Journal, 12, 29 – 46.   
Bizzell, P. (1992). Academic discourse and critical consciousness. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.   
Brand, A. G. (1987). The why of cognition: Emotion and the writing process. College Composition and Communication, 38 (4), 436 – 443.   
Connor, U. M., & Kramer, M. G. (1995). Writing from sources: Case studies of graduate students in business management. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy ( pp. 155 – 182). New Jersey: Ablex.   
Cumming, A. (1989). Writing expertise and second-language proficiency. Language Learning, 39, 81 – 141.   
Cumming, A. (1998). Theoretical perspectives on writing. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 18, 61 – 78.   
Daly, J. A. (1985). Writing apprehension. In M. Rose (Ed.), When a writer can’t write: Studies in writer’s block and other composing-process problems ( pp. 43 – 82). New York: Guilford Press.   
Daly, J. A., & Miller, M. D. (1975a). The empirical development of an instrument of writing apprehension. Research in the Teaching of English, 9 (3), 242 – 249.   
Daly, J. A., & Miller, M. D. (1975b). Apprehension of writing as a predictor of message intensity. Journal of Psychology, 89, 175 – 177.   
Daly, J. A., & Witte, S. P. (1982). Relationship of writing apprehension to teachers’ classroom behaviors and emphasis on writing activities. Paper presented at the annual conference of the American Educational Research Association, New York.   
Ehrman, M. (1996). Understanding second language learning difficulties. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.   
Faigley, L., Daly, J. A., & Witte, S. P. (1981). The role of writing apprehension in writing performance. Journal of Educational Research, 75, 16 – 21.   
Flower, L., & Hayes, J. R. (1981). A cognitive process theory of writing. College Composition and Communication, 32, 365 – 387.   
Freeman, D. (1998). Doing teacher research: From inquiry to understanding. Pacific Grove, CA: Heinle & Heinle.   
Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the oppressed. Harmondswroth: Penguin.   
Gibbs, G., Morgan, A., & Taylor, E. (1982). A review of the research of Ference Marton: A phenomenological research perspective on learning. Higher Education, 11, 123 – 145.   
Graman, T. (1988). Education for humanization: Applying Paolo Freire’s pedagogy to learning a second language. Harvard Educational Review, 58, 433 – 448.   
Hilgard, E. R. (1948). Theories of learning. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.   
Hillocks G. (1986). Research on written composition: New directions for teaching. National Conference on Research in English, ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading and Communication Skills, National Institute of Education.   
Horwitz, E. K., Horwitz, M. B., & Cope, J. (1986). Foreign language classroom anxiety. Modern Language Journal, 70, 125 – 132.   
Katznelson, H., Perpignan, H., & Rubin, B. (1999). Writing courses as agents of transformation: An exploratory study [CD-ROM]. In Proceedings of the TDTR4 IATEFL Conference, Leuven, Belgium.   
Katznelson, H., Perpignan, H., & Rubin, B. (2000, September). Beyond the borders of academic writing courses: Learner-perceived outcomes. Paper presented at EARLI European Writing Conference 2000, Verona, Italy.   
Katznelson, H., & Rubin, B. (1998). Teachers’ responses to student writing: Does empowering commentary make a difference? A preliminary study. In Proceedings of EARLI Special Interest Group ‘‘Writing,’’ Poitiers, France ( pp. 297 – 305).   
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.   
Krashen, S. (1984). Writing: research, theory and applications. Oxford: Pergamon.   
Lewin, K. (1964). Field theory and learning. In D. Cartwright (Ed.), Field theory and social science ( pp. 60 – 86). New York: Harper & Row.   
Madigan, R., Linton, P., & Johnson, S. (1996). The paradox of writing apprehension. In C. M. Levy & S. Ransdell (Eds.), The science of writing: Theories, methods, individual differences and applications ( pp. 295 – 307). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Marton, F., Dall’Alba, G., & Beaty, E. (1989). Conceptions of learning. International Journal of Educational Research, 19, 277 – 300.   
McLeod, S. (1987). Some thoughts about feelings: The affective domain and the writing process. College Composition and Communication, 38 (4), 426 – 435.   
Norris, S. (1995). Responding to the adult ESL writer: A teacher-as-researcher case study. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Sunshine State TESOL.   
Nunan, D. (1999, April/May). The very first day of the rest of my life. TESOL Matters, 9, 3.   
Pennycook, A. (1990). Critical pedagogy and second language acquisition. System, 18, 301 – 314.   
Rogers, C. (1969). Freedom to learn. Columbus, OH: Merill.   
Rose, M. (1985). Complexity, rigor, evolving method, and the puzzle of writer’s block: Thoughts on composing-process research. In M. Rose (Ed.), When a writer can’t write: Studies in writer’s block and other composing-process problems ( pp. 227 – 260). New York: Guilford Press.   
Schumann, J. H. (1998). The role of affect in cognition. In The neurobiology of affect in language, a supplement to Language Learning ( pp. 237 – 252). University of Michigan: Blackwell.   
Shaver, J. (1990). Reliability and validity of measures of attitudes toward writing and toward writing with the computer. Written Communication, 7, 375 – 392.   
Shaw, P. (1996). One-to-one work on dissertations: Effectiveness of correction and efficiency of pedagogy. In M. Hewings & T. Dudley-Evans (Eds.), Review of English language teaching: Evaluation and course design in EAP (pp. 86 – 95). UK: Prentice-Hall/Macmillan in association with The British Council.   
Shaw, P., & Ting-Kun Liu, E. (1997). What develops in the development of second language writing? Applied Linguistics, 19 (2), 225 – 254.   
Silva, T., Leki, I., & Carson, J. (1997). Broadening the perspective of mainstream composition studies: Some thoughts from the disciplinary margins. Written Communication, 14 (3), 398 – 428.   
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques. Newbury: Sage.   
Widdowson, H. (1983). New starts and different kinds of failures. In A. Freedman, I. Pringle & J. Yalden (Eds.), Learning to write: First language, second language ( pp. 34 – 47). New York: Longman.