# Reflections on Teacher Empowerment and Teacher Education

MARGARET YONEMURA State University of New York, Binghamton

Margaret Yonemura discusses the development of her concept of empowerment and its current expression in a teacher education program. The author has been influenced by the Malting House School and its Deweyan focus on the whole child actively generating knowledge out of daily experiences, guided by a teacher who helps connect it with the disciplines. She explores three ways in which she works to empower students in teacher training: through the invention of curriculum, through ongoing peer relations, and through child study. The author joins Jean Piaget, Paulo Freire, and others in suggesting that humans beings can and must shift educational perspectives in the direction of emancipation.

At the first working conference on "Critical Pedagogy," I was impressed by the many different paths we the participants had taken to arrive at a concept of empowerment.' Various meanings and interpretations of empowerment grow out of our life experiences and, as a person who works with children and teachers, I bring my own meanings and interpretations to the concept. In this paper I trace the roots of my beliefs about empowerment and the ways in which these beliefs find expression in my work as a faculty member in a master's degree program preparing teachers of young children.

As an undergraduate at the University of London almost forty years ago, I did not know which of my studies would stay with me or why. But looking back I see that the work of Susan Isaacs provided me with one of my earliest understandings of empowerment; it influenced the ways I taught children and continues to influence my work with teachers. In 1924 Isaacs started the Malting House School in Cambridge, England, for about twenty middle-class children aged two through eight. She was interested in seeing how far children could develop intellectually in a Deweyan environment that was responsive to their varied interests and energies. Her book, Intellectual Growth in Young Children, is a testament to children and teachers mutually engaged in learning within a curriculum that ranged from geography to pathology, leading the teacher to new understandings about children's intellects.2

Isaacs carried out her work from 1924 to 1927, when the view that children were to obey adults unquestioningly was common. Isaacs, however, revealed a choice that parents and other adults could make in how they saw and responded to children: either in relationships fostering dependence and subservience or in ones based on reciprocity between persons at different developmental stages. Isaacs stepped outside of the role set for teachers in her time. She created perspectives on the curriculum and teaching that opened up choices for liberating children as persons and expanding their decision-making powers. She showed that original designs for classroom life could actively involve everyone in the school, including the teacher. To read the vivid accounts of teaching and learning in that school is to rediscover the satisfaction and empowerment which derive from the adventures of minds that are freed to think.

One brief example may serve to give the flavor of life in Isaacs's school. One day an airplane flew overhead, which was an exciting event in the twenties. When the children saw the airplane, they called for it to come down. One child wondered whether the airplane pilot could see them. When another child asked what the pilot could see and what the children looked like from the plane, Isaacs suggested making a model of the garden as it looked to the pilot. Some of the children climbed as high up on a ladder as they could to see for themselves how the garden and its occupants looked. "One boy of four-and-a-half realized spontaneously that from the plane only the tops of their own heads would be seen, and he dotted a number of small, flat ovals over the paths of the model. That's the children running about.' "3 These beginnings of aerial mapping provided the children with the roots of the discipline of geography, experienced not "as if it were a matter of something already done, constituted, completed, and finished,"4 but as a form of knowledge to which adults and children could contribute out of their own backgrounds.

During the ten years that I taught in and directed a school serving largely black and Puerto Rican children from New York City, I found that Isaacs's way of working transcended race and social class. The children with whom I worked enthusiastically seized opportunities to make sense of their world and to learn about their environment. They were active inquirers, and were able to join in writing the script of their own education by making as well as absorbing knowledge. They learned to model the Hudson River and Tarrytown as Isaacs's children had moved on to model the River Cam and Cambridge.

My students were inner-city children from a population often described as needing structure-but the structure frequently advocated is highly teacher-dominated. Ironically, the children who so desperately need to experience control and power are often deprived of it. They become passive memorizers of educational scripts to which they make no original contribution, and which do not expand and enrich their day-to-day experiences. The neglect of children's experiences and the denial of the relevance of those experiences to established fields of knowledge stunts children's intellectual growth and diminishes who they are and what they can become. Children can learn universal geographic concepts even as they focus upon the Hudson, the Cam, or other landmarks of the environment. As participants in forming knowledge, they bring feelings of autonomy, initiative, and energy to formal aspects of the discipline. They can bring all of themselves to the task of learning.

From Isaacs, Caroline Pratt, Lucy Sprague Mitchell, Emma Sheehy, and other educators I have come to understand that child empowerment is an outcome of teacher empowerment. I have seen that children and teachers learn best when they are viewed as people rather than locked into pupil roles or teacher roles and are thus freed to bring themselves and their views to the classroom world. Teachers free to be themselves are not threatened by children; they move with, not against, the energy released when children find their own answers.

Consequently, in my work in teacher education I try to help students become familiar with the role teachers play, without being absorbed by that role. I try to help students remain themselves even as they learn to draw on new inner resources in order to teach well. I encourage them to hold on to their own voices rather than adopt the "teacher" voice to which many of us are addicted. I try to help them see themselves as generators of knowledge as well as recipients of the knowledge of the profession. And I try to give them a sense of their own power as learners and teachers.

I use three approaches to empower the students with whom I work. First, in their classroom placements students invent curricula which will permit them to share with children their own experiences and personal meanings. Second, the students work together in pairs as often as possible to support a belief that all of us generate knowledge. Third, students are given opportunities to study and work with children and to see them as active, knowledgeable, and fully human. Through these three approaches, I give students a chance to see that they have power and that the settings of school and classroom are not "inescapable reality,' but are transformable.6.

The program serves about thirty-six graduate students, some of whom are teachers with undergraduate degrees in education, seeking master's degrees for permanent certification, while others are liberal arts graduates in a two-year fulltime program of study. The students form a heterogeneous group and they hold varied and complex views about children, the curriculum, and teaching. But for the most part, they have been strongly influenced by teacher- and curriculumdominated classrooms.

Some of the liberal arts graduates have taken an undergraduate course in applied behavioral science with a practicum in which they--the teachers-- function as technicians who enact clipboard programs written elsewhere. They are as highly controlled as the children whom they direct. Even as they observe that "it works,' this distancing between teacher and children paradoxically concerns the students. Though they fulfill their very real hopes of teaching children and gain a measure of confidence from using a script written by an expert, these committed young people are nonetheless generally discomforted by their manipulative role.

Understandably, students are searching for ways to anchor themselves in the world of work, to become the experts who write the programs, with all the attendant status and recognition. I have to remind myself about students' expectations and hopes in order to withstand the anger and anxiety that surface when it first becomes clear that they are not going to receive scripts from me. I try to help them realize that I will support them in their own invention of the education script and help them respond confidently and creatively to the question most of them ask themselves about their own knowledge: "What do I know?" We have all heard a strongly insistent message in our culture: there are the cognoscenti, and then there are the rest of us. That message was clear, for example, when Merce Cunningham was scorned by critics for daring to introduce his modern dance movement without the expected music and story.

But there are those in the culture who reject the notion of children-- and teachers-- as empty vessels. In my own life, several teachers helped me become aware of my strengths and knowledge. In particular, I recall a graduate course in music education taught by Sheehy, which I took very reluctantly as part of the master's degree program at Teachers College, Columbia University. I brought a long personal history to music, having grown up in Wales, which thinks rightly of itself as the land of song. Despite music lessons, I emerged as a young adult with a perception that music and I were a poor match. Sheehy had written a book, There's Music in Children, and she based her course on the thesis that we were all musically endowed.' In such an atmosphere of acceptance, I learned to play the guitar-- not well, but well enough. I felt disproportionately pleased about that and about the free explorations of sound in which we engaged. I even made my own drum, an arduous task since we were to produce an honest instrument, not a toy. One result of these experiences was that as a teacher and director of schools for young children, I perceived children as having music within them to be explored in their own way on the piano and other musical instruments. It was easier to guide children to the varieties of music in our culture because I felt they were bringing themselves as musicians to the task. Many students and teachers do not teach music or art because they lack extraordinary talent and therefore feel they have nothing within themselves to draw upon. Of course, I needed to draw on music and art specialists, but Emma Sheehy taught me that I could also draw on myself.

I bring to my work with students a belief that they have within themselves resources for contributing to the education program. Part of my work is to elicit these resources. Time for doing this is built into the advising process, based on the model at the Bank Street College of Education. Each student becomes a member of a small conference group which meets with a faculty member for several hours each week for two semesters. This faculty member makes visits to student placements regularly, and at least once a month students and faculty members confer formally. Reflection on practice and its meanings for the students is the agenda for these seminars and conferences.

A low faculty-student ratio in our program and the time purposefully set aside allow for reflection and for musing together. Most students need these conditions in order to reveal their deeply held interests and knowledge, especially since they usually come to the program with a sense that these are peripheral to their teaching. A project developed by students in one of my conference groups may illustrate how these personal interests can illumine teaching.

These students are at the end of the master's program, which means they are completing their integrative projects in lieu of theses, as well as meeting the requirements of the conference group and their classroom teaching. For their integrative projects, three of the ten students in the group have chosen to take part in planning for a city-wide celebration of the arts. They have had the chance to see how they can serve as resource people for a number of community agencies which work together.

We were discussing this integrative project at the beginning of a seminar when Lynn, one of the trio, pointed out that he had worked on a community-wide project before: he and his brother had organized the first sports car race through the streets of Binghamton, New York. He recalled preparing the city streets for the race by surrounding the bases of the buildings with old tires, and the general excitement of the event. He spoke with pride about his car, "no ordinary small car-- a red 1954 MG Midget with the front of a bug-eyed Sprite."' Brenda, director of an early childhood program, jokingly asked Lynn if he would bring the car to her school. She was planning to take the children to a new museum where an old automobile was being displayed.

When Brenda and Lynn met later to discuss procedures, they decided to design Lynn's visit to meet one of the requirements of a reading course that they were taking; they would videotape the event and present it with follow-up activities as a language-experience approach to the teaching of reading. Later, Lynn and Brenda brought the videotape of the visit to a conference group seminar for us to view. The five-year-olds had been captivated as each took a turn buckling up, steering, and wearing Lynn's red protective helmet. Lynn had listened to their ideas about racing cars--based on television and on direct experiences--and had elicited thoughtful questions. To judge by the children's dictated stories and free crayoned drawings, Lynn had indeed awakened the children's interest in the general concept of speed. In this way, Lynn's knowledge of cars and racing found an outlet in Brenda's educational program..

Opening up curriculum so that student teachers can join in its creation is one way of empowering them. Students need placements where they are allowed to generate knowledge from their own lives and bring it to the children. There is a set of challenges in finding such placements, but I will return to that issue later.

Another way of helping students value their own meanings and knowledge is to provide opportunities for them to explore the question, "What do people like me, my peers, know?" Time is built into the program for pairs of students to work and reflect together. For example, in the final seminar the students pair up in a series of conferences to explore each other's values and beliefs about children, the curriculum, and teaching. Each pair writes and tape-records its discussions and brings extracts to the seminar. They observe one another's teaching and compare espoused and enacted values. Prior to their observations, I have spent a morning in each of their classrooms gathering non-judgmental data. This information forms the starting point of the conference that follows between the student and me. The classroom data are used to stimulate memory for further details and to determine how the events of the classroom--as we each saw them-- accorded with expressed values and beliefs. In our conference, we search for ways to close the inevitable gaps between espoused and enacted values.

The conference group is a forum designed to validate as well as test the personal-professional knowledge we have all acquired. These reflections are honored with time because they are as significant as any component in the graduate program. In this way, then, opportunities are built into the program for students to learn to value their own knowledge and experiences, as well as those of their peers.

As a third strategy toward empowerment, we give students opportunities to explore the question, "What do children know?" When we come to see children as knowledgeable, hard at work making meanings, and fully human, we can see ourselves in a new and revealing light. Derived from the psychology of B. F. Skinner, our conventional view of children holds that they are empty vessels; their actions are explained in behavioristic terminology. While my students are often not satisfied with the explanatory power of behaviorism, they do not see the barriers such conceptual schemes put between them and children. The behaviorist framework conceals from them the power of their sensitively tuned relationships with children. It renders invisible the teacher's daily responsiveness and thought. Worst of all, this framework diminishes children: they become mechanisms incapable of making complex meanings, decisions, or choices to change their ways of acting. The teacher educator's challenge is to offer students the chance to examine critically their conceptual framework and the consequences of their beliefs, while presenting alternative ways to perceive children as active, not only reactive, organisms.

One graduate course in the master's program centers on studying children. I make no claims for the originality of this course; it is a standard requirement in most undergraduate and graduate teacher education programs. In the thirteen years I have taught it, however, the course has acquired a different set of foci for me. I have moved from thinking primarily about the individual child to a much more ecological perspective, heeding Gregory Bateson's warning that to focus on one spot in the web is to miss the nature of its interconnectedness.' I now see the course as one more place where students, children, and I can come to know what we know, and to examine critically what we know in terms of values, beliefs, and choices.

Students in the course do focus on one child, but they do so within a classroom group in which they play an interactive role. Students do not take the teacher and classroom setting for granted as "inescapable reality," but bring them to center stage periodically to be examined and demystified. The study involves participant observation so that the students can see child growth and development partially as a function of what they themselves do and experience, not simply as professionals, but as persons.

Some students are surprised that I encourage them to perceive the children as persons from whom they can learn, not just as objects of study, but as active inquirers into the meanings they are making collaboratively and uniquely as part of classroom life. Barry Wadsworth points out that "surprise always contains . . a cognitive element of prediction or expectancy that is not confirmed."1o The surprise is explored for its deeper meanings, which are often connected to the view that children really have nothing to teach us. Since many people do not adequately recognize the knowledge and experience of teachers and students, it is not surprising that they are reluctant to view children as knowledgeable.

Having presented the idea that children have knowledge, we explore ways to gain access to that knowledge. The students learn how to interview children using Piaget's clinical design. For some it is the first time that they have really listened to a child. The children's responses to Piagetian tasks invariably interest most of the class. My hope is that through this experience the students will come to value and respect the knowledge we make from our earliest years on through life.

Students draw on their own observations, their conversations, and their games with the children, and they come to see themselves as gatherers of valuable data. Over the semester I ask them to bring into class portfolios of a particular child's artwork. I encourage them to look at the work of all the children, and to study that one child's work in depth. Most of the students express satisfaction at this immersion in one child's life. Students supplement the description of the child's life in the classroom with various data emerging from tests and other evaluations, but these are presented only as a secondary source of information about the child.

Other aspects of the assignment surprise some of the students because they violate what seems like a "natural" way of behaving. When I point out that they will need to obtain the child's permission in order to do the study, two submerged beliefs surface for exploration. One is that adults do not need to ask children's permission because children are not old enough to know what is good for them. The other belief is that teachers can choose to ask children's permission because teachers hold the power.

A few of the students are also surprised that the children are expected to take part in what is usually referred to as the parent-teacher conference, which therefore becomes a parent-teacher-child conference. These few have not considered that as teachers they have the power to decide whether or not to view the child as part of the conference group. Often they have not been given a chance to reflect on the underlying values and beliefs about childhood that dehumanize young children, which is a common outcome of treating classroom life as if it were "inescapable reality."

What occurs in classrooms is not "inescapable reality," but modifying what happens can be slow and discouraging. It is not easy to find placements that meet my requirements for students. The students sometimes work with teachers who devalue their own knowledge and cling to the rigid structure of a set curriculum. My task is to work toward empowering both the cooperating teacher and the student. I try to avoid ritualistic scripts when we talk together, and I try to listen to the teacher's views so that we may jointly create the best possible learning experience for students.

To sum up, I have identified three approaches to the empowerment of teachers and children: through the invention of curriculum, through the fostering of peer relationships, and through study that promotes shifts in perspectives about children. How effective are these approaches? Some students and teachers come into the program already committed to empowerment. I hope to reaffirm their beliefs, and perhaps, with my colleagues and their peers, to offer broader options for acting upon them. Some students grow in understanding before my eyes, and that is encouraging indeed. Some, I know, leave the program as they entered, uncommitted and occasionally hostile to empowerment. On these occasions I am disappointed and sometimes daunted.

Yet I am buoyed by what I have learned about human development. Jean Piaget has shown that right from the start we shift our perspectives in ways that expand our lives. Toddlers live in a world of tactile-kinesthetic awareness, all centered on their own bodies. But Piaget states that "at about eighteen months, through a shift of perspective (decentration) truly comparable to the Copernican revolution, space becomes a single homogeneous container in which all objects are situated, including one's own body."l Another liberation and major shift in perspective occurs when a child realizes that her sister has a sister and it is she. The world of social relations expands and opens up. Human beings of all ages struggle all their lives to shift perspectives in order to gain wider worlds.

Piaget also points out that in the struggle for liberating perspectives we move backwards as well as ahead. We do not acquire new knowledge merely by addition, but by the reformulation of previously held viewpoints. These changes can be turbulent and unsettling, and can cause us to regress to safer territory for a time. Paulo Freire urges us toward the struggle in a similar vein when he says that "education is a permanent act of cognition. . . . It means making a new effort, in a new situation, in which new aspects which were not clear before are clearly presented to the educatee.'12 In my own work I interpret this to mean that the cooperating teachers, the students, and I must be ready to take time to talk together and be ready for the backward as well as the forward movement that is inevitably part of a valuable shift of perspective.

This material has been reprinted with permission of the Harvard Educational Review for personal use only. Any other use, print or electronic, will require written permission from the Review. For more information, please visit www.harvardeducationalreview.org or call 1-617-495-3432. Copyright $\circledcirc$ by the President and Fellows of Harvard College. All rights reserved. The Harvard Educational Review is an imprint of the Harvard Education Publishing Group, publishers of the Harvard Education Letter and books under the imprint Harvard Education Press. HEPG's editorial offices are located at 8 Story Street, First Floor, Cambridge, MA 02138, tel. 617-495-3432, or email to. hepg@harvard.edu.