# Keeping the kids on message... one school's attempt at helping sixth form students to engage in historical debate using ICT

At post-16 level, keeping the kids' on message is critical. Teaching and learning must be focused on the relatively narrow goals of the examination syllabus, but set within broader historical and historiographical contexts. Students need to how know, and where, to fit their ideas into those of existing historians. Ideally they will do this with the guidance of a teacher and with the ability to test their ideas against those of their peers. But, with all the other demands on lesson time, how can all this be fitted in? Denise Thompson and Nathan Cole suggest one answer: ICT. A message board provides motivation and the time for reflection and enables staff to monitor and guide students' thinking. Thompson and Cole show how their relatively small initial investment of time, in integrating use of the message board into their schemes of work and mastering its technical aspects, has paid handsome dividends in terms of their students' learning. For Thompson and Cole, keeping the kids on message is a matter of keeping them on-line.

As teachers we constantly reflect on the effectiveness of Our classroom practice. We wonder where we have gone wrong when able students still try to use historians'works as proof of thelr argument, or, worse, cannot even use historical works to illustrate their ideas because they have not read any historians outside of a basic AS textbook. In thinking about how to engage our sixth formers in their own learning and push them to work beyond the confines of a raw (and possibly flawed) examination syllabus, we puzzled over how to keep the fun, energy. enthusiasm and sheer momentum going in a too crowded post-16 curriculum without losing the rigour to which we know our students are used. Even if we were used to getting good'results in league table terms,this was not what we were aiming for. We wanted to explore ways of persuading all our students to think and argue as budding historians. In other words, we were committed to teaching history, and looking beyond levels of skills and responses both to creating real engagement, and to fostering genuine pleasure in learning.

of the classroom and allow us to develop reflection and extended thinking in our students.a The message board offered a way to encourage discussion which linked directly to the reading required and recommended as part of the course of study. Once students began informally to discuss on the message board what they were reading they could be encouraged to develop their arguments. As they made their argument and responded to challenges on-line they began to realise that argument, to be effective,needs shape and purpose. Our students realised that to win the argument on-line, they needed to select evidence carefully to support their contentions. They had to be specific and analytical. It was not good enough just to express an opinion. Richard Harris is right, of course, when he says that it is important for students to build up their own opinions, but only as part of building a coherent historical argument.+ The sloppiness of, I think... because I say SO...' is just not good enough. As our students built their argument and were forced by the other contributors to the board to keep their opinions rooted in evidence, they began to transfer these skills and apply them to their writing. As Richard Andrews has stated, the ability to argue in writing develops in two main stages: the first is by gaining an awareness ofhow anargument is constructed actually watching it develop (in our case literally). and the second is by reading challenging texts that are founded upon argument.The former came about logically through our almost artificial initial stirmulus of deliberately posted questions around which to construct an argument. The latter came almost by accident when the number of contributors increased and we had input from professional historians.In other words, not only could we improve our students' ability to argue, but we could also help them to write better essays and hence achieve higher grades-- thus satisfying both purists and examiners!

# Improving argument and written communication

Much has been written by conributors to Teaching History and others about the real benefits of ICT in promoting quality history thinking,particularly at Key Stages 3 and 4.2 Our question was whether ICT could help to lift the quality of discussion and engagement with argument at Key Stage 5. We decided that the medium of the on-line message board might have something to offer our students. A basic conference type board thar was user friendly and cheap to operate-the one we use is free-could provide a forum for discussion, debate and argument outside of the confines