#deadline  all tasks should set a deadline 
#toSchedule  all tasks should be scheduled a time to work on (usually one sitting say 30 minutes)
#profDev 
[[review openRouter API usage]] 
[[Ruby IB student]]  this afternoon 8-23-2025 I spent about 2 hours with [[Sharon Shen]]'s daughter




[[turn word and PPT into markdown- data management]]  


finally we [[clean up email box]]  done 2pm [[2025-08-22]] 

[[å…¨çƒå­¦æœ¯å£°èª‰è°ƒæŸ¥]] 

[[AHKLC work]] 

[[scrap paper]] 

# Daily notes 
### [[2025-08-24]]
---
### [[2025-08-25]]
--- 
[[2025-08-26]]
-- 
[[2025-08-27]]
---
---
[[2025-08-28]]
---
---
[[2025-08-29]]
---
---
[[2025-08-30]]
---
---
[[2025-08-31]]
---
---
[[2025-09-01]]
---
---
[[2025-09-02]]
---
---
[[2025-09-03]]
---
---
[[2025-09-04]]
---
---
[[2025-09-05]]
---
---
[[2025-09-06]]
---
---
[[2025-09-07]]
---
---
[[2025-09-08]]
---
---
[[2025-09-09]]
---
---
[[2025-09-10]]
---
---
[[2025-09-11]]
---
---
[[2025-09-12]]
---
---
[[2025-09-13]]
---
---
[[2025-09-14]]
---
---
[[2025-09-15]]
---
---
[[2025-09-16]]
---
---
[[2025-09-17]]
---
---
[[2025-09-18]]
---
---
[[2025-09-19]]
---
---
[[2025-09-20]]
---
---
[[2025-09-21]]
---
---
[[2025-09-22]]
---
---
[[2025-09-23]]
---
---
[[2025-09-24]]
---
---
[[2025-09-25]]
---
---
[[2025-09-26]]
---
---
[[2025-09-27]]
---
---
[[2025-09-28]]
---
---
[[2025-09-29]]
---
---
[[2025-09-30]]


# other tasks  
[[finance matters]]
[[PMC meetings]] 

[[enhance file reading of Bytewise]] 

[[Lucia Luo]] 

[[pdf2md module]] 

[[UE1 UCLC1008 University English I]] 

notes taking and paper trail 
- for today in the morning - first let me clean up the mailbox 
- I am still looking for a good way to manage my email [[GTD Get things done hacks]]  
- [[Chinese med avatar]] 

[[Business School Career Centre Bytewise project]] 

[[Gen AI Advisory Guidelines]] â€“ Summarised Version for Students - get back to Kimmy 
- [ ] respond in the online form - no comments - endorse 
[[LC website revamp]] 
[[Rachel Ying DONG]] 
[[Joannie WEN]] 
[[Mable Chan]]  - get back about outreach report [[section outreach report]]  - nothing to report for #24-25 - let's think about #25-26  #Fall2025  

[[workshop on AI use for social science students]] 

[[Canva for HKBU]] 
[[Karol Weiwei Gao]] 

**File updated: 2025-08-21 00:12:27**
[[2025-08-21]] 
[[China Daily project]] 
- [ ] ğŸ›« 2025-08-21  prepare #teaching [[UE1 UCLC1008 University English I]] [[Week 1-3 Fall 2025]] ğŸ“… 2025-08-25  
- [ ] [[clean up email box]] 
- [ ] Your APR files - need to try that HRO systemğŸ“… 2025-08-21  
- [ ] [[Alex Haiying Hu]] 
[[consult poe on Ob]]  

[[LANG 2077]]  student list and result
for Outreach report/plan [[Mable Chan]] 
[[Kristen LI]] 

[[use case video generation chatbot]] 

this should be where I list all the tasks to work on - I suppose 

[[Week 1-3 Fall 2025]]
[[Week 4-6  Fall 2025]] 

- [ ] clean up email 
- [ ] move the notes and to do items from Google docs paper trail 
- [ ] [[review for ESP]] 


#email_head [ELC] (Action Required) [[Gen AI Advisory Guidelines]] â€“ Summarised Version for Students 


|||
|Bytewise dev|[Bytewise developement (discussion notes) summer 2025](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19ydIb9fEIabWXTL8nKGT6dZGATWNgb5io2laBZlZp-g/edit?tab=t.gineptd8x1vp#heading=h.7bxh9fh2o9b3)|
|Chinese med Avatar project|[Avatar for Chinese medicine students](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mNAs7Qmqxvd0YpQC1pzEExQemS7ohOx9pCpuzsbgouU/edit?usp=drivesdk)|
|PTH debate coach|[æ™®é€šè©±è¾¯è«– presentation](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YReGXdw17NHVlWJTXVQIJ31KRSA-soC-g1gmUwA9WGM/edit?tab=t.nc7zrxugy5db)|
|Screening test project|[Screening test platform discussion notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wDN3LfyLbzSzhOH2wtWzPH6qTPS6CYcFGTaphtwaaZ0/edit?tab=t.bck82y1c5k96)|

  
  
  

Aug 20, 2025 Aug 20, 2025 8:11â€¯AMÂ 

The top priority today is get the docs ready for APRÂ 

I think I should have a folder for thisÂ 

  
  

Enhance file reading of Bytewise (Ahmad)Â 

PDF2MD moduleÂ Â 

EEGC writing TaskÂ 

Transition from hkbu.life to hkbu.tech

mock writing testÂ Â 

games.hkbu.tech to lessons.hkbu.tech + Github web builderÂ 

invitation to guest edit a special issue of journal - sth to work on - maybe a Google drive folder would doÂ 

First I have to locate the email from HermineÂ 

  
  
  
  

Aug 15, 2025 9:03â€¯AM

Screening test issues (working with Kelly)Â Â 

  
  

Aug 14, 2025 Aug 14, 2025 12:59â€¯PM

  

Will have a meeting with Kaitai tonight discussing the development of Bytewise etcÂ 

May write a letter on Emergency Alert System regarding the black Rainstorm warningÂ 

Oh but we need to have a quick meeting with Joven as wellÂ 

Got a meeting with CD colleague at 3pmÂ 

Then Iâ€™ll go homeÂ 

  

Suggestion to Improve Ticketing Arrangement for â€œKowloon Walled Ciy: A Cinematic Joumneyâ€ Movie Set Exhibition_Final Reply

  
  
  
  

Aug 13, 2025

Letâ€™s introduce a point-based award systemÂ 

  
  
  
  
  
  

Aug 9, 2025 11:46â€¯PM

TomorrowÂ 

Really need to review the finance a bit more and send more receipts to Google Form and figure out the funding situationÂ 

Develop a plan for GCAP 3226 -write some enquiries to the governmentÂ 

  

take a small step at a timeÂ 

- [ ] 
    
    go jogging and shower in the club - not yet Aug 10, 2025 8:44â€¯AM how about working for an hour or so and then go jogging and shower in the clubÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    To get started with financing- let me submit the reimbursement requests onÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    [poe.com](http://poe.com)
    

- [x] 
    
    Hswanghk
    
- [ ] 
    
    Simonwanghkteacher
    
- [ ] 
    
    ReginaÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    

  
  
  

Aug 8, 2025

Aug 8, 2025 8:46â€¯PMÂ 

I sense that N8n could be a game changer with a lot of potentialÂ 

- [ ] 
    
    Bytewise SSO for HKBU and non-HKBU usersÂ 
    

So I am thinking maybe I should spend more time on thisÂ Â 

I had some difficulties with watching too much NetFlix- it is the last episode of season 5- So I need to cold turkeyÂ 

A lot of things to be doneÂ 

First just go through the email box and come up with a good strategy with emailÂ 

I made some breakthrough with developing a new platform - still earlyÂ 

Working with AhmadÂ 

Working with Ethan (CD)Â 

- [x] 
    
    Hiring Kaitai ZHANG as a full time project assistant
    
- [x] 
    
    APR Documents - Designated OneDrive FolderÂ 
    

Working with CiciÂ 

- Tentative Meeting with Ashley on August 11 at 3 PM â€“ Please Confirm Availability
    

Working with Karim -Weekly Progress UpdateÂ 

Team buildingÂ 

ReimbursementÂ 

- PoeÂ 
    

- Two different accounts of Simon
    
- One account for ReginaÂ 
    
- Switch to a shared accountÂ 
    

- GitHubÂ 
    
- TaobaoÂ 
    

- Graphic designÂ 
    
- XiaoetongÂ 
    

- CourseraÂ 
    
- PictoryÂ 
    
- Check ZA bankÂ 
    
- Check AlipayÂ 
    
- Check PayPalÂ 
    
- Data usageÂ 
    
- Screening testÂ 
    
- WebsiteÂ 
    
- Henan Study Tour ReimbursementÂ Â 
    
- æ ¡é•¿ 1000Â 
    
- Minxin â€¦Â 
    

  
  
  

Aug 6, 2025

  

Â Aug 6, 2025 10:53â€¯PM already almost bed timeÂ 

Iâ€™ve got threeÂ 

  
  

- [ ] 
    
    Got two events - to mark the calendarÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Got this [APR - Annual Performance Review](https://edmsys.hkbu.edu.hk/tracker/URLServer/370555632/KtOqADTZ11nsEm5m2WYfJdua/156337) Â  APR Documents - Designated OneDrive FolderÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    Submission of Annual Performance Documents
    

- [x] 
    
    Action Required: PRV P0084001Â  for CHAU, Man Kit Sam ( 8,000.00 HKD ) - [Gao Weiwei to charge CISL](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1s9h6siwRMbktOwQ4XWpn4zDMNhWhUKdnHXXSx5oJgZg/edit?tab=t.nk0ny0rsmrce)
    
- [ ] 
    
    2025 HKBU STEM Internship Scheme-Performance Evaluation for Student Intern (Summer)Â Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Re: LC website content updateÂ  - to check the STAGE CMS ([AEM training folder](https://hkbuhk.sharepoint.com/sites/Teams_DXS/Shared%20Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?CT=1754495869183&OR=OWA%2DNT%2DMail&CID=596495b0%2Dd6a0%2Ddc00%2Df420%2Db6363180ab06&e=5%3A084ad5481c844f8ea0d32a44c0152ad6&sharingv2=true&fromShare=true&at=9&FolderCTID=0x012000EE366A21D19C79438EF46F729EE9F7C9&id=%2Fsites%2FTeams%5FDXS%2FShared%20Documents%2FAEM%2FAEM%20training%20%2817%20Apr%202024%29))
    
- [ ] 
    
    Bytewise Front Page and CSS - catch up with AndyÂ Â Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    67th issue of LC Scholarship Bulletin (30 July 2025)- follow up as part of LC websiteÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Update on Route 56 Slides & SimPy Question (GCAP 3226)Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    (SOC) Staff Availability for Proper AI-Use Workshop in October 2025 - work on materials about ethical use of AIÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Henan Study Tour Reimbursement - Rachel sent some docs for reimbursement - need to work on these and the team building planÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Screening test update - accounts for test 1 trial: issues and bugsÂ  - follow up on screening testÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    PMC - Meeting - Aug 25 (Mon) 2-5pmÂ Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    2025 Orientation Promotion - booth assistants (11 Aug & 12 Aug)Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    [WB/12/2025] Seeking an explanation of blocking the views in virtual tour and request tendering document for virtual tour developmentÂ Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    access to the account - to get access to the lcbadges accountÂ 
    

  
  
  

Aug 3, 2025 SundayÂ 

  

Get back to work (less than a month before the new semester begins)Â 

  

I should start preparing for the teaching materials for Sept- the goal for Aug is to get ready for the first 4 weeks of the semesterÂ 

- [x] 
    
    Email Sam about hiring ZHANG KaitaiÂ 
    
- [x] 
    
    Then email wife the PDF of the med receiptsÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Review usage- bug reportÂ  - follow up via Bytewise [Bytewise developement (discussion notes) summer 2025](https://docs.google.com/document/u/0/d/19ydIb9fEIabWXTL8nKGT6dZGATWNgb5io2laBZlZp-g/edit)
    
- [ ] 
    
    Â Canva for Hong Kong Baptist University - to discuss with Cici and invite her to follow upÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    [https://poe.com/simonGenAIdemo](https://poe.com/simonGenAIdemo) to further develop and refine (an email to be sent to Prof Hu at 3pm Aug 4, 2025 Aug 4, 2025 8:31â€¯AM- still have some time to work on)Â 
    
- [x] 
    
    [HEA] (Action Required) Fellowship Application Forms and Timeline for Application SubmissionÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Promotion of LC Offerings and Initiatives in Aug and Sept  
    Please indicate your availability for both the August and September sessions by 7 August (since the first day for promotion will be 11 August): [![](https://lh7-rt.googleusercontent.com/docsz/AD_4nXeRptv1igiBMgTBUd9BbbUQDFKtI3cbf4tf5gkaX9V071HC25ekaxrKzjjxYrSSt1Ok5DvSfso7j_dA-BeykJPFRXvVCWQ9xnzun1-H6xFNrABWjdX0mzWETU3qznKwXWyBtuRKfg?key=EEdjX4vXnPTvi96GezwACA)Duty roster for LC promotion activities in Aug & Sept 2025.xlsx](https://hkbuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:x:/g/personal/joeycylam_hkbu_edu_hk/EcvSwPFyulBIpq9fGiCqICUB0PWKuKXUUSjSaq1zaJaHrA?CID=6e873422-069a-248c-276e-7d741bd483ea)
    
- [ ] 
    
    EEGC writing TaskÂ  - get back to Emma  
    Please let me know if you need anything else. I know you must have a lot to do when you return from AL, so this is not urgent. If you could come up with an idea of how we might assist EEGC students to get an AI review by August 18th
    

- [ ] 
    
    EEGC Pre-course Meeting and Teaching Materials - another email from Emma to all teachersÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    Speaker Series and Next Steps - get back to Aditi; also work on AHKLC (as the secretary)Â 
    

- [ ] 
    
    I plan to work on the secretary handbookÂ 
    
- [x] 
    
    Sent a quick reply to Aditi Aug 4, 2025 9:18â€¯AM
    

- [ ] 
    
    2025 HKBU STEM Internship Scheme-Performance Evaluation for Student Intern (Summer)
    

- [x] 
    
    Has contacted the interns asking them to return the formsÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    Weâ€™re waiting for your response | Re: #13489994 - Re: You have a new message | Re: #: 13414603 - Canva for HKBU Re: You have a new message | Re: #: 13105468 - Canva for Hong Kong Baptist UniversityÂ 
    

  
  
  
  
  
  

TestingÂ 

So Iâ€™ve got this keyboard for iPad

this is really portable

so I wonâ€™t bring my notebook computer- but need to get used to typingÂ 

Jul 23, 2025

First let me do the medical claimsÂ 

- [x] 
    
    Rachel
    
- [x] 
    
    SimonÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    APS250616A83089 Repair Needed for Congested Drainage at Junction Road (Case Ref: 3-8781350175) - this is a case to be followed up via GCAP 3056Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    ITO - Your Service Request RITM0150998 Endorsement - get back to cancel the caseÂ Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Hidden Trash Bin at MTR Lok Ma Chau Station (Case Reference: 3-8791239922) - to follow up via GCAP 3056Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Bytewise domain and database migrationÂ  - to follow up with Barry and RiverÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Tin Ka Ping Character and Ethics Development Scheme â€“ Release of Funding and Project Report Submission (LANG2077)  
    Please note that the closing date of the below project account is 31 August 2025. Please ensure all reimbursement requests with related invoices and supporting documents were submitted via i-Expense Module or to the Finance Office before the account closing date.
    

Furthermore, a project report in Traditional Chinese has to be submitted by 30 September 2025 for the review of the Working Group of the Scheme (WG) and the Funder. Please find attached the report template for your convenience.

- [ ] 
    
    Video generation feature of Bytewise for flipped classroom -Â  26 Sept 2:30pmÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Screening Test - recruitment of student helpers: updates and ques - get back to Joanne- she is on leave anyway - but sheâ€™s got an invigilator note that can be useful - weâ€™ll need to prepare a new oneÂ 
    
- [x] 
    
    Screening test update - accounts for test 1 trial: issues and bugsÂ  -get back to JoshuaÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    [UE1 update  
    ](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1s9h6siwRMbktOwQ4XWpn4zDMNhWhUKdnHXXSx5oJgZg/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.huxwevd5bjhr)Thanks for sharing the folder. I wonder if you could share with me the latest course schedule, assignment instructions, rubrics as well as student samples (if available). As we discussed in our previous meeting, I'll prepare some materials for self-access on AI-assisted learning for UE1 students.  
    Also, kindly send me AI workshop materials for me to review and endorse (given that the materials used in Fall 2024 had some problems in how AI was perceived and understood and also my role as the Innovation Officer/ e-Learning coordinator on promoting the use of AI).Â Â Â Â Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    AI assessment on Jupyter notebook files and word files - to discuss with Karim and Barry furtherÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    ITO - Your Service Request RITM0147547 - comments added - submit another service request form (Domain Name DNS Registration Request Form [IT065b]) for pointing â€œbytewise.hkbu.edu.hkâ€ to your external cloud serverÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    GCAP 3226 Request info from TD on Bus Route 56 - to follow up and send the info requestÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    New AEM System â€“ Admin Accounts and Training - follow up with ITOÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Re: LC website content update - follow up with Sherman and ReginaÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Wrap-up of Service-Learning Course - deadline this Friday - follow up with Cici and Rachel  
    As we continue preparing our upcoming publication, we would also appreciate it if you could provide a short paragraph (or bullet points) describing what the SL project 'Developing AL Literary through Service-Learning Projects' involved by this Friday as well. For example, you might mention details such as:
    

Key activities or highlights from the project

1. Workshops conducted in Hong Kong
    
2. The SL trip to Zhuhai
    
3. Other(s) if any
    

No. of HKBU students and participants

Community Partner(s)

- [ ] 
    
    Share button and commenting feature - need to optimize - to discuss with AndyÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    The password is LCbadges2324! - for [lcbadges@hkbu.edu.hk](mailto:lcbadges@hkbu.edu.hk)Â 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Complaint Against Taxi Driver (License Plate FW6669) (Case Ref: 3-8793255711) - to follow up as one of the GCAP 3056 projectsÂ 
    

  
  
  

  

  
  

Jul 20, 2025

  

- [ ] 
    
    Top priority today is to test the screening assessment platform
    

- [x] 
    
    - Iâ€™ve got a Google docs on it [Screening test platform discussion notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wDN3LfyLbzSzhOH2wtWzPH6qTPS6CYcFGTaphtwaaZ0/edit?tab=t.bck82y1c5k96)
    
- [ ] 
    
    First review and respond to Joanneâ€™s comments - some have been addressed - this should be done as part of the debugging and feature improvementÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Then I should go through the test myself and notice a few things and draft a basic candidate manual and invigilator manualÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    I also need to prepare some notes regarding how to schedule a testÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Follow up with Hermine about schedule
    
- [ ] 
    
    Consult the personal data expertÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    UploadÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    DownloadÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    Remember to upload the doc (meeting note) to AHKLC website - I should have a task on it in LarkÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    I want to start developing some materials on JRE and release them via å°éµé€š or sth (or as part of the prep for GCAP 3056)Â  - can I collect donation via patreon - sthÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    Need to apply for outside practice - where is the form?Â Â 
    

- [ ] 
    

  
  

Jul 19, 2025

Meeting at 10:30am ? Â   
Talked to Ethan this morning about China Daily demo on Jul 21, 2025Â 

Jul 19, 2025 9:28â€¯PM plan to meet with River after taking a showerÂ 

Need to share with him a number of student code and password and initialÂ Â 

We only get some ideas about how this worksÂ 

  
  
  
  

We need to considerÂ 

- how Ethanâ€™s codes can be integrated into BytewiseÂ Â 
    
- We need to add the notes to Bytewise notesÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    Â Letâ€™s go through the inboxÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    

  
  
  

Jul 18, 2025Â 

  

Prepare a meeting tomorrow Jul 19, 2025 on China Daily project and ask Ethan to send timesheetÂ 

  
  

Jul 17, 2025

[Action Required] Revision of Course Outlines for the Research Student Development Framework_LC - take a look at Ellieâ€™s attachmentsÂ 

  
  
  
  
  
  

Jul 15, 2025

Jul 15, 2025 6:41â€¯PMÂ 

  

Video gen chatbot

- [ ] 
    
    change the avatars - allow different selectionÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    same for voiceÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    add some bullet points to show on the background- background settings changeÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    embed vimeoÂ 
    

  

Chinese med projectÂ 

[Avatar for Chinese medicine students](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mNAs7Qmqxvd0YpQC1pzEExQemS7ohOx9pCpuzsbgouU/edit?usp=drivesdk)

- [ ] 
    
    clarify the settings for using the avatars - which students- what are the objectives; three stagesÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    explanation and demo
    
- [ ] 
    
    practicesÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    summary and feedbackÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    review materials from Ellie- turn into plain texts- feed to BytewiseÂ 
    

  

Bytewise - further developmentÂ 

- [ ] 
    
    improve raise hands function- the leave message UI should be on the sideÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    explore continue to chat and merge chat featuresÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    invites someone to comment via emailÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    generate system prompt and chatbot introductions UI
    
- [ ] 
    
    checklist chatbot needs some testingÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    workshop modules- only share loginÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    html preview and deploymentÂ 
    

  

- [ ] 
    
    Follow up on the test question [Screening test platform discussion notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wDN3LfyLbzSzhOH2wtWzPH6qTPS6CYcFGTaphtwaaZ0/edit?tab=t.bck82y1c5k96) Student and invigilator UI for online testingÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    Two tests are now available- need to come up with sth a bit different for testing purposesÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Sent the tests to AI to generate something comparableÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Now finalised the format of the test - need to ensure the markdown format aligns with the test questionsÂ 
    

  
  
  

- [ ] 
    
    new front page and UI color themes for Bytewise
    

- [ ] 
    
    Prepare an html version of the Bytewise frontage Email: new front page and UI color themes for Bytewise
    

- [ ] 
    
    Got this [APR - Annual Performance Review](https://edmsys.hkbu.edu.hk/tracker/URLServer/370555632/KtOqADTZ11nsEm5m2WYfJdua/156337)Â  Reminder: APR for AY 2024-2025 (email)Â  - deadline: Aug 17  
    Please log into HCM, under Me>Career and Performance>Goals, you will find your goals
    

- [ ] 
    
    need to use AI to help write the reportÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Find the past APR - there should be 8 copies - I should take a look as referenceÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Think about data governance of LC- the various reports that the department needs to prepareÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Another email from Hermine Reminder: APR for AY 2024-2025Â 
    

  

Jul 14, 2025Â 

[https://gamesbe.asia:3000/GamePlay/AI_workshop_Simon](https://gamesbe.asia:3000/GamePlay/AI_workshop_Simon) - link to slidesÂ 

  
  
  

Bytewise- frontpage needs to be finalised asap for deploymentÂ 

  

- [x] 
    
    [TLPC] Feedback on FITE [Annual Progress Report](https://hkbuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/personal/simonwang_hkbu_edu_hk/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7BED4E1724-FC75-4988-B2E5-4BFF3741A4C7%7D&file=FITE-20250714-IP2.docx&action=default&mobileredirect=true) - get back by Jul 15, 2025Â  ([chat session](https://chat.hkbu.life/#/chat/eb1b06fa-43bd-4be7-806e-71a5ef7b3e59/session/12e3ec9e-2550-4044-8922-eb2ed8995a32?sessionName=FITE+progress+report+&courseId=c42230ba-f6d1-493a-a034-312e9fd6c154&courseTitle=Admin+work+at+LC&moduleId=b616d7b7-bbfa-457f-9aa4-05707fbf32c1&moduleTitle=Workshop+and+activities+) )
    

- [x] 
    
    Chat link locatedÂ 
    
- [x] 
    
    Comment 1: The original proposal was to developed an AI-powered language course. Â  While other related efforts can be included in this report, the focus should be the course.Â  We should also check against the [milestones in the proposal](https://kdocs.cn/l/cpXpfs3JSkpW).Â  If the milestones are not met or changed, justifications should be provide.Â 
    

- [x] 
    
    We need to look at the original proposal - right here to review ã€WPS Docsã€‘ 02-FITE-July2023-Proposal-ARRS-LC [https://kdocs.cn/l/cpXpfs3JSkpW](https://kdocs.cn/l/cpXpfs3JSkpW)Â Â 
    

- [x] 
    
    Comment 2: There are issues related to Bytewise which need to be resolved .Â  I do not think we should promote it before these issues are resolved. - just remove this bitÂ 
    
- [x] 
    
    Set up the chatbot - I think it is in staff?Â 
    

- [ ] 
    
    LANG 2077 Service-Learning trip budget for FO approval - need to collect the subsidy forms HKD 300Â 
    

- [ ] 
    
    For both LANG 2077Â 
    

- [ ] 
    
    Check with Rachel about the list of studentsÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Share with Rachel the LARK responseÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Follow up with Sam about the FO account creationÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    Â the CISL projectÂ 
    

- [x] 
    
    Student Incentives Reimbursement MaterialsÂ 
    

- [x] 
    
    To send the folder to Sam for processing and chage FITE; also need to know the amount of money left (remaining balance)Â 
    

- [x] 
    
    Confirmation of AI-Generated Prompt Feature Development Requirements
    

- [x] 
    
    To respond to Barryâ€™s emailÂ 
    
- [x] 
    
    [Notes on Bytewise](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19ydIb9fEIabWXTL8nKGT6dZGATWNgb5io2laBZlZp-g/edit?tab=t.xxfi4e6dxxmi)
    

- [ ] 
    
    Supervisor Marking: CBS5506/07/08/09 MScGAH Capstone Project/Dissertation - 16 July
    

- [ ] 
    
    [The marksheet in Word (one drive)](https://hkbuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/personal/simonwang_hkbu_edu_hk/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7B1C5C83D1-E6F8-45B7-8C88-91E9D2C0F504%7D&file=Mark%20sheet_Dissertation_Final%20report.doc&action=default&mobileredirect=true)
    

- [ ] 
    
    Formal Complaint Regarding Minibus Route 27A Incident on June 16, 2025, and Non-Compliance with Safety Regulations(VRM: FF3148) (Case Ref: 3-8776828154) - add this case to the repository for GCAP 3056 - we need about 10 cases for GCAP 3056 for AY 25-26 â†’ relate to GCAP 3056
    

- [ ] 
    
    Request for Information, Suggestion, and Complaint Regarding the Format of the JRE Chinese Language Paper
    

- [ ] 
    
    Set up a chatbot session for this caseÂ 
    
- [ ] 
    
    Think about how the chatbot platform may evolveÂ 
    

- [ ] 
    
    Formal Complaint Regarding Minibus Route 27A Incident on June 16, 2025, and Non-Compliance with Safety Regulations(VRM: FF3148) (Case Ref: 3-8776828154)
    

- [ ] 
    
    Create a new case and set up a chat sessionÂ 
    

  
  

Jul 14, 2025 7:39â€¯AM let me work on the Markdown file first - it is on the other Mac; I should retrieve the file and start editing it and load all the questions from Test 1 to Markdown file

The Markdown file should be saved in the same folder as the folder shared by RhettÂ Â 

I should reply to the email and raise questionsÂ 

I should also refer to Joanneâ€™s questions raised earlier -maybe all these should be done via the folderÂ 

  

Is there a folder in OneDriveÂ 

  
  
  
  
  
  

Jul 13, 2025

Just sent out an email to Andrew and Connie about the new video generation featureÂ 

[Simon hours AY 25-26](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1FpFIYDg1i0uX0tMBA1zMGVCvcrccwuZhfDyN7bVwUaw/edit?gid=0#gid=0)Â 

Jul 13, 2025 10:12â€¯AM Today is Sunday - I just set up my Calendar for the Fall semester - will do so for the Spring semester later (maybe next week) - it would be good to do more prep work during the summer breakÂ 

  
  
  

The top priority for todayÂ 

- [x] 
    
    Get back to Ellie about the Chinese med project - just a quick note should be fine- then work with Andy a bitÂ 
    
- [x] 
    
    Screening test - get the markdown readyÂ 
    
- [ ] Preliminary Proposal for New Student Organization: [[AI for Social Good Society]]  Â  - found a new student organization [21220867@life.hkbu.edu.hk](mailto:21220867@life.hkbu.edu.hk) LinkaÂ [[Linka]]
    
- [x] More Information Request: HKBU_OU - Expense E1059450Â  for Wang, Simon H (3,766.40 HKD) - this is long overdue - Rachel has set up a OneDrive Word doc [here](https://hkbuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/r/personal/racheldong_hkbu_edu_hk/Documents/Expense%20E1059450%20%20for%20Wang,%20Simon%20H%20\(3,766.40%20HKD\)?csf=1&web=1&e=ORAAme) - Sam just sent me a reminder âœ… 2025-08-21
    

Student Incentives Reimbursement Materials - need to ask the 4 students to set up student helper paymentÂ 
    

  

Made some progress on the screening testÂ 

Still need to update Markdown fileÂ 

Send colleagues an email about the testÂ 

  - [ ] need to implement the promised tasks [FITE Annual Progress Report (2025)_HKBU-Institutional-Simon-changes highlighted.docx](https://docs.google.com/document/d/18caDHEtXbz1nzzEQMpuHeNsN8RgsqQmh/edit) [[FITE project]] 


[æ™®é€šè©±è¾¯è«– presentation](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YReGXdw17NHVlWJTXVQIJ31KRSA-soC-g1gmUwA9WGM/edit?tab=t.nc7zrxugy5db) [Canva for PTH presentation](https://www.canva.com/design/DAGsohM6WZE/xMCEgJcIy0VJJJ9FtwmJxg/edit?ui=eyJEIjp7IlAiOnsiQiI6ZmFsc2V9fX0&continue_in_browser=true)Â Â Â  [[talk for VTC]] [[PTH debate coach]] 

[https://poe.com/chat/p7pczww63gwea3od83](https://poe.com/chat/p7pczww63gwea3od83)Â  been working on this poe thing for a while - seems more trouble than worth it - I should focus on the actual content not the tech part**