#admin 
#importantEvent #toSchedule  - maybe in mid Sept [[2025-09-16]]  to review a couple of items 
but need to look at [[APR Annual Performance Review]] 

#email_head  PMC - Aug 25 (Mon) 2-5pm Meeting Agenda and Documents
[[2025-08-25]] 

Need to prepare - I would list all the files received from [[Hermine Chan]] 

[[1st PMC AY 2025-26 Agenda 01.docx]] 
[[1st PMC AY 2025-26 Agenda- md]] 

Letter from UGC - this item is not accessible [[letter from UGC]] 
we need to email Hermine for a copy 
[[digital profile of students at LC]] 


[[2025-08-25]] let's review the past documents and my roles as [[Innovation Officer]]  [[Innovation Officer_memo to PMC 2023-12-18-Simon comments and suggestions-MD]] Already served for three semesters (need to think through this #reflection #idea  [[APR Annual Performance Review]] ) #deadline #toSchedule  

Had a meeting yesterday- next one would be 6 months later- we should start thinking about this 
[[APR Annual Performance Review]] [[LC KPI]] 

[[funding for conference at LC]] 
