# The use of cohesive devices in argumentative writing by Chinese EFL learners at different proficiency levels

Wenxing Yanga,b,∗, Ying Sunb,1

a National Research Center for Foreign Language Education, Beijing Foreign Studies University, 2 North Xisanhuan Avenue, Beijing 100089, China b Yangzhou University, 88 South University Ave., Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225009, China

# a r t i c l e i n f o

# a b s t r a c t

Article history: Available online 20 November 2011

Keywords:   
Cohesive devices   
EFL learners   
Patterns of variation   
Written discourse competence   
Writing quality   
ESL/EFL writing pedagogy

This article reports on a study that comparatively investigated the differences and similarities in the (incorrect) use of cohesive devices by second-year and fourth-year undergraduate Chinese EFL learners in their argumentative writings. Via detailed analysis of the quantitative and qualitative data, this study seeks to reveal if the patterns of variation in participants’ (incorrect) employment of cohesive items may help portray whether and how EFL learners of higher proficiency develop their written discourse competence as compared with the lower proficiency counterparts, and to what degree the (correct) use of cohesive devices indicates their writing quality. Results show that EFL learners at different proficiency levels significantly diverged from each other in their (incorrect) adoption of some cohesive items. In the main, higher proficiency EFL learners’ overall ability to apprehend and manipulate cohesive devices has indeed strengthened, which to some extent reflects the gradual maturation of their written discourse competence. Meanwhile, it merits heed that the upward trend may not be in an absolutely all-round fashion. Results also demonstrate that the (correct) use of cohesive devices correlated significantly positively with the writing quality, irrespective of the EFL proficiency levels. These findings hold some implications for ESL/EFL writing theory and pedagogy.

$^ { © }$ 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

This study comparatively analyzed the commonalities and distinctions in the (incorrect) use of cohesive devices by second-year and fourth-year undergraduate Chinese EFL learners in their argumentative writings. Via detailed analysis of the quantitative and qualitative data, this study seeks to reveal if the patterns of variation in participants’ (incorrect) employment of cohesive items may help sketch whether and how EFL learners of higher proficiency develop their written discourse competence as compared with the lower proficiency counterparts, and to what degree the (correct) use of cohesive devices indicates their writing quality. In what follows we present a literature overview of the relevant studies concerning the theory of textual cohesion and its application to ESL/EFL writing so as to frame our own research and conceptualize the research questions guiding it.

# 1.1. Textual cohesion

The concept of cohesion, firstly proposed by Halliday and Hasan (1976) and further elaborated by Halliday (1994), Halliday and Hasan (1985), has enacted an exceptionally key role in the field of text analysis. According to Halliday and Hasan (1976), a text has texture, which makes a text a unity with respect to its context and distinguishes it from a set of disconnected sentences. There are two essential elements which serve to provide texture: structural and non-structural relations. The former one comprises information structure, thematic patterns and the like; the latter refers to cohesion which is a semantic relation that can be further categorized into reference, conjunction, substitution, ellipsis and lexical cohesion within a text. Being a necessary though not a sufficient condition for the creation of texts (Halliday & Hasan, 1976), cohesion, in sum, primarily serves the textual function, one of the three metafunctions of language theorized by Halliday (1978, 1994), in that it organizes all the relevant information orderly which binds a text as a unified whole.

For a long period of time, there has been some debate over the relationship between cohesion and coherence, and the two terms are used interchangeably on many occasions. It is generally accepted that they are theoretically different from and conceptually inter-connected with each other. Cohesion, a crucial linguistic resource in the expression of coherent meaning, consists of the elements or cues of the text (Halliday & Hasan, 1976, 1985; Thompson, 1996), while coherence is referred to as the consistency of the elements or cues as a mental representation (see, e.g., Crossley & McNamara, 2009; McNamara, Crossley, & McCarthy, 2010). Hence, the more skillful and frequent use of cohesive devices, the more coherent and understandable a text is supposed to be.

# 1.2. Previous studies on cohesive devices in ESL/EFL writing

The introduction of cohesion by Halliday and Hasan (1976) has engendered a vast body of research, much of which estimated the potential role of the cohesive system in text analysis and language teaching (see, e.g., McCarthy, 1991). This theory, for one thing, helps to analyze the association between text and its context or the way in which a text is organized; for another, it aids language learners in grasping how a text unfolds in virtue of the semantic system fabricated by cohesive ties within the text, thus promoting learners’ awareness of the entire text as a macro holistic semantic entity. In other words, textual cohesion, a seemingly superficial surface-level linguistic device, is “a critical aspect of successful language processing and comprehension and is premised on building connections between ideas in text” (Crossley & McNamara, 2009, p. 120). Endowed with multitudinous important functions, the theory of cohesion has obviously broadened the horizon of ESL/EFL investigators, and has blazed a novel trail for their writing teaching and studies as it should be.

In the last three decades, a number of studies (e.g., Connor, 1984; Green, Christopher, & Jacquelyn, 2000; Johnson, 1992), have examined cohesive devices in ESL/EFL writing, and some of them have also analyzed the association between the employment of cohesive items and writing quality. The findings, however, have been somewhat conflicting due to diverse research foci and approaches. Some scholars claimed that cohesion did not represent an element of writing quality (e.g., Johnson, 1992; Todd, Khongput, & Darasawang, 2007; Zhang, 2000); some, on the contrary, discovered that the use of cohesive devices correlated significantly with the quality of compositions (e.g., Chiang, 1999; Liu & Braine, 2005; Song & Xia, 2002). In reality, the controversy over the association between cohesion and writing quality may probably stem from either the methodological flaws or restricted foci of the foregoing investigations. In Liu and Braine’s (2005) as well as Song and Xia’s (2002) studies, when coding the data, the researchers merely counted the quantity of cohesion instead of adjusting that number to yield a frequency of cohesive devices per 100 words or per T-Unit in the essays, and accordingly the salient positive correlation between the use of cohesive devices and essay quality could simply be an artifact of the likely tendency of better essays to contain significantly more lexical items than the weaker essays, as realized by Liu and Braine (2005) themselves. The experiments carried out by Chiang (1999), Johnson (1992) and Zhang (2000), on the other hand, exclusively concentrated on ESL/EFL learners of single proficiency level (e.g., elementary or intermediate), thus the positive/negative correlation between the employment of cohesion and writing scores discerned by the investigators may not incarnate sufficient reliability when the participants were replaced by those across different proficiency levels. Given these observations, more upgraded studies are therefore needed to justify the power of cohesive networks in predicting writing quality.

In addition to the correlation between cohesion and the quality of compositions, researchers have also identified some problems concerning cohesion in the writings of ESL/EFL learners. Kang (2005) compared the cohesive devices in the compositions of American students as opposed to those of Korean EFL learners and showed that Korean students overused some reference devices. The case was the same with the essays composed by Bulgarian ESL learners (see, e.g., Blagoeva, 2004). Both Blagoeva and Kang contended that L1 interference might be responsible for redundant or inappropriate use of certain cohesive devices in ESL/EFL writing. It is, nevertheless, noteworthy that although much have been done to survey inappropriate use of cohesive items in ESL/EFL writing, most of the studies merely provided a sketchy description of the problems pertinent to cohesion rather than presented elaborated classification of cohesion errors (e.g., Liu & Braine, 2005), centered around learners of single proficiency level instead of checking the change features in cohesion problems produced by learners of distinct proficiencies (Kang, 2005; Zhang, 2000), or offered a little bit over-generalized pedagogical suggestions without propounding the specific cohesion errors that may warrant heed in the future research and pedagogy (e.g., Liu & Braine, 2005).

All these mixed results of empirical studies, taken together, demonstrate that, for one thing, the existing research findings with reference to cohesive agents in writing are inconsistent and hardly conclusive, thus demanding an increasing number of relevant researches to tackle these disputes; for another, a large proportion of ESL/EFL learners fail to make appropriate use of cohesive devices in writing, which requires that researchers constantly update their research approaches and methods so as to enhance their teaching and assist learners in overcoming those difficulties.

# 1.3. Rationale for the present study

Admittedly, considerable studies have been dedicated to the examination of cohesion in the ESL/EFL written discourse, but those on the use of cohesive devices by ESL/EFL writers across proficiency levels were definitely scarce. The foregoing experiments (e.g., Cox, Shanahan, & Tinzmann, 1991; Crowhurst, 1987; Spiegel & Fitzgerald, 1990) investigating the cohesive features in compositions produced by learners across grade/proficiency levels have been limited to native English writers rather than ESL/EFL learners. Their research findings, in the meantime, have turned out to be opaque and contradictory. Some (e.g., Spiegel & Fitzgerald, 1990) found a negative relationship between the use of cohesive links and learners’ grade/proficiency levels. Other investigators (e.g., Cox et al., 1991; McCutchen & Perfetti, 1983) claimed that the number of cohesive devices used co-varied significantly with the grade/proficiency levels. On analyzing these inconclusive findings concerning native English writers and noticing that there is scant information on the use of cohesive devices by ESL/EFL writers across proficiency levels, researchers may inevitably wonder to which extent the use of cohesive items might associate with ESL/EFL learners’ proficiency/grade levels, or whether there exist distinctions or similarities with relevance to cohesive agents or cohesion errors in writing generated by ESL/EFL learners of different proficiencies. In other words, it seems necessary to explore the (incorrect) use of cohesive devices by distinct proficiency ESL/EFL writers so as to deepen our understanding of the deployment of cohesive items in ESL/EFL writing, which may address the conspicuous gap concerning cohesive issue that currently surfaces in ESL/EFL writing inquires.

Apart from the reality that little has been done to find out the use of cohesive devices by ESL/EFL writers of different proficiency levels, a stronger reason underlying the execution of this experiment is the necessity to account for ESL/EFL learners’ developmental success or failure, as proved by a number of second language acquisition (SLA) theorists (see, e.g., Doughty & Long, 2003). Given that research on L2 learners at a single or specific stage of development does not provide a complete picture of how learners acquire L2 or essential L2 skills, researchers have increasingly recognized the need to consider the entirety of learner language in order to uncover the systems of rules that learners construct at different stages of development (Ellis, 1994), which is undoubtedly one of the chief concerns of the ongoing SLA inquiries. Being an indispensable textual property, cohesion, the grammatical and lexical glue of discourse (Celce-Murcia, 1991), aids in the formation of textual/discourse competence (see, e.g., Bachman, 1990; Canale, 1983; Canale & Swain, 1980), the ability to handle language above the sentence or to structure a series of sentences as a meaningful whole, which has been increasingly deemed in the SLA field as one of the most important constituent abilities that contribute to a language learner’s overall proficiency (e.g., Bachman & Palmer, 1982; Harley, Cummins, Swain, & Allen, 1990). In reality, textual/discourse competence has been valued over the production of basic intrasentential elements like vocabularies or isolated syntactic forms by researchers in recent L2 writing research (e.g., Chiang, 2003; Liu & Braine, 2005), given that becoming a competent user of a target language involves more than interiorizing its essential linguistic forms (Kang, 2005), e.g., vocabulary and grammar, and that only through the analysis of learners’ output of the linguistic units beyond words and sentences can inquirers offer a valid and reliable portrait of whether and how the learners command the target language. In other words, analyzing L2 writers’ change features in (incorrect) using cohesive agents at different proficiency levels can provide more informative insights into their strengths and weaknesses in their learner language variations, especially those at the textual level which may intently relate to the overall proficiency of their learner language. The current research is, therefore, performed to comparatively investigate cohesive devices and cohesion errors in argumentative essays generated by second-year and fourth-year undergraduate Chinese EFL learners, and to inspect the correlation between their (correct) deployment of cohesive items and the writing quality.

# 1.4. Why argumentative writing was selected?

As indicated in the foregoing illustrations, the model of writing under the present investigation is argumentation. Other things being equal (e.g., learners’ familiarity with the writing topic), argumentative essay has been affirmed by researchers to be the hardest model, in comparison with description, narration and exposition, in both L1 and L2 (or foreign language) writing (e.g., Ferretti, Andrews-Weckerly, & Lewis, 2007; Gleason, 1999; Richards & Schmidt, 1992), given that argumentative writing is a language specific model of discourse (Golder & Coirier, 1996). On the one hand, argumentative writing is language specific, as a number of L2 writers are liable to generate this model of composition in L2 that is quite different from the one written in their L1 as far as the syntactic or discourse features are concerned (Neff, Martinez, & Rica, 2001; Neff-van Aertselaer & Dafouz-Milne, 2008). L2 argumentative writing tasks which involve high levels of idiomatic or phrasal verb knowledge plus the ability to generate complex sentences, manage the argumentations and bind all these relevant elements at the discourse level in the target language pose intricate cognitive demands for learners. Learners, however, governed and limited by the availability and rules in L2, may confront a number of difficulties in producing argumentative essays. In addition to these points, since argumentative writing falls under the umbrella of formal written register (for detailed account of the oral register vs. the written register, see Biber, 1988; Louwerse, McCarthy, McNamara, & Graesser, 2004), written argumentations may simultaneously mirror the writers’ ability to signal the differences between the oral and written registers, and their acquisitional state of the written discourse competence in L2.

These three characteristics, taken together, prognosticate the potential challenges L2 learners may encounter in producing an argumentative discourse, because they may not manipulate such language-specific systems with facility. In other words, argumentative writing can be used as an effective tool that indexes the writers’ pragmatic sensitivity and written discourse competence in the second/foreign language by shedding light on their ability to produce linguistically and culturally appropriate discourse in that language.

# 1.5. Research questions

Given these observations raised above, the present study, to be specific, addresses the following questions:

1. What are the differences or similarities, if any, between EFL learners of different proficiency levels in terms of the (incorrect) cohesive devices used in their argumentative compositions?   
2. Can the results generated from Question 1 indicate any patterns of variation in the written discourse competence between lower proficiency and higher proficiency EFL learners?   
3. What is the relationship between the use of cohesive devices (especially the correct use of devices) and the quality of the compositions? Will this relationship vary with the change of EFL learners’ proficiency levels?

# 2. Research design

# 2.1. Participants

30 second-year (4 males and 26 females) and 30 fourth-year (7 males and 23 females) undergraduate Chinese students of English language and literature from a university in China, ranging in age from 19 to 22 years, were randomly chosen as the subjects for the present study.2 As indicated by the national syllabus (English Team of Teaching and Learning Guidance Committee for Foreign Language Majors in Higher Institutions, 2000), the Year 2 students were intermediate learners; the Year 4 students, advanced learners. Though the level of study or institutional status at the university seemed a somewhat crude and arbitrary measure, this was nonetheless the best means we had available for distinguishing different proficiency EFL learners, as is affirmed by Thomas (1994) that the most frequent technique employed in the SLA research to establish learners’ target language proficiency is their institutional status (e.g., first-year vs. third-year students), which groups together a relatively homogeneous population whose language proficiency is similar.

Before entering college, these students had, on average, received 8 years of formal compulsory EFL education and demonstrated English as well as other academic skills as part of the university entrance process. The English scores of these participants on the Chinese college entrance exam were above the 77th percentile nationally for Chinese college applicants. Being English majors in a Chinese university, students took various language skill courses (e.g., reading, listening, speaking, writing and translation) of around $1 5 \mathrm { - } 1 8 \mathrm { h }$ per week. The 2-h per week writing class, which lasted for 4 years, was compulsory. In the class, students would learn various models of writing, e.g., narration, exposition and argumentation, among which argumentative writing constituted one of the most important components in teaching and learning. In addition, students would receive instructions on a number of elements in writing, e.g., diction of vocabularies and syntax, employment of rhetoric strategies and use of cohesion to govern the textual construct.

# 2.2. Data collection

Each subject was asked to write independently an argumentative essay (the requirement and prompt of the writing task was presented in Appendix A) of no fewer than 250 words within a class period $( 4 5 \mathrm { m i n } )$ while they attended the English writing class towards the end of the second semester (the total number of the compositions were 60, 30 written by sophomores and 30 by seniors). Neither dictionaries nor other reference books were allowed. All the compositions, then, were graded holistically according to the independent writing rubrics of TOEFL by three teachers of applied linguistics independently. They had, on average, 10 years’ experience teaching EFL and were quite familiar with the marking criteria of TOEFL writing test. Each of the compositions was only labeled with a code number without disclosing any information about the writers’ names or grade levels. Therefore, the raters could not be biased by the writers’ grade levels or other personal information while assigning scores to the compositions. The inter-rater reliability was examined among the scores given by the raters and reached 0.82. The final score for each composition was the mean of the scores marked by three raters.

The four marking benchmarks of TOEFL independent writing section (see ETS, 2009), standard scoring criteria for argumentative writing, are very appropriate and effective tools to assess the essays under present investigation. For one thing, the first two criteria which concern the writer’s manifestation of his/her position on the issue to be addressed and his/her utilization of the supporting examples to justify the position are specifically targeted at argumentative writing. For another, the last two criteria evaluate the writer’s organization of the text and his/her mastery of idiomatic vocabulary, syntax, etc., which are the universal benchmarks for scoring writing. Therefore, the independent writing rubrics of TOEFL can not only validly assess argumentative compositions, but also accurately index EFL learners’ writing proficiency. Furthermore, the scores yielded from TOEFL independent writing rubrics can effectively mirror learners’ overall EFL proficiency as well, since one of the four scoring criteria concerns writer’s idiomatic and various vocabulary choices, syntactic complexity and the number of lexical and grammatical errors in writing, which is, no doubt, directly associated with the writer’s overall EFL proficiency. Hence, the writing scores, as demonstrated in Table 12, may again justify that seniors, in comparison with the sophomores, are higher proficiency learners.

# 2.3. Theoretical framework for data coding

To analyze cohesive devices in the compositions, Halliday and Hasan’s (1976) cohesion system was adopted as the main source for quantifying cohesive items. Meanwhile, some modifications, enlightened by Halliday (1994), Halliday and Hasan (1985), and Biesenbach-Lucas and Weasenforth (2001), were made for theoretical and practical considerations. For instance, ellipsis was counted together with substitution in that the two, on the one hand, are very close to each other and are interchangeable on many occasions (Thompson, 1996). For example, the cohesive device used in the sentence “I haven’t even met Mrs. McCaffrey. I suppose I ought to have done $[ =$ met Mrs McCaffrey]” (Thompson, 1996, p. 155) can be viewed as either substitution or ellipsis. Obviously the second clause is an elliptical one in that the whole residue ‘met Mrs. Mc Caffrey’ is omitted. However, when ‘do’ by itself stands in for the whole residue, it can be regarded as a substitute form as well. On the other hand, the two cohesive items are more characteristically found in dialogues (Halliday, 1994) and seldom used in formal writing. If treated separately, the figures would be too insignificant to be considered. Besides, it should be noted that both intersentential cohesive ties (links between two elements located in different sentences) and intrasentential cohesion (links between elements within the same sentence) were included in the analysis, which imitated the methodology adopted by Salkie (1995) and Liu and Braine (2005). After appropriate revision and classification, all cohesive devices totaled as variables in this study were as follows. These definitions and examples are taken from Crowhurst (1987), Hu (1994) and Thompson (1996).

1. Reference: the set of grammatical resources which allow the writer/speaker to indicate whether something is being repeated from somewhere else in the text, or whether it has not yet appeared in the text.

(1) Personal pronoun (e.g., Peter was generally not a hater. He spoke tolerantly of his foes.) (2) Demonstrative pronoun (e.g., I visited Hungary last year. That was my first visit.) (3) Demonstrative noun phrase (e.g., Freshmen have $2 0 \mathrm { h }$ of courses per week. These courses are very interesting.) (4) Comparative reference (e.g., Otherwise his story is the same as Katherine’s.)

2. Conjunction: the semantic links that combine any two textual elements into a potentially coherent complex semantic unit.

(1) Additive (e.g., and, moreover) (2) Causative (e.g., therefore, hence) (3) Temporal (e.g., then, next) (4) Adversative (e.g., but, however, rather)

# 3. Ellipsis/substitution

(1) Ellipsis: a set of resources by which full repetition of a clause or clause element can be avoided, and by which it can be signaled to readers that they should repeat the wording from a previous clause (e.g., She wore the blue dress. But the pink suits her better.)   
(2) Substitution: a linguistic token put in the place of wording to be repeated from elsewhere (e.g., It’s large for 5 months, but not abnormally so.)

4. Lexical cohesion: a cohesive device achieved by reiterating a lexical item or by using a lexical item that regularly co-occurs with another (e.g., repetition, synonym and antonym, superordination, collocation).

# 2.4. Coding of the data

To begin with, we independently identified and counted the number of cohesive devices in each composition. Our interrater reliability of quantification of cohesive agents was 0.90. To control for different length essays, we then adjusted the frequencies of cohesive items by dividing the number of devices by the number of words in the essay and multiplying that number by 100 to yield a frequency of cohesive devices per 100 words. Under the guidance of this measure, the quantity of each category and subcategory of cohesive devices used by sophomores and seniors was computed. Moreover, we independently discerned and quantified cohesion errors in the essays and adjusted the number per 100 words so that we could compare the incorrect use of cohesive items between the two groups of students. It should be noted that in this study, the term error was used in its broad sense, given that we did not distinguish error and mistake, two relevant concepts in SLA research. According to Ellis (1994, 1997), a mistake is a deviation in learner language that occurs when learners fail to perform their competence. It reflects occasional lapses in learners’ performance. An error, on the other hand, is a deviation in learner language which reflects gaps in learners’ knowledge. However, judging whether a cohesion error is an error or a mistake fell outside of the parameters of this study.

To count cohesion errors, we drew upon the definition of cohesion errors raised by Spiegel and Fitzgerald (1990), i.e., misuse, improper omission and improper addition of cohesive ties which resulted in meaning ambiguity or hindered the coherence of texts. Some examples of how we identified cohesion errors were listed as follows:

Reference error: e.g., Good health is very significant to people. With good heath, they can feel happy for you are energetic enough to do a lot of things (inconsistency of personal reference).   
Conjunction error: e.g., It is argued that happiness does not mean material success, but (and) this idea has been widely accepted. Many reasons can support this argumentation (misuse of conjunction).   
Substitution/ellipsis error: e.g., He thought that a birthday gift could make his wife happy. He decided to look for an appropriate gift. However, it was an unpleasant experience. He searched from shop to shop. But still he couldn’t find an ideal one. (Readers find it difficult to ascertain for which part “one” substitutes.)   
Lexical cohesion error: e.g., They are trying their best to preserve their money to become rich. But they don’t really know how to prevent their money. (“Prevent” is misused and should be replaced with “preserve” or “reserve”.)

It is noteworthy that we only quantified the upper-level categories of cohesion errors (i.e., reference, conjunction, substitution/ellipsis and lexical cohesion) without counting each subset of cohesion errors, given that as manifested by the procedures of some studies (e.g., Xu, 2003), the frequency of each subset of cohesion errors, once adjusted per 100 words, would seem too inconspicuous to have statistical effect, and that each subclass of cohesion errors often clustered or interlaced with each other, leading to the demarcation between them vague and hardly distinguishable.3 In the meantime, our inter-rater reliability of the coding of cohesion errors was checked and reached 0.73. Then, we discussed discrepancies and reached $1 0 0 \%$ agreement in our categorization.

# 2.5. Data analysis

To address Research Question 1, we performed Independent-Samples t tests, regarding the proficiency levels as the independent between group variables (group 1: sophomores; group 2: seniors) and the frequency of respective category and subcategory of cohesive devices per 100 words and each category of cohesion errors per 100 words in each group as dependent variables, to investigate and compare the (incorrect) use of cohesive items by the two groups of students. Prior to the Independent-Samples t test, test for homogeneity of variance was also conducted to ensure that the variance between group 1 variables and group 2 variables was equal. If the homogeneity of variance was violated, a Welch–Satterthwaite t test score was calculated.

Grounded in the elaboration on the findings pertinent to Question 1, we would respond to Research Question 2 in the Discussion section. Finally, for Research Question 3, the Pearson correlation analysis was carried out to observe the association between the (correct) use of cohesive devices and the writing quality.

# 3. Results

3.1. The differences or similarities between students of two proficiency levels in the use of (incorrect) cohesive devices

Table 1 showed that statistically significant difference was observed for the use of reference $( t = 3 . 1 5 7 , p = . 0 0 3$ ) and lexical cohesion $( t = - 3 . 1 0 9 , p = . 0 0 3$ at two proficiency levels, with large effect sizes (reference: $d = . 8 1 5$ ; lexical cohesion: $\begin{array} { r }  d = - . 8 0 3 \ \end{array}$ ). Table 2 demonstrated that all cohesion errors, with the exception of conjunction and substitution/ellipsis, were significantly different between the two groups (reference error: $t = 2 0 . 2 7 1$ , $p { = } . 0 0 0$ ; lexical cohesion error: $t = 2 2 . 6 9 9$ , $p { = } . 0 0 0$ ; total cohesion error: $t { = } 5 . 7 4 3$ , $p { = } . 0 0 0 \dot { }$ ). The effect sizes for the three variables were all very large (reference error: $d = 9 . 6 2 2$ ; lexical cohesion error: $d = 1 1 . 3 2 4$ ; total cohesion error: $d = 1 . 6 0 4 _ { , }$ ). These figures preliminarily indicate that students of different EFL proficiency levels really have certain distinct options in the (inaccurate) application of cohesive devices. A more detailed discussion regarding particular changes, disparities or similarities of cohesive devices or cohesion errors would be made in the following several sections.

Table 1 Means, standard deviations, Independent-Samples t test results and effect sizes for each category of cohesive devices (adjusted per 100 words) in sophomores’ and seniors’ essays.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Cohesive devices</td><td colspan="2">Sophomores</td><td colspan="2">Seniors</td><td>t</td><td>p-Value</td><td>d</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mean (S.D.)</td><td>N</td><td>Mean (S.D.)</td><td>N</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Reference</td><td>6.997 (1.440)</td><td>30</td><td>5.973 (1.038)</td><td>30</td><td>3.157</td><td>.003</td><td>.815</td></tr><tr><td>Conjunction</td><td>2.660 (1.132)</td><td>30</td><td>2.766 (.550)</td><td>30</td><td>.462a</td><td>.646</td><td>-.119</td></tr><tr><td>Substitution/ellipsis</td><td>.705 (.561)</td><td>13</td><td>.632 (.390)</td><td> 9</td><td>.333</td><td>.743</td><td>.149</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical cohesion</td><td>6.499 (1.822)</td><td>30</td><td>7.655 (.906)</td><td>30</td><td>3.109</td><td>.003</td><td>.803</td></tr><tr><td>Total number of cohesive devices</td><td>16.461 (2.649)</td><td>30</td><td>16.584 (1.471)</td><td>30</td><td>-.222a</td><td>.825</td><td>-.057</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Welch–Satterthwaite t value.

Table 2 Means, standard deviations, Independent-Samples t test results and effect sizes for each category of cohesion errors (adjusted per 100 words) in sophomores’ and seniors’ essays.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Cohesion errors</td><td colspan="2">Sophomores</td><td colspan="2"> Seniors</td><td>t</td><td>p-Value</td><td>d</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mean (S.D.)</td><td>N</td><td>Mean (S.D.)</td><td>N</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Reference error</td><td>.552 (.056)</td><td>19</td><td>.129 (.027)</td><td>8</td><td>20.271</td><td>.000</td><td>9.622</td></tr><tr><td>Conjunction errore</td><td>.279 (.107)</td><td>15</td><td>.219 (.040)</td><td>13</td><td>2.011a</td><td>.059</td><td>.743</td></tr><tr><td>Substitution/ellipsis error</td><td>.060 (.141)</td><td>2</td><td>.040</td><td>1</td><td>1.155</td><td>.454</td><td>.201</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical cohesion error</td><td>.547 (.025)</td><td>14</td><td>.275 (.023)</td><td>6</td><td>22.699.</td><td>.000</td><td>11.324</td></tr><tr><td>Total number of cohesion errors</td><td>.802 (.395)</td><td>28</td><td>.310 (.179)</td><td>18</td><td>5.743a</td><td>.000</td><td>1.604</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Welch–Satterthwaite t value.

Table 3 Proportion of the total frequency of cohesion errors (adjusted per 100 words) in sophomores’ writing.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Reference</td><td>Conjunction</td><td>Substitution/ellipsis</td><td>Lexical cohesion</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Total frequencye</td><td>209.892</td><td>79.793</td><td>9.159</td><td>194.974</td><td>493.817</td></tr><tr><td>Total frequency of errors</td><td>10.488</td><td>4.191</td><td>.120</td><td>7.655</td><td>22.454</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage of errors.</td><td>5.00%</td><td>5.25%</td><td>1.31%</td><td>3.93%</td><td>4.55%</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Proportion of the total frequency of cohesion errors (adjusted per 100 words) in seniors’ writing.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Reference</td><td>Conjunction</td><td>Substitution/ellipsis</td><td>Lexical cohesion</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Total frequency</td><td>179.202</td><td>82.980</td><td>5.691</td><td>229.636</td><td>497.510</td></tr><tr><td>Total frequency of errors</td><td>1.031</td><td>2.852</td><td>.040</td><td>1.650</td><td>5.573</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage of errors</td><td>5.75%</td><td>3.46%</td><td>7.03%</td><td>7.19%</td><td>1.12%</td></tr></table></body></html>

Means, standard deviations, Independent-Samples t test results and effect sizes for each subcategory of cohesive devices (adjusted per 100 words) in sophomores’ and seniors’ essays.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Cohesive devices</td><td colspan="2">Sophomores</td><td colspan="2">Seniors</td><td>t</td><td>p-Value</td><td>d</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mean (S.D.)</td><td>N</td><td>Mean (S.D.)</td><td>N</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Personal pronoun</td><td>3.792 (1.020)</td><td>30</td><td>2.841 (.601)</td><td>30</td><td>4.399a</td><td>.000</td><td>1.136</td></tr><tr><td>Comparative reference</td><td>.705 (.474)</td><td>22</td><td>.627 (.279)</td><td>22</td><td>.660</td><td>.513</td><td>.201</td></tr><tr><td>Demonstrative pronoun</td><td>.895 (.355)</td><td>23</td><td>.654 (.275)</td><td>21</td><td>2.502</td><td>.016</td><td>.759</td></tr><tr><td>Demonstrative noun phrase</td><td>1.992 (.600)</td><td>30</td><td>2.203 (.582)</td><td>30</td><td>1.378</td><td>.174</td><td>.360</td></tr><tr><td>Additive</td><td>.725 (.336)</td><td>23</td><td>.732 (.295)</td><td>24</td><td>-.073</td><td>.942</td><td>.022</td></tr><tr><td>Adversative</td><td>.757 (.411)</td><td>27</td><td>1.038 (.371)</td><td>28</td><td>2.660</td><td>.010</td><td>.718</td></tr><tr><td>Causative</td><td>.955 (.416)</td><td>22</td><td>.797 (.356)</td><td>24</td><td>1.387</td><td>.172</td><td>.410</td></tr><tr><td> Temporal</td><td>.942 (.536)</td><td>23</td><td>.725 (.374)</td><td>24</td><td>1.610a</td><td>.115</td><td>.481</td></tr><tr><td>Repetition</td><td>4.528(1.681)</td><td>30</td><td>4.432 (.844)</td><td>30</td><td>.278a</td><td>.782</td><td>.072</td></tr><tr><td> Synonym/antonym</td><td>.642 (.515)</td><td>24</td><td>1.834 (.579)</td><td>29</td><td>7.830</td><td>.000</td><td>2.175</td></tr><tr><td> Superordination</td><td>.820 (.430)</td><td>25</td><td>.846 (.334)</td><td>25</td><td>.240</td><td>.812</td><td>.070</td></tr><tr><td>Collocation</td><td>.830 (.402)</td><td>28</td><td>.860 (.348)</td><td>26</td><td>.290</td><td>.773</td><td>.080</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Welch–Satterthwaite t value.

# 3.1.1. The use of reference

Table 5 revealed significant difference between proficiency levels on two variables, i.e., personal reference $\chi = 4 . 3 9 9$ , $p = . 0 0 0 \}$ and demonstrative pronoun $t = 2 . 5 0 2$ , $p { = } . 0 1 6 $ , among the subcategories of reference. The effect size for personal reference was large $\quad \cdot d = 1 . 1 3 6$ ), and that for demonstrative pronoun was medium, but near to the large level $( d = . 7 5 9 )$ .

After a deliberate analysis of the compositions, we observed that $8 6 . 6 7 \%$ (26/30) of the sophomores had either enumerated their personal experiences/feelings to highlight their argumentations or made generalizations which targeted at a generic audience signaled by such references as “we” or “you”, while only $5 6 . 6 7 \% ( 1 7 / 3 0 )$ of the seniors adopted such kind of strategy. Sophomores, therefore, employed a remarkably larger number of first person or second person pronouns (e.g., I, we, us, you) than their senior equivalents to elaborate on their viewpoints (see Examples 1 and 2). Meanwhile, we have calculated that a vast majority of the first or second person pronouns $( 8 3 . 7 5 \% )$ used by second-year learners was to illustrate their personal experiences/feelings, as compared with the minority part $( 1 6 . 2 5 \% )$ which was employed to address a generic audience about their claims. Seniors, in contrast, did not utilize first or second person references as frequently as sophomores. Even if they expounded their personal experiences/feelings or addressed a generic audience with respect to their standpoints, the density of the first or second person pronouns was much lower in their writing than that in the sophomores’ compositions (see Examples 3 and 4). Through an Independent-Samples t test, we further checked the mean of the first and second person references (adjusted per 100 words) and ascertained that a significant difference existed between the two groups (sophomore: mean $= 2 . 4 2 6$ [S.D. $= . 5 7 6 $ ]; seniors: mean $= 1 . 1 8 7$ [S.D. $= . 2 4 1$ ], $t = 9 . 7 4 6$ ,4 $p = . 0 0 0 \}$ , with a large effect size $\dot { \boldsymbol { d } } = 2 . 8 0 6 \boldsymbol { }$ . We also calculated the percentage of the total quantity of the first and second person references (adjusted per 100 words) in proportion to the overall amount of the personal references (adjusted per 100 words): sophomore $\mathrm { ; = } 5 5 . 4 6 \%$ , seniors $= 2 3 . 6 7 \%$ . All these figures again verified that sophomores had employed much more first person and second person references than seniors.

Example 1. An excerpt from a sophomore’s essay.

I have a good family so that I can support myself. I don’t need to ask money from parents. And I use the money to buy a lot of things. I am sure that I will be much happier with increasing money. . .. I really don’t know how to handle daily life if I have no job or money. . .. So we can know that we will feel happy if we have a good job and a harmonious family. . .. In conclusion, I am quite convinced from these examples that material satisfactions can give me real happiness.

Example 2. An excerpt from a sophomore’s essay.

In every day life, I feel happy when I am making progress or I get spiritual contentment. . .. I started learning how to ride a bike. In that process, I was joyful every day, because every single day, I made more or less progress. And after I accomplished this skill, I had a great sense of satisfaction which made me smile and very happy. You cannot imagine how difficult it is to ride a bike, and you cannot know how important spiritual satisfaction is to me.

Example 3. An excerpt from a senior’s essay.

What makes people happy? To someone, delicious food gives them happiness; to someone, high marks give them happiness. All these happiness are physical senses. They just last a short period. The real happiness should last the whole life and give people spiritual joy. . .. We should bear in mind that money gives men nothing sort of a material joy. . .. Thus, spiritual satisfaction can make us happy.

Example 4. An excerpt from a senior’s essay.

There is no denying that each and every one is longing for happiness. However, we may find it difficult to find a universal definition of the concept of happiness. . .. In view of the above reasoning, I am convinced that it is difficult to define the word “happiness”, and that it is advisable for every person to adjust his or her understanding of happiness.

In addition to first and second person pronouns, sophomores also used a noticeably higher frequency of demonstrative pronouns than seniors did (see Table 5, Examples 5 and 6).

Example 5. An excerpt from a sophomore’s essay.

Someone beholds that happiness means a good job or a lot of money. Someone believes that good health can give us happiness. These are merely physical and superficial happiness. . .. Money can bring us happiness. But that does not last long. . .. So, happiness is spiritual in nature. If a person can know this, he will get real happiness.

Example 6. An excerpt from a senior’s essay.

What is real happiness? This issue has been debated over centuries. . .. Happiness can derive from wealth or an ideal occupation. But all this is not real happiness. . .. He has a harmonious family. He loves singing. He is also optimistic towards everything. These facts have one thing in common: they are spiritual happiness.

# 3.1.2. The use of conjunction

Table 5 demonstrated that there was no significant difference in the use of all subcategories of conjunction except adversity $\prime { = } \mathrm { { } } { - } 2 . 6 6 0$ , $p { = } . 0 1 0 ^ { \cdot }$ between the two groups of students. The effect size for this variable was medium, but close to the large level $\scriptstyle ( d = - . 7 1 8 )$ .

We, then, further investigated their compositions and figured out that $5 3 . 3 3 \% ( 1 6 / 3 0 )$ of the sophomores referred to quite a few counterarguments or conflicting statements to back their stances (see Examples 7 and 8). Most seniors $8 6 . 6 7 \%$ , 26/30), in contrast, were capable of recounting more than one piece of event or commenting on several contradictory opinions, which, undoubtedly, generated either counterarguments or a transition from one statement to another. The frequency of adversative conjunction (but, however, etc.), as a result, had increased sharply (see Examples 9 and 10). Although not all the adversative conjunctions were used to construct counterargument, seniors, on the whole, employed significantly larger quantity of adversities to illustrate counterarguments than sophomores did.

Example 7. An excerpt from a sophomore’s essay.

For some, happiness is identified in terms of the increasing amount of money on the paycheck. For others, happiness means the awards hung on the wall. In my opinion, happiness is spiritual rather than material satisfaction. The reasons are as follows. . .. These reasons may not be very convincing, but I firmly believe that spiritual satisfaction is really a happy thing, from which all of us could benefit.

Example 8. An excerpt from a sophomore’s essay.

What is happiness? Views on it vary from person to person. Generally speaking, it can be defined as a feeling of satisfaction at getting what one wants. But for me, keeping healthy can bring us physical satisfaction which is the true happiness. All people, men and women, old and young, want to be happy. But it is very hard for them to find the true happiness. . .. Happiness needs us tasting again and again, and health provides us such an opportunity.

Example 9. An excerpt from a senior’s essay.

Some people held the opinion that one who possesses a large fortune is the happiest person in the world, because he can buy whatever he likes. But some people disagree with this idea. In other words, only good health can bring happiness because a rich man cannot buy health and life. . .. In contrast to these opinions, some people keep the different ideas that all the happiness mentioned above is physical happiness. . .. All these factors sound plausible. But I wonder whether the real happiness lies in physical contentment?. . . Physical joy is of great importance, but only spiritual pleasure can give people real happiness.

# Example 10. An excerpt from a senior’s essay.

It’s a universal wish to live a happy life. But what on earth is happiness? Some people are happy when they’ve made money. However, others are happy when they’ve found their true love. . .. Different from these views, it is widely accepted that mental contentment is what matters. People sometimes go to extremes, and frantically purse wealth, power, high social status, etc., which are all worldly symbols of success, but seldom lead to real happiness. . .. But how do people achieve happiness? No doubt, different people have different ways of making themselves happy.

Example 11. An excerpt from a sophomore’s essay.

Many hold the view that money means happiness. So they try all means to get more money and someone even commits a crime. But what’s the result? Most rich people are leading a terrible life. They don’t have a truthful friend because they trust nobody. . .. From what have been mentioned above, some are never contented with their belongings, so they can’t find happiness from what they have now. But some are satisfied with their living conditions. So their happiness is endless.

Example 12. An excerpt from a senior’s essay.

The way people enjoy life is no longer limited to seeking material contentment. But it lies in the pursuit of spiritual satisfaction. . .. On the way to achieve success, one may experience failure countless times. So if his happiness relies on wealth accumulation, then it won’t last long. . .. Those who prefer mental contentment will be optimistic when they come across failure. So they can enjoy everlasting happiness. . .. Mental contentment is universal and is easy to approach. But many people still cannot get it. . .. So, no matter who the person is, he is the controller of himself. Mental contentment is only set by himself.

It, nevertheless, merits attention that the overall trend of all students’ usage of conjunction was so analogous that there was no salient increase or decrease with respect to the employment of the mean quantity of this cohesive device between sophomores and seniors (see Table 1). In addition, via One-Sample t tests comparing the mean difference between conjunction and other cohesive devices (see Tables 6 and 7), plus the computation of the number of conjunctions and other cohesive items in proportion to the total quantity of cohesive devices (see Table 8), we justified that students of both groups used conjunctions less frequently than other cohesive devices (excluding substitution/ellipsis, two oral-style cohesive items). What is more, we discovered that students of both groups were prone to make restricted choice of conjunctive items: the vocabularies adopted by them were usually monotonous, thus lacking depth and variety. For instance, in expressing the causal relation, students were confined to a narrow range of repeated words such as “so” (see Examples 11 and 12). We then tested the entire frequency of “so” used by the two groups of students (adjusted per 100 words): sophomores $= 1 7 . 3 4 7$ , $8 2 . 5 7 \%$ o f the quantity of causative conjunctions that they used; seniors $= 1 5 . 5 2 0$ , $8 1 . 1 3 \%$ of the quantity of causative conjunctions that they used. In a similar vein, both groups of students invariably took advantage of “but” to signify the adversative relation (see Examples 11 and 12). We also examined the overall frequency of “but” used by the two groups of students (adjusted per 100 words): sophomores $= 1 6 . 6 0 4$ , $8 1 . 2 5 \%$ of the number of adversity they employed; seniors $= 2 2 . 7 5 3$ , $7 8 . 3 1 \%$ of the number of adversity they employed.

Table 6 One-Sample t test results for the differences between conjunction and other cohesive devices (sophomores).   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Mean difference</td><td>t</td><td>p-Value</td></tr><tr><td>Reference vs. conjunction</td><td>4.336</td><td>16.495</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Substitution/ellipsis vs. conjunction</td><td>1.955</td><td>12.564</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical cohesion vs. conjunction.</td><td>3.839</td><td>11.539</td><td>.000</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 One-Sample t test results for the differences between conjunction and other cohesive devices (seniors).   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Mean difference</td><td>t</td><td>p-Value</td></tr><tr><td>Reference vs. conjunction</td><td>3.207</td><td>16.930</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Substitution/ellipsis vs. conjunction</td><td>2.134</td><td>16.404</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical cohesion vs. conjunction</td><td>4.888</td><td>29.545</td><td>.000</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.1.3. The use of substitution/ellipsis

The results (see Table 1) are congruent with the discoveries and conclusions of the existing research (e.g., Halliday & Hasan, 1976; Liu & Braine, 2005) that substitution and ellipsis are more characteristically found in dialogues and seldom used in formal written discourse. The subjects being tested sporadically employed these two cohesive devices in writing. $5 6 . 6 7 \%$ (17/30) of the sophomores and $7 0 \%$ (21/30) of the seniors had not used this kind of device. This outcome demonstrates that most EFL learners at different proficiency levels have become aware of the inappropriateness of using substitution/ellipsis in formal writing, thus restricting their occurrence by design.

# 3.1.4. The use of lexical cohesion

Table 5 revealed that the mere noticeable difference between the second-year and fourth-year learners lay in their employment of synonyms/antonyms $\mathrm { \Delta } t = - 7 . 8 3 0$ , $p { = } . 0 0 0$ , and see Examples 13–15: there are mainly repetitive occurrences of, e.g., “money” and “happiness”, in sophomores’ writing, while there are many more synonyms or antonyms, e.g., “spiritual/psychological”, “happiness/joy/enjoyment/pleasure”, “satisfaction/contentment”, “sort of/kind of”, “seek/pursue”, “material/spiritual”, “give/gain”, in seniors’ writing), which consequently generated salient difference of the overall mean of lexical cohesion used by the two groups of students (see Table 1). The effect size for synonyms/antonyms was also indicative of a large difference $\dot { \ : } d = - 2 . 1 7 5$ ).

Example 13. An excerpt from a sophomore’s essay.

Some people in society think the more money they own, the more happiness they will have. But in my view, even though money is necessary to life, it can’t buy happiness. . .. On the one hand, happiness is not something that can be measured by money. . .. Therefore, although money is necessary to get happiness in life, it can’t buy happiness. . .. Sometimes money can buy whatever we want except happiness. . .. So in my opinion, happiness has nothing to do with the amount of money we have.

Example 14. An excerpt from a sophomore’s essay.

Some people think that happiness is based on wealth and power, others believe that happiness is the moment when we gather with our family members and friends. In my opinion, happiness can be found everywhere if we have spiritual satisfaction. . .. Having spiritual satisfaction helps us conquer difficulties. . .. And we get happiness in this process. Moreover, having spiritual satisfaction makes us feel good, in the process of which we can get happiness as well. . .. Having spiritual satisfaction gives us real happiness.

Table 8 Comparison of the number (adjusted per 100 words) of each category of cohesive devices in proportion to the total number of cohesive devices (adjusted per 100 words).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Cohesive devices</td><td colspan="2">Sophomores (n= 30)</td><td colspan="2">Seniors (n= 30)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Number</td><td>Percentage (%)</td><td>Number</td><td>Percentage (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Conjunction</td><td>79.793</td><td>16.16</td><td>82.980</td><td>16.68</td></tr><tr><td>Reference</td><td>209.892</td><td>42.51</td><td>179.202</td><td>36.02</td></tr><tr><td>Substitution/ellipsis</td><td>9.159</td><td>1.85</td><td>5.691</td><td>1.14</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical cohesion</td><td>194.974</td><td>39.48</td><td>229.636</td><td>46.16</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>493.817</td><td>100</td><td>497.510</td><td>100</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 9 One-Sample t test results for the differences between repetition and other lexical cohesive devices (sophomores).   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Mean difference</td><td>t</td><td>p-Value</td></tr><tr><td>Synonym/antonym vs. repetition</td><td>3.886</td><td>36.945</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Superordination vs. repetition.</td><td>3.708</td><td>43.159</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Collocation vs. repetition.</td><td>3.698</td><td>48.634</td><td>.000</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 10 One-Sample t test results for the differences between repetition and other lexical cohesive devices (seniors).   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Mean difference</td><td>t</td><td>p-Value</td></tr><tr><td>Synonym/antonym vs. repetition</td><td>2.598</td><td>24.146</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Superordination vs. repetition</td><td>3.586</td><td>53.699</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Collocation vs. repetition.</td><td>3.573</td><td>52.304</td><td>.000</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Example 15. An excerpt from a senior’s essay.

In the modern society, some people hold the view that having much money is happiness. However, this sort of happiness is material and not long-lasting. . .. Spiritual satisfaction is the spring of happiness. . .. It is generally accepted that, it is a kind of happiness to work hard to pursue what people want and then to make it. Therefore, the process of seeking happiness is a great joy because it gives people a sense of satisfaction. . .. The process of pursuing happiness enriches people’s lives, although it may be full of hardships. . .. The process of seeking joy calls for energy and ability. In other words, paying great effort to achieve what we want can be also an enormous enjoyment. . .. So happiness is physiological contentment. From the abovementioned examples we can see that if a person can try his best to pursue what he wants and makes it, he will gain sense of pleasure at the same time. This kind of joy is the spiritual contentment which can be regarded as the real happiness.

Moreover, it should be noted that, the mean of lexical reiteration was unanimously much larger than the other three lexical devices in compositions created by both groups of students. Through One-Sample t tests measuring the mean distinction between lexical repetition and other lexical devices (see Tables 9 and 10), as well as the calculation of the number of repetition and other lexical devices in proportion to the total quantity of lexical cohesion (see Table 11), we justified that students of both groups used lexical reiteration, e.g., “happiness”, much more frequently than other lexical devices (see also Examples 13–15).

# 3.1.5. Cohesion errors

Apart from the examination of the difference of the mean of cohesive devices across proficiency levels, we also checked the mean of the incorrect use of cohesion by the two groups (see Table 2), and the proportion of the mean of cohesion errors (see Tables 3 and 4).

3.1.5.1. Reference error. Tables 2–4 manifested that the occurrence and frequency of the incorrect use of reference declined sharply with the increase of learners’ proficiency levels. Via a detailed observation, we then discerned the primary reference infelicities in students’ essays, which were summarized as follows:

Table 11 Comparison of the number (adjusted per 100 words) of each subcategory of lexical cohesion in proportion to the total number of lexical cohesion (adjusted per 100 words).   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Cohesive devices</td><td colspan="2">Sophomores (n= 30)</td><td colspan="2">Seniors (n= 30)</td></tr><tr><td>Number</td><td>Percentage (%)</td><td>Number</td><td>Percentage (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Repetition</td><td>135.837</td><td>69.67</td><td>132.968</td><td>57.90</td></tr><tr><td> Synonyms/antonyms</td><td>15.416</td><td>7.91</td><td>53.181</td><td>23.16</td></tr><tr><td>Superordination</td><td>20.491</td><td>10.51</td><td>21.143</td><td>9.21</td></tr><tr><td>Collocation</td><td>23.230</td><td>11.91</td><td>22.346</td><td>9.73</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>194.974</td><td>100</td><td>229.636</td><td>100</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 12 Means, standard deviation, Independent-Samples t test results and effect sizes for students’ writing scores.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Sophomores (n= 30)</td><td colspan="2">Seniors (n=30)</td><td>t</td><td> p-Value</td><td>d</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mean (S.D.)</td><td>Range</td><td>Mean (S.D.)</td><td>Range</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Writing scores</td><td>21.710 (2.486)</td><td>10.20</td><td>23.080 (2.615)</td><td>9.90</td><td>2.080</td><td>.042</td><td>.537</td></tr></table></body></html>

(1) Inconsistency of intersentential and intrasentential personal reference: When using devices of personal reference, students, especially the sophomores, tended to make confusing shifts in pronouns between and within sentences (e.g., from first person to second person or third person, disagreement between the presupposed items and referents in terms of number or gender), which gave rise to the reference ambiguity and inconsistency. Altogether $3 0 \%$ (9/30) of the sophomores and $1 3 . 3 3 \%$ (4/30) of the seniors committed this type of error (see Examples 16–19).

Example 16 ((From a sophomore)). Once men enjoy spiritual happiness, they can sense the hope of life. When they are on the edge of losing hope, spiritual happiness can give you the hope to overcome all the difficulties and to live as usual.

Example 17 ((From a sophomore)). Good health is very significant to people. With good heath, they can feel happy for you are energetic enough to do a lot of things.

Example 18 ((From a sophomore)). My friends behold that material happiness is of utmost significance. It can bring them whatever he wants.

Example 19 ((From a senior)). She is not rich. But she feels very happy because the spiritual contentment brings him invaluable happiness.

(2) Inappropriate use of the proximity demonstrative “those/these”: Some students failed to differentiate between the general adjective “some” and the specific demonstrative “those/these”. On the whole, $1 6 . 6 7 \% ( 5 / 3 0 )$ of the sophomores and $6 . 6 7 \%$ (2/30) of the seniors appeared to make this kind of error (see Example 20).

Example 20 ((From a sophomore)). What can make people happy? Let me offer you those different causes. The first one is material goods. . . (The writer had better use the general adjective “some” instead of the specific demonstrative “those”.)

(3) Incorrect use of comparative degree of adjectives or adverbs: Students committed errors with the comparative degree form of monosyllabic and disyllabic words (see Examples 21 and 22). This kind of error was almost of analogous universality in both groups of students’ compositions (sophomores: $2 3 . 3 3 \%$ , 7/30; seniors, $1 6 . 6 7 \%$ , 5/30).

Example 21 ((From a sophomore)). After doing sports, we can become more healthy and life span will be more long. This is indeed a very happy thing.

Example 22 ((From a senior)). He is now more happy than he was ever before.5

3.1.5.2. Conjunction error. The results (Tables 2–4) demonstrated that the group difference of conjunction errors was insignificant. The major types of conjunction errors were as follows.

(1) Redundant use of conjunctions: The redundant use of conjunctions referred to the unnecessary use of conjunctions between sentences which not only impaired the intersentential or intrasentential logical link, but also misled the readers. In total, $1 0 \%$ (3/30) of the sophomores and $6 . 6 7 \%$ (2/30) of the seniors committed this sort of error (see Examples 23–25).

Example 23 ((From a sophomore)). He is the boss of a big company. And so he can earn a lot of money.

Example 24 ((From a sophomore)). We can enjoy material happiness. And moreover we can appreciate spiritual happ xample 25 ((From a senior)). Although material goods can give us pleasant feelings, but we are not really happy.

(2) Unreasonable lack of conjunction: Students at times failed to use conjunctions where there should be, which resulted in the loss of coherence and logical opacity between and within clauses. Altogether $4 3 . 3 3 \%$ (13/30) of the sophomores and $3 6 . 6 7 \%$ (11/30) of the seniors committed this type of error (see Examples 26 and 27).

Example 26 ((From a sophomore)). They get up early, go to work hurriedly, ˆ (and) take all kinds of opportunities to earn money.

Example 27 ((From a senior)). A lot of people no longer feel satisfied with physical contentment, ˆ (and) they begin to pursue spiritual happiness.

(3) Misuse of conjunction: The misuse of conjunction referred to the students’ inability to opt for appropriate conjunctions to connect sentences logically which accordingly led to comprehension difficulty. This type of error appeared in $1 3 . 3 3 \%$ (4/30) of the sophomores’ writing and $2 3 . 3 3 \%$ (7/30) of the seniors’ writing (see Examples 28 and 29).

Example 28 ((From a sophomore)). Whether happiness is material or spiritual is controversial. It is argued that happiness does not mean material success, but (and) this idea has been widely accepted. Many reasons can support this argumentation. I also believe that happiness is not material, and I will illustrate my viewpoint as follows.

Example 29 ((From a senior)). Wealth can bring us almost everything we want. On the other hand (besides/moreover/in addition), much of our happiness comes from wealth.

3.1.5.3. Substitution/ellipsis error. Tables 2–4 confirmed that substitution/ellipsis errors rarely appeared, and that there was no significant between group difference. A careful examination of students’ compositions showed that only $6 . 6 7 \%$ (2/30) of sophomores and $3 . 3 3 \%$ (1/30) of seniors made substitution/ellipsis errors, which fell into one category, i.e., Inappropriate omission of the necessary parts in the sentences (see Examples 30 and 31).

Example 30 ((From a sophomore)). They got a lot of money, but they were not satisfied. They tried to ˆ(get/obtain) much more money.

Example 31 ((From a senior)). Spiritual happiness is and will $\scriptstyle \left( { \mathrm { ~ b e } } \right)$ important today and in the future.

3.1.5.4. Lexical cohesion error. These figures (Tables 2–4) certified that the frequency and occurrence of the incorrect use of lexical devices varied significantly between the two groups. We then uncovered the following lexical errors which were quite typical in students’ writings.

(1) Misuse of synonym: Students failed to distinguish words with identical or close meanings but of subtle distinctions. All in all, this type of error existed in $2 3 . 3 3 \% ( 7 / 3 0 )$ of sophomores’ and $1 0 \% ( 3 / 3 0 )$ of seniors’ essays (see Examples 32 and 33).

Example 32 ((From a sophomore)). They are trying their best to preserve their money to become rich. But they don’t really know how to prevent their money. (“Prevent” is improperly used and should be replaced with “preserve” or “reserve”.)

Example 33 ((From a senior)). Without money, our living conditions will be affected. Even our family relationship will be effected. (The writer had better use words like “impair” to substitute for “effect”.)

(2) Overlap of superordination and hyponym: Given that superordination compromises the meaning of its hyponym, the two were not supposed to stand together coordinately. $6 . 6 7 \%$ (2/30) of sophomores and no seniors produced this type of error (see Example 34).

Example 34 ((From a sophomore)). Keeping healthy can be happy. Hence, he does all kinds of exercises such as walking, playing soccer and strolling to keep fit. (Since “walking” is the superordination of “strolling”, the latter should be removed.)

(3) Inaccurate collocation of words: Some pairs of words, though not collocative in nature, were matched arbitrarily by students. $2 0 \%$ (6/30) of sophomores and $1 3 . 3 3 \% ( 4 / 3 0 )$ of seniors committed this kind of error (see Examples 35 and 36).

Example 35 ((From a sophomore)). In fact, a great many grave problems have been realized (caused) by wealth. For example. . .

Example 36 ((From a senior)). Crimes around us are becoming increasingly heavier (serious) than before.

3.2. The relationship between the (correct) use of cohesive devices and the quality of the compositions

Table 13 revealed that the writing scores co-varied significantly positively with the overall use of cohesive devices by both groups of students (sophomores: $r = . 5 5 6$ , $p < . 0 1$ ; seniors, $r = . 8 1 4 , p < . 0 1 )$ . Meanwhile, students of different proficiency levels were dissimilar to each other in terms of the extent to which each category of cohesive items may contribute to the writing quality. Among the cohesive devices employed by second-year students, only one variable, i.e., lexical cohesion $( r = . 3 8 6 , p < . 0 5 )$ correlated noticeably positively with their writing scores. In contrast, all cohesive devices other than substitution/ellipsis correlated significantly positively with fourth-year students’ writing quality: reference contributed most to the good writing $( r = . 5 0 2 , p < . 0 1 )$ , followed by lexical cohesion $( r = . 4 7 3 , p < . 0 1 )$ and conjunction $( r = . 3 6 2 , p < . 0 5 )$ . Moreover, a weak correlation was found between the use of ellipsis/substitution and the writing quality of both groups of students (sophomores: $r = - . 1 9 3$ ; seniors: $r = . 4 5 4 \AA$ ). This result indirectly confirms the theoretical position that substitution/ellipsis are oriented by oral style, and that they seldom occur in the formal written discourse.

Table 13 Correlation between the use of cohesive devices and writing scores (Pearson’s $r$ ).   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Reference</td><td>Conjunction</td><td>Substitution/ellipsis</td><td>Lexical cohesion</td><td>Total number of cohesive items</td></tr><tr><td>Writing scores (sophomores)</td><td>.354.</td><td>.309</td><td>.193</td><td>.386*</td><td>.556**</td></tr><tr><td>Writing scores (seniors)</td><td>.502**</td><td>.362*</td><td>.454</td><td>.473**</td><td>.814**</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* Correlation is significant at the .05 level. \*\* Correlation is significant at the .01 level.

Table 14 Correlation between the correct use of cohesive devices and writing scores (Pearson’s r).   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Reference</td><td>Conjunction</td><td>Substitution/ellipsis</td><td>Lexical cohesion</td><td>Total number of cohesive items</td></tr><tr><td>Writing scores (sophomores)</td><td>.390</td><td>.332.</td><td>.167</td><td>.361*</td><td>.550*</td></tr><tr><td>Writing scores (seniors)</td><td>.504**</td><td>.405*</td><td>.451</td><td>.497**</td><td>.821**</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* Correlation is significant at the .05 level. \*\* Correlation is significant at the .01 level.

Beyond that, we checked the correlations between composition scores and the correct use of different cohesive variables (the quantity of correct cohesive devices $=$ the quantity of cohesive devices − the quantity of cohesion errors, also adjusted per 100 words). The results (Table 14) showed that among sophomores, three variables, i.e., the overall correct use of cohesion $( r = . 5 5 0 , p < . 0 1 )$ ), the correct use of reference $( r = . 3 9 0 , p < . 0 5 )$ , and lexical cohesion $( r = . 3 6 1 , p < . 0 5 )$ correlated significantly positively with their writing scores, while among seniors, all variables except the correct use of substitution/ellipsis correlated noticeably positively with the quality of their essays (the total correct use of cohesion: $r = . 8 2 1$ , $p < . 0 1$ ; reference: $r = . 5 0 4 $ , $p < . 0 1$ ; lexical cohesion: $r = . 4 9 7$ , $p < . 0 1$ ; conjunction: $r = . 4 0 5$ , $p < . 0 5$ ).

# 4. Discussion

The main findings from this study can be encapsulated as follows:

1. Undergraduate EFL learners at different proficiency levels were statistically different in their use of reference, lexical cohesion and in their employment of four subsets of cohesive items, i.e., personal reference, demonstrative pronoun, adversity, synonym/antonym, with large or near-large effect sizes.   
2. Despite the disparities, the students of both groups were similar in two respects. First, they utilized conjunctions less frequently than other cohesive agents (excluding substitution/ellipsis). Second, their essays were replete with monotonous repetitions of conjunctions and overlaps of lexical cohesive devices.   
3. The frequency of incorrect use of all cohesive items other than conjunction and substitution/ellipsis errors decreased significantly from grade two to grade four, which were evidently reflected in the large effect sizes.   
4. A significant positive correlation was identified between the overall (correct) use of cohesive devices and students’ writing quality, irrespective of the EFL proficiency levels. Some subsets of (correct) cohesive devices also correlated significantly positively with the students’ writing scores, and such kind of correlation was particularly conspicuous in the senior group.

4.1. The differences/similarities between EFL learners of different proficiency levels in the use of cohesive devices and patterns of variation in their written discourse competence

There were salient differences in the use of some cohesive devices revealed by comparing the sophomores’ writings with the seniors’ writings. For instance, the sophomores employed noticeably more personal references and demonstrative pronouns than seniors. The significant between group distinction in personal reference resulted from sophomores’ overreliance on first or second person pronouns to illustrate the supporting examples included in the essays or to address a generic audience about their argumentations. As claimed by investigators, first and second person pronouns embody the authorial (reader’s) stance markers in texts (van Hell, Verhoeven, Tak, & van Oosterhout, 2005), and they are endowed with more of the characters of oral discourse than those of written text (Biber, 1988). Therefore, the excessive use of these two pronouns which in general over-underline the writer (reader) visibility and express explicitly the author’s (reader’s) stance incarnate his/her direct personal involvement in the text (Chafe, 1982), which is prone to yield oral discourse traits in the written text. Given the spoken essence, first and second person pronouns, occasionally viewed as non-cohesive in written discourse, are considered far less important than other personal references in the construction and interpretation of such formal written texts as academic articles. Seniors, on the other hand, restrictedly applied first or second person pronouns to unfolding their argumentations, which to some extent aided in disguising their authorial stance markers and contributed to relatively more objectivity and more written style features in their essays. Admittedly, a few of the first or second person pronouns used by sophomores were to stake general claims targeted at generic audience, but the quantity was quite limited and could not counteract the fact that as compared with the fourth-year learners, the second-year counterparts over depended on first or second person pronouns and that an overwhelming majority of the two types of pronouns in their essays served to expound the personal experiences/feelings. Therefore, the writer (reader) visibility was much more marked in sophomores’ writing, demonstrating relatively more orality than that in seniors’ compositions.

The analysis of demonstrative pronouns showed a result similar to that of the analysis of first and second person pronouns between the two groups. Demonstrative pronouns, when referring to something other than a nominal antecedent, are liable to induce broad reference (Moskovit, 1983) or vague reference (Roberts, 1952), and the writers probably run the risk of being unclear or imprecise and creating confusion for the readers. Hence, these reference devices represent the characteristics of oral or unplanned discourse (Biesenbach-Lucas, 1994; Biesenbach-Lucas & Weasenforth, 2001). They are inappropriate to occur in formal written text and authors should refrain from employing them (Maimon, Peritz, & Yancey, 2007). Given these points, the significant difference in the use of demonstrative pronouns between the two groups, coupled with the apparent between group discrepancy in the use of personal reference, may, for one thing, support the theoretical position that L2 learners may move from a more “spoken” type of discourse to a more “written” type of discourse in writing as they are progressing in L2 learning (Shaw & Liu, 1998; Wen, Ding, & Wang, 2003); for another, it may to some degree reflect higher proficiency L2 writers’ gradual sophistication of L2 written discourse competence in the formal written text.

True, sophomores applied a larger quantity of personal references and demonstrative pronouns to use than seniors, but they employed remarkably fewer adversities, overall lexical cohesive agents and one subcategory of lexical cohesion, synonym/antonym. As evidenced by the present study, seniors’ use of notably more adversities aroused from the fact that their essays incorporated significantly more counterarguments than sophomores’. Counterarguments or opposing stands which infer complex psycholinguistic processing and reasoning abilities (Golder & Coirier, 1994, 1996) are often regarded as significant and indispensable components of argumentative writing (Kuhn, 1991; Walton, 1996), for they make the thesis more convincing and persuasive (Nussbaum & Kardash, 2005). Some studies (e.g., Reznitskaya, Kuo, Glina, & Anderson, 2009) have verified that argumentative writings which are backed up by substantial well-marshaled counterarguments represented higher quality than those embrace much fewer confronting stands. Therefore, seniors’ frequent adoption of adversities to elicit counterarguments and intensify the pervasiveness of their positions demonstrates that their L2 written discourse competence to produce fairly formal written texts like argumentative compositions, as compared with that of sophomores, has pressed forward to a more advanced stage.

The final prominent distinction between the second-year and fourth-year learners lay in their employment of synonyms/antonyms, which consequently led to the salient difference of the global use of lexical cohesion by the two groups of students. In light of the findings of this study, the less proficient EFL learners, probably subservient to their relatively weaker L2 conversation or writing ability, had limited choice of lexical items at their disposal and made slavishly repeated use of words which provided less lexical diversity and complexity than learners of higher proficiency. The higher proficient EFL learners, by contrast, were competent to utilize synonyms/antonyms which were relatively more intricate and sophisticated than the ordinary words6 that the lower proficient learners used to promote variety and maturity in writing. Therefore, their more skillful employment of synonyms/antonyms not only contributed to higher density of lexical devices, but also created semantically more complex and sophisticated arguments. This result indicates that, for one thing, the total amount of lexical cohesion adopted by L2 learners correlates significantly with their L2 proficiency; for another, it justifies the findings of Jin (2001) that learners are more capable of varying their lexical choices in maintaining the cohesion of their writing, as their L2 proficiency levels press upward. Furthermore, this result may index seniors’ relatively more sophisticated L2 written discourse competence, since lexical elaboration has been documented to be one of the essential properties of formal written texts (e.g., Wen, 2009).

The abovementioned significant disparities, nevertheless, cannot counteract the fact that the two groups of students in some aspects resembled each other, since both of them sporadically used conjunctions and substitution/ellipsis, repeatedly used the same conjunction items and produced many overlaps of lexical cohesive devices. We will elaborate on all the between group similarities, with the exception of substitution/ellipsis, given their oral traits and the dearth of their appearance in students’ writing.

The discovery of constrained employment of conjunctive devices by both groups of students concurs with Granger and Tyson’s (1996) statement that even at a reasonably advanced level, connectors are difficult to master in L2 acquisition. According to Biber (1988) and Ben-Anath (2005), conjunctions which explicitly show the logical relations between sentences display the formal written style features and they are indispensable for the organization and interpretation of a text. The adequate adoption of conjunctions is, therefore, of great importance in the written text. However, the current finding reveals that the application of conjunctions to use in writing may constitute persistent challenges to EFL learners across different proficiencies.

With respect to the similarities in their over-reiterations of the same conjunction and repetitions of the identical lexical cohesive items, the discovery of the present study is in line with that of Liu and Braine (2005) and Zhang (2000). This result manifests that rigid lexical proficiency emerged in the written discourse appears to be a universal challenge with which most EFL learners, regardless of their EFL proficiency, might be confronted. The vocabulary repertoire of a number of EFL learners may be insufficient to generate a high level of lexical diversity and sophistication. Even if the advanced learners can, relatively speaking, promote the vocabulary diversity in writing, they are still unable to thoroughly eradicate the lexical monotonicity. This finding again justifies the previous research outcomes that vocabulary may be one of the thorniest parts of learning a foreign language (e.g., Hu, Brown, & Brown, 1982; Kang, 1995).

As for the investigation of the incorrect use of cohesive devices, this study indicates that there was a significant linear drop of the amount of all categories of cohesion errors between intermediate and advanced EFL learners, with the exception of substitution/ellipsis, on which we will not elaborate, and conjunctions. The discovery of the insignificant between group difference in the incorrect use of conjunctions corresponds to the results of the homogeneity in students’ restricted employment of connectors, which further amplifies that connectors are difficult to master even at advanced level of L2 acquisition. Beyond that, in SLA, conjunction errors are global errors (Ellis, 1994) that affect overall sentence organization and are likely to interfere with comprehension in a markedly manner. The severity of conjunction errors, together with the discoveries of Granger and Tyson (1996), Biber (1988), Ben-Anath (2005), and the present study, manifests that using conjunctions correctly is crucial, and that conjunction error may be an enduring and obstinate deficiency at different stages of ESL/EFL learning which should be attended to by both teachers and learners.

In addition, this study identified the typical cohesion errors in students’ writings. These cohesion errors indeed warrant attention in the SLA domain, given that they varied in many categories and that they did occur even in advanced learners’ writing, despite the significant decline in their quantity. Though detailed interpretation of the sources of these cohesion errors falls outside of the scope of the present inquiry, the exploration in relation to the underlying origin of the cohesion errors can be the concern of our future study.

All in all, these findings present a depiction of EFL writers’ change features of the use of cohesive devices across proficiency levels. Higher proficiency EFL learners’ overall ability to apprehend and manipulate cohesive devices has indeed strengthened in comparison with the lower proficiency equivalents. In addition, given that cohesion constitutes a crucial component of the formal written text (Hu, 1994), the current findings can to some degree reflect the gradual maturation of higher proficiency EFL learners’ written discourse competence. In the meantime, it warrants attention that the upward trend may not be in an absolutely all-round fashion, because the use of a few important cohesive devices and some cohesion errors under investigation witnessed no salient change between the two groups.

4.2. The relationship between the (correct) use of cohesive devices and the writing quality

The findings of this study consolidate the discoveries of the previous research (e.g., Chiang, 2003; Liu & Braine, 2005) that the overall frequency of (correct) cohesive devices constitutes a very effective predictor in evaluating the quality of essays composed by ESL/EFL learners, regardless of their proficiency.

As compared with sophomores, the more intimate correlation between the (correct) use of subcategories of cohesive items and senior’ writing scores demonstrates that concurrently with the advancement of EFL proficiency level and accumulation of linguistic knowledge, the writing competence of most higher proficiency learners may have developed into a relatively stable state, which enables them to systematically put cohesive devices to use, thus maintaining the coherence of their compositions and attaining excellent marks.

# 5. Conclusion

This study probed the differences and similarities in the use of cohesive devices by second-year and fourth-year undergraduate Chinese EFL learners in their argumentative writings, and explored the change features in their (incorrect) employment of cohesive items at different proficiency levels, which may provide some reasonable evidence of whether and how higher proficiency EFL learners develop their written discourse competence as compared with the lower proficiency counterparts. Additionally, this study revealed the association between the (correct) use of cohesion and EFL learners’ writing quality. Many implications can be drawn from this study, an important one being that, through exploring distinct proficiency L2 learners’ writing literacy at the textual level, it theoretically provides some insights into the patterns of variation of L2 written discourse competence. Furthermore, it uncovers the areas of persistent challenge to EFL learners across different proficiencies, e.g., (correct) use of conjunctions and flexible manipulation of lexical elaboration, which may merit heed of many EFL teachers and they can frame their future teaching and inquiries to help learners overcome these weaknesses. Last but not the least, this study sustains the notion of Chiang (1999, 2003) that cohesion, on the whole, can be adopted as a crucial marking criterion to judge L2 writing quality, and that such a criterion may be particularly applicable to the assessment of compositions of advanced L2 learners.

However, this study, being exploratory in nature, did contain some limitations. First, the sample under investigation, 60 compositions produced by 30 second-year and 30 fourth-year undergraduate Chinese EFL learners, seemed small in size. The generalizations of its findings should be tested by future studies which include a larger sample. Second, this study, featuring cross-sectional in design, only looked at EFL learners at two proficiency levels, i.e., intermediate and advanced levels. Future investigations are expected to focus endeavor on a single group of ESL/EFL learners across various proficiency levels so as to better delineate the developmental trends in L2 written discourse competence. Third, this study identified some specific cohesive features or errors in students’ writing (e.g., the infrequent use of conjunctions and the insignificant difference in the incorrect use of conjunctions by the two proficiency groups) which may be of significance and be worthy of elaboration in the future research as they turned out to be prevailing infelicities in ESL/EFL writing. Fourth, the categorizations of cohesion errors may be exploratory in nature, and the generalizations to other research should be made with prudence. Last but not the least, by focusing on cohesion in writing, this study did not examine other textual parameters, e.g., rhetorical organizations (see Bachman, 1990; Bachman & Palmer, 1996) and linguistic properties specific to written discourse (see Chafe, 1982), which equally serve to construct the written discourse competence. For the sake of addressing how ESL/EFL writers develop their written discourse competence in a full-scale measure, more studies which build into analysis all these abovementioned indices need to be executed.

# Acknowledgements

We are grateful to the two anonymous reviewers and the associate editor Dr. Huhua Ouyang for their insightful comments on an earlier version of the paper. We also want to thank the statistical advisor Prof. Shiliang Gu.

# Appendix A. The requirement and prompt of the writing task

“What is real happiness” has long been a controversial issue among people. Happiness definitely means distinct things for different people. Some contend that happiness is a state of mind or feeling characterized by contentment, love or joy. Happiness is, hence, brought about by psychological elements. On the other hand, some people define happiness as living a good life or wealth, rather than simply as an emotion. Only by procuring physical or material satisfaction can one feel happy. Then, which point of view is reasonable or persuasive? Write an argumentative composition of no fewer than 250 words with the title “Whether happiness is psychological contentment or physical (material) satisfaction”. In your writing, you have to present a particular position (happiness is psychological contentment/happiness is physical [material] satisfaction) and back up your argumentation with convincing evidence.

# References

Bachman, L. F. (1990). Fundamental considerations in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Bachman, L. F. & Palmer, A. S. (1982). The construct validation of some components of communicative proficiency. TESOL Quarterly, 16, 449–465.   
Bachman, L. F. & Palmer, A. S. (1996). Language testing in practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Ben-Anath, D. (2005). The role of connectives in text comprehension. Teachers College, Columbia University Working Papers in TESOL & Applied Linguistics, 5(2), 1–27.   
Biber, D. (1988). Variation across speech and writing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (1994). A comparative genre analysis: The research article and its popularization. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Georgetown University, Washington, DC.   
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. & Weasenforth, D. (2001). E-mail and word processing in the ESL classroom: How the medium affects the message. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 135–165.   
Blagoeva, R. (2004). Demonstrative reference as a cohesive device in advanced learner writing: A corpus-based study. In K. Aijmer, & B. Altenberg (Eds.), Advances in corpus linguistics: Papers from the 23rd International Conference on English Language Research on Computerized Corpora (ICAME 23) (pp. 297–307). Amsterdam: Rodopi.   
Canale, M. (1983). On some dimensions of language proficiency. In J. W. Oller (Ed.), Issues in language testing research (pp. 333–342). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.   
Canale, M. & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics, 1, 1–47.   
Celce-Murcia, M. (1991). Grammar pedagogy in second and foreign language teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 25, 459–480.   
Chafe, W. (1982). Integration and involvement in speaking, writing, and oral literature. In D. Tannen (Ed.), Spoken and written language: Exploring orality and literacy (pp. 35–54). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
Chiang, S. Y. (1999). Assessing grammatical and textual features in L2 writing samples: The case of French as a foreign language. The Modern Language Journal, 83, 219–232.   
Chiang, S. Y. (2003). The importance of cohesive conditions to perceptions of writing quality at the early stages of foreign language learning. System, 31, 471–484.   
Connor, U. (1984). A study of cohesion and coherence in ESL students’ writing. Papers in Linguistics: International Journal of Human Communication, 17, 301–316.   
Cox, B. E., Shanahan, T. & Tinzmann, M. (1991). Children’s knowledge of organization, cohesion and voice. Research in the Teaching of English, 25, 179–218.   
Crossley, S. A. & McNamara, D. S. (2009). Computational assessment of lexical differences in L1 and L2 writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 18, 119–135.   
Crowhurst, M. (1987). Cohesion in argument and narration at three grade levels. Research in the Teaching of English, 21, 185–201.   
Doughty, C. J. & Long, M. H. (2003). The scope of inquiry and goals of SLA. In C. J. Doughty, & M. H. Long (Eds.), The handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 3–16). Malden, MA: Blackwell.   
Ellis, R. (1994). The study of second language acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Ellis, R. (1997). Second language acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
ETS. (2009). The official guide to the TOEFL test. Beijing: Beijing Language and Culture University Press.   
English Team of Teaching and Learning Guidance Committee for Foreign Language Majors in Higher Institutions. (2000). The teaching syllabus for English major in higher institutions. Beijing: Higher Education Press.   
Ferretti, R. P., Andrews-Weckerly, S. & Lewis, W. E. (2007). Improving the argumentative writing of students with learning disabilities: Descriptive and normative considerations. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 23, 267–285.   
Gleason, M. M. (1999). The role of evidence in argumentative writing. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 14, 81–106.   
Golder, C. & Coirier, P. (1994). Argumentative text writing: Developmental trends. Discourse Processes, 18, 187–210.   
Golder, C. & Coirier, P. (1996). The production and recognition of typological argumentative text markers. Argumentation, 10, 271–282.   
Granger, S. & Tyson, S. (1996). Connector usage in the English essay writing of native and non-native EFL speakers of English. World Englishes, 15, 17–27.   
Green, C. F., Christopher, E. R. & Jacquelyn, L. (2000). The incidence and effects on coherence of marked themes in interlanguage texts: A corpus-based enquiry. English for Specific Purposes, 19, 99–113.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as social semiotic: The social interpretation of language and meaning. London: Edward Arnold.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold.   
Halliday, M. A. K. & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London: Longman.   
Halliday, M. A. K. & Hasan, R. (1985). Language, context, and text: Aspects of language in a socio-semiotic perspective. Victoria: Deakin University Press.   
Harley, B., Cummins, J., Swain, M. & Allen, P. (1990). The nature of language proficiency. In B. Harley, J. Cummins, M. Swain, & P. Allen (Eds.), The development of second language proficiency (pp. 7–25). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Hu, Z. (1994). (Discourse cohesion and coherence) Yupian de xianjie yu lianguan. Shanghai: Shanghai Foreign Language Education Press.   
Hu, Z., Brown, D. F. & Brown, L. B. (1982). Some linguistic differences in the written English of Chinese and Australian students. Language Learning and Communication, 1, 39–49.   
Jin, W. (2001). A quantitative study of cohesion in Chinese graduate students’ writing: Variations across genres and proficiency levels. Paper presented at the symposium on Second Language Writing at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, September 15–16, 2000 [ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED452726].   
Johnson, D. P. (1992). Cohesion and coherence in compositions in Malay and English. RELC Journal, 23, 1–17.   
Kang, J. Y. (2005). Written narratives as an index of L2 competence in Korean EFL learners. Journal of Second Language Writing, 14, 259–279.   
Kang, S. (1995). The effects of a context-embedded approach to second-language vocabulary learning. System, 23, 43–56.   
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skill of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Liu, M. & Braine, G. (2005). Cohesive features in argumentative writing produced by Chinese undergraduates. System, 33, 623–636.   
Louwerse, M. M., McCarthy, P. M., McNamara, D. S. & Graesser, A. C. (2004). Variation in language and cohesion across written and spoken registers. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th annual cognitive science society (pp. 843–848). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Maimon, E., Peritz, J. & Yancey, K. (2007). A writer’s resource: A handbook for writing and research (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw Hill.   
McCarthy, M. (1991). Discourse analysis for language teachers. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
McCutchen, D. & Perfetti, C. A. (1983). Helping young writers manage a complex task. The Elementary School Journal, 84, 71–75.   
McNamara, D. S., Crossley, S. A. & McCarthy, M. (2010). Linguistic features of writing quality. Written Communication, 27, 57–86.   
Moskovit, L. (1983). When is broad reference clear? College Composition and Communication, 34, 454–469.   
Neff, J., Martinez, F., & Rica, J. P. (2001). A contrastive study of qualification devices in native and non-native argumentative texts in English. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Association of Applied Linguistics, St. Louis, MO, February 24–27, 2001 [ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED465301].   
Neff-van Aertselaer, J. & Dafouz-Milne, E. (2008). Argumentative patterns in different languages: An analysis of metadiscourse markers in English and Spanish texts. In M. Pütz, & J. Neff-van Aertselaer (Eds.), Developing contrastive pragmatics interlanguage and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 87–102). Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Nussbaum, E. M. & Kardash, C. M. (2005). The effects of goal instructions and text on the generation of counterarguments during writing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 157–169.   
Reznitskaya, A., Kuo, L. J., Glina, M. & Anderson, R. C. (2009). Measuring argumentative reasoning: What’s behind the numbers? Learning and Individual Differences, 19, 219–224.   
Richards, J. C. & Schmidt, R. (1992). Longman dictionary of language teaching $\varepsilon { _ { \sigma } }$ applied linguistics. London: Longman.   
Roberts, P. (1952). Pronominal ‘this’: A quantitative analysis. American Speech, 27, 171–178.   
Salkie, R. (1995). Text and discourse analysis. London: Routledge.   
Shaw, P. & Liu, E. (1998). What develops in the development of second-language writing? Applied Linguistics, 19, 225–254.   
Song, M. & Xia, W. (2002). Yingyu xiezuo zhong yupian xianjie shouduan yu yupian jiaoxue—Dui fei yingyu zhuanye dayi benkesheng haozuowen yu cizuowen de tongji fenxi [Combination of textual cohesive ties and textual teaching for the teaching of English writing—a statistical analysis of the good and poor compositions written by non-English major freshmen]. Foreign Language World, 6, 40–44.   
Spiegel, D. L. & Fitzgerald, J. (1990). Textual cohesion and coherence in children’s writing revisited. Research in the Teaching of English, 24, 49–66.   
Thomas, M. (1994). Assessment of L2 proficiency in second language acquisition research. Language Learning, 44, 307–336.   
Thompson, G. (1996). Introducing functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold.   
Todd, R. W., Khongput, S. & Darasawang, P. (2007). Coherence, cohesion and comments on students’ academic essays. Assessing Writing, 12, 10–25.   
van Hell, J. G., Verhoeven, L., Tak, M. & van Oosterhout, M. (2005). To take a stance: A developmental study of the use of pronouns and passives in spoken and written narrative and expository texts in Dutch. Journal of Pragmatics, 37, 239–273.   
Wang, W. & Wen, Q. (2002). L1 use in the L2 composing process: An exploratory study of 16 Chinese EFL writers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 11, 225–246.   
Walton, D. (1996). Argument structure: A pragmatic theory. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.   
Wen, Q. (2009). Xuexizhe yingyu yuti tezheng bianhua de yanjiu [A study on changes of register features in learner English]. Journal of Foreign Languages, 32(4), 2–10.   
Wen, Q., Ding, Y. & Wang, W. (2003). Zhongguo daxuesheng yingyu shumianyu zhong de kouyuhua qingxiang: Gaoshuiping yingyu xuexizhe yuliao duibi fenxi [Features of oral style in English compositions of advanced Chinese learners: An exploratory study by contrastive learner corpus analysis]. Foreign Language Teaching and Research, 4, 268–274.   
Xu, Y. (2003). Yingyu zuowen xianjie moshi yu xianjie cuowu de duibi fenxi [A contrastive analysis of cohesive ties and cohesive errors in English writing]. Foreign Language Teaching Abroad, 3, 54–60.   
Zhang, M. (2000). Cohesive features in the expository writing of undergraduates in two Chinese universities. RELC Journal, 31, 61–95.