# Reconciling top-down and bottom-up approaches to graduate writing: Using a corpus to teach rhetorical functions

Maggie Charles

Oxford University Language Centre, 12 Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6HT, UK

# Abstract

This paper shows how top-down and bottom-up approaches can be reconciled in EAP writing materials through a pedagogic approach which combines discourse analysis with corpus investigation. The materials have been trialled with approximately 40 international graduates and are designed both to introduce concordancing and to raise awareness of certain rhetorical functions. Here I present and discuss the material on Defending your Research against Criticism. Initial discourse-based tasks help students to recognise a two-part rhetorical pattern, in which the writer first concedes the possibility of criticism and then moves to neutralise its potentially negative effect. Subsequently, students perform controlled, context sensitive corpus searches, which provide broader exposure to the pattern and focus on specific lexico-grammatical issues. These corpus-based tasks require work on a small number of expanded concordance lines in detail, a procedure which leads to enhanced understanding of the context in which the rhetorical function appears. The two types of learning activity involve different, but complementary types of work: in the discourse tasks, the focus is primarily on function, whereas in the corpus tasks, it is on form. I argue that it is the combination of the two approaches that provides the enriched input necessary for students to make the connection between general rhetorical purposes and specific lexico-grammatical choices.

$©$ 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Academic writing; Corpus-based materials; Concordancing; Language awareness; Rhetorical function; Corpus pedagogy

# 1. Introduction

Work on the applications of corpora in teaching and learning has long been associated with the field of English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and in particular, with the teaching of writing. Early examples include some of the tasks suggested in Tribble and Jones (1990), Johns’ ‘data-driven learning’ approach (1991a, 1991b) and other work in the same volume (Johns & King, 1991). More recent materials include the textbook on academic lexis by Thurstun and Candlin (1997, 1998) and tasks on citation practices (Thompson & Tribble, 2001), on the specialised lexis of economics and medicine (Gavioli, 2005) and on writing abstracts (Bondi, 2001). Comparisons of corpus data have also been used with students to raise awareness of the differences between learner writing and that of native English speakers (Granger & Tribble, 1998). Other approaches taken by EAP writing practitioners are designed to encourage students to consult a corpus according to their own needs (Bernardini, 2002; Yoon & Hirvela, 2004) and even to build their own corpora for ongoing individual consultation (Lee & Swales, 2006).

In spite of this wealth of activity, concern has been expressed over the discrepancy that exists between top-down approaches to academic discourse such as genre analysis and the bottom-up nature of corpus investigations. In particular, Swales (2002) contrasts what he sees as the ‘integrated’ world of EAP materials design with the ‘fragmented’ world of corpus linguistics. He notes that in constructing materials for EAP, attention is normally given first to macro-textual features; only subsequently is there a focus on linguistic realisations and the provision of explanations that connect the two. In corpus linguistics, however, the reverse procedure occurs: the analyst starts with the linguistic features found in the corpus and then attempts to link them to wider discoursal concerns. Swales questions the efficiency and practicality of this process, suggesting that the gains achieved have been meagre. Flowerdew (1998, 2002) also points out that many applied corpus studies tend to concentrate on examining lexico-grammatical patterning at a local level, with very little attention given to the functions performed by these patterns in the discourse as a whole. She reviews research in EAP that does attempt to bridge this gap, but concludes that it has little impact on syllabuses or materials because it fails to address pedagogical issues adequately.

I would argue that one of these key issues is that the use of corpus consultation to explore a series of lexico-grammatical patterns does not in itself add up to a coherent set of teaching materials. Rather, it is essentially an individual response to individual problems. If corpus work is to be incorporated routinely into the class teaching of academic writing, then it is up to its proponents to show that it can also help students to tackle their higher level discourse concerns. This change of focus would entail reconciling top-down and bottom-up approaches in the production of EAP teaching materials and I suggest that this can be achieved through a pedagogic approach which combines discourse analysis with corpus investigation. The materials for graduate students described in detail below are designed not only to introduce corpora and concordancing, but also to develop students’ recognition and understanding of certain rhetorical functions. They begin with discourse-based tasks designed to raise students’ awareness of a given function and follow this with hands-on concordancing, which uses the corpus to focus on specific lexico-grammatical options for performing that function.

# 2. Background to the study

# 2.1. Programme details

Oxford University Language Centre runs a three-term in-sessional programme of academic writing classes, with students enrolling for one, two or three terms, according to their own choice. The materials discussed here were part of a small pilot project to introduce students to corpus use and were trialled with four groups during the summer term of 2006. Each group had around 10 participants, who were advanced level students from a variety of different native language backgrounds and disciplines. Students attended one $^ { 2 \mathrm { h } }$ class per week and the work on corpora and rhetorical functions took place in weeks 3–5 of the 8-week term. Rhetorical functions covered were as follows: week 3 ‘Constructing Interaction with your Reader’; week 4 ‘Defending your Research against Criticism’; week 5 ‘Criticising the Research of Others.’ Weeks 6 and 7 were also devoted to corpus work, but this time in conjunction with editing and revising the students’ own academic writing. In these later classes, the students carried out investigations individually, searching the corpus for information to help with their own language problems. Such work falls outside the scope of this paper and will not be reported on here. At the end of the corpus work in week 7, participants filled in a short questionnaire, adapted from that given in Yoon and Hirvela (2004), which provided information on native language, disciplinary and computing background, as well as an evaluation of working with corpora.

# 2.2. Participants in the classes

The participants were 40 international graduate students or researchers at Oxford University, the majority of whom were taking a doctoral degree. They worked in 27 different research fields, including natural sciences (e.g., biology, engineering) social sciences (e.g., management, sociology) and humanities (e.g., history, archaeology). The students came from 19 different countries and spoke 15 different languages, although the largest single group (11) came from China. About $60 \%$ were female. Twenty-eight students $( 7 0 \% )$ attended all three classes on rhetorical functions.

Participants were willing and frequent computer users, with $9 5 \%$ stating that they liked using computers and about $8 5 \%$ reporting that they used computers several times a day for both personal and work purposes. For about $8 7 \%$ of the students, English was the major language of their computing sessions, used $7 5 \mathrm { - } 1 0 0 \%$ of the time. However, very few participants, only six $( 1 5 \% )$ , had used a corpus on their own before the classes.

# 2.3. Corpora and software used in class

The two corpora used in these classes consist of theses written by native-speakers in two disciplinary areas: eight MPhil theses (about 190,000 words) in politics/international relations and eight doctoral theses (approximately 300,000 words) in materials science. Further details of the corpora can be found in Charles (2003, 2006). Given that the purpose of these classes was twofold: to introduce corpus work and to develop awareness and understanding of certain rhetorical functions, the small size of the corpus was considered to be an advantage. In particular, it meant that the students were faced with only a limited amount of data as they came to grips with the techniques of searching and interpreting concordance examples. The advantages of using small specialised corpora for EAP purposes have been well documented (e.g., Flowerdew, 2004; Tribble, 2001). The corpora used in this study contain texts that are exemplars of one of the students’ most important target genres: the thesis. It was therefore held that they provided a suitable initial corpus for these students to consult. Although it is recognised that individual disciplines differ substantially in their use of both lexicogrammatical patterns and rhetorical functions (see e.g., Hyland, 2000), with students from such a heterogeneous group of disciplines in the same class, it was not possible to provide tailor-made corpora to suit each student’s field of study. However, some of the tasks required students to compare findings in the two corpora and disciplinary variation was also a key point discussed at length during the overall class feedback sessions.

The software used was the WordSmith Tools Version 4 (Scott, 2004) concordancer, which is relatively quick and easy for students to learn. In addition to provide for the manipulation of the concordance lines, this software allows the performance of advanced searches with context words, a facility required in these materials. This option enables users to stipulate that a certain word or phrase must occur within a specified number of places to the right and/or left of the search item. The ability to specify the contextual environment of the search term in this way is particularly important for the investigation of rhetorical functions, which may be performed over relatively long stretches of text and using a combination of signals.

# 2.4. Overview of the classroom procedure

Each 2-hour class is divided into two sessions of equal length, separated by a $1 0 { \cdot } \mathrm { m i n }$ break. In the first session, students are introduced to the rhetorical function to be covered. In pairs or small groups, they carry out discourse-based tasks to develop their awareness of the function, its purpose in the text and the ways in which it can be realised linguistically. The discourse part of the class ends with whole-class feedback and discussion to highlight the insights that students have gained in their group work.

In the second session, students move on to corpus work, ideally with two students working together on a single computer, since this allows for discussion and formulation of ideas. This, in turn, contributes to fostering a very explicit awareness and understanding of the way in which the rhetorical function is realised. At the end of this session, feedback and discussion with the whole class again allows each group or pair to contribute what they have noticed and to check their findings and interpretations against those of others in the class.

Finally, paper versions of the concordances are handed out, so that students can study them further at home and enabling those who do not complete the class tasks or who were absent to catch up in their own time. The provision of paper versions of the concordances is important in giving students a record of what they have done, which allows them to return to it in future, even when the corpora are no longer available. It also supplies many other examples of language use, in addition to those that are the focus of the class.

# 3. The material on defending your research against criticism

# 3.1. The discourse session

The purpose of the first task in the unit on Defending your Research against Criticism is to investigate students’ attitudes to weaknesses in their research and to discuss possible ways of dealing with such weaknesses. The task provides four versions of a short extract from the corpus and students are asked to underline the differences between the versions and to discuss the change in persuasive effect. Version 1A is the original; it acknowledges a potential weakness in a technique used, but claims immediately that it is not important within this research context:

# VERSION 1A

The Clarendon Laboratory has facilities for etching the surface using a jet of silica particles entrained in an air stream. The resolution of this technique is only of the order of microns but this is adequate for the purposes of the work conducted for this thesis. As a result a beryllium– copper alloy mask was produced by photographic reduction and etching techniques supplied by the Physics Photographic Unit and the pattern was successfully transferred to the substrate.

Version 1B mentions the weakness, but fails to justify the use of the technique:

y The resolution of this technique is only of the order of microns. A beryllium– copper alloy mask was produced y

Version 1C mentions the limits of the technique, but does not construct this as a weakness:

y The resolution of this technique is of the order of microns. A beryllium– copper alloy mask was produced y

In version 1D there is no mention of the weakness and hence no justification is necessary:

y entrained in an air stream. A beryllium– copper alloy mask was produced y

Students are encouraged here to notice how this writer deals with a weakness in his work by anticipating a criticism from the reader and dealing with it. Secondly they are asked to reflect upon how persuasive each version is, which leads on to a discussion of whether it is better to mention weaknesses in their own work or to ignore them. Thus Task 1 is very general in its scope.

Task 2 narrows the focus of the class by asking students to identify further examples of anticipated criticism and writer defence, focusing particularly on the linguistic realisations of the rhetorical pattern. Students are asked to identify anticipated criticisms in which the writer makes an apparent concession to the reader’s view by seeming to admit that a potential criticism may be justified. Criticisms and defences are given in Table 1. The two apparent concessions are found in extracts B and C (in bold), signalled particularly by the use of the modal verb may together with seem and appear as well as by while and the verb acknowledge in extract C. The focus here on the combination of criticism and defence encourages students to become aware of the extended patterns in discourse.

Table 1 Anticipated criticisms and writer’s defence (Task 2)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Extract</td><td>Anticipated criticism</td><td>Writer&#x27;s defence</td></tr><tr><td>A</td><td>Although the results of the experiments are not. conclusive,</td><td>I hope to show that enough information is now available to draw tentative conclusions and to propose a programme ...</td></tr><tr><td>B</td><td>There is nothing essential in these categories, and they may not appear tenable to other scholars..</td><td>However, the assumption that socialization. affects various registers of state practice differently is useful in analysing ...</td></tr><tr><td>C</td><td>While I acknowledge that in some cases the distinction between institutions and groups may. seem rather arbitrary,</td><td>Such political actor subjects are not the focus of interest in this thesis..</td></tr><tr><td>D</td><td>Unfortunately, specimen preparation is especially laborious for the completed device structure, which meant that further progress could not be made during this project.</td><td>However, the work done so far indicates that the device has, at least on the sub-micron scale, been fabricated correctly.</td></tr></table></body></html>

The initial discourse session ends with whole class discussion of the two-part pattern: anticipated criticism defence and its realisation using signals of apparent concession, contrast and justification. Information is summarised on the handout for future student reference.

# 3.2. The corpus session

In Task 3, students are asked to load both corpora and to retrieve while in sentence initial position with the context terms appear\*/seem\* /may occurring up to eight words to the right of the search term. This leads to the retrieval of 14 concordance lines, which are expanded to show further context. After checking that all the examples are, in fact, concessions, students are asked to focus on the context verbs and to determine whether there is a preferred way of constructing a concession in these corpora. In all the lines, sentence initial while in the context of appear\* /seem\* /may is used to signal a concession and its use with may is the most frequent. There are eight uses of may alone, three uses of may together with seem, three uses of seem on its own and no occurrences of the verb appear. Thus, students can see that one way of constructing a concession is to use while at the beginning of a sentence together with may or seem.

The second part of Task 3 asks students to perform a similar search to the one above, but this time to look for while within a sentence rather than at sentence initial position. From this search, it is immediately evident that there are far fewer concordance lines. Five instances occur, only two of which are used to construct a concession. Further questions lead students to compare the results of the two concordances and to formulate a generalisation about the use of while to construct a concession. Finally, they are asked to explain why the while clause tends to occur at the beginning of the sentence. By ordering the clauses in this way, the writer downgrades the importance of the conceded proposition and puts the emphasis instead on the information in the main clause which counters the concession and provides the justification for the writer’s view.

While this may seem contradictory to the conclusions drawn above about length of step required, the cell was only being used for charge densities and not energetics, and the positions, and hence strains, for the atoms are acceptably similar to a larger cell.

Task 4 explores patterns that may carry out a similar rhetorical function when discourse units are considered in combination. Students are asked to perform searches on sentence initial and medial although, to check whether this subordinator is used in constructing concessions and if so, how it functions. Here again sentence initial uses are concessive, but the verb appear occurs in addition to may and seem. In contrast to the use of while, medial position for although is as frequent as initial position. Interestingly, however, in medial position, the clause is not so readily interpreted as a concession to a potential criticism by the reader. Instead it seems simply to introduce a reservation or contrasting observation by the writer regarding the proposition put forward.

Rather thick samples were formed, as shown in Figure 43, although the individual QD seem well separated.

If time allows, students are encouraged to perform further searches on other signals of concession identified in the discourse sessions. At the end of the class, all groups contribute their ideas and findings to a class discussion; finally, a summary of the findings together with a paper version of the concordances is handed out for students to study further at home. Students can also be asked to write a short paragraph using a two-part concession pattern to defend their own work against criticism.

# 4. Searching for rhetorical patterns: a new approach to corpus work

Putting rhetorical patterns at the centre of the investigation leads to a different kind of corpus consultation, which demands a new approach. The purpose is still to look for repeated regularities, but these are patterns of discourse, rather than lexis or grammar. Such rhetorical patterns show a high degree of variability, are likely to be signalled by combinations of linguistic features and to extend over longer stretches of text. Thus, it is necessary to expand the concordance lines in order to see the patterning and understand how it operates. Moreover, instead of reading down the concordance and looking at the words immediately to the right and left of the search term (Tognini-Bonelli, 2001), users have to read the whole of each concordance entry carefully, sometimes working with lines that have been expanded to paragraph length or even going back to the original text, when the pattern or its function is unclear. Individual concordance entries are therefore studied in much greater detail. In the type of corpus consultation advocated here, the search term is used as a probe to locate the parts of a text in which a given rhetorical function may occur and which may thus merit closer study.

Because the work is so detailed, fewer concordance lines can be consulted within a given time than is the case with traditional corpus work. Thus, the aim is to cut down the number of concordance entries in such a way as to retrieve only those that are most likely to yield relevant data. This is achieved not only by working with a small corpus, but more importantly, by using the options for advanced searches offered by the WordSmith Tools concordance programme. In the example discussed above, the search on while was narrowed down by limiting the search both by sentence position (with or without a capital letter) and by the stipulation that a certain word or words had to occur in the context and in a given position in relation to the search term (within eight places to the right). To give an illustration of this narrowing down process, in these corpora the total number of occurrences of while is 257; the total number of sentence initial instances of while is 87, which is still too large for the present purposes. However, the use of the context feature enables us to focus on only 14 which are likely to perform the concession function that is the focus of attention.

Of course, it is not claimed here that the use of sentence initial while with may or seem is the only way of making a concession, or even that using a context sensitive search in the manner described reveals all the instances of while that carry out the concession function. Nonetheless, I would suggest that refining a search in this way cuts down ‘noise’ in the system. The concordances retrieved are likely to contain a higher proportion of instances of the pattern under investigation, thus allowing greater attention to be paid to those most likely to be relevant. As Aston (1997) notes, one of the ways of adjusting the difficulty of corpus tasks is to reduce the amount of data to be consulted. The use of the context search facility enables this reduction to take place on a principled basis and thus facilitates the detailed attention to each concordance line that is essential for identifying and examining rhetorical patterns in text.

# 5. Pedagogical issues raised by the corpus sessions

# 5.1. Controlled or free searches?

In the present materials, it is the materials writer/teacher who controls the searches that the students carry out. This differs from much data-driven learning, in which teacher and student discover together answers to questions posed by the students themselves (Bernardini, 2002; Johns, 1991a). Due to the amount of control exercised, it may seem that the present materials forfeit many of the advantages usually associated with corpus work. For example, the student is not on an equal footing with the teacher as regards knowledge of likely search outcomes; nor is the student the initiator of the investigative process. It is clear, then, that the students are neither acting as ‘researchers’ in the fullest sense implied by Johns (1991a), nor is their role that of the ‘traveller’, freely exploring the data with minimal backup from the teacher (Bernardini, 2001).

I would suggest, however, that at the early stages of corpus work, there are good arguments in favour of exerting the amount of teacher control seen here, that the advantages of discovery learning are by no means lost and that the value of controlled work outweighs any benefits that may be relinquished. Several writers have pointed out the many pitfalls associated with ‘free’ corpus searches (e.g., Chambers, 2005; FrankenbergGarcia, 2005; Kennedy & Miceli, 2001). Students have difficulty with search techniques: for example, they may make typographical errors or their searches may be too narrow to yield any results or too wide for them to identify the relevant data. Even with a wellformulated search, students may have difficulty at the next stage in interpreting the data: they may have problems with understanding and analysing the concordance lines; they may make over-generalisations or may not notice crucial information. While it is true that training and practice in concordancing will lead to an improvement in these areas, it is often the case that there is insufficient class time for students to develop their skills under the guidance of an experienced corpus investigator. Thus, there is a persuasive argument that limited class time should be devoted to searches known to be of value for the matter under investigation.

As Gavioli (2005, p. 30) points out, the issue is not so much whether the role of the teacher should be cut out in favour of allowing students direct access to the data, but rather of ‘‘which type of filter they [teachers] should exercise and in what way.’’ Providing a controlled introduction to concordancing with a limited number of concordance lines and a clearly defined set of questions can assist students, not only to gain specific answers to the questions posed, but also to develop their searching and interpreting techniques. By following a set of detailed instructions, for example, they learn how important it is to be accurate in entering a search and will soon find out, from other students or from the teacher, if they have gone wrong and in what way. By responding to questions that are given, students are encouraged to focus on the purpose of the search, to pay attention to specific linguistic features of the concordance lines and to notice similarities and differences between lines. This helps them gradually to develop an understanding of which aspects of the data are likely to be significant and of how to make valid generalisations from the material.

However, it is also important to point out that, although the teacher can aim to exercise some control over the students’ consultation of the corpus, in practice it is neither possible nor desirable to attempt to enforce conformity. Thus, even with a controlled set of materials such as those described above, some students still opt to carry out their own searches or, seduced by the richness of the data, become involved in answering their own questions rather than those of the assignment. Such freedom to pursue their own interests is inherent in the corpus as a tool for exploration and the benefits of the ‘serendipitous’ learning that may ensue have rightly been emphasised, particularly by Bernardini (2000). Thus, while offering a framework for controlled discovery, the teacher should also be prepared to stand back and allow students to go in a direction that better suits their immediate needs. Even when a high degree of control is ostensibly exercised, corpus work always leaves scope for student input, and indeed take-over. It is worth emphasising that this freedom is not present to the same extent with paper-based materials, as the scope for students’ own explorations is necessarily limited by the examples that are given in the handout or textbook.

Finally, of course, controlled tasks can give way to more flexible ones. Once students have become familiar with the procedures, they can be encouraged to branch out on their own. Corpus searches have a tendency to lead to new questions, which in turn can lead on to new searches not originally envisaged by the teacher. Thus, the controlled tasks can be seen both as a temporary measure to ensure a fruitful (if somewhat limited) outcome for the class work and as a basis for the further development of students’ searching and interpreting skills. In this sense, they provide a jumping off point, from which the more motivated and skilled students can pursue their own enquiries.

# 5.2. Contextualisaton

It has been suggested that the language presented in a corpus is ‘de-contextualised’ (Widdowson, 2000, pp. 7–8); in such a view, concordance lines are seen as fragments divorced from the social and communicative circumstances of their production and needing ‘re-contextualisation’ in the classroom. Paradoxically, however, I would argue that one of the advantages of the type of corpus work described here is that it allows students to gain a greater sense of contextualisation than is possible to achieve through the use of paper-based materials.

This point is particularly relevant for the teaching of academic writing to graduate students, since the texts that these writers have to produce are comparatively long, for example about 1000–3000 words for an essay, roughly 6000 words for a research article and around 80,000 words for a thesis. Such texts are too lengthy to present in their entirety in paper-based materials, with the result that published materials designed to teach EAP tend to work with extracts from the target genres (see e.g., Swales & Feak, 1994, 2000; Weissberg & Buker, 1990). In corpus-based work, however, students can expand the context of each concordance line at will and can even access the original file. Thus, the corpus offers the possibility of consulting the entire text and reading as much as necessary for the development of contextual knowledge.

Further, I would suggest that the appearance of expanded concordance lines, in contrast to that of paper-based extracts, can also foster in students a greater sense of contextualisation. This is because printed extracts on the page look complete. They generally begin at the beginning of a sentence and end at the end of one; they are printed as individual paragraphs and surrounded by white space, which isolates and divides them off from the material that precedes and follows. These factors lead students to see each extract as a self-contained entity and to forget that it is part of a greater whole, joined to the rest of the text at the beginning and end.

By contrast, when students look at concordance lines, it is quite clear that no example is complete in itself. Thus, students are stimulated to look further into the context, to expand the lines as far as necessary or to consult the source text. It is particularly important for students to gain this sense of the way in which individual examples fit into their context when they are studying rhetorical functions, since such patterns may extend over a large amount of text. Indeed I would suggest that the ability to expand concordance lines and read extended context at will provides a prime example of how corpora can offer a resource that contributes to enriching the overall pedagogical environment (Aston, 1995, 1997).

# 6. Evaluation of the materials

Unfortunately data was not gathered on students’ reactions to the material on rhetorical functions specifically and so it is not possible to report directly on their evaluation. However, students’ responses to more general questions on corpus use were encouraging: $8 6 \%$ said that they would like to use corpora in future English classes; $9 3 \%$ said that they would use a corpus for individual help with their English and $91 \%$ said that they would recommend other international students to use a corpus. Thus, it would seem that the materials were successful, at least to the extent of fostering a positive attitude to corpus use among the students.

For the writer/teacher, the use of this approach requires access to a suitable corpus, and a high degree of familiarity with the data is necessary in order to choose searches that prove rewarding. This entails a relatively high cost in preparation time, as each potentially useful search must be carried out in advance, the lines analysed and the value of the concordance data in supporting a given teaching point established before the search can be included in the materials. On the plus side, however, this detailed preparation leads to one of the advantages of controlled materials for students: limited classroom time is not spent on searches which turn out to be unrewarding for the topic under investigation. Much more work is, of course, necessary both to expand the number of rhetorical functions taught and to refine and improve the searches performed. This work is in hand and it is hoped to trial a modified and much expanded set of materials during the summer term of 2007.

# 7. Combining discourse and corpus work: the best of both worlds?

As noted above, in materials where rhetorical functions are taught, it is generally with reference to extracts from academic texts and in fact, the tasks used are often similar to those presented in the discourse-based sessions described here. For example, students may be given part of a research article and asked to identify and discuss the construction of a ‘gap’ in the research (e.g., Swales & Feak, 1994, p. 186; Weissberg & Buker, 1990, p. 66). Such a procedure is familiar to students and works well; thus, we may ask what further value, if any, is provided by the inclusion of the corpus sessions.

As several studies have pointed out (e.g., Aston 2001; Gavioli, 2005; Johns, 1991b), the process of searching a corpus for a given pattern is of great value in itself, since it promotes active engagement by students in their own learning. In particular, with a context sensitive search, the student is faced with a problem that immediately excites their interest: what, if anything, do these concordance examples have in common? It is this drive to distinguish underlying patterns that promotes detailed attention to the context of the search terms and leads students to notice and think about linguistic features that might otherwise be overlooked. Because students perform the searches themselves, they also have a greater investment in finding out about the concordance examples they have retrieved. Although the materials give instructions as to which searches are to be performed, it is still the students who carry them out and manipulate the lines, sorting, deleting and grouping them in any way they choose. In this way, then, the corpus sessions actively promote ‘discovery learning.’

I would suggest, however, that in these materials it is the combination of discourse and corpus work that is particularly valuable. First, on a pedagogical level, it may be more effective to begin with task types and procedures that are well known to students and to move on later to corpus work, which is likely to be less familiar. In this way students encounter the new material first in an accustomed form: they are not faced both with an unfamiliar concept (the rhetorical function) and with an unfamiliar task type (the corpus search) simultaneously. The combination of discourse and corpus sessions also takes account of the fact that some students are reluctant to work with computers, in that it offers at least some tasks that suit their inclinations. Indeed it may be argued that, since all students have different learning styles and preferences, it is generally beneficial to offer a variety of ways of engaging with new material.

In practical terms, the use of discourse-based tasks allows the teacher to present several ways in which a single rhetorical function may be performed. Not all of these will necessarily be suitable for corpus investigation, but students can gain some awareness of the variability that characterises the realisation of these functions. In addition, the discourse extracts provide a set of potential search items, only some of which can be taken up in the class material. The remainder constitutes a resource which can be used later for individual searches by students. With corpus-based tasks, on the other hand, multiple instances of a single pattern are easily retrieved, which allows students to see more examples than could be presented in extract form. In this way, students can gain further insight into the grammatical and lexical features of each individual pattern. For example, when investigating the ways in which a gap is constructed, students use the search term to date and are encouraged to note its frequent co-occurrence with the present perfect verb form. This focus on patterning helps students to understand the extent of the regularity of language, even at the discourse level.

The discourse sessions, then, lay the foundations for the work on corpora by providing a wider range and greater variety of patterns, while the corpus investigations deepen and enrich the discourse work by revealing the frequency and detail of a limited number of those patterns. It is important to emphasise, however, that the two sessions involve different types of work and are designed to achieve different, and complementary, outcomes. In the discourse session, the students focus predominantly on function. They are encouraged to notice the occurrence of the rhetorical feature and to discuss its effect. By contrast, in the corpus session, the focus is on form. Students are asked to examine specific patterns in linguistic detail. Thus, in moving from discourse to corpus, the class moves from studying what texts do, to investigating how they do it. It is this combination of session types that provides the student with a richer experience of the rhetorical pattern than would be achievable through work of either type alone.

# 8. Conclusion

In this paper, I have argued that work on rhetorical functions can provide the missing link between top-down and bottom-up approaches to EAP materials and I have proposed a pedagogical approach that combines discourse-based and corpus-based tasks. In attempting to answer the question ‘What do we want EAP teaching materials for?’ Harwood (2005) concludes that their prime purpose is to raise awareness of the key features of academic discourse. I would argue that these features include rhetorical functions such as those addressed here. If, as Harwood suggests, one of the ways of raising the quality of EAP materials is through greater corpus consultation, then it is important to find ways of using corpora in the teaching of rhetorical patterning. This paper has illustrated one means of achieving this goal; it has shown how a combined discourse and corpus approach can provide enriched input for students, thus enabling them to make the connection between general rhetorical purposes and specific lexico-grammatical choices. This understanding is essential to the construction of appropriate academic discourse.

# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to members of staff at the Language Centre who helped set up the project, to the students who took part and to the thesis writers for permission to use their texts.

# References

Aston, G. (1995). Corpora in language pedagogy: Matching theory and practice. In G. Cook, & B. Seidlhofer (Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics (pp. 257–270). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Aston, G. (1997). Enriching the learning environment: Corpora in ELT. In A. Wichman, S. Fligelstone, T. McEnery, & G. Knowles (Eds.), Teaching and language corpora (pp. 51–64). London: Addison-Wesley Longman.

Bologna: CLUEB.   
Bernardini, S. (2000). Systematising serendipity: Proposals for concordancing large corpora with language learners. In L. Burnard, & T. McEnery (Eds.), Rethinking language pedagogy from a corpus perspective (pp. 225–234). Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
Bernardini, S. (2001). ‘Spoilt for choice’: A learner explores general language corpora. In G. Aston (Ed.), Learning with corpora (pp. 220–249). Bologna: CLUEB.   
Bernardini, S. (2002). Exploring new directions for discovery learning. In B. Kettemann, & G. Marko (Eds.), Teaching and learning by doing corpus analysis (pp. 165–182). Amsterdam: Rodopi.   
Bondi, M. (2001). Small corpora and language variation. In M. Ghadessy, A. Henry, & R. L. Roseberry (Eds.), Small corpus studies and ELT (pp. 135–174). Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Chambers, A. (2005). Integrating corpus consultation in language studies. Language Learning and Technology, 9(2), 111–125.   
Charles, M. (2003). ‘This mystery y’: A corpus-based study of the use of nouns to construct stance in theses from two contrasting disciplines. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(4), 313–326.   
Charles, M. (2006). The construction of stance in reporting clauses: A cross-disciplinary study of theses. Applied Linguistics, 27(3), 492–518.   
Flowerdew, L. (1998). Corpus linguistic techniques applied to textlinguistics. System, 26, 541–552.   
Flowerdew, L. (2002). Corpus-based analyses in EAP. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 95–114). London: Longman.   
Flowerdew, L. (2004). The argument for using English specialized corpora to understand academic and professional language. In U. Connor, & T. Upton (Eds.), Discourse in the professions: Perspectives from corpus linguistics (pp. 11–33). Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Frankenberg-Garcia, A. (2005). A peek into what today’s language learners as researchers actually do. International Journal of Lexicography, 18(3), 335–355.   
Gavioli, L. (2005). Exploring corpora for ESP learning. Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Granger, S., & Tribble, C. (1998). Learner corpus data in the foreign language classroom: Form-focused instruction and data-driven learning. In S. Granger (Ed.), Learner English on computer (pp. 199–209). London: Longman.   
Harwood, N. (2005). What do we want EAP teaching materials for? Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 4(2), 149–161.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. Harlow: Longman.   
Johns, T. (1991a). Should you be persuaded: Two samples of data-driven learning materials. In T. Johns, & P. King (Eds.), Classrooom concordancing (pp. 1–16). Birmingham: ELR University of Birmingham.   
Johns, T. (1991b). From printout to handout: Grammar and vocabulary teaching in the context of data-driven learning. In T. Johns, & P. King (Eds.), Classrooom concordancing (pp. 27–37). Birmingham: ELR University of Birmingham.   
Johns, T., & King, P. (Eds.). (1991). Classrooom concordancing. Birmingham: ELR, University of Birmingham.   
Kennedy, C., & Miceli, T. (2001). An evaluation of intermediate students’ approaches to corpus investigation. Language Learning and Technology, 5(3), 77–90.   
Lee, D., & Swales, J. (2006). A corpus-based EAP course for NNS doctoral students: Moving from available specialized corpora to self-compiled corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 25(1), 56–75.   
Scott, M. (2004). WordSmith Tools (Version 4). Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2002). Integrated and fragmented worlds: EAP materials and corpus linguistics. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 150–164). London: Longman.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (1994). Academic writing for graduate students. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2000). English in today’s research world. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Thompson, P., & Tribble, C. (2001). Looking at citations: Using corpora in English for academic purposes. Language Learning and Technology, 5(3), 91–105.   
Thurstun, J., & Candlin, C. (1997). Exploring academic English: A workbook for student essay writing. Sydney: NCELTR.   
Thurstun, J., & Candlin, C. (1998). Concordancing and the teaching of the vocabulary of academic English. English for Specific Purposes, 17(3), 267–280.   
Tognini-Bonelli, E. (2001). Corpus linguistics at work. Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Tribble, C. (2001). Small corpora and teaching writing. In M. Ghadessy, A. Henry, & R. L. Roseberry (Eds.), Small corpus studies and ELT (pp. 381–408). Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Tribble, C., & Jones, G. (1990). Concordances in the classroom. Harlow: Longman.   
Weissberg, R., & Buker, S. (1990). Writing up research. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.   
Widdowson, H. G. (2000). On the limitations of linguistics applied. Applied Linguistics, 21(1), 3–25.   
Yoon, H., & Hirvela, A. (2004). ESL student attitudes towards corpus use in L2 writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 13(4), 257–283.

Maggie Charles is tutor in EAP at Oxford University Language Centre, where she teaches academic writing to graduates. Her research interests include pedagogical applications of corpus linguistics, the study of stance and discipline-specific discourse. She has published in Applied Linguistics, Journal of English for Academic Purposes and English for Specific Purposes.