# A specialized vocabulary list from an original corpus of digital science resources for middle school learners

Rebeca Arndt

University of Central Florida, 4000 Central Florida Blvd, Orlando, FL, 32816, USA

# 1. Introduction

The rapid expansion of digital science resources in middle chools across the United States (Us) has surpassed the research mo mentum on the nature of the vocabulary enclosed in such resources. Explorations of the vocabulary in digital science resources used in middle school (MS) classrooms are warranted because vocabulary is essential for the academic achievement of both first (L1) and second language (L2) learners (Webb & Nation, 2017). From one point of view, science i a subect area abundant in science vocabulary (Fitzgerald et al., 2022) that is linguistically and cognitively demanding tocurrent English Learners (ELs) (Ardasheva et al., 2021). From another perspective, science instructional materials for MS students presently used in teaching and learning have changed from traditional rinted materials to modern digital materials, which are now used in US-based middl schools more oten than textbooks, according to the report authored by Gray and Lewis (2021). For instance, the report shared that educational technology was an important component of middle school teachers instruction as it was used to acces various digital resources incorporated in instruction: interactive textbooks $( 6 4 \% )$ , non-interactive textbooks $( 3 7 \% )$ , and supplemental materials $( 7 7 \% )$ (Gray & Lewis, 2021). Moreover, science vocabulary is the strongest predictor of MS ELs' science reading comprehension (Ardasheva et al., 2021), a necessary skill to participate in language-intensive practices or scientific sense-making required by the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) (NGSS Lead States, 2013a).

Importantly, regardles of English proficiency, MS learners in the US are expected to read science texts (NGss Lead States, 2013b), whether paper-based or digital. However, with the rapid adoption of digital science resources (Gray & Lewis, 2021), students are transitioning from reading paper-based science texts to engaging regularly in digital reading. A recent study that explored differences acrss dgital and paper reading modes for reading behaviors and reading comprehension (Goodwin et al, 2020 suggested dfferences in quantity and quantity for behavior (paper annotating and highlighting) as well as reading comprehension. All in al, as digital reading involves relevant processng diffrences compared with paper-based texts when reading identical texts by middle schoolers, it is worthwhile to explore the composition of digital science resources used increasingly in classrooms.

Previous corpus-based research examining science texts for middle (Greene & Coxhead, 2015) and high school (Green & Lambert 2018) students loked at paper-based textbooks, which made sense at that time, rather than today's more commonly used digital resources consisting of curatd and nn-curatd artices, intractive lesons, ecyclopdic ries, infographics, dital workshts, tc. Earlier explorations resulted in two series of corpus-based lists designed using different principles and inclusion criteria.While Green and Lambert (2018)considered dispersion in creating their Secondary Vocabulary Lists (SVL), Greene and Coxhead (2015) failed to address this crucial criterion. Both sets of lists excluded judgment-based critri e., dictionary checking, expert checking) and only included corpus-based measures (e.g, frequency range, dispersion, etc.). It can be argued that while valuable, previously designed word lists for secondary learners are not suitable to meet the demand in middle schools across the Us, where most f the texts students read are comprised of digtal science resource (Gray & Lewis, 2021) Likewise, these list are unsuitale for ELs who may stil work on decoding and acquiring words with multiple meanings. Moreover, the Middle School Vocabulary List (MsvL) for Science (Greene & Coxhead, 2015), created for MS learners did not account for the even distribution f lexical items acros the corpus (dispersion), meaning that the list may not be equally beneficial to learners reading Lif Science (LS), Physical Science (PS) or Earth and Space Science (ESS) texts.

To fill n the reseach gap, the focus of this study was to create digita science list from digital cience resources, considering both corpus and judgment-based criteria. With this goal in mind, a unique corpus was first created from thousands of digital science re. sources for middle schoolers retrieved from ten highest-ranked available and accessible platforms. Then, a lis of hundreds of word types was assembled based on the set inclusion criteria. Lastly, the lexical coverage of the digital it was examined against the digital corpus and its validation corpora and compared with four other secondary science lists.

The following section presents the literature review of specialized corpus-based lists of single words designed for secondary education learners and several limitations of these lists. This paper continues with the methodology section detailing the data collection methods and procedures, the justification for selecting the unit of measurement, and the inclusion criteria. Finally, the final ection presents the results and discussion while addressing several pedagogical suggestions and limitations.

# 2. Specialized corpus-based lists of single words

In corpus linguistics, specialized corpus-based lists of single words have been developed from written and spoken language found in textbooks, workbooks, unit standards, and instruction manuals for pedagogical purposes (Coxhead and Demecheler, 2018; Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007; Gree & Lambert, 2018; Greene & Coxhead, 2015; Lei & Liu, 2016; Watson Todd, 2017) Several specialized corpus-based lists have focused on science vocabulary (Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007; Green & Lambert, 2018; Greene & Coxhead, 2015), however, no science-based word list has been assembled from digital science content used increasingly in middle schoos across the United States (Gray & Lewis, 2021).

Academic and technical leical items, clustered under the umbrella of specialized vocabulary,occur most frequently in academic and subject-specific language (Coxhead, 2018). The distinction between academic and technical lexical items is that while academic vocabulary consiss of words that occur across a wide range of subjects, technical vocabulary is composed of words with a specialized meaning used usually in one specific subject" (Liu & Lei, 2020, p. 112). However, some lexical items can be both academic and technical. For instance, the word potential included in the Academic Word List (AwL)(Coxhead, 200) is science-specific, technical in nature (e.g., actual potential or chemical potential).

Specialized corpus-based lists of single words (measured in types, lemmas, or word families) had either included general vocabulary (Gardner & Davies, 2014; Green & Lambert, 2018; Lei & Liu, 2016) or excluded it (Coxhead, 2000; Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007; Greene & Coxhead, 2015). General or high-frequency vocabulary occurs most frequently in written and spoken language and is contained in the frst 200-3000 most frequent word families (Nation, 2001; Schmitt & Schmit, 2014). General vocabulary lists such as the General Service List (GSL) (West, 1953) and the New-General Service List (New-GSL) (Brezina & Gablasova, 2015), which contain roughly 200 word familie, seem to acknowledge the 2000 word families threshold for high-frequency lexical items. On the one hand, excluding general vocabulary from specialized corpus-based lists ensures that learners who have already acquired general vocabulary are not required to relearn known vocabulary (Dang, 2020a). On the other hand, the exclusion of general vocabulary from specialized lists does not account for specialized meanings of general vocabulary words (e.g, crop) that may be unfamiliar to learers, particularly ELs, and it impacts the strength of such lists built on top of general lists (Dang, 2020a). Since about $1 5 \%$ of English words have multiple meanings (Goulden et al., 1990), it is important to account for general words with specialized meanings.

# 2.1. The Middle School Vocabulary Lists (MSVL)

Extant studies on subject-specific vocabulary for secondary learners (middle school and high school) have produced two series of helpful vocabulary lis. For instance, Greene and Coxhead (2015) designed the Middle School Vocabulary List (MSVL), a set of five corpus-based liss, to identify the most frequently occurring pecialized vocabulary contained in a sizeable corpus (18,202,382 individual words or tokens). The MSVL excluded GSL word familie and included AWL and non-AWL word families. One of the lists in this series was the MSVL for Science (435 word families and 859 word types), created from a corpus of 3,725,422 tokens. The word families contained in the MSVL for Science were identified via a multi-leveled bottom-up proces that excluded GSL words and included words on the determined range and frequency thresholds. The MSVL for Science provided a lexical coverage of $1 0 . 1 7 \%$ across the corpus from which it was assembled, $9 . 4 8 \%$ across a parallel science corpus, and $2 . 0 9 \%$ across a literature corpus. The lexical coverage of a list gies ifoation out the useuls f a spifi ist, thrfre, lists with hghr lexicl coverags are eived as better than lists with lower lexical coverages. However, to asess the pedagogical value of lists in terms of lexical coverage, it is important that lis are validated across ther domain-specfic corpora and not solely across the corpus from which they were gathered.

# 2.2. The Secondary Vocabulary Lists (SVL)

From a different perspective, Gree and Lambert (2018) designed eight lemma-based content-specific lists from a corpus of 16,253 350 tokens. Lemma is a unit of counting that identifies parts of peech and includes the stem of a word together with its inflectional suffixes The Second Vocabulary Lis (SVL) were extracte from eight sub-corpora ranging from 1,404,280 to 2,389,034 tokens using six inclusion critria: freuecy, range, dispersin, range ratio, frquenc/kyes, and  major part f spech mmas that met allthe established inclusion criteria were added to the SVL (totaling 4781 lemmas). For instance, the Biology list contained 880 lemmas, the

Chemistry list had 519 lemmas, and the Physics list consisted of 546 lemmas. Regarding leical coverage, the SVL for Biology covered $2 3 \%$ of the Biology sub-corpora, and the SVL for Physics offered $2 2 . 7 \%$ lexical coverage across the Physics sub-corpora. The SVL f01 Chemistry provided $2 5 \%$ coverage across the Chemistry sub-corpora. Although these lists were not validated against parallel o1 comparison corpora, they were measured against the overall corpus to reveal lexical coverages ranging between 2 and $2 . 9 \%$

There are many strengths of the two series of vocabulary lists developed for secondary education learners (Greene & Coxhead 2015; Gre & Lambert, 018), hower, as llustrate in more dtail in the following ction, thee are ral limttions of these ists with implications for this study.

# 2.3. Limitations of secondary corpus-based lists of single words

Greene and Coxhead (2015) and Green and Lambert (2018) have acknowledged some limitations of their lists. For example, one limitation identified by Greene and Coxhead (2015) was that the MSVL excluded the GSL (West, 1953) word families. A subsequent criticism may stem from the purposeful inclusion of AWL family members within the MSVL. In esence, Greene and Coxhead (2015) used only three inclusion criteria: non-GSL lexical items, range, and frequency at various thresholds. This methodology might be criticized sice i dos nt address dsersion which "is as importnt an  a i is sill cted r een complely igored (Grie, 2020, p. 111). Moreover, Green and Lambert (2018) have recognized several limitations of the sVL, particularly discusing the teaching value of the lemmas included in the lists. The authors noted that not allexical items in the SVL require the same amount of instructional atention. Gren and Lambert (2018) noted that corpus-based ists are imply one category of toos that can be used in the classrom; hence, the way teachers use these toos in the classroom "depends on the educational context, e.g, grade level, language proficiency" (Gree & Lambert, 2018, p. 114). Notably, Green and Lambert (2018) did not include any judgment-based criteria when constructing their specialized lists, which faled to acknowledge that some general words have specialized meanings and should be considered specialized vocabulary as they are reflective of the language encountered by high school students i subject-specific texts.

While valid, these areas of concern are reoccurring in discussions about most of the vocabulary lists that used strict inclusion/ exclusion criteria: they are not all-encompassing. Despite diffrences between methodologies followed to create specialized lists, in recent years, however, more emphasis has been placed on reporting dispersion information in corpus studies (Gries, 2020) and incorporating dispersion as an inclusion criterion (Gardner & Davies, 2014; Green & Lambert, 2018). Likewise, judgment-based criteria have been used increasingly in assembling specialized lists to address pedagogical concerns (Dang, 2020a; 2020b) Acknowledging the above-mentioned limitations of the MSVL and the SVL, in the creation of the DSL, a different approach is taken from the approaches used thus far i orus studes yilding pcializd word is for secondary leaners i., indig dipersion and judgment-based criteria).

# 2.4. Inclusion criteria for single-word lists

Corpus-based studies that focused on designing single-word is have used a wide range f inclusion criteria justified by reearchers ased on previous research or the researchers choice. For instance, Michael West (1953) selected six inclusion criteria for his famous GSL, developed for L2 learners. Among these criteria frequency was deemed the most prominent criterion, categorizing the GSL as a general high-frequency word lis. The other five criteria selected by West (1953) were ase of learning, necesty, cover, stylistic lel, and emotional neutrality, as reported by Dang (2020a). Although the GSL was one of the first single-word is designed from a corpus counting millions of tokens, the researcher chose several judgment-based criteria and one corpus-based criterio (i.e, frequency.

In the last 70 years, ince West's (1953) GSL, hundreds of single-word lists have been created using corpus and judgment-based criteria. Corpus-based criteria encompasfrequency, range, dispersion, and keyness and generally involve using corpus software (Dang, 2020a). These criteria have been used in most corpus studies yielding corpus-based lists (Coxhead, 2000; Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007; Dang, 2017, 2020b; Gardner & Davies, 2014; Gren & Lambert, 2018; Lei & Liu, 2016). For instance, frequency depicts the number of repetitions of a word in a corpus, while range refers to the number of sub-corpora the word can be found across (Dang, 2020b; Watson Todd, 2017). Dispersion, arguably "the most crucial but at the same time most underused basic statistical measures in corpus inguisics (Gries, 2020, p.99), shows the degre of evenly distributed words across sub-corpora. Likewise, keynes, acriterion amply used in corpus studies, ensures that specialized words included in specialized vocabulary lis are keywords with a higher frequency in a specialized corpus than in a comparison corpus (Dang, 2020b; Watson Todd, 2017). Judgment-based criteria take a qualitative approach, including dictionary checking and expert checking. While dictionary checking can be categorized as an objective criterion since itinvolves dictionaries, expert checking can be categorized as a subjective criterion since t uses the expert's judgment (Dang, 2020a; 2020b).

Although specialized single-word lists have been developed considering carefully selected criteria (Coxhead, 2o00; Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007; Dang, 2017, 2020b; Gardner & Davies, 2014; Green & Lambert, 2018; Lei & Liu, 2016), few specialized lists have included both corpus and judgment-based criteria (Dang, 2020b) and no list considered both types of criteria in the design of word list assembled from digital science resources for middle school students.

# 2.5. Research questions

The literature review has revealed the need to explore the composition of digital cience resources used with middle school students in the United States and design word is from such resources using corpus and judgment-based criteria.Given this landscape, the current study aims to answer three research questions:

Research Question 1: How many word types in a corpus of digital science resources for middle chool students meet seven inclusion criteria (i.e., frequency, range, dispersion, specialized meanings of general words, keynes, science dictionary checking, and expert checking)?

Research Question 2: What percentage of coverage do these word types provide across the digital science corpus and validatio. corpora?

Research Question 3: How do the coverage figures for this word list compare with those of other related word lists such as MsvL for Science (Greene & Coxhead, 2015) and SVL for Biology, Chemistry, and Physics (Green & Lambert, 2018) in relation to the digital science corpus?

# 3. Methodology

The purpose of this corpus-based study was multifold: to extract a specialized digital ocabulary list from a corpus harvested from ten web-based science platforms used by teachers in the US, validate the list with several corpora, and compare its lexical coverage with the lexical coverages of other ists in the digital corpus (also done for validation purpose). The research design for this study was inspired by the work of Dang (2020b), Liu and Lei (2020), and Watson Todd (2017) and adhered to Dang's (2020a) and Nation and Sorell's (2016) guidelines.

# 3.1. Data collection: Digital Science Corpus (Dsc) compilation

A total of 3456 digital science resources with approximatel 2.7 million tokens were rerieved from ten science-based platforms. The tokens were gathered from content on three cience topics taught in middle schools acros the US based on four guiding principles: representativeness, coherence, size, and balance of sub-corpora (Dang, 2020a; Nation & Sorell, 2016).

# 3.1.1. Representativeness

The digital science resources included in the DSC were compiled from ten representative, available, and accessible science-based platforms (Dang, 2020a). Threesub-corpora that constructed the DSC were assembled based on the NGss (NGsS Lead States, 2013b) for MS (grades 6-8) to ensure the corpus represents the authentic language in digital science resources for the specific grade levels. These standards, used in 44 states across the US, are ivided into three main categories: Life Science (S), Physical Science (PS), and Earth and Space Science (Es). The texts included in the DSC had to be written for grades 6-8 and connected to at least one of the NGSS (NGSs Lead States, 2013b), searchable as keywords (e.g., Cells, Cycle of Water, etc.).

# 3.1.2. Coherence

Each sub-corpora was assembled based on the coherence principle outlined by Nation and Sorell (2016). This means that each sub-corpora was constructed from the same kind of digital texts available online on science-based platforms used by science MS teachers. The final list of ten science platorms resulted from a purposeful sampling method using an initial list of 62 science-based educational platorms and tools developed according to the ranking given by 91 science teachers to various science-based platforms. Based on a ranking system and a top-down approach, the initial list was rfined into the final list used in assembling the DSC. Entire digital science resources rather than sampled pages were added to the corpus, however, several elements were excluded (i. front and back matter such as images, logos, standards, links to various videos, and photographer names). This decision was based primarily on the idea that it is unlikely for MS students to read this type of information, therefore, theseelements served no language learning or pedagogical purpose. Although links to other sources and social media platforms may be useful when embedded in digital resources, these links have ittle educational value when converted into text (tt) file. A secondary reason for the exclusion of certain text elements was to align this study with earlier research that eliminated front and back matter such as tables, appendix (Greene & Coxhead, 2015), diagrams, pictures, and other visual images (Groves, 2016) since corpus software cannot processthese elements. The DSC also included additional resources related to the main electronic resource, such as glossaries, worksheet, discussion questions, assessments, note-taking forms, and the like. While such resources are commonly used in traditional classrooms in paper format, glossaries, digital worksheets disussion questions, assments, and note-taking forms, which may dffer from paper-based versions, are also used in science classes, therefore, MS students are, in fact, likely to read and interact with such content.

# 3.1.3. Balancing

According to Nation and Sorel (2016), balancing the sub-corpora within a corpus isvital because employing range as a criterion includes comparing sub-corpora with each other. In this case, comparing unequal sub-corpora can skew the results. To this end, the current study adopted a balancing approach similar to the one taken by Coxhead (2000. First the science resourcesrtrieved from these plaforms were included in three balanced sub-corpora LS, ES, and PS sub-corpora contained an approximately equal number of tokens (i.., 900,o00. Second, the resources included in the corpus were further categorized into small () (1-750 tokens), medium (M) (751-1500 tokens), and large (L) resources (more than 1501 tokens). This arbitrary decision of sizing resources was made to include in the corpus resources of varying sizes and ensure a balanced inclusion of resources with various lengths (Coxhead, 2000). The adopted balancing strategy proved efective as each sub-corpora contained a comparable number of S, M, and L science resources retrieved from each platform.

# 3.1.4. Size

Considering Nation and Sorell's (2016) suggestion, the size of a corpus and sub-corpora should be carefully considered when developing a word list because it should provide ample opportunity for the word of interes to occur with sufficient frequency. A reasonably sied corpus contains millions of tokens to ensure that th language enlosed in thecorpus accurately represents the specific language analyzed. Although some of the previously assembled specialized corpora that yielded specialized vocabulary contained between 1,150,000 (Watson Todd, 2017) and 1,761,380 tokens (Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007), thesize of the DSC exceeds 2 million tokens In fact, after processing for unusable characters (Watson Todd, 2017), 2,734,595 useable tokens continued to the data analysis portin of this study.

# 3.2. Data collection: validation corpora

Aside from compiling the DSC, two validation corpora were assembled. The Parallel Digital Science Corpus (PDsC) was created from ES and LS resources excluded from the DSC when the three sub-corpora were balanced. The size of the PDSC was 1,116,137 tokens. The fiction corpus, namely the Digital iction Corpus (DFC), contained fiction content retrieved from 32 novels catering to middle schoolers. In short, the 32 novels (with an average of 85,650 tokens) added to the DFC totaled 2,740,814 tokens. Two other readily available corpora were used for validation purposes: the Academic Abstracts Corpus (211,698 words) and COCA Sampler (1,689,318 words).

# 3.3. Unit of measurement and justifying the criteria for DSL inclusion

The current study uses type (unrepeated lexical item in a text) as the counting unit of the DSL. The framework used to define a type was Bauer and Nation's (1993) taxonomy. This taxonomy defines a type considering each form as a different word (Bauer & Nation, 1993). The reasoning for selecting this unit of counting was based on several reasons. Firt it was in alignment with Fitzgerald et al. (2022), considering that diffrent student developmental trajectories for learning morphological functions impact consideration of ages at which base words and thir morphological extensions would be considered to be distinct in meaning" (p. 1261). In other words this unit selection accounted for a possible lack of knowledge of word derivations. Second, word type is a unit often selected in specialized lis. Several studies yielding specialized vocabulary lists opted to use type as the unit of measurement (Dang, 2020b; Lu, 2018; Watson Todd, 2017). Third i followed the didactic uggestion of Folse (2020), who noted that having students learn a whole word family, which often contains more than half a dozen members, i unnecessary and overly demanding given that only one type in that family may be frequent and worth learning.

The DSL was extracted from the DSC using a dichotomous approach involving corpus and a judgment-based criteria to ensure that the DSL is a practical and methodologicall sound specialized list. Several corpus-based inclusion criteria such as frequency, range, distinctiveness (ispersion and keyness), and GSL lexical items were considered (Chung and Nation, 2003; Coxhead, 2000; Dang, 2020b; Gren & Lambert, 2018; Lei & Liu, 2016; Watson Todd, 2017). The selection of corpus-based criteria was anchored in the desire to capture word types that are frequent, wide-ranging, and distinct (Dang, 2020b). The judgment-based criteria, namely the dictionary and expert checking, were selected because these two criteria accounted for the specialized meaning, ensuring the word types in the DSL were specialized words found in science texts used by middle schoolers, meaning that they were accurately reflected in the science discipline (Chung and Nation, 2003; Coxhead & Demecheleer, 2018; Dang, 2020b).

# 3.3.1. Frequency

The frequency criterion was selected based on previous corpus-based studies that yielded vocabulary ists considering the needs of L2 learners (e.g., GSL, AWL). Previous research indicates that L2 learners are more likely to learn high-frequent words than lowfrequent words due to repeated exposure to high-frequency words (Laufer, 1998; Pujadas & Munoz, 2020; Stahr, 2008). Likewise, the selection of the frequency criterion was rooed in Nagy and Hiebert's (2011) analysis that explored factors impacting the choice of words to teach. This analysis revealed that frequency was the most impactful factor in selecting words worthy of teaching. Moreover, word frequency was identified in the science domain as predicting word knowledge and word learning (Cervett et al., 2015).

# 3.3.2. Range

The range criterion was elected because meeting a specifi frequency in the entire corpus is insufficient; instead, words (types. lemmas, word families) must occur with a particular expected frequency across sub-corpora and disciplines. The range criterion ensured that frequent lexical items occur in the entire corpus (frequency criterion) and a wide range of sub-corpora and disciplines (range criterion). Earlier corpus-based studies that extracted specialized lists (e.g., AWL, MSVL, etc.) considered the range criterion. For instance, Coxhead (200) decided that a member of a word family had to occur at least ten times in each of the four sub-corpora and at least 15 out of the 28 subject areas. I creating their MSVL, Greene and Coxhead (2015) considered the same range criterion as Coxhead (200); thus, range was calculated for the size of each sub-corpora. Gardner and Davies (2014) and Green and Lambert (2018) decided that lemmas included in their specialized lists must occur in at least. $5 0 \%$ of the texts in each discipline.

# 3.3.3. Dispersion

Dispersion i a sttistical measure referring to the even distribution of lexical item acrossparts of a corpus (Gries, 2020), measured on a continuum from 0.01 to 1, from uneven distribution to perfectly even distribution. This criterion was selected because the types included in the DSL were sought to be evenly isributed acos the corpus, thus encountered with equal likeliness by students in S, PS, and ESS rather than being clumped in solely one sub-corpora. Since Gries (2020) pinpointed that uneven dispersion of lexical items across a corpus posed "a serious threat to the validit f irtuall all orpus-based statistics (p. 106), this measure was selected as one of the inclusion criteria. There were three reasons for choosing Juilland's D (Juillnd and Chang-Rodriguez, 1964) to measure dispersion. irst this measure handled different sizes of the corus parts by using percentages that make up each corpus part instead of observed frequencies (Gries, 2020). Likewise, Juilland's D was chosen based on previous research (Gardner & Davies, 2014; Green & Lambert, 2018; Lei & Liu, 2016). Finall, dispersion was selected based on Nagy and Hiebert's (2011) analysis of factors impacting the choice of words for instruction, which identified dispersion as one of the factors impacting language learning and instruction.

# 3.3.4. Specialized meanings of general words

General vocabulary with science-specialized meaning was included in the DSL based on prior studies (Dang, 2020b; Lei & Liu. 2016). The DSL accounted for types considered general vocabulary with specialized meanings in science (e.g., crop, dating, work) because this list's purpose was to capture the subject-specific nature of the MS science written language found in digital science resources. The inclusion in the DSL of GSL types with specialized meanings can be categorized as both a corpus-based and judgment-based criterion. Although a science dictionary was used to check if the GSL types have specialized meanings, corpus software was used to identify the GSL types after being converted from word families at level 6 (Bauer & Nation, 1993) into word types. Due to the use of corpus software, this criterion was listed under the umbrella of corpus-based criteria.

# 3.3.5. Keyness

The keynesscriterion was selected on the premise that the specialized types included in the DSL should be keywords essential to content comprehension and with substantiall higher frequency in science texts than in general texts. Previously conducted scholarly work in the field of specialized vocabulary also used this citerion to enhance the usefulness of their list e., Dang, 2020b; Green & Lambert, 2018; Watson Todd, 2017). For this study, keyword statistic log-likelihood with a threshold of $p < 0 . 0 5$ $\cdot +$ Bonferroni) was conducted with AntConc (Anthony, 2019). The keyword criterion or keyness was set as the same value as decided by Dang (2020), whose research produced a specialized word list. Although Dang's (2020b) criterion was set at a more rigorous cutof point than other studies, it ensured fewer specialized leical items were included in her list. The keyness criterion for the current study was selected with similar reasoning to compare specialized lexical items in the science corpus (DSC) with lexical items in a non-science reference corpus (i.e., DFC).

# 3.3.6. Science dictionary checking

Dictionary checking was used in earlier research to produce specialized vocabulary lists (Coxhead & Demecheleer, 2018; Dang, 2020b). The Oford ctionary of Science, sixth editio, was used toverify if types that met the reviously outlied critriaxisted in the dictionary as headwords either in their singular or plural form.

# 3.3.7. Expert checking

Expert checking has been used in the design of specialized lists for decades (Chung and Nation, 2003; Coxhead & Demecheleer. 2018; Dang, 2020b) to decide "whether the individual meanings of words all into the sphere of specialized meaning or not (Chung & Nation, 2004, p. 252). Generall, domain-specific experts rate lexical items based on a rating scale. In this study, two science teachers verified f the types that met al the aforementioned criteria had specalized meanings and should be added to the final DSL. The expert checking portion of the specialized list extraction was completed using the adapted semantic 4 points scale for science, as seen in Table 1 (Chung and Nation, 2003; Dang, 2020b). The rating scale has been adapted to include science as the specific field. Following a similar method as Dang (2020b), the raters were intructed to assgn points to the types in the Pilot DSL. When the experts were unsure how many points to assig to a specific lexical item, a concordance line of that type in the corpus was ofered. This stratgy aimed to aid the experts in thir decision-making was required only once. Words rated with 1 by both experts (e.g., bomb, sequence, surface) were deleted from the list.

# 3.4. Procedures and instrumentation

# 3.4.1. Research question 1

After collecting the data and deciding upon the inclusion criteria in the DSL (Table 2), multiple steps were followed. First WordSmith Tools (Scott, 2020) Version 8 was used to analyze the DSC and create the frequency master list of the entire corpus containing 43,888 types. WordSmith Tools (Scott 2020) Version 8 provided information about dispersion values (measured with Juilland's D). Then, AntWordProfiler (Anthony, 2021) was employed to conduct the lexical profile analysis of the master lis across the three sub-corpora to obtain range and frequency information. Lastly, AntConc (Anthony, 2019) was used to conduct the keyword analysis and obtain keyness values for keywords in the DSC compared with the DFC.

Table 1 Adapted rating scale (Chung and Nation, 2003).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Rating</td><td>Description of the Scale</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>The word has no specific relationship with the field of science.</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>The word has a meaning assciated with the field of science and it means aproximately the same thing when used in everyday language.</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>The word has a meaning assciated with the field of science and it means a different thing when used in everyday language.</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>The word has only one (or more) meaning(s), which is/are always associated with the field of science.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 The inclusion criteria in the DSL.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="5">DSL</td><td>Corpus-based Criteria:</td></tr><tr><td>1 Frequency: at least 28.5 times/million or 77 in the entire corpus (Coxhead, 2000; Green &amp; Lambert, 2018; Lei &amp; Liu, 2016)</td></tr><tr><td>2 Range: occurrence in each sub-corpora with a frequency of at least ten (Coxhead, 2000)</td></tr><tr><td>3 Dispersion: at least 0.5 measured with Juilland&#x27;s D (Green &amp; Lambert, 2018; Lei &amp; Liu, 2016)</td></tr><tr><td>4 Specialized meaning of GSL types (Lei &amp; Liu, 2016) 5 Keyness: at least 28.7 (Dang, 2020b; Watson Todd, 2017)</td></tr><tr><td>Judgment-based Criteria:</td><td>6 Dictionary Check: headwords in science dictionary (Coxhead &amp; Demecheleer, 2018; Dang, 2020b) 7 Expect Check: expert vetting based on an adapted semantic 4 points scale (Chung and Nation, 2003; Dang, 2020b)</td></tr></table></body></html>

The Pilot DSL was refined from 3426 types in the irst phase (afer applying the frequency criterion) to 412 types in the last phase (after applying the expert-check criterion) (Table 3).

It is worth explaining that in the fourth stage of the DSL refinement proces, the word families in the GSL were converted into types which were then compared with the types included in the Pilot DSL in the previous phase. A total of 1937 types shared between the Pilot DSL Phase 3 and the GSL were checked for specialized meanings using the sixth edition of the Oxford Dictionary of Science. The types found in the science dictionary as headwords were further aded to the Pilot DSL Phase 4. A total of 1700 types were removed at this stage of the list refinement. Afer the refinement proces of the DSL was completed, 412 types were included in the final DSL (Supplementary Materials), among which 136 GSL types carry specialized meanings identified in the ist with bold font).

# 3.4.2. Research question 2 and research question 3

The final DSL, the MSVL for Science, and the three science-based SVL (Biology, Chemistry, and Physics) were profiled with Ant WordProfiler (Anthony, 2021) against the DSC and the validation corpora to compare the coverage figures of these ists in relation to these corpora. For this lexical analys to make clear comparison, alls were converted into types. The type-based version of the MSVL (859 types) was received from the creators of the list. The headword lemmas in the SVL were manuall converted into types using Bauer and Nation's (1993 taxonomy for word familie at level 2 by adding to the baseword several derivational ffixes (e.g., -s for plural on nouns or verbs, e/ing on verbs, er/-est on adjectives, th on number, and -en on rregular verbs). Also, the spelling for British words was adjusted to American English (e.g., colour, fertilise, hydrolyse, syntesise, etc.).

# 4. Results and discussion

# 4.1. Research question 1

The analysis indicates that 412 types met seven corpus and judgment-based criteria. The types in the DSL ist are presented in Supplementary Materials, sorted in descending order based on their frequencies, where energy is the most frequent type in the corpus (8,663), and types such as bulbs, concentrated, creation, and rods are the least frequent types in the corpus (77).

4.1.1. Methodological implication for applying corpus-based and judgment-based criteria

Although some corpus-based criteria (e.g., dispersion, range) and judgment-based inclusion criteria (dictionary and expert checking) are similar constructs, each criterion has its own merits. For instance, dispersion captures evenly distributed types across sub-corpora (Gries, 2020), whil range helps capture wide-ranging words in digital science resources (Dang, 2020b). If only dispersion had been applied and range removed, wors such as bidiversty, earhqukes, gravittional, preators, tropicl, tctonc, fosil, or orbit may have been included in the Pilot DSL. However, while these types had a value of Juilland's D higher than 0.5, sugesting a farly even dispersion, they were encountered les than ten times in one or more sub-corpora e.g., biodiversity was encountered five times in the PS sub-corpora and 28 times in the LS sub-corpora). On the same token, if only range had been applied and dispersion removed, types such as crst blood, atomic, proins, boundary, mineral, oeanic, and friction may have ben included inthe Pilot SL Eve though these types were encountered at least ten times in each sub-corpora, a Juilland's D value lower than 0.5 sugests relative uneven disribution (e.g, atomic had a Juilland's D value of 0.26) If keyness had followed the dispersion criteria and GSL words had been excluded altogether from the DSL, the Pilot DSL Phase 4 would have contained 689 types. Also, if dictionary-checking had ben removed, many proper nouns would have bn included in the Pilot DSL Phase 5e.g., Africa, Asia, Colorado, Clifonia, America, Brazil Canada, Japan, et.).Finall, if the expert checking had been omitted, 63 types that passed the dictionary checking would have been added to the Piot D Phase , continent, cure, device, intensity, sequence, soda, tape, ec.). Hwever, the two experts decided that these words do not have a spefic relationship with the field of science. In a sense the two judgment-based criteria acted as checks and balances. Allin ll, it isclear that the inclusion/exclusion criteriafor the DSL impacted the list's content and perhaps the list's usefulness.

Table 3 The refinement process of the DSL.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Criterion</td><td>Types Excluded</td><td>Types Included in the Pilot DSL</td></tr><tr><td>Phase 1: Frequency</td><td>40,462</td><td>3426</td></tr><tr><td>Phase 2: Range</td><td>631</td><td>2795</td></tr><tr><td>Phase 3: Dispersion</td><td>91</td><td>2704</td></tr><tr><td>Phase 4: Specialized Meaning of GSL Types</td><td>1700</td><td>1004</td></tr><tr><td>Phase 5: Keyness</td><td>146</td><td>858</td></tr><tr><td>Phase 6: Dictionary Check</td><td>383</td><td>475</td></tr><tr><td>Phase 7: Expect Check</td><td>63</td><td>412</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.2. Research question 2

According to the output obtained by profiling DSL against the DSC, the 412 types provide $8 . 6 4 \%$ lexical coverage, which is reasonable coverage considering the sie of the lis. The DSL is les than hal the siz of the MSVL for Science (859 types) and is smaller than the thre science-based SVL. However, the DSL is larger than Watson Todd's (2017) specialized list (186 types). Although there is no specific standard for the size of a vocabulary it, from a practical standpoint, lists with manageable sizes may be preferred. The usefulness of a list is not measured in terms of size but rather in terms of lexical coverage of the list across a corpus.

Validation-wise the lexical coverage of the list was calculated and compared with its coverages in general, academic, and science corpora (Dang, 2020b; Gardner & Davies, 2014; Lei & Liu, 2016). The DFC (2.7 million tokens) was used as the general corpus, the Academic Abstracts Corpus (211,698tokens) as the academic corpus, and the PDsc (1,116,137 tokens) as the parallel corpus. Due to the acknowledged limitation of the DFC, whose texts were much larger than those included in the DSC and its possbly perceived specialized nature (fiction), another general corpus was also used, namely, cOCA Sampler (1.7 million words).

The results revealed that the coverage of the DSL in the Academic Abstracts Corpus $( 5 . 2 8 \% )$ was much higher than its coverage in the DFC $( 0 . 8 5 \% )$ and COCA Sampler $( 2 . 8 8 \% )$ . This means the DSL contains types used more often in general academic texts than in fiction and general US English texts. More importantly, the DSL coverage in the PDSC $( 9 . 6 7 \% )$ was almost twice its coverage in the Academic Abstracts Corpus, which provides evidence that the DSL contains types used more often in science contexts than in general academic contexts. Notably, the final DSL contains 136 types (bolded) found in the GSL (West, 1953) (e.., dating, crop, electrict, salt work, etc.).

# 4.3. Research question 3

Compared with the MSVL for Science,the DSL provides higher coverage across the DSC when considering the lexical coverage per type. The MSVL for Science (859 types) grants $8 . 5 6 \%$ lexical coverage across the DSC, whereas the DSL (412 types) provides $8 . 6 4 \%$ lexical coverage across the DSC. When calculating the lexical coverage per type (see Table 4), the DSL provides more than twice (2.11 times) the lexical coverage offred by the MsVL for Science. In other words, a much smaller vocabulary list (DSL) provides more coverage than a larger ist (MSVL for Science). Aside from the suggested usefulnes of the DSL compared with the MSVL for Science, the DSL ensures the list is equall valuable for PS, LS, and Ess topics because the types are evenly dispersed. ince the MsVL for Science does not account for the dispersion of leical items across the corpus, it is not clear how useful this ist would be in terms of the likeliness for students to evenly encounter these words in the digital texts they read.

For comparison purposes, the headword lemmas were converted into types using Bauer & Nation's (1993) taxonomy. Also, some types spelled using British spelling were onverted to American spelling. The results indicate that the lexical coverage per type of the SVL for Biology is more than five times lower than the DSL coverage. Likewise, it appears the lexical coverage per type of SVL for Chemistry is more than four times lower than the one of the DSL across the DSC. Fially, the lexical coverage per type of SVL for Physics is more than three times lower than the lexical coverage of the DSL.

Compared with the MSVL for Science and the three SVL, the DSL affords a higher lexical coverage per type than any of these other lists. Generally, the lexical coverages of most corpus-based lists are higher across the corpora from which they were extracted than other corpora. However, there are several differences between the DSL, the MSVL for Science, and the three SVL in terms of the corpora's composition, balance, and size. For instance, the composition of the DSC is ifferent from the science corpora assembled by Green and Lambert (2018) and the science portion of the MS-Corpus (Greene & Coxhead, 2015). DSC was composed of digital re sources used in the United States with MS learners. In contrast the science portion of the MS-Corpus (Greene & Coxhead, 2015) was assembled from MS textbooks for middle schoolers in the US, while Green and Lambert's (2018) corpora were gathered from paper-based science textbooks for high schoolers in the UK and Singapore. Moreover, as the DSC contained several thousand resources categorized into three sub-corpora according to three ifferent size (S, M, and L), the science section of the MS-Corpus (Greene Coxhead, 2015) consisted of 32 science textbooks with an unknown distribution of LS, ESS, and PS texts, and the science corpora designed by Green and Lambert (2018) contained an unknown number of textbooks. Size-wise the DSC included 2,734,595 tokens, Greene and Coxhead's (2015) science corpus contained 3,725,422 tokens, and Green and Lambert's (2018) science corpora varied between 1,908,228 and 2,011,083 tokens.

Table 4 The lexical coverage per type in the DSC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>List</td><td>Number of types</td><td>Lexical coverage in DSC</td><td> Lexical coverage per type</td></tr><tr><td>DSL</td><td>412</td><td>8.64%</td><td>0.0209</td></tr><tr><td>MSVL for Science</td><td>859</td><td>8.56%</td><td>0.0099</td></tr><tr><td> SVL for Biologye</td><td>1625</td><td>6.67%</td><td>0.0041</td></tr><tr><td>SVL for Chemistry</td><td>938</td><td>4.12%</td><td>0.0044</td></tr><tr><td> SVL for Physics</td><td>1018</td><td>6.59%</td><td>0.0065</td></tr></table></body></html>

It i important to mention that a fair comparison among corpus-based lists cannot be made since the corpora used to assemble the lists used different methodologies, units of measurement, size, compositions, etc. However, when looking at the M for Science and the DSL, two lists deined for Mstudents in the Unt States, it can be noticed that the two liss share 174 types ., acid, molecul. cell, ecosystem, hydrogen, etc.) which is $4 2 . 2 3 \%$ of the DSL and $2 0 . 2 6 \%$ of the MSVL for Science. Significantly, more than half the types in the is (238 types) are unique to the DSL (e.g., ammonia, cancer, ecological, greenouse, freing, sotopes, methane, nonrenewable, petroleum, phytoplankton, technologies, trophic, UV, etc.). The composition of the DSL may suggest a change in the language contained in digital science resources compared to the language of science paper-based textbooks for MS students. For example, some of the new types in the DSL suggest that the nature of the science topics may have changed with a greater emphasis on Earth and Space Science related topics such as Weather and Climate (e.g., rezing, greehouse, methane, nonrenewable, endangered, extinctio, UV, warming, et.) and Human mpact on the Environment (lasics, poluat, rcyling, et.) Such changes may suggest that examining the vocabulary in science resources (whether digital or paper-based) and extracting vocabulary lsts may need to be done regularl to keep up with the shifts in the language contained in science texts for middle schoolers.

# 4.4. Pedagogical suggestions

Due to the substantial lexical coverage of the DSL across the DSC, teaching and learning the 412 types in the DSL would most likly benefit MS learners, especially ELs, because teaching and learning a relatively small number of words would help students comprehend almost $9 \%$ of the digital science texts they may be reading. This ist may prove specifically useful to ELs and remedial learners still having trouble decoding and unaware that general words such as dating, work, or crop have specialized meanings in the field of science. Since MS English Native Speakers (ENss (aged 12-14 years old) could have acquired a fair amount of DSL words, including multiplemeaning words due to the age of acquisition (AoA) at which most words in the DSL are acquired by (Brysbaert & Biemiller, 2017), it may be inferred that this word list could be less beneficial for ENss than for their English learning peers.

One way to use the DSL in the classooms i by first comparing the content of a specific digital science resource with the DSL to find out how many DSL types exist in the resource. This comparison can be conducted using Text Lex Compare (Cobb, 2021) Version 5. First, to conduct such a comparison, the content of the science resource and the DSL types can be pasted into the text boxes or uploaded as text files on the platform. The output yields a list titled Shared At Least Once. This list contains tokens shared between the two texts. The Shared At Least Once list representing the DSL types found in the digital science resource can be extracted and saved. Secondly, words from the Shared At Least Once ist (DSL) can be pasted into the text box on Word Sift (n.d.). The user can click on any DSL type and visualize it with the Wordet Visualztion feure. Likewise, the user can click on mage/vids to accesspicture/vides related to the word/concept. August et al. (2009) suggest that teaching specialized vocabulary in context using visual images s an effective approach for L2 vocabulary instruction. Moreover, a series of studies conducted in science education support teaching specialized vocabulary in context for L2 learners (Anthony et al., 2010; Ardasheva, 2017; Ardasheva & Treter, 2017). Another way to use the DSL in the classooms i to hyperlink DSL types to online dictionaries (e.g., Dictionary.com, Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary and Thesaurus, etc.) or add them to online glossaries that could be created using a tool such as Virtual Writing Tutor.

# 4.5. Limitations

An acknowledged limitation of the DSL relates to the use of the Digital Fiction Corpus (DFC) as the benchmark corpus for keyword analysis. A possible concern might be that fiction discourse is specialized in nature rather than general. The use of the DFC impacts the content of the DSL, which in turn may weaken the list. A second limitation is the overrepresentation of ES and LS resources included in PDSC assembled from resources excluded from the DSC during the balancing phase of the data collection and the lack of PS resources from the already mentioned parallel corpus. A final limitation is that nonrandomization was chosen for the sampling of the digital platforms. This decision was made to depict a real-life situation because teachers do not randomly choose the platorms they use in the classroom. Nonetheless if random selection might have been considered instead, the composition of the corpus might have been entirely different because the content on some platforms may differ in terms of quality and quantity.

# 4.6. Conclusion

This study contributes to the iterature because it uses a unique methodological approach to produce a type-based science list, namely the DSL, from a digital science corpus gathered from 3456 resources and more than 2,7 million tokens. The current landscape of MS education made this project relevant, as no other study has researched digital science resources for MS leaners to assemble a specialized list using corpus and judgment-based criteria. Likewise, this study adds to the existing literature through the pedagogical merits of this list which could be used as an instructional resource in science classrooms with MS students, allowing teachers and MS students to identify, organize and work on frequently occurring specialied vocabulary encountered across dgital science reources. Lastly, DsL fill the gap in research on digital science resources widely used in middle school cassrooms across the United tates.

# Author statement

The author warrants that the article is the original work, hasn't received prior publication, and isn't under consideration for publication elsewhere. However, the DSC was used in a previously published article. Two analyses were completed: (1) the vocabulary load of the DSC and (2) the frequency and distribution of the lexical items in the corpus.

# Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

# Acknowledgements

My gratitude to Dr. Keith Folse and Dr. T. N.Y. Dang for guiding me along this project. My thanks to Yusuf Canbolat for his useful feedback.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101187.

# References

Anthny,  09 .t, , J: tr ed /y.re.h   
Anthny,  2021).rfie ( 1.1. , J:  t. mtr fr ie fr ://.y.t software.html.   
Any,  .1   h Science Education, 40(1), 45-64. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11165-009-9156-7   
Ardshea,. 2017   or e cme   dir ex .  sci gih language learners (pp. 219-241). Cham: Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-53594-4_10.   
Ardsha      021   of mic  a  i eg comprehension among linguistically diverse students. TEs0L Quarterly, 55(3), 931-965. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.3039   
Ardsha e . 017 ic    h c ih r.  f n Education and Bilingualism, 20(3), 252-271. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2015.1042356   
Agst  - 09 grade English language leners. Journal of Rearch on Edcational Effctivenes, 2(4), 345-376. htps://doi.org/10.1080/19345740903217623   
Bauer, L, & Nation, P. (193). Word families. Intenational Joundl of Lexicography, 6(4), 253-279. https://doi.org/10.1093/ijl/6.4.253   
Br 015 t  the  i si 1) /. 10.1093/applin/amt018   
Bryaert,   lr,  2017eta g-stion nm for 4 tsnd ish wd meng. orM, 49, 1520-1523 https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-016-0811-4   
eeti,  t,     5.t tf    ,2) 153-185. https://doi.org/10.1177/1086296X15615363   
Chung, T. M., & Nation, P. (2003). Technical vocabulary in specialised texts. Reading in a Foreign Language, 15(2), 103-116.   
Chung, T. M., & Nation, P. (2004). Identifying technical vocabulary. System, 21, 251-263. htps://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2003.11.008   
Cobb, T. (2021). Text Lex compare (Version 5). Computer Software. Retrieved from https://ww.lextutor.ca/cgi-bin/tl compare.   
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TEs0L Quarterly, 34(2), 213-238. https://doi.org/10.2307/3587951   
oxhead, (2018).by d Elish fr pecifi us rch: Qntie d quitiv ective. ondn an wYork Rtdge.   
Coed  hr,  018).tig th l y f Pb sh for ii e, 51, 847. /.g/.016/. esp.2018.03.006   
Ced, 07  t  dp 2, 5-8. //917/2.05   
Dng 17   a Victoria University of Wellington.   
Dang, T.. 2020).Cs-a wd is i ond  y r, , an g.    .), The Re ho vocabulary studies (pp. 288-303). New York, NY: Routledge.   
ang, . 0h l o n iiu f t e a  to h- grams Insights from medical corpora. TEs0L Quarterly, 54(2), 436-459. https:/doi.org/10.1002/tesq.552   
Fil      2      46) 1257-1273. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000735   
Folse, K. (2020). Acdic word lis (E-sigl): What ery tcher nesto knw (Kinde Eion). The Universty Michgan Pres Kinde version]   
Gardner, D., & Davies, M. (2014). A new academic vocabulary list. Aplied Linusics, 35, 305-327. https:/o.org/10.1093/appin/amt015   
G, h   , Br   0     d   r   st. American Educational Research Journal, 57(4), 1837-1867. https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831219890300   
Gra,    201.  of   i  019001-17   . National Center for Education Statistics. Retrieved from https://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2021017.   
Gree 15     or   .   
e e   r    ie for eight secondary subjects. Jounal of English for Academic Purposes, 35, 105-115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j jeap.2018.07.004   
Gries, S. (2020). Analyzing dispersion. In M. Paquet, & S. Gries (Eds.), A practical handbook of corpus linguisics. Switzerland: Springer.   
Goe 6      6605. doi.org/10.1111/ssm.12183   
Juilland, A. G., & Chang-Rodriguez, E. (1964). Frequency dictionary of Spanish words. London: Mouton.   
Laer, . 19  i ti   e i 55271. 10.1093/applin/19.2.255   
Lei, L   016  l a d it s  h  m  f h for   , 42-53 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.01.008   
Liu, D. Lei, L (2020). eca voulary. In . Wb (Ed.), The Rue hook of uly ste . 111-123). N York, : Rtee.   
Lu, C. 2018) f hia University of Wellington.   
agy, W. Hrt 11) h f d eti, n, o .fc .) o  g research (Vol. 4, pp. 388-404). New York, NY: Longman.   
atin  .. 01)  a  ti     o. nMs , er .) m corpus studies and ELT (pp. 31-46). John Benjamins Publishing.   
atin, P, o, J. (2016). s etion ig  .ion (., k si wd iss  ge l n etip. 95-105) Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
NGSS L t. 03).  in c d r tes y st. hno  ti es P.d frm /ww. nextgenscience.og/site/default/files/Appendix%20F%20%20Science%20and%20Engineering%20Practices%20in%20the%20NGss%20-%20FINAL% 20060513.pdf.   
3/ nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/Appendix%20D%20Diversity%20and%20Equity%206-14-13.pdf.   
Pujadas, G., &Mz, . 2020). Exng et FL ers  ving comprehsion thrgh cations and sutite d in nd ngage Acquisition, 42(3), 551-575. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0272263120000042   
Schmit, N., & Schmit, D. (2014). A reasesment ofrequency and vocabulary ize in L2 vocabulary teachng. Lnuage ching, 47(), 484-503.   
Scott, M. (2020). WordSmith Tools (Version 8). Stroud: Lexical Analysi Software. Retrieved from https://www.lxially.net/wordsmith.   
Staehr, L . (208. auy sie and h kils f listng, reg and witin g ng Joal, 36, 139-152. hp/oi.rg/10.1080/ 09571730802389975   
Waton d 017).  quegn d ist h  s  tc fs is for i , 45, 31-39. /i.10.1016/. esp.2016.08.003   
Webb, S., & Nation, I. S. P. (2017). How vocabulary is learned. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
West, M. (1953). A general service list of English words. Longman: Longman, Green. Yilin Education.   
Word Sift. (n.d.) Word Sift. Retrieved from https://wordsift.org/.