# Discourses of professional identities and linguistic capital formation of international STEM faculty

Bal Krishna Sharma a, \* , Ibtesam Hussein b

a 875 Perimeter Drive, Department of English, University of Idaho, USA b 875 Perimeter Drive, American Language and Culture Program, University of Idaho, USA

# a r t i c l e i n f o

# a b s t r a c t

Article history:   
Received 7 September 2020   
Received in revised form 16 February 2021   
Accepted 10 March 2021   
Available online 13 March 2021

Keywords:   
Competence   
Identity   
Linguistic capital   
Ownership

This article investigates the discourses of professional identities and linguistic capital formation communicated by international scholars in the STEM disciplines in the US university context. In so doing, the study examines interviews of 17 such individuals and identifies two key discursive processes: the formation of a marketable self and the enactment of the legitimacy of World Englishes. The first discursive process is used by the professionals to position themselves as novice scholars needing to build necessary linguistic capital for employment and communication in the instructional setting. The second version of their discursive positioning, which was formed later in their career, demonstrates a competent self that legitimizes their existing linguistic capital and the ownership of non-Inner Circle Englishes for academic communication. As the participants position their identities vis-a-vis their profession, they claim transformation of the self in de  fining their linguistic capital and competence across time and space. The findings overall show that the (re-)formation and conversion of international STEM scholars’ linguistic capital are variously shaped by relations of power influenced by the linguistic market and their respective disciplinary communities.

$^ ©$ 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Internationalization of higher education is a focus of universities in many Inner Circle1 English speaking countries today. As a result, the number of international students and skilled professionals from outside these countries has become a significant part of the academe (Gimenez & Morgan, 2017). The inevitability and demand for economic development in the world has expanded the need for STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) majors in these countries (National Science Board, 2020). Data from the Institute of International Education shows that the number of international students in US colleges and universities alone surpassed one million during the 2018e2019 academic year, and 124,705 of them are doctoral students. This trend largely represents the population moving from developing countries where non-Inner Circle English is a norm. All these figures suggest that higher education institutions in the English speaking world are going to witness an increasing number of international faculty who speak English as a second language. This growth is particularly striking in the STEM disciplines. This demographic diversity has created conditions for the use of varied languages and language varieties in academic settings and beyond.

Scholarship in World Englishes and English as a lingua franca (ELF) has provided important insights into understanding the tensions inherent in the policies and practices related to the language of academic communication. Even when speakers share a common language, it is possible that they have different expectations of what kinds of communicative norms and repertories are appropriate, how to establish social relationships, or how to express and interpret the body language (Mauranen, 2012). The focus is on the use of language rather on the user. This means the key goal of communication in the academic context is to treat language as a resource for meaning making and not just to mark the ethnonational identity of the speaker (Mahboob, 2010a, 2010b). Taking into account these new realities, Jenkins (2013) provides three broad scenarios of ELF in academic settings. The first scenario is guided by the conforming approaches which require international students and professionals to follow “native” English for academic communication. The second case involves the challenging approaches that question the taken-for-granted native speaker norms for academic communication. And, finally the third one involves the paradigm shifting approach which considers ELF as the appropriate kind of English for academic communication. Despite the fact that homogenizing forces favoring standard language ideologies for academic communication continue to be dominant, ELF speakers exercise agency to appropriate dominant communicative norms to meet their professional and interpersonal goals.

In the fields of applied linguistics and Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL), there is an increasing interest in understanding and documenting how multilingual scholars accomplish the work of teaching and research when using English as a second or additional language (Bjorkman, 2011 € ). Studies have found that there is self and other stereotyping that has made many non-native English speaking scholars see themselves as lacking self-confidence and language skills that native English-speaking scholars have; this has led many international scholars to perceive that they may not be as qualified as native English-speaking counterparts (Villareal, 2012/13). For instance, some studies have revealed that the assessment of the accents of non-native instructors and TAs is not usually in favor of non-native English teachers (Hendriks, van Meurs, & Reimer, 2018). This feeling has created a perceived barrier of academic growth for many multilingual scholars despite the fact that they have skills and qualifications that may exceed those of native English-speaking faculty. Thus, one key issue that is of interest to applied linguists is to understand the role language competence plays in the professional development of international scholars who grew up speaking a different variety of English in their “home” countries and who were socialized into academic contexts where English is used as a second language. Except for some notable work (e. g. Canagarajah, 2018a; 2018b), there is very little documented research that examines the place of English for STEM professionals in academia.

The present study investigates the role of English in the professional development trajectories of international scholars in STEM who were teaching and conducting research at a university located in the north-west US. It examines the discourses about the formation and conversion of their linguistic capital and the assumed legitimacy of such capital in the instructional context. We are using the concept of discourses in a Foucauldian sense to refer to the conventional ways of talking and thinking with the belief that “the use of language presents different views of the world and different understandings” (Paltridge, 2012, p. 2). The study shows that in the process of capital conversion, the professionals do not only transform themselves to fit the workplace context, but also enact agency to show the ownership of World Englishes and claim competence in the context of academic communication. To understand the participants’ professional development trajectories, we used semi-structured interviews because they offer us a window to understand how individuals position themselves, others, and the world around them in interactions (De Fina, 2013). We deliberately chose to study university faculty members (as opposed to teaching assistants) because they were able to offer us details from across various times and spaces depicting their professional life from their being graduate teaching assistants to senior faculty. The findings can be used as resources for the training and socialization of new STEM scholars who move from the expanding and outer circle Englishspeaking countries to the Inner Circle countries for study and work.

# 2. Theoretical framework: Linguistic capital and performative competence

We draw on the notions of linguistic capital (Bourdieu, 1991) and performative competence (Canagarajah, 2013) to take into account the discourses of professional development trajectories of international STEM scholars. Linguistic capital encompasses the language-related skills, knowledge and dispositions that are valued in the economic market (Bourdieu, 1991). This form of capital largely shapes an individual’s position and identity, for example employability and entitlement of certain services, in society. As Park (2011) argues, linguistic capital is not value-free; it “is mediated through social power relations” (p. 231), legitimized by influential institutions such as education or the economic market. The value of a particular form of linguistic capital, however, is not uniform across times and spaces. The different language-related resources and skills acquired by an individual may not be considered legitimate to the same degree when the individual moves from one social context to another (Blommaert, 2010). In the case of English, skills and language competences acquired in the outer circle and the expanding circle countries tend to be valued less when the individuals move to the Inner Circle countries (Canagarajah, 2017; Kachru, 1992). Professionals are required to continually develop a portfolio of competencies and skills that can address diverse and competitive market conditions (Piller & Cho, 2013; Rabbi & Canagarajah, 2017). There is the need for the individual to convert the skills and knowledge into the “appropriate” linguistic capital in the new situations so that they are recognized and valued for their career enhancement (Park & Wee, 2013). Capital conversion is largely shaped by the local linguistic market, particularly in contexts when institutions and language users operate under the capitalist economy (Bourdieu, 1986). Among the various types of capitals, Bourdieu argues that economic capital, which is concomitant to possessing material gains, is key to determining the market value of linguistic capital.

Not everything that is considered linguistic capital is deployed in communication in professional settings. Individuals rather have skilled agency to make choices of resources and negotiate norms and strategies for effective communication. We draw on the notion of performative competence proposed by Canagarajah (2013) to take into account this aspect of agency. For him, performative competence is a “grammar of practices” that makes use of plural language norms and mobile semiotic resources. As this competence focuses on how communication takes place rather than what is involved in communication, it is “developed in and through practice, shaping both cognition and form in terms of one’s ongoing experiences” (p. 174). Adaptability is one main feature of this competence which allows multilinguals to respond to “highly diverse, unexpected, and changing contexts and codes by strategically combining ecological resources” (p. 174) as they move across various communities and locations. Performatively competent individuals are strategically capable of positioning themselves and their actions via networks of semiotic resources, environmental factors, and human subjects in achieving communicative needs and goals. Overall, we believe that the concepts of linguistic capital and performative competence complement each other by allowing us to see how professional capabilities and practices are construed in discourse.

# 3. Non-native English speaking scholars in Inner Circle academe

Because of the centrality of language competence in the profession, the issue of non-native speaker identity has gained considerable attention in applied linguistics, including book-length contributions (Braine, 2013; Mahboob, 2010a, 2010b), journal articles (e.g. Hendriks et al., 2018; Tajeddin & Adeh, 2016) and special interest groups and caucuses at professional conferences. These discussions represent attempts to fight against the hegemony of native-speakerism (Holliday, 2006), legitimizing non-native speaker identities in the profession, including the legitimacy of World Englishes resources and unique pedagogies the speakers bring to the classroom. It has been argued that with their transnational dispositions and translingual resources, NNES have unique qualities that make them well-qualified to teach in contexts where English is the dominant language. Although helpful, as Aneja (2016) reminds us, it is to be noted that these two identity categories are not objectively distinct; they instead are socially and discursively constructed.

The topic of non-native speakerness has received some attention in STEM-focused applied linguistics scholarship. Earlier research in this area in the Inner Circle contexts of English use investigated the issue from a deficiency point of viewd making “problems” or communication “gaps” as central concerns (e.g. Bailey, 1984; Villareal, 2012/13). Although most research studies focused on international teaching assistants (ITAs), Gravois (2005) reminds us that this concern does not exclude more senior international faculty in STEM fields. From a study on a mathematics professor from India at a US university, Villareal (2012/13) notes that undergraduate students were socialized into accent bias since they internalized the association between the professor’s accent and poor teaching quality, and this form of accent bias was validated as socially acceptable by peers who held similar attitudes. More recent studies, however, show the value of capitals and resources international scholars utilize for academic communication (e.g. Chang & Kanno, 2010). Canagarajah’s studies (2018a; 2018b) further confirmed these arguments and findings. He argues that although the international STEM scholars from China seemed to have limited possession of formal grammatical competence, they were competent enough in professional communication since they deployed diverse semiotic resources that are embedded within “social networks and material affordances” (2018a, p.48).

Overall, the findings from studies on NNES scholars in STEM disciplines challenge the often-negative portrayal of such populations in the English-speaking Inner Circle academe and the presumed centrality of English (Chang & Kanno, 2010). Findings suggest that the ideology of native speakerness is less significant in STEM academic communication than in other disciplinary contexts. Therefore, it is our contention that a focus on the discourses about linguistic capital and performative competence construed by STEM scholars can illuminate how these scholars navigate their professional development trajectories, enact agency, and claim the ownership of linguistic resources in academic communication in instructional settings.

# 4. Data, participants and analytical framework

The data analyzed in this article come from semi-structured interviews conducted with 17 STEM faculty members ( $1 5 =$ males; $2 =$ females) who worked at a public university located in the north-west region of the US. The questions asked the participants to reflect on the role of language in their academic work. We used the following criteria to recruit the participants using our personal networks, searching faculty webpages, and snowball referrals: (i) they had their first university degree in their home countries, (ii) they obtained their ultimate degree (Ph.D.) from an Inner Circle English speaking country (e.g., the US or Canada), and (iii) they were full time STEM faculty members who were teaching undergraduate/ graduate classes at the university (that is, they were not Teaching Assistants). These criteria allowed us to go into the depth and details of their academic and professional development trajectories across various times and spaces. The participants came from various countries in Asia: India (6), China (5), Bangladesh (2), Iran (1), Japan (1), South Korea (1) end Nepal (1). Fourteen of them had obtained their Ph. D. from the US and the remaining three from Canada. They were from a variety of STEM disciplines: physics, chemistry, agricultural engineering, electrical engineering, material engineering, biological engineering, mathematics, and computer science. The participants were contacted via email. The interviews were conducted in their respective office spaces, where they felt comfortable talking to us. All the participants self-identified as multilingual speakers who learned English as an additional language after their childhood in their respective countries, mainly through formal training in schools and universities. The interviews were loosely structured so that the participants could narrate their experiences in a flexible manner (see Appendix A for the interview questions). When we explained the goal of our research to the participants, we made it clear that the purpose was to understand their experiences and professional development trajectories. We were continuously aware that we did not want to represent the participants as deficient speakers of English. We were equally interested in their agency in using diverse linguacultural norms for academic communication. Each interview took between $^ { 1 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ and $3 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ to $^ { 2 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ and 14 of the interviewees were interviewed twice. For analytical purposes, all the interview responses were first transcribed verbatim.

Using Kachru’s (1992) World Englishes framework, we view the participants coming from either the Outer Circle or the Expanding Circle countries where English functions in different roles in various domains. Although either British or American English is historically regarded as a curricular norm in academic settings within these countries, there are local varieties such as “Indian English”, “Chinese English” or “Bangladeshi English” that characterize the English use of the speakers from these regions. The participants acknowledged that they continued to carry several features of their respective Englishes in communicating in academic contexts in the US. Overall, the scholars from the Outer Circle contexts such as India and Bangladesh had more experience with and exposure to English, compared to the scholars from the Expanding Circle countries such as South Korea and Japan. The interviews helped us understand how their linguistic capital and competences were shaped by various forms of Englishes from diverse geo-political contexts.

We make use of discursive positioning as the analytical framework (Bamberg, 1997; De Fina, 2013). We consider interviews as a key instance of social interactions in which identities are constructed and competences are talked about in a highly reflexive manner (Patio-Santos, 2016). By paying attention to the words and discourses that the participants use, we focus on how the participants position themselves in relation to broader socio-political concerns as they talk about their professional lives. These concerns were not always directly indexed by linguistic devices used in the participants’ interactional positioning. Therefore, following suggestion from De Fina (2013), we relied on the contextual knowledge e for example, our knowledge of the interactional context as well as the background against which the narratives were told– to interpret ideological presuppositions and attitudes displayed by the participants. Bamberg (1997) identifies this as a Level 3 positioning. The significance of this level lies in its strength to investigate both the micro and macro levels of discourses. This level is necessary to deal with how participants negotiate who they are, e.g. their membership, or lack thereof, into social, cultural and linguistic identities (De Fina, 2013). As we conducted the interviews, we usually started the conversation by talking about our own professional development trajectories in the US and highlighted our challenges and accomplishments as multilingual scholars. As the interviews proceeded, they took the shape of two-party conversations in which we presented ourselves as “one of you” and injected our responses with relevant small stories, alignments, and disaffiliations. The fact that both of us were English speakers from non-Inner Circle contexts (the first author is from Nepal and the second author is from Libya) likely created a conducive environment for the participants to follow a particular trajectory in their interactive positionings. Bamberg (2011: 7) introduces the idea of two “directions of fit” to discuss individual agency in interactive positioning: passive agency is a world-to-subject direction fit whereby individuals make efforts to adjust to the structure of the society, and active agency implies a subject-to-world direction fit, whereby individuals change the social world to fit their individual goals. It is these two directions of fit that help us examine the aspects of discourses of linguistic capital and competence. The participants widely shared these two discursive positions to which we turn next.

# 5. Formation of a marketable self and capital conversion

The interview responses positioned the participants in tandem with their disciplinary discourses, their ideologies toward English language varieties, and the legitimacy of the varieties in academic communication. As the interviewees talked about their initial years in the US and their professional development trajectories, they displayed a world-to-subject direction fit (Bamberg, 2011) strategy in order to create a marketable self. Such discourses positioned them as individuals who worked hard on their linguistic capital conversion by attempting to acquire “native-like” English repertoires, especially for oral communication. They highlight aspects of accent and pronunciation for this purpose.

While the participants asserted their strong performative competence in accomplishing communication in English as a lingua franca, they positioned themselves as disadvantaged in the US context due to the language dispositions and resources acquired in their countries of origin. They highlighted the importance of building more refined dispositions and a need for a conversion of their linguistic capital for their employability and professional advancement. The excerpt below shows discourses of capital conversion from linguistic to economic.

Excerpt 1: minimize accent

1. From PhD to a professor (.) so I had a lot of opportunities   
2. learn the tools or techniques required to handle the   
3. situations (.) such as so in (0.2) when we speak English we speak really fast.   
4. Iranian way you know. so here when I came as a PhD student I was doing the   
5. same thing. It was very difficult when I was a teaching assistant it was   
6. very difficult for students to understand me and it was same way understand for   
7. me to them and then one of professors in my department told me tools (.)   
8. watch YouTube videos so that I can learn English and perform my work better.   
9. (.) suggested me to slow down while I’m speaking and also ask   
10. students to slow down when they speak. In that way you can minimize your   
11. Iranian accent and convey your things in an effective way and you can also   
12. understand what they are saying. This is very important when you   
13. want to find a job to work in the US. (Ahmed, from Iran, Physics)

Ahmed highlights his trajectories of capital conversion from an Expanding Circle English variety to a form of English that functions in the US academic work contexts. He positions his initial days in the US as challenging from a language and communication perspective by using phrases such as ‘handle the situations’ (lines 2, 3), and by displaying an affective stance ‘difficult’ twice in lines 5 and 6. His earlier attempts of professional development focused more on building accommodative resources and strategies through his efforts to minimize the features of Iranian English and adopting “native” ways of speaking in the classroom. As communicative resources such as accent move from Iran to the US (line 11), their functional value becomes weaker. Ahmed characterizes some features of Iranian English as problematic in his physics class. He then highlights the need for improving English speech by watching YouTube videos (line 8). This discursive positioning demands a refined linguistic capital that fulfils academic market needs, that is employability (lines 12, 13).

Another participant Rita mentioned that she socialized herself into the dominant discourses and ways of speaking in American classrooms when she was a graduate Teaching Assistant.

Excerpt 2: colonial influence.

1. After coming here working as a grad teaching assistant, slowly started   
2. picking up things and understanding and ultimately it is when you make   
3. the switching (.) yes you have to make a conscious effort to change too.   
4. From Indian English to American English. This type of phrases or   
5. this type of usage and I think it comes easy for us   
6. who have more of English (0.2) you know through the colonial influence   
7. or British influence or whatever. (Rita, from India, Computer Science)

Rita positions herself as a hardworking individual who made the ‘switching’ from Indian English to American English through a ‘conscious effort’ by incorporating certain types of phrases or language usage in her speech (lines 3, 4). Demonstrating her awareness, Rita invokes the colonial history of English in India that led to the development of different norms in English use. Her response displays a positive evaluation of her learning endeavor (‘easy’, line 5), positioning herself as a privileged speaker of English: ‘have more of English you know through the colonial influence’ (lines 6, 7). Rita’s positioning discourses show how postcolonial subjectivities and World Englishes varieties work in alignment with the requirements of the market in which linguistic resources can be deployed to serve both communicative and economic interests.

Another participant noted an interesting world-to-subject direction fit strategy when his legitimacy as a professor was questioned because his ‘accent’ was a ‘problem’ in student evaluations (line 1).

Excerpt 3: toastmaster

1. Sanki: I had a problem with accent and student reflected that in their review.   
2. But I wanted good reviews for my tenure and promotion.   
3. Interviewer: Oh yeah   
4. Sanki: So I tried my best now I went to Toastmasters club and was a member   
5. of a toast man do you know what toast master is?   
6. Interviewer: No   
7. Sanki: Okay toast master is an international club we have about two   
8. Toastmasters club here and basically this club is (.) you go and speak for   
9. public speaking everybody will come there who wants to improve their   
10. public speaking (0.2) it’s not only for non-native speakers it’s everybody.   
11. Public speaking is one of the biggest fear for everybody they come   
12. in there-there would be the club meets once a week. (Sanki, from South Korea, Biology)

Sanki’s response positions himself against the expectations of the institution, work and the market. As the interview shows, he made conscious efforts to fit the world by changing his Korean ‘accent’ by regularly taking part in a public speaking club in the university town. The participation allowed him not only to practice his linguistic skills, but also to groom a set of repertoires needed for performative competence: speaking style, confidence and so on by mingling himself with diverse speakers of English. Sanki positions himself as somebody who constantly worked to be a good English speaker, and this discursive position is co-constructed with the interviewer when they exchange a question and a subsequent response in lines 5 and 6. Like the participants in the previous examples, Sanki also shows his alignment with the types of communicative resources required at the workplace and valued in the job market, e.g. for tenure and promotion (line 2). Park (2011) notes that speakers’ accumulation of linguistic capital characterizes the logic of the capitalist market where the worker is “expected to carry the burden of self-development, including the continuous improvement of linguistic skills” (p. 445). Thus, the workrelated competence is a recognized part of the knowledge-based economy, which heavily relies on a “discourse-based economy” (Fairclough, 2013). Language is the key element of the discourse-based economy.

Overall, the analysis shows that the participants had built English linguistic capital in their home countries before coming to the US, but the recognition of only certain forms of language resources as legitimate positions these professionals in a disadvantaged situation. This condition privileges some individuals while limiting access to opportunities for others on the basis of whether they have the “right” type of linguistic capital. The interactive positioning construes linguistic capital as a form of “placed resources” (Blommaert, 2010)d the resources that are functional in one particular place and can become weaker in their value as they are moved to other places. The resources that were valued in their previous markets and institutions can partly lose their legitimacy in terms of their prestige and economic value in the new context. However, these resources, rather than being static, show greater flexibility as the speakers build on the existing set of communicative repertoires rather than creating completely new ones. Although the participants’ discourses acknowledge the importance of enhancing their linguistic skills and dispositions for intelligibility purposes, they validate such requirements primarily determined by their workplace and the market. Developing the right type of linguistic-pedagogical discourses is likely to lead to a more positive evaluation of them by students, which feeds back to their capital accumulation and career enrichment. Particularly notable instances of capital conversion are the participants’ conscious efforts to change their English-speaking patterns, which they identified as “accent”, to accomplish their work. Park and Wee (2013) note that the indexical associations between linguistic forms and social meanings given to these forms are the expressions of realities in the linguistic market, and they form the basis for various forms of hierarchies and discriminations. The (re-) formation and conversion of capital is not only characterized by the differences in cultures or societies but are shaped by relations of power. International scholars at US universities work continuously to refine their linguistic capital by developing a set of repertoires so that they can adapt to work conditions largely shaped by the economic interest of the market.

# 6. The ownership of English and the relevance of non-native English speaker identity

Discursive positionings showed changes as the participants discussed their linguistic capital in relation to their presentday work life, communication in the classroom, and participation in disciplinary communities. These discourses illustrate the agency of the individuals in the manner of subject-to-world direction of fit (Bamberg, 2011). This direction positions the participants’ linguistic capital as dynamic; it shows a shift in identities from the relatively disadvantaged speakers of Word Englishes to the agentive and competent subjects at present. This was construed in the discourses of the ownership of English and the deployment of performative competence at work. This form of agentive discourses by the same group of participants shows tensions and contradictions with the ideological message of the discourses discussed in the previous section. De Fina (2009) points out that the lack of coherence and a display of contradictions is a characteristic feature of discursive positioning as speakers retain their agency to portray multiple realities within and across their responses.

There is a long tradition of research in applied linguistics that shows that speakers of global Englishes appropriate English and enact their ownership of it to serve their local needs and goals, which can decenter native speaker norms (Kachru, 1992; Mauranen, 2012). Studies also show that with the global mobility of transnational professionals, peripheral norms create communicative space in the classroom in Inner Circle contexts (e.g. Smith, Warrican, Kumi-Yeboah, & Richards, 2018).

The interviews show that the participants particularly from the Outer Circle contexts shared a strong sense of the ownership of the English they grew up speaking. They questioned the dichotomy of native speaker vs. non-native speaker identities and its relevance for their professional communication. According to Hyland (2015), academic contexts “are the places we craft our identities, cement relationships and achieve recognition, where we find the tools and resources to live out our professional lives.” (p.33). For example, Mahesh highlights the significant number of Indian faculty members in his department, and positions “native” English-speaking students as needing to adapt to global Englishes norms.

Excerpt 4: we are the majority

1. Our department is the largest population of Indian faculty.   
2. So especially with chemical and materials we have ...   
3. a combined department chemical and materials engineering.   
4. and we offer BS in chemical engineering and BS in material engineering.   
5. In chemical, there are two faculty from India (0.2) and in materials we have   
6. three faculty from India. So totally five in our department.   
7. So basically we are the majority. And probably we are   
8. the only department where it has the um (.) hehehe so when   
9. student come to senior level they are used to our accents. (Mahesh, from India, Chemical Engineering)

Mahesh’s response here reverses the direction of the perceived need of the STEM faculty for linguistic accommodation and capital conversion analyzed in the previous section. The number of international faculty in his department not only gives him a sense of confidence in his professional task accomplishment (see ‘we are the majority’ in line 7), but also reverses the power dynamics. This discursive positioning claims that the linguistic capital and competence that speakers of traditionally marginalized Englishes bring to the US classroom can receive power and legitimacy. The development of competence required to perform academic work becomes a negotiated enterprise (Mauranen, 2012) instead of a unidirectional endeavor within which speakers of the global lingua franca are required to adapt to elite speaker norms. The recognition of these linguistic norms suggests the speakers’ acceptance and ownership of their own varieties of English, which are different from elite varieties. Also, as speakers (hence students) of elite varieties work with international multilingual scientists and engineers in the classroom, the students are likely to develop new communicative repertoires and strategies as a result of their common practices. In the example above, the institutional identity of Mahesh as a professor positions him as an epistemic authority and offers him the power for pedagogical discourse. This claim makes his professional identity more salient than his English speaker identity. This assertion questions the need for the STEM scholars to solely depend on “native” English norms for instructional purposes in the classroom.

Hiroko, a faculty member in chemical and materials engineering likewise interprets accent and intelligibility as more ideological than practical.

Excerpt 5: not seen enough diversity

1. The accent is important if the person you are talking to cannot   
2. understand anything. You know (.) it’s not like that all the time. If you have   
3. your schooling (.) you have got your degree. It’s not like people can’t   
4. understand but whether they are making efforts to understand you. Another thing   
5. is that there could be some other reasons. Like I’m saying, they have not seen   
6. enough diversity in their life. So it takes some times to adjust for them.   
7. For us also when we came here you know we see people are different around   
8. and you have to (.) it will take some time to adjust. So and then of course   
9. other cultural issues. How open they are. (Hiroko, from Japan, Bio-chemistry)

Hiroko’s response here emphasizes the primacy of academic credentials over accent and language for his profession. The response points to the possibility of transnational and transcultural dispositions (Gu & Canagarajah, 2018; Menard-Warwick, 2008) that international faculty develop in home countries as well as in their new work contexts. Such a negotiated form of disposition is constitutive of various forms of beliefs, credentials, knowledge, values and skills and becomes a site of power struggle among individuals in the socialization of language and disciplinary discourses. Hiroko points out the importance of negotiation in intercultural contact in the classroom and indicates that the degree of adjustment required for communication places more responsibility on native speakers of English, the students in this context (lines 8e9). Native English-speaking students are positioned as individuals who have not experienced enough linguistic and cultural diversity in their life. Wordings such as ‘whether they are making efforts’ (line 4), ‘have not seen enough diversity’ (lines 5 and 6), and ‘how open they are’ (line 9) all lead us to interpret Hiroko’s response in terms of participants’ resistance to the hegemonic discourses that privilege “native” English speakers and their linguistic capital.

It is critical to note the importance of the negotiation of norms-in-practice between those who take their language repertoires to a new context and those who inhabit those contexts (Canagarajah, 2013) such as in the university classroom. In characterizing such communicative contexts, it is useful to be reminded of Lippi-Green’s (1997) idea of communicative burden in contacts across linguistic differences and the ideological role accent plays in such contexts. In a typical communicative contact situation, both parties share efforts to achieve mutual intelligibility by cooperating with one another. When it comes to interactions that involve native and non-native speakers of English, accent or communication style does not determine how collaborative both parties will be in understanding each other. It is one’s ideological filter that often prevents participants in understanding. That is, the “breakdown of communication is due not so much to accent as it is to negotiate social evaluation of the accent in question” (Lippi-Green, 1997, p. 71). Mahesh’s and Hiroko’s positioning discourses question the legitimacy of placing communicative burden only on the speakers of the marginalized varieties of Englishes; instead, the burden is to be shared by both parties within a conversation. This position shows the possibility of the transformation of university classroom’s physical space into a social space characterized by translocal and transnational norms that are largely fluid and negotiated (Canagarajah, 2013). The participants see communication not as a shift from one set of linguistic norms to another but as a two-way process whereby parties mutually collaborate to work on language differences. In such situations, the legitimacy of linguistic capital becomes a negotiated enterprise.

In their discourses of subject-to-world direction fit, the participants render the traditionally static identity categories of native vs. non-native speakers of English largely irrelevant as part of their performative competence. Kiran, for example, questions the legitimacy of this dichotomy.

Excerpt 6: let me put separate

1. Kiran: It is a futile job, I never compare with native speakers.   
2. Interviewer: Because it is unattainable or what?   
3. Kiran: It is one is that if you try, you can attain, other is even if you   
4. try you cannot attain, there are two different things   
5. Interviewer: So, which one are you?   
6. Kiran: For example, I cannot be a White, I am already   
7. Asian with the dark color, I cannot change that   
8. Interviewer: No, I mean not in terms looks.   
9. Kiran: No, that’s what I am saying, example I am giving, similarly,   
10. no matter how much I try, I cannot be an English equivalent   
11. to a native English speaker, that what I think, it’s   
12. unattainable achievement, I cannot do it. So, okay let me put separate   
13. that I do the best I can do in my way.   
14. Interviewer: Um um   
15. Kiran: If they cannot accept it then   
16. Interviewer: Okay, like you said earlier you accepted that, yeah.   
17. Kiran: It is their problem, not mine. (Kiran, from Nepal, Materials Engineering)

Kiran’s discourse challenges the significance of the dichotomy. He notes that a comparison between native and non-native English speakers is not only ‘futile’ but ‘unattainable’. He invokes the dominant discourses of how English native speaker identity is stereotypically associated with a particular ethnicity, that is whiteness, and its role in creating ethnic hierarchies. He does not self-stigmatize his ethnic identity; rather he legitimizes his subject position: ‘let me put separate’ (line 12). Here, Kiran’s introduction of an ethno-national categories such as ‘white’ (line 6) and ‘Asian with the dark color’ (line 7), as De Fina (2013) reminds, creates an expectation of the saliency of the category in interaction. For Kiran, if his performative competence is judged against his non-native English speaker identity, the problem lies on those who make such judgements.

Instead of the native-nonnative speaker identities, the participants positioned themselves primarily as members of their disciplinary professional communities, as seen below in Li’s comments.

Excerpt 7: we are engineers

1. The difference is that like we are engineers (.) so we work   
2. in a particular-particular discipline in terms of research so when it   
3. comes to competing with other people we compare ourselves with   
4. people who are working in that area. So we never compare in terms   
5. of the language but we compare in terms of grants or publications (0.2)   
6. it doesn’t matter what the person is (.) that researchers   
7. living say and in India, China or Europe or anywhere.   
8. It does not matter (Li, from China, Computer Engineering)

Li’s response again dismisses the relevance of native vs. non-native speaker categories in shaping his professional identity. He shows the relevance of disciplinary identities that cross the boundary of particular ethnicities, nation-states and speech communities (lines 2e3). This way of conceptualizing the role of language within the profession assumes that people do not need to abandon their language differences to collaborate with others in order to have successful outcomes in their professional life. Many of the participants told us that they considered English native speakerness as a non-factor in accomplishing their work in the classroom and beyond.

The discourses of the legitimacy of World Englishes and the resistance toward the dichotomous native vs. non-native speaker identities recognize the usefulness of the notion of the community of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991) in developing and executing performative competence. Rather than the more homogeneous notions of communities based on such essentialized features as race, ethnicity, or language, the notion of the community of practice suggests that communities can be formed and imagined by members with fluid and flexible boundaries based on people’s professional activities such as research and teaching. The engineers and scientists claim that they accomplish their shared goals through a mutual engagement in common practices that deploy communicative repertoires shared among community members. It is these repertoires that define the legitimacy of their performative competence and linguistic capital.

The participants characterized their performative competence in instructional settings constituting of a set of repertoires in which language is but one element of the complex system. They used the keyword ‘technical’ to characterize communication in the STEM fields as they talked about the role of English therein. Fang’s comments below illustrate of a larger pattern.

Excerpt 8: technology thing

1. We do a lot of design thing. We do a lot of technology thing.   
2. We do a lot of math, right? Math and science. It’s- (.) you don’t need   
3. that amount of understanding of the society to just to   
4. communicate in a technical level, right? So in that sense   
5. I never had embarrassment in expressing myself but I would   
6. limit my saying I wouldn’t joke around. (Fang, from China, Electrical Engineering)

Fang’s positioning discourses highlight the importance of design and technology in math and science. He minimizes the role language plays in his practice. Furthermore, his epistemic stance suggests the importance of technical knowledge but underrates the role of socio-cultural knowledge (line 3). He views complex repertoires in a language as not necessarily required for content delivery and for communication at a ‘technical level’ (line 4). For him, a more sophisticated level of language use is reserved for social purposes such as expressing humor (line 6). Ranbir’s response shows a similar position.

Excerpt 9: math equation

1. I mean again it’s different because it’s engineering and on top of   
2. that it is graduate engineering and the type of class I’m teaching so a lot   
3. of it is a is-is mathematical development of equations (.) let’s say   
4. so what we do is maybe in each class we start with certain equation (.)   
5. and have the equal in mold and they make the changes or they refine   
6. it and develop it and to get the final form. It is the actions and activities that are   
7. more important than language. You have to be able to effectively carry out these   
8. actions and activities in the classroom and in the lab. (Ranbir, from Bangladesh, Math)

Ranbir highlights that in his mathematics class, there is an important role of various forms of technical language such as equations, experiments, and lab results. The way he communicates his ideas, in his view, is less important than the actual technical content that is being delivered to students. These discourses position linguistic competence as less important for his work and place performative competence at the center where language functions as just one component. Other components are actions and activities that may involve the minimal use of language (lines 7, 8). Thus, an effective deployment of performative competence to accomplish successful communication does not solely depend on a shared norm, but is made possible by the coordinated deployment of a variety of semiotic repertoires and ecological affordances that function in a collaborative manner (Canagarajah, 2013).

# 7. Conclusion

In this article, we have examined how international scientists and engineers at a US university construct the discourses of capital conversion and performative competence in the context of academic communication. These discourses help us understand how international STEM faculty in the US negotiate their linguistic resources, skills, and ideologies in relation to instructional work. Of particular significance is the construction of two different but inter-connected positionings of the self in commenting on their linguistic capital and competence. These positioning discourses showed tensions and contradictions and revealed the multiplicity of the participants’ subject positions during the interviews. Following insights from Bamberg’s (2011) Level 3 of discursive positioning, we identified two directions of relationship between the individual and the social worlds they are part of. First, the discourses pertaining to world-to-subject direction fit have demonstrated how broader economic and institutional forces shape individual ideological constructions, such as the notions of correct accent and appropriate language use that need to be continuously refined for their capital value. The discourses mostly displayed monodirectional accommodative stances and a strong case of capital conversion, where linguistic knowledge and skills acquired in the participants’ home countries were refined to meet their professional needs in the new context. Second, and conversely, the analysis has shown the discursive process of subject-to-world direction fit; that is, how agentive individuals reappropriate and give meaning to dominant ideologies about language by asserting the ownership of their linguistic capital that constitutes non-Inner Circle Englishes. The enactment of this evolved self shares some characteristics of what Sandhu (2016) recognizes as “discursive empowerment”; that is, “the vehicles through which power is exercised” (p. 32) by the participants. Our participants displayed discursive claims of empowerment as competent professionals. Simultaneously, the discourses have shown that the dichotomy of native speaker vs. non-native speaker identities is less significant in defining the competence of these professionals in instructional settings. The study has shown that performative competence occupies a more important space than linguistic knowledge and competence, and linguistic repertoires constitute a part of this competence rather than dominating or shaping it (cf. Canagarajah, 2018).

To conclude, the perceived logic of capital conversion coincides with the dispositions required by the linguistic marketplace in academia in the US. However, this conversion is not construed in the way that is recognized and imagined by neoliberal markets as observed in other contexts; for example, in call centers (Cameron, 2000). Rather than endorsing a homogenizing norm that is subject to objective judgements, the participants claim that there is room for diversity, fluidity, and hybridity in characterizing their linguistic capital and performative competence. This recognition validates the dynamic and multi-directional strategies, abilities and dispositions that these multilingual STEM scholars deploy in their instructional practice. Performative competence provides a different orientation whereby individuals add new values and resources to the repertoires they bring with them, eventually building their transnational disposition (Canagarajah, 2017). This disposition makes it possible for them to acquire tastes, skills and values that acknowledge the co-existence of others whose identities are not confined by national and cultural boundaries in order to develop professionally and academically. Finally, the study has some important implications for English for academic purposes. Those working as instructors and material developers should know more about the role of language in STEM communication so that the pedagogical activities should be geared toward meeting students’ needs. Instructors can allow students to not only develop conforming repertoires and communicative norms but also strategies to challenge dominant norms to create space for diverse linguacultural practices. Non-Inner Circle English repertoires are resources rather than a liability.

# Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Tenzin Dolma for her contribution to data collection for this project. Moreover, the first author acknowledges the University of Idaho for the seed grant that was received to conduct the study.

# Appendix A: Interview guide

Native language(s): Gender:   
Country of previous schooling: Teaching experience:   
Graduate school completed from: Teaching department:   
Specialization:

1. Tell me something about your schooling and university education.   
2. How would you describe your experience in regard to the transition from being an international student to a university   
professor?   
3. What is your greatest accomplishment as a scientist/engineer?   
4. Describe your typical class: Who are you students? What and how do you teach?   
5. Is there a difference between the English that you speak in your previous country and here in your teaching context?   
6. What would be your biggest pedagogical challenge as an international professional?   
7. Tell me how you can utilize your previous language and culture in your teaching now, if any.   
8. What is the role of English in your research and scholarship?   
9. Do you want to add anything?

# References

Aneja, G. A. (2016). (Non) native speakered: Rethinking (non) nativeness and teacher identity in TESOL teacher education. TESOL Quarterly, 50(3), 572e596. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.315   
Bailey, K. M. (1984). The “foreign TA problem. In K. Bailey, F. Pialorsi, & J. Zukowski/Faust (Eds.), Foreign teaching assistants in U.S. universities (pp. 3e15). Washington, DC: Center for Instructional Development and Research.   
Bamberg, M. (1997). Positioning between structure and performance. Journal of Narrative and Life History, 7(1e4), 335e342.   
Bamberg, M. (2011). Who am I? Narration and its contribution to self and identity. Theory & Psychology, 21(1), 3e24.   
Bjorkman, B. (2011). English as a lingua franca in higher education: Implications for EAP. € Iberica: Revista de la Asociacion Europea de Lenguas para Fines Especificos, (22), 79e100.   
Blommaert, J. (2010). The sociolinguistics of globalization. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511845307   
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education (pp. 241e258). New York, NY: Greenwood Press.   
Bourdieu, P. (1991). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.   
Braine, G. (2013). Non-native educators in English language teaching. New York: Routledge.   
Cameron, D. (2000). Styling the worker: Gender and the commodification of language in the globalized service economy. Journal of SocioLinguistics, 4(3), 323e347. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9481.00119   
Canagarajah, S. (2013). Translingual practices: Global Englishes and cosmopolitan relations. New York and London: Routledge.   
Canagarajah, S. (2017). Translingual practices and neoliberal policies. Switzerland: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-41243-6   
Canagarajah, S. (2018a). English as a Spatial Resource: Explaining the claimed competence of Chinese STEM professionals. World Englishes, 37, 34e50. https://doi.org/10.1111/weng.12301   
Canagarajah, S. (2018b). Materializing ‘competence’: Perspectives from international STEM scholars. The Modern Language Journal, 102(2), 268e291. https:// doi.org/10.1111/modl.12464   
Chang, Y. J., & Kanno, Y. (2010). NNES doctoral students in English-speaking academe: The nexus between language and discipline. Applied Linguistics, 31(5), 671e692. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amq026   
De Fina, A. (2009). Narratives in interviewdthe case of accounts: For an interactional approach to narrative genres. Narrative Inquiry, 19(2), 233e258. https://doi.org/10.1075/ni.19.2.03def   
De Fina, A. (2013). Positioning level 3: Connecting local identity displays to macro social processes. Narrative Inquiry, 23(1), 40e61. https://doi.org/10.1075/ ni.23.1.03de   
Gimenez, J., & Morgan, W. J. (2017). Academics across borders: Narratives of linguistic capital, language competence and communication strategies. Globalisation, Societies and Education, 15(1), 68e95. https://doi.org/10.1080/14767724.2014.937402   
Gravois, J. (2005, April 8). Teach impediment (p. A10). Chronicle of Higher Education. https://www.chronicle.com/article/Teach-Impediment/33613. (Accessed 29 May 2018).   
Gu, M. M., & Canagarajah, S. (2018). Harnessing the professional value of a transnational disposition: Perceptions of migrant English language teachers in Hong Kong. Applied Linguistics, 39(5), 718e740. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amw048   
Hendriks, B., van Meurs, F., & Reimer, A. K. (2018). The evaluation of lecturers’ nonnative-accented English: Dutch and German students’ evaluations of different degrees of Dutch-accented and German-accented English of lecturers in higher education. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 34, 28e45.   
Holliday, A. (2006). Native-speakerism. ELT Journal, 60(4), 385e387. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccl030   
Hyland, K. (2015). Genre, discipline and identity. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 19, 32e43.   
Jenkins, J. (2013). English as a lingua franca in the international university: The politics of academic English language policy. London: Routledge.   
Kachru, B. B. (1992). The other tongue (2nd ed.). Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.   
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/ CBO9780511815355   
Lippi-Green, R. (1997). English with an accent: Language, ideology, and discrimination in the United States. Psychology Press.   
Mahboob, A. (2010a). The NNEST lens: Nonnative English speakers in TESOL. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Press.   
Mahboob, A. (2010b). World Englishes and higher education. Kritika Kultura, (15), 5e33.   
Mauranen, A. (2012). Exploring ELF: Academic English shaped by non-native speakers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Menard-Warwick, J. (2008). The cultural and intercultural identities of transnational English teachers: Two case studies from the Americas. TESOL Quarterly, 42, 617e640. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1545-7249.2008.tb00151.x   
National Science Board. (2020). The state of US science and engineering. Alexandria, VA: National Science Foundation.   
Paltridge, B. (2012). Discourse analysis: An introduction $2 ^ { \mathrm { n d } }$ ed.). Bloomsbury Publishing.   
Park, J. S. Y. (2011). The promise of English: Linguistic capital and the neoliberal worker in the South Korean job market. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 14(4), 443e455.   
Park, J. S. Y., & Wee, L. (2013). Markets of English: Linguistic capital and language policy in a globalizing world. New York, NY: Routledge.   
Piller, I., & Cho, J. (2013). Neoliberalism as language policy. Language in Society, 42(1), 23e44. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0047404512000887   
Rabbi, S., & Canagarajah, A. S. (2017). Socialization in the neoliberal academy of STEM scholars: A case study of negotiating dispositions in an international graduate student in entomology. Humanities, 6(2), 39.   
Sandhu, P. (2016). Professional identity constructions of Indian women. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing Company.   
Smith, P., Warrican, S., Kumi-Yeboah, A., & Richards, J. (2018). Understanding Afro-Caribbean educators’ experiences with Englishes across Caribbean and U. S. contexts and classrooms: Recursivity, (re)positionality, bidirectionality. Teaching and Teacher Education, 69, 210e222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate. 2017.10.009   
Tajeddin, Z., & Adeh, A. (2016). Native and nonnative English teachers’ perceptions of their professional identity: Convergent or divergent? Iranian Journal of Language Teaching Research, 4(3), 37e54.   
Villarreal, D. (2012/2013). Closing the communication gap between undergraduates and international faculty. CATESOL Journal, 24(1), 8e28.

Bal Krishna Sharma is an assistant professor of English at the University of Idaho. His research interests include sociolinguistics, discourse analysis, intercultural communication, and qualitative research methods. His previous publications have appeared in the Journal of Sociolinguistics, Language in Society, Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, and Language and Intercultural Communication.

Ibtesam Hussein has an earned doctorate in Language, Literacy and Technology from Washington State University, and a master’s degree in TESOL from the University of Pennsylvania. Her scholarly interest focuses on teacher training, the application of linguistics to language teaching as well as the impact of L2 teachers’ classroom practices on second language learners’ academic success.