# Literacy and disciplinary practices: opening and closing perspectives

Ann M. Johns\*, John M. Swales

Department of Rhetonic and Writing, San Diego State University, San Diego, California, USA

# Abstract

There are widespread (and correct) beliefs that the writing tasks that students are asked to undertake as they move through their undergraduate and graduate years show a broadly upward progression in terms of length, complexity of resources utilized, and sophistication expected. Even so, we also suggest that a number of uncertainties persist: whether these writings are ‘‘real’’ or ‘‘school’’ products; whether there is a coherent audience, and if so, how best can it be identified; and what role there might be for a personal voice. To support this argument, we present two explorations of EAP practice. The first looks at the situation of dissertation writers, explores their rhetorical and other difficulties, and suggests some ways of mitigating them. The second deals with students at the opposite end of the spectrum of student experience; that of entering undergraduates taking their first class in anthropology and assisted by a linked course designed to initiate them into disciplinary literary practices. Despite the huge differences between these two sets of circumstance, we conclude that the writers’ problems are surprisingly similar, as are the strategies for rendering them assistance.

$©$ 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

# 1. Introduction

It seems to us that the EAP researchers who view disciplinary practices in terms of their published products, and who concomitantly interview the producers and targeted receivers of such discourses, have a relatively straightforward research life. These texts, such as research articles, are already valorized and ratified by the very fact of being published; they have typically undergone an arduous and laborious review process; and they are easily available, indeed increasingly available for corpus-andconcordance analysis (e.g. Hyland, 2000). Although Paul et al. (2001) have recently questioned whether this type of valorization is really sufficient, there is no doubt that, vanity products aside, publication offers a reasonable level of quality assurance. Further, the literature suggests that published disciplinary specialists have much to say in response to such questions as ‘‘What counts as a solid contribution in your field?’’, ‘‘What changes in publications are occurring and why?’’, and ‘‘How is expertise realized in texts and other practices?’’.

Once, however, we enter the world of student texts, matters are not so simple. Indeed, we argue that surprisingly similar complexities emerge across all levels of student expertise. At the beginning of a university career (the ‘‘opening perspective’’ of the title), US undergraduates, especially those from so-called ‘‘disadvantaged’’ backgrounds, may need EAP-type help as they begin to enter disciplinary terrain. A decade of university experience later, a select few of those entrants will be attempting to close out their student lives by completing doctoral dissertations (the ‘‘closing perspective’’ of the title), and again, at least for some, benefit may derive from the kind of instructional assistance that EAP support services are increasingly able to provide. Despite the palpable differences between these two situations, some communalities remain. In both, the issue of the relation between ‘‘school genres’’ and ‘‘real genres’’ (Johns, 1997) persists. In both questions of audience and hence of recipient design continue to perplex many participants and protagonists. And in both, an appropriate role for the authorial persona—as personified by the use/nonuse of ‘‘I’’—requires reflection and negotiation.

As it happens, the opening perspective represents Johns’ major area of educational endeavor (Johns, 1997, 2001, 2002), while the closing perspective that of Swales’ primary teaching interests, at least in recent years (Swales & Feak, 2000). In this paper, therefore, we present profiles of our current thinking in these two contexts, and then pick out some similarities and differences between them. We begin with a shorter reprise of the situation of the senior international graduate student, which is then followed by a more extensive discussion of that of the entering undergraduate.

# 2. The doctoral dissertation and the international dissertation writer

Although Dudley-Evans (1999) can still claim that the doctoral dissertation or thesis1 remains a ‘‘neglected’’ genre, the amount of discoursal attention directed at this genre has markedly increased in recent years. There have been studies of its structure (e.g. Dong, 1998; Ridley, 2000; Thompson, 1999; Paltridge, 2001); on the important role of metadiscourse in such long texts (Bunton, 1998); on citational patterns (Thompson, 1998); and on disciplinary variation (Parry, 1998). Case study research into the struggles of individual dissertation writers, beginning with James (1984), now includes Belcher (1994), Dong (1996) and Sung (2000). Pedagogical implications and applications have been taken up by Shaw (1996) and Paltridge (1997), among others. Since this body of work as a whole has investigated British, Scandinavian and Australian ‘‘traditions’’ in dissertation work in addition to those prevalent in the US, one useful early conclusion from surveying this literature would be that the dissertation (very much unlike its oral defense) shows rather little in the way of distinct national characteristics. Instead, cross-nationally, disciplinary field or subfield emerges as the strongest determinant of structure and rhetorical shape.

In fact, the structure of the dissertation genre appears from this research to be quite variable, but to basically fall into three patterns. Although there is a wide perception that there is standard or traditional format for the dissertation (DudleyEvans, 1999) consisting essentially of a ‘‘blown up’’ version of the IMRD structure of research articles (plus a separate Literature Review chapter following the introduction), only about $1 5 \%$ of the recent exemplars analysed actually adopt this format. A second variant is the anthology-type ‘‘article compilation’’ format with each of the main chapters itself following IMRD. Of the 100 dissertations cumulatively discussed in the recent literature, 44 adopt this model, this pattern being favored in ‘‘hard’’ fields. However, there is considerable area-internal variation: for example, Ridley (1999) found that while 13 out of 19 ‘‘pure science’’ dissertations were article-compilations, only five of her 13 engineering texts had this structure— indeed another five were ‘‘traditional’’. The third pattern is most often called ‘‘topic-based’’ and is thus more reminiscent of the chapter features found in academic books; these chapter-length analysis-discussions may variously deal with texts, computer models, or various kinds of empirical research including that based on fieldwork.2

Paltridge (2002), among others, warns us that there is no simple correlation between discipline and dissertation structure; further, Thompson (1998) shows clear differences in structure between two contiguous departments within the same school of agriculture. It looks as though even the basic outline of the dissertation is a complex issue to be negotiated among advisors and candidates, wherein sub-field selected or choice of methodology or choice of theory may emerge as strong determining factors.

As we have seen from the available evidence, the article-compilation format is marginally the most popular. Dong summarizes the rationale for this option as follows:

The article-compilation format gives graduate students on-the-job training, preparing them for what they will be expected to do in their fields after they receive the PhD degree. In addition, the article format reduces the time for publication if dissertation chapters can be submitted directly for journal publication, without requiring extensive pruning and reformatting; therefore, it meets the need for timely knowledge dissemination and it starts to accumulate credits for the students professional career. (Dong, 1998:p.371).

She further notes, based on her survey results, that graduate students felt the audience for the traditional format was the advisor, the committee and close student colleagues, while in the new format this perception broadened to include a wider disciplinary community. Secondly, and not unexpectedly, she found that in the anthology format, advisors tended to be more fussy (by requiring more drafts) and more involved (by doing more of the writing themselves).

However, this account somewhat disguises the difficult rhetorical problems that the new format engenders. These include:

(a) A bibliography consolidated at the end, at each chapter’s close, or even both? (b) Metadiscoursal references to chapters or to papers? (c) Using ‘‘I’’, or recognizing co-authorship by using ‘‘we’’?

A random survey (Swales, in preparation) of post-1992 dissertations from three science departments at the University of Michigan reveals considerable hybridity and considerable variation in response to the underlying issue as to whether a dissertation should be a monograph or a loose anthology. Of the eight Physics dissertations examined, five had a consolidated bibliography, one had the references at the end of each chapter, while the remaining two had both! The author of the one with no closing bibliography opted for the article terminology and had no difficulty in pluralizing the authorship; for example, she opens her fourth chapter with, ‘‘In this paper we study. . .’’. However, in the other texts, there were general preferences for the label chapter and the singular pronoun $I .$ Similar uncertainties were also apparent in the biology dissertations. A 1994 text by an international student has the references only at the end of each paper, but recognizes that in their current states and formats they are still chapters, even though they exist or will exist in another genre. Here are three of the chapter openings:

Chapter 3: ‘‘This chapter has been published as. . .’ Chapter 4: ‘‘Parts of this chapter will be published. . .’’ Chapter 5: ‘‘This chapter will be published as. . .’’

Given the pressures on doctoral students in nearly all programs in the US (and often elsewhere) to establish publication profiles before graduation, the rhetorical complexities imposed by hybridization are only likely to spread and deepen.

An equally intractable but more fundamental issue that underlies the format question is whether the dissertation is au fond that ‘‘original contribution to knowledge’’ which university authorities worldwide always claim it to be, or is it merely the final examination in a long student career. Of course, it can be immediately objected—and rightly—that such an either/or dichotomy will turn out to be unsustainable; as Woolgar (1989: xix) notes, there is ‘‘the play between thesis-as-argument and thesis-as-an-occasioned academic product’’. However, this kind of observation is of no comfort or consolidation to the poor dissertation writers as they struggle to conceptualize and then complete their long and exhausting texts, often under severe deadline pressures. In an early but important paper, Shaw (1991) concluded, based on interviews conducted with science doctoral students at the University of Newcastle, that the dissertation represented something of a ‘‘pseudo communicative’’ task. He explains: ‘‘They were often required to do something rather unnatural like pretending that they were writing to inform sophisticated nonspecialists, while being uneasily aware that really the aim is to persuade an expert that they were worthy to join a community of scholars’’ (ibid.: p.194). Just like all students, both undergraduate and graduate, they were still caught between ‘‘knowledge-display and information-transmission’’ (ibid.: p.193).

Today, it has become something of a truism to say that all genres are embedded in their socio-historical contexts. Whether this is as generally true as its many advocates claim is somewhat doubtful, but it is certainly true of the US doctoral dissertation. There are several layers of shaping context that impinge on the construction and creation of a particular instance of the genre.

The outermost, as it were, of these layers is that created by the scholarly expectations of the university as a whole, and as ratified by its official forms and procedures for approval. Next, we find the constraints and opportunities provided by the established expectations of a department or a discipline and what that collectivity considers to be appropriate topics and appropriate claims for novelty and innovation. A third set of factors that influences our attempts to repurpose the genre (Askehave & Swales, 2001) resides in the subfield chosen, in the methodologies and approaches used, and in the rhetorical options to be explored. There is today much ‘‘in the air’’ here including more personal or narratological treatments (see Chang & Swales, 1999, for the discomfort caused by these trends for non-native speakers of English). Last but by no means least, there are situated localities of advisor-advisee relationships (as ably discussed by Belcher, 1994, Prior, 1998, and others), the need to take into account different expectations among committee members, the existence (or otherwise) of support groups, workshops or dissertation writing classes, the availability and type of financial support, and so on.

The larger point to be made is that these four types of influence are unstable in the force of their effects, having variable impact from one individual case to another. Sometimes, institutional effects prevail as when a student just wants ‘‘the piece of paper’’ and then get on with his or her life. In such cases, the dissertation does indeed turn out to be little more than an ultimate exercise in slogging drudgery designed to placate the examiners. At the other extreme, there is the dedicated and successful researcher, with a string of publications to her name, with a good academic or research job lined up, and for whom putting the dissertation together is as much a distraction as anything else. For another group of doctoral candidates, the dissertation will present itself to them as a draft of a subsequent scholarly book that will itself form the basis of an academic career.3 Finally, there are those doctoral students who love the social and intellectual life of being doctoral students in a culturally-attractive city and for whom completing the dissertation will most likely be nothing but a ticket out of paradise. And of course for many, several of these attitudinal stances combine in order to add psychological confusion to an already demanding intellectual and rhetorical task.

It turns out then, as we might have expected, that there is no simple or no one answer to the initial question of whether the dissertation and its associated defense are ‘‘school genres’’. Dissertations are sometimes more and sometimes less ‘‘occasioned academic products’’; sometimes more and sometimes less ‘‘significant contributions’’ to their specialisms; sometimes more and sometimes less collaborative co-authored enterprises; and sometimes more and sometimes less waystages in academic careers.

Given all these complexities and uncertainties, it would seem obvious that more might be done to help doctoral students, especially those from other cultures and with some remaining limitations in their English-language proficiency, to better understand their situations so as to realize their dissertational objectives with greater dispatch and lesser angst. A few outline suggestions follow, which are premised on the expectation that appropriate dissertation classes will not (yet) be available:

(a) Reduce isolation by persuading students to seek and utilize social support, such as organizing themselves into writing groups. In so doing, as Connor and Mayberry (1996: p.249) pertinently note: ‘‘It is important then to teach students strategies to use respondents and other social responses well’’.   
(b) Raise rhetorical consciousness by helping students conduct their own discoursal analyses of texts germane to their own, including previous dissertations from their departments.   
(c) Suggest ways of how to make best use of any one-on-one writing consultancies available.   
(d) Give advice on the strengths and weaknesses of the various manuals and guides available. Ask them to contribute to this database by soliciting critiques.   
(e) Offer workshops on using corpora and concordances, particularly as a support for (b) above. Thompson and Tribble (2001) have excellent advice on how to use these for checking out citational forms and patterns in the chosen discipline.

# 3. Initiating the undergraduate

Those of us who work from the bottom-up (as it were), with novice undergraduate students, are faced initially with a broader question, about how we should approach the teaching and learning of disciplinary practices—even before we begin to consider how these practices begin to influence the uninitiated. This teaching and learning question is especially daunting in the United States where post-secondary students are required to take classes for breadth (‘‘general education’’) before they begin their major concentrations, often delayed until their third year of university. As a result, there is considerable discussion in the literature about what we should teach in our first year literacy classes, such as whether integrating our writing classes with disciplines without critique of the textual hegemony of the university is advisable (see, e.g. Spack, 1988; Benesch, 2001).

However, from a pragmatic perspective, exposure to a discipline and analysis of its texts and practices would seem essential to university success everywhere in the world; and with students like those at San Diego State, whose university drop-out rates can reach $60 \%$ , learning about and negotiating university cultures and classrooms is particularly important for their continuation and motivation. So this second story is about attempts to assist in this domain—and how the students interpret emergent pedagogies and disciplinary practices.

Elsewhere Johns (1997, 2001, 2002) has described in some depth the integrated curriculum (Freshman Success) program that she helped to establish in the mid-80s and has been teaching in ever since, so a brief overview here will suffice. In this program, first year post-secondary students (17 and 18-year-olds) enroll in a fourclass cluster which includes a breath-class (biology, sociology, psychology, etc.), a study group for that class, an academic writing class, and a university orientation course. During the past four years, Johns has been teaching the ‘‘remedial/ESL’’ writing class integrated with the cultural anthropology cluster in this program. The students are all from the first generation in their families to attend university, and about two-thirds are relatively new immigrants. All of the students, except the African –Americans, come from bilingual families.4 Because these students have come from underserved secondary schools with student-counselor ratios of over 1:200, and because their parents know very little about higher education, most of the students are ‘‘clueless’’ about university and have not chosen a major concentration. The standard answer to ‘‘What is your major?’’ is ‘‘Business,’’ because they have been told that business majors make money5

Teaching cultural anthropology to these students – and teaching the writing class that explores disciplinary literacies through anthropology—requires a number of important decisions about course focus and assignments. Although there is some consensus among faculty in the local Anthropology Department about topics in this breadth course (e.g. kinship systems), there seems to be little agreement about concepts and tasks that should be introduced at this level. In addition to this lack of consensus on campus, there are major, open methodological and values quarrels in the field. Anyone who has read Marcus and Fischer (1986) about the crisis in approach and methodology in cultural anthropology, or has followed the ‘‘adventures’’ of Napoleon Chagnon and the Yamamano (1968) knows that there is open warfare among the various academic clans in anthropology.

Fortunately for these novice students, the anthropology instructor took a fairly conservative approach. She selected a standard textbook, in its twelfth edition, and she and this paper’s first author co-constructed the major literacy tasks that would lead, eventually, to an IMRD (Introduction, Methodology, Results, Discussion) paper, incorporating research on human migration and cultural persistence from student and family interviews, the WEB, and print texts. They chose the IMRD believing that it represents a general, and generative, framework for many of the sciences and social sciences, one which students might be able to apply, with revisions, to other courses.6 This text structure also provided opportunities to ‘‘scaffold’’ (see Vygotsky, 1986) the writing process by addressing the various sections of the paper individually, thus, for example, assisting students to separate methods from results, and results from discussion. Decisions were also made about the literacy and disciplinary foci:

Because methodology (and its critique) is central to anthropology and all the social sciences, and the ‘‘hard’’ sciences, as well, this became basic to the discussions of the values of the discipline and its literacies. Reading about the traditional methods of cultural anthropology (see e.g. Scheper-Hughes, 2000) and analyzing and describing methods for the final IMRD paper became central to student success.   
One method with which students were familiar was the interview. Thus, they were asked to investigate their family histories through interviews in an initial paper whose basic information was integrated into the final IMRD piece, both of which centered around a ‘‘Human Migration and Cultural Persistence’’ topic. Constructing this first interview paper about their families was for many of the students the most interesting and enjoyable task for their highly intertextual final paper   
Another element of the assigned papers was citation. We discussed why citation is used, how to effectively draw from sources, what language signals a citation, and, because the students had had so little practice, how to write internal citations and produce a references page. Because most of the university uses the APA style sheet, we insisted that they learn this style, despite the fact that the MLA is much preferred in the secondary schools. [See Hyland (2000), from which some ideas for this part of the instruction were drawn.]   
In addition to introducing the IMRD paper in stages, an experience that students found puzzling and difficult after the five-paragraph essay of their secondary school years (see Johns, 2002), we attempted to teach other general features of academic writing, described by Geertz (1988) in his discussion of ‘‘author-evacuated’’ prose. By asking students to read and analyze the language of research studies in anthropology, we also hoped to encourage a sophisticated understanding of the rules of and reasons for ‘‘hedging’’ described by Hyland (1998).

Lea and Street note, quite appropriately, that in academic classrooms:

. .students are seldom given support in conceptualizing the epistemological frameworks within which [disciplinary genres] are constructed or in recognising that they consist of contestable knowledge claims rather than given truths. (1999, p. 64)

Overall, these pedagogical choices were attempts to make potential textual frameworks and their purposes more explicit and to encourage students to use a language that demonstrated their recognition that all research findings are contestable. In this way, it was hoped that the students would also learn to ask the right questions of their future instructors about their academic subjects and tasks (e.g. Johns, 1997).

Much of this curriculum was overwhelmingly new to the students (‘‘and hard!’’) who came to university with no conception of faculty disciplinary orientations, no idea that faculty have ‘‘implicit conceptions of what constitutes writing’’ (Lea & Street, 1999, p. 63) or that these conceptions vary across and among disciplines, no understanding of the differences between pedagogical genres (e.g. an assigned’’ research paper’’) and disciplinary genres, and very little understanding of academic language and values. However, they did have remarkable life experiences and personal insights, and in many cases, these experiences plus their high motivation to prove themselves in university succeeded in compensating for any lack of information about those foreign tribes and clans to which we in university belong (Becher, 1989).

# 3.1. Findings

So what did the students make of all this? At the end of the term, what did they now believe about the values and practices of cultural anthropologists? What did they understand about the various methods used by researchers to triangulate their qualitative studies? How did they perceive of textual practices and registers of cultural anthropology? And finally, what topics did they find to be of most interest for their own research?

What follows is a selection of some of the most insightful student reflections made during the Fall Semester, 2001, to shed the best light on essentially non-generalizable results. (Corrected for sentence-level errors.)

First, students were asked: ‘‘What is an anthropologist? Define this term to a friend.’’ Though most of the students responded with something they had memorized for the examinations in anthropology, a few were much more analytical. Here are their comments:

For a cultural anthropologist, studying the way a culture affects its people is important. (Stevan)

Stevan has identified the heart and soul of the discipline: the basic foundations of its research. No matter what their particular emphasis (symbolic, linguistic, archeological), anthropologists focus upon the relationships between a culture and the behavior and beliefs of people within that culture.

Anthropologists study cultures’ world views and try to understand why people in a culture do what they do. They are interested in studying the meanings of what people do, the motives in each culture. (Vicky)

Vicky’s answer leans toward the work of the symbolic anthropologist. But it also identifies the kinds of syntheses that all anthropologists must complete in order to explore the meanings of certain beliefs or rituals within a culture.

They look at things that we would not necessarily look at or write about. They have a more complex way of putting things and analyzing people’s actions. They analyze things like language and marriage rituals. (Jennifer)

Jennifer singles out some of the subject matter of anthropology (language and marriage customs) as unusual; that, in addition to the ‘‘complex way of putting things’’ sets anthropologists apart from ‘‘what we would write about.’’ She does not believe that she has been initiated and still sees herself as a student, outside of the expert culture.

Anthropologists’ work is important because it’s important to understand the similarities and differences among people so that we can understand the ways they adapt. With the understanding of other cultures, ethnocentrism will diminish. (Marysol)

Decreasing ethnocentrism among the students is a major goal of this course, perhaps the most important of all the goals. Marysol has identified it and spoken of its importance.

A second reflection question related to the purported stance of the professional anthropologist both in his/her research and writing. I asked ‘‘What do the methods that anthropologists use, and their ways of writing, tell you about the rules for being an effective researcher and writer in this discipline?’’ Here are some of the best responses:

You have to be able to analyze the data in a holistic perspective, making sure not to have your biases or feelings interfere. (Phi Ha)   
They tend to put their own beliefs and morals into play when living with a culture, but they can’t do that. They have to do everything the people do, whether they like it or not. (Sherisee)   
They must leave personal opinions out and morals behind when they write about a certain culture. Unlike other writers, anthropologists actually must undertake participant observation. This allows them to make much stronger conclusions about what a culture is like. (David)   
Assimilation, like culture, is an extremely subjective word. What may seem like assimilated behavior to one person may be perceived as traditional to another. (Alfred)

As these reflections show, the students understood several of the anthropologist’s major dilemmas: researchers cannot escape who they are, both personally and culturally, but they must try to be ‘‘objective’’ as they conduct their research. Even the basic concepts such as ‘‘assimilation’’ are subject to interpretation. But David, who is unaware of the methodological crisis in anthropology, argues that methodology may be a saving factor: participant observation enables anthropologists to make strong conclusions.

Another question was fruitful in terms of response, principally because the students had not only read about the problems in conducting research but had experienced these problems when attempting to interview their relatives and the students in the secondary schools for their IMRD papers. The question was: ‘‘What are some of the problems that researchers, including you, face when attempting to get information from consultants? What are some of the measures that you took to overcome these problems?’’

The difficulties that anthropologists encounter are lack of information. A consultant (the person from the culture being interviewed) may refuse to cooperate with me. He could also be unfocused on the purpose of the research and not take the questions seriously. Another difficulty could be that a family would be unwilling for me change to attend their festivities and rituals of their daily lives. (Carolina) Time is also a problem—and difficulty with language. (Annette)

For these novice students, problems that researchers face had become a reality. Throughout the semester, they complained about how difficult it is to obtain interesting data.

How did students approach their interviews for their IMRD papers with a group of secondary students, whom they hardly knew? Here, they were past masters— experts in discovering and organizing the small bits of information that the young students (most were 14 years old) gave them. The answers to this question appear in the students’ methodology sections of the IMRD paper:

Before I got to the school, I went over the questions and I made sub-questions so that I could get as much as possible. (Jennifer)   
I couldn’t just ask the questions for my paper. I had to kind of make conversation and then give a question. I tried to show the students that we had something in common so I went into detail about where $I$ grew up and my school. (Steven)   
To take notes, I divided my paper in half because I had two students and I wanted to make sure that I recorded their answers right. (Phi Ha)

A very important question for their understanding of the ways in which disciplinary texts relate to practices was the following: ‘‘How do anthropologists write? What do their research papers look like? Why?’’ We know from the dissertation discussions outlined in this paper that the answers to these questions are remarkably complex. Here are some sample responses:

In anthropology, you write in a different style, very detailed and analytical. Most (of our) papers are about what you think, but anthropologists try to prove or investigate something. Then they express their feelings (in the discussion). (David)   
You have to be open-minded. Careful, meaning do not just write what people do but explain why they do them and what event caused them to think the way they do. (Marysol)   
Anthropologists take themselves out of the paper completely. They write everything down in steps and use a lot of detail. Mostly facts are used, and when they write their thoughts, it is separated from the facts in writing. In English classes, the writer is usually included in the paper. Most of their thoughts and beliefs reflect a point of view. (Shannon)   
Anthropologists write in a different format/style. I wasn’t familiar with the IMRD format until I enrolled in this class. I also found it interesting that the writer should not let her own feelings get the best of them when writing in scientific style. They pretty much just write what they did, how they did it, and what they found out. As for me, I have always written in the five paragraph style and let my feeling take the best of me when I write because I thought this helped me get my point across. (Phi Ha)

This last group of comments represents an important beginning, an attempt by the students to distinguish between the ubiquitous, personal five-paragraph essay of their secondary school English classes (see Johns, 2002) and the ‘‘rules’’ of the academic textual game. Particularly interesting perhaps, is Phi, who was impressed by the fact that different sections of texts serve different functions. This last feature became increasingly prominent as the class sessions attempted to convince the students that they needed to divide their methods from results and results from discussion, divisions that they thought odd, to say the least.

Hyland (1999: p.115) notes that ‘‘. . .researchers typically conceal their rhetorical identities behind a cloak of objectivity, masking their involvement with an array of linguistic detachment..’’ Although the students could not express this argument in quite the same way (yet), they certainly managed to gain some inkling of Hyland’s ‘‘cloak of objectivity.’’ What they failed to understand, of course, is that all texts are constructed, and that this involvement (as well as personal identity and committed argument) can persist even when couched or cloaked in what outsiders will perceive as staid, dry, voiceless academic language.

In the final writing examination, the students were asked to discuss what they would like to pursue in anthropological research if they had the time. What emerged is quite similar to what might be found among more experienced researchers, such as dissertation candidates: that their research interests mirrored their own human interests at this stage of their development. So Marysol, an apostolic Christian, wanted to pursue her student consultant’s religious conversion from Catholicism: ‘‘How has Cindy’s apostolic views changed her family’s attitudes toward traditional Mexican culture?’’ Thai, whose family speaks Vietnamese exclusively in her home, was very interested in investigating the code-switching that her Somali secondary student consultant had mentioned: ‘‘What are the differences between the languages he uses at home [where his father dominates the discourse] and the language he uses with friends at school?’’ Carolina wanted to investigate meaning: ‘‘When I asked the girl about rituals, I would need to know what they mean.’’ Shannon focused on the influence of migration on the cultural mix, the hybridization of cultures: ’’ I would have to figure out what parts of the culture were borrowed from other cultures as the people migrated.’’

# 3.2. Pedagogical implications

So what do the students’ comments tell us about what we should be teaching from the very beginning of a post-secondary education and perhaps earlier? These student comments suggest that:

Faculty in all classes need to encourage student awareness of the texts, language, research questions, and methodologies of the discipline that the class represents. If possible, the pedagogical genres of these classes should be more disciplinary than school-based (see Dudley-Evans, 2002). Students should be assigned to research texts, practices, language, and other aspects of academic disciplines. They should learn to observe, analyze, ask questions, and if possible, negotiate their tasks to enhance their success. Within literacy classes, students should be assigned a variety of writing tasks, requiring a number of intertextual and formal textual experiences. Students should be encouraged to write in different genres and under different conditions. We should encourage student meta-awareness of the social nature of genres. Periodically, students should be asked to reflect upon their literacy experiences and to compare these experiences with those in other classes or other schools.

# 3.3. Final considerations

In this paper we have explored two backgrounds to contemporary EAP practice in US universities. These two backgrounds could not, of course, be more different since one is grounded in the first two years of a decade-long university student experience and the other deals with its final two years. There is, in consequence, a huge ‘‘excluded middle’’ wherein a majority of students reside, especially when we recognize the increasing role of Masters degrees in post-secondary education.

Despite the huge differences between the two populations, in age and maturity, in specialization and sophistication, and in writing and reading experience, their educational experiences and educational needs turn out to be different in degree rather than in kind. Both groups are encouraged to undertake ‘‘real’’ research and to write it up with a professional stance, but for both, more obviously for the junior undergraduates and more insidiously for the senior graduates, the role of school genres and its examinable trappings intrudes. Both groups, at their different levels, are engaged in ‘‘pseudocommunicative tasks’’ because of confusion as to whom precisely they are writing for. While, on one level, the answer may be obvious (for an instructor and for a dissertation committee), this does not itself clarify what those instructors and those committees are actually looking for—especially as all too many academics remain rather ‘‘cagey’’ about their expectations.

For both groups, isolation (within a class or within a graduate program) and subsequent failure to ask the right questions or get the right kind of help can be (for all but the most exceptional) a major threat to academic progress and success. Sung (2000) investigated the experiences of over a hundred Taiwanese doctoral students at a major research university, and found very different levels of what she calls ‘‘rounded academic success’’. Here is an interview extract from a third year doctoral student in Industrial Health who was not doing well, and indeed still taking classes:

Typically, I eat, sleep, spend time with my wife, and study. I don’t socialize with Americans. . .I went out of class after class is dismissed. . .. We attend Chinese church. . .This is the primary social activity I have. I don’t attend departmental activities. I don’t have a sense of belonging because of my English and stutter. .

The dividing line between isolation and alienation can be disturbingly thin. More generally, one of Sung’s major conclusions is that her cohort (with some exceptions) seek primary help from their co-nationals when their spoken English proficiency is limited, and only approach their advisors when their English competence and selfconfidence is higher. There is a clear role for EAP mediation services of various kinds when we are confronted with these uncomfortable findings.

Finally, Spack (1988) is right, of course. We cannot prepare students for all eventualities in academic classrooms or in other situations (such as proposal defenses), nor do we understand other disciplines or other pedagogical practices well enough to give our students templates for success. What we can do, across the board, is raise students’ awareness, give them a variety of experiences and exposures, encourage their analyses and critique of texts and contexts, and motivate them to see the university, like all institutions, as human and constructed, rigid, fluid, hegemonous and negotiable—all at the same time.

# References

Askehave, I., & Swales, J. M. (2001). Genre identification and communicative purpose: a problem and a possible solution. Applied Linguistics, 22, 195–212.   
Bahktin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: four essays by M.M. Bahktin (C. Emerson & M. Holquist, Trans.) Austin: University of Texas.   
Becher, T. (1989). Academic tribes and territories: intellectual inquiry and the cultures of disciplines. Milton Keynes: SRHE/Oxford.   
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. (1999). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communities. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, Associates.   
Belcher, D. (1994). The apprenticeship approach to advanced academic literacy: graduate students and their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 23–34.   
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes: theory, politics, and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Bunton, D. (1998). Linguistic and textual problems in PhD and M Phil theses: an analysis of genre moves and metatext. Unpublished PhD thesis. The University of Hong Kong.   
Chagnon, N. (1968). Yanamamo: the fierce people. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.   
Chang, Y.-Y., & Swales, J. M. (1999). Informal elements in academic writing: threats and opportunities for advanced non-native speakers. In C. Candlin, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: texts, processes and practices (pp. 145–164). London: Longman.   
Connor, U., & Mayberry, S. (1996). Learning disciplin-specific academic writing: a case study of a Finnish graduate student in the United States. In E. Ventola, & A. Mauranen (Eds.), Academic writing: intercultural and textual issues (pp. 231–253). Amsterdam: John Benjamin.   
Dong, Y. R. (1996). Learning to use citations for knowledge transformation: non-native doctoral students’ dissertation writing in science. Research in the Teaching of English, 30, 428–457.   
Dong, Y. R. (1998). Non-native speaker graduate students’ thesis/dissertation writing in science: Selfreports by students and advisors from two US institutions. English for Specific Purposes, 17, 369–390.   
Dudley-Evans, T. (1999). The dissertation: a case of neglect? In P. Thompson (Ed.), Issues in E AP writing research and instruction (pp. 28–36). Reading University: CALS.   
Dudley-Evans, T. (2002). The teaching of the academic essay. Is a genre approach possible? In A. M. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom: multiple perspectives (pp. 225–236). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Geertz, C. (1988). Words and lives The anthropologist as author. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: social interactions in academic writing. Harlow, England: Longman/Pearson.   
Hyland, K. (1999). Disciplinary discourses: writer stance in research articles. In C. Candlin, & K. Hyland, (Eds.), (pp. 99–121)   
Hyland, K. (1998). Hedging in scientific research articles. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
James, K. (1984). The writing of theses by speakers of English as a foreign language. In R. Williams, J. Swales, & J. Kirkman (Eds.), Common ground: shared inyterests in ESP and communication studies (pp. 99–113). Oxford: Pergamon.   
Johns, A. M. (2002). Destabilizing and enriching novice students’ genre theories. In A. M. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom: multiple perspectives (pp. 237–248). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Mahwah, NJ.   
Johns, A. M. (2001). An interdisciplinary, interinstitutional learning communities program: student involvement and student success. In I. Leki (Ed.), Academic writing programs: case studies in TESOL practice (pp. 61–72). Alexandria, VA: TESOL.   
Johns, A. M. (1997). Text, role, and context: developing academic literacies. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Lea, M. R., & Street, B. (1999). Writing as academic literacies: understanding textual practices in higher education. In C. Candlin, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: texts, processes, and practices (pp. 62–82). London: Longman.   
Marcus, G. E., & Fischer, M. M. J. (1986). Anthropology as cultural critique: an experimental moment in the human sciences. University of Chicago Press.   
Paltridge, B. (1997). Thesis and dissertation writing: preparing ESL students for research. English for Specific Purposes, 16, 61–70.   
Paltridge, B. (2002). Thesis and dissertation writing: an examination of published advice and actual practice. English for Specific Purposes, 21, 125–143.   
Parry, S. (1998). Disciplinary discourse in doctoral education. Higher Education, 36, 273–299.   
Paul, D., Charney, D., & Kendall, A. (2001). Moving beyond the moment: reception studies in the rhetoric of science. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 15, 372–399.   
Prior, P. A. (1998). Writing disciplinarity: a sociohistoric account of literate activity in the academy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Ridley, D. (2000). The different guises of a PhD thesis and the role of a literature review. In P. Thompson (Ed.), Patterns and perspectives: insights into EAP writing practice (pp. 61–76). The University of Reading: CALS.   
Shaw, P. (1991). Science research students’ composing processes. English for Specific Puproses, 10, 189– 206.   
Shaw, P. M. (1996). One-to-one work on dissertations; effectiveness of correction and efficiency of pedagogy. In M. Hewings, & T. Dudley-Evans (Eds.), Evaluation and course design in EAP (pp. 86–95). London: Prentice-Hall.   
Spack, R. (1988). Initiating students into the academic discourse community: how far should we go? TESOL Quarterly, 22, 29–52.   
Sung, C.-I. (2000). Investigating rounded academic success: the influence of English language proficieny, academic performance, and socio-academic interaction for Taiwanese doctoral students in the United States. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan.   
Swales, J. M. (in preparation). The genres of the research world. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2000). English in today’s research world: a writing guide. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press.   
Thompson, P. (1998). Examining PhD theses in a corpus (pp. 177–182). TALC Conference, Keble College Oxford.   
Thompson, P. (1999). Exploring the contexts of writing: interview with PhD supervisors. In P. Thompson (Ed.), Issues in EAP writing research and instruction (pp. 37–54). The University of Reading: CALS.   
Thompson, P. & Tribble, C. (2001). Looking at citations: using corpora in English for academic purposes. Language learning and technology (electronic journal; details not available).   
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Woolgar, S. (1989). Introduction to Ashmore M. The reflexive thesis: writing sociology of scientific knowledge. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.