# Cultural and disciplinary variation in academic discourse: The issue of influencing factors

Tatyana Yakhontova \*

Department of Foreign Languages for Natural Sciences, Ivan Franko National University of L’viv, Doroshenka 41, L’viv, Ukraine

# Abstract

This paper demonstrates the role of disciplinary context in shaping the common rhetorical and textual features of research texts in different languages and, more broadly, problematizes the validity of straightforward sociocultural explanations of rhetorical differences frequently used in the literature. The research is based on the contrastive genre analysis of English and Slavic (Ukrainian and Russian) conference abstracts in the field of applied mathematics. The features compared include rhetorical moves revealed and identified by reference to Swales’ CARS model, their textual distribution, the paragraph organization of the texts, the syntactic structure of titles, and the use of personal pronouns I/we. The findings of the investigation compared with previously obtained results in the domain of applied linguistics show essential interdisciplinary variation between the two sets of data. This somewhat questions interpretations of rhetorical differences entirely based on the role of external determinants and highlights the importance of established traditions in various academic disciplines and cultures.

$©$ 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: English for Academic Purposes; Contrastive rhetoric; Genre; Academic discourse; Conference abstracts

# 1. Introduction

Contrastive rhetorical investigations, which focus on the comparison of academic written discourses in English versus comparable discourses in other languages, have already become an established area of inquiry, and the scope of this research is clearly tending to widen. In particular, the number of cultures/languages from which discourses are drawn to be contrasted to English has increased in the last decade and now includes several Slavic tongues, which were underrepresented or not considered before, such as Bulgarian (Vassileva, 2000, 2002), Czech (Cˇ mejrkova´, 1996; Cˇ mejrkova´ & Danesˇ, 1997), Polish (Duszak, 1997a,b; Golebiowski, 1999),

Russian (Prozorova, 1997; Vassileva, 2000; Yakhontova, 2002a,b), and Ukrainian (Yakhontova, 2002a,b). However, along with a number of remarkable insights, contrastive rhetorical research has also raised certain questions and problems, most important of them being the interpretation of differences found in contrasted texts and their explanation in the light of multiple influencing factors.

The discrepancies in writing styles and patterns of textual organization revealed in the texts contrasted are traditionally labeled as ‘cultural’ or ‘culture-specific’ differences. This umbrella term seems to embrace rather diverse interpretations stemming from a wide range of possible influences, varying, for example, from sociopolitical factors to purely intralinguistic peculiarities, which are assumed to interplay and leave their joint imprints upon the texts created within different linguistic and cultural environments. The extremely complicated relationship between writing and culture obviously accounts for the existence of these interpretational perspectives, which may roughly be grouped into academic discourse community factors, influences of sociohistorical and sociopolitical circumstances, of national intellectual styles, and, finally, of the possible correlation between language structures and grammatical norms.

According to the first view (referred to, e.g. in Ahmad, 1997; Melander, Swales, & Fredrickson, 1997; Prozorova, 1997; Salager-Meyer, Ariza, & Zambrano, 2003), specific features and even the size of a particular discourse community may to a certain extent shape the conventions of the writing, which its members produce. Thus, Melander et al. (1997) argue that there exists a correlation between the less developed rhetorical schema of Swedish research abstracts (as compared to their American counterparts) and the size and local character of the academic discourse community in Sweden, in which abstracts play a less vital ‘gatekeeping’ function than in international environments. This important factor, however, is viewed as not entirely isolated from the sociohistorical and sociopolitical or ideological circumstances of a particular discourse community’s development (considered in Salager-Meyer et al., 2003; Yakhontova, 2002a). For example, it was assumed in Yakhontova (2002a) that a frequent reference to a current sociopolitical or economic situation in recently produced Ukrainian and Russian linguistic texts seems to be a ‘remnant’ of the Communist discourse with its constant emphasis on the superiority of societal values over individual ones. Such a consideration is, in its turn, related to what is called ‘national intellectual styles’ and appropriate writing traditions often associated with the name of Galtung (1985), who distinguished between several culturallymarked systems of intellectual communication. The explanation of differences in writing based on the impact of national intellectual traditions is prominent, for example, in the work of Clyne (1991) and Duszak (1997a,b).

The three above-mentioned interpretations, which may be referred to as ‘sociocultural factors,’ have become widespread in comparative rhetorical studies. Much less prominent, however, are the explanations of differences or similarities in the light of possible correlation between language and text structures or styles (addressed, for example, in Chesterman, 1998; Kassevitch, 1998; Nichols, 1988). Within the field of contrastive rhetoric, they are often treated with certain skepticism (see for example, Melander, 1998). Usually, investigators in this domain choose the first three explanations, either separately or in combination.

It should be noted, however, that one important dimension in the interplay of these factors— the influence of professional or disciplinary context—has been rarely taken into account. When applied to academic discourse, which exists in a variety of disciplinary realizations, consideration of the influence of the professional subculture (e.g. mathematical, linguistic, medical) becomes essential. It is thus reasonable to assume that disciplinary conventions interplay with national cultural influences, and, furthermore, in the fields marked by a more universal character of cognitive paradigms (hard sciences) the former may even be more prominent. It is not clear, however, how professional and national cultural factors interact in particular languages and fields when both of these variables are considered: do they intricately intertwine producing mixed rhetorical strategies and discourse structures or is it just that the former simply overriding the influence of the latter (as has been shown by Melander et al., 1997 in biology texts)? The results of the contrastive study reported below will provide some insights into this complicated issue.

This paper demonstrates the role of disciplinary proclivities in research writing and, more broadly, problematizes the validity of straightforward sociocultural explanations of rhetorical differences frequently used in the literature. It is based on the extension of the previous contrastive rhetorical and textlinguistic study of English and Slavic (Ukrainian and Russian) conference abstracts in applied linguistics. The present investigation (1) compares the instances of the same genre and languages, which belong to a quite different domain-applied mathematics, (2) contrasts them to the previous findings in the field of applied linguistics, and (3) reconsiders the objectivity of possible sociocultural explanations of the revealed differences. Initially, this study sought to understand the role of a disciplinary context and to analyze its interaction with other possible influences in shaping the common rhetorical and textual features of the AngloAmerican and Slavic texts. However, the findings of the present investigation have also allowed taking a somewhat critical perspective on the issue of influencing factors important for contrastive rhetoric and providing relevant implications for academic writing pedagogy.

The paper will begin with the description of the analytical approach used for the purposes of this research followed by the presentation of findings, their comparison with the previously obtained ones and discussion of the role of external (sociopolitical and sociocultural) determinants.

# 2. Data and approach

The corpus analyzed consisted of 100 conference abstracts in the field of applied mathematics, of which 50 were written by English speakers (as judged both from their names and the names of their institutions), and another 50 by the speakers of two Slavic languages, Ukrainian and Russian. Of these 50, 30 texts were produced in Ukrainian, and the remaining 20—in Russian. The choice of the texts in two Slavic languages was motivated by the following considerations: both languages, although lexically different, have close syntactic features and, more importantly, share common rhetorical patterns developed under the influence of certain sociohistorical circumstances. They are used as academic languages of scholarship in Ukraine; for example, Ukrainian journals and conference volumes usually include texts in both languages (nowadays, however, the number of Ukrainian publications is increasing due to the state policy of Ukrainization). As representative means of Ukrainian academic interaction, Ukrainian and Russian may thus be treated as one group, at least in opposition to the English language.

It was decided at the outset of the study that both English and Slavic texts compared should be (1) of approximately equal length (with 300 words on average), and (2) single-authored, since one aspect of this research involved consideration of the use of first-person pronouns denoting the persona of the author. The texts, which satisfied these selection criteria were taken from the appropriate books of abstracts (their bibliographical descriptions and abbreviated names are provided in the Appendix A of this paper with indication of the number of articles analyzed from each book). For English abstracts, the procedure of extraction looked as follows: all abstracts, which correspond to the above requirements were taken from the books labeled as SolMec and

WCCM (34 altogether), while the remaining 16 were selected from the ICIAM volume as first (with reference to the established criteria) occurring texts. The same principle was applied to the choice of Ukrainian and Russian abstracts. All relevant texts were extracted from the smaller in size books of abstracts (two Ukrainian and one Russian texts from the BR volume, one Ukrainian and two Russian abstracts from the volume indicated in the Appendix A as MNS, and 15 Ukrainian texts from the SME book). The rest of Ukrainian and Russian abstracts (29 in number) chosen as the data for investigation were extracted from the MPM book of abstracts, every first appropriate text being selected for analysis.

It should be mentioned, however, that the character of the conferences, to which the abstracts were submitted, was slightly different, even though all of them were labeled as ‘international.’ English conference abstracts were part of large-scale fora involving participants from many countries and cultural backgrounds, while Ukrainian international conferences mostly included participants from Ukraine and neighboring East European countries (such as Russia, Belarus, and Poland). It is natural to suppose that the factor of the audience and, particularly, its size might differently influence the rhetoric of abstracts. However, as it will be shown further, no significant evidence for this assumption has been found.

As to the method of investigation, the same model as adopted by Yakhontova (2002a) in her comparative investigation of linguistics conference abstracts was used. It may be termed as contrastive genre analysis and includes consecutive consideration of the three levels of generic structure in the texts contrasted (functional organization of their content in terms of rhetorical moves and strategies, formal textual layout, and linguistic features) with the focus on the differences. These three levels of investigation correspond to the Bakhtinian vision of genre as the inseparable unity of its thematic content, compositional structure and style that “. are equally determined by the specific nature of the particular sphere of communication” (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 60). The starting level of this procedure focuses on the analysis of the rhetorical organization of the texts followed by the examination of their layout and the consideration of the most distinctive language features, which seem to play a role in accomplishing the communicative purpose of the genre in question. These features may involve various types of lexical groups (e.g. evaluative words), peculiarities of lexicogrammatical phenomena, such as use of first-person pronouns or tenses, and instances of stylistic variation.

The results of the contrastive analysis of English and Slavic abstracts in applied mathematics are provided in the following section.

# 3. Results

# 3.1. Major cross-cultural findings

The rhetorical structure of the abstracts was interpreted as a series of moves in the spirit of Swales’ (1990) well-known CARS model. The modification of this model applied to the conference abstracts in linguistics (Yakhontova, 2002a) was also used for the investigation of their mathematical counterparts. The present model consists of five rhetorical moves:

1. Outlining the research field.   
2. Justifying a particular research/study.   
3. Introducing the paper to be presented at the conference.   
4. Summarizing the paper.   
5. Highlighting its outcome/results.

Table 1 Quantitative distribution of moves in mathematical conference abstracts   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Moves</td><td>English texts</td><td>Ukrainian and Russian texts</td></tr><tr><td>Outlining the field</td><td>34</td><td>25</td></tr><tr><td>Justifying a research</td><td>31</td><td>33</td></tr><tr><td>Introducing the paper</td><td>45</td><td>44</td></tr><tr><td>Summarizing the paper</td><td>40</td><td>49</td></tr><tr><td>Highlighting its outcome</td><td>21</td><td>38</td></tr></table></body></html>

The first three moves of the model coincide with those suggested by Swales for research paper introductions, while the final two are specific for conventionalized structuring of the genre of the conference abstract.

First of all, the rhetorical moves in the texts under analysis were identified, and appropriate statistical data were accumulated. In some cases, it was not easy to draw distinct boundaries between certain moves (a problem encountered, perhaps, by many genre analysts); therefore, the interpretation of the move structure of the texts under investigation is rather subjective and reveals only the most important and visible tendencies of their organization.

The quantitative distribution of the moves is shown in Table 1.

As can be seen from the table, some moves are more prominent in the English texts, while others occur more frequently in their Slavic counterparts. Thus, the first move, ‘Outlining the research field’, appears more often in English abstracts. At the same time, ‘Highlighting the outcome’ is noticeably less represented in them: only 21 of 50 English abstracts possess this move, while a considerably larger number of Slavic texts—38—highlight their findings. As to the concrete strategies of the moves’ realization, the following similarities and differences have been observed.

The first move, ‘Outlining the research field’, is predominantly realized in both sets of abstracts by reference to established knowledge often combined with importance claim and the reviewing of selected items of previous research. Similarly, the second move, ‘Justifying a particular research/study’, also tends to share one and the same strategy of realization; this time by offering a solution to the existing problem in the field or by extending research in the area. Only two out of 33 Slavic abstracts and 12 out of 31 English ones possessing this move justify their investigations by strategies noticeable in other fields such as indicating a gap or counterclaiming.

The third move, ‘Introducing the paper’, immediately follows the justification of research in the form of a metadiscursive phrase (rarely two phrases) in both groups of abstracts. Here are the representative beginnings excerpted from English (1) and Ukrainian (2) abstracts:

(1) Outlining the research field Plastic deformation of steel and other metals is sensitive to the temperature and rate at which the deformation takes place. The sensitivity is introduced through the mechanisms that govern the deformation and the evolution of the deforming material. Justifying a particular research/study A thorough understanding of a specific material behavior can be obtained only from a detailed and accurate testing over a wide range of temperatures and strain rates. Introducing the paper The focus in the present paper is on the response of hot-rolled 1020 and 1151 steels over temperatures ranging from 25 to $1 0 0 0 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C }$ and strain rates ranging from $5 \times { 1 0 } ^ { - 4 }$ to $1 0 0 0 \mathrm { { s } ^ { - 1 } }$ . (SolMec: 8)

(2) Outlining the research field In modern technologies of the processing of electroconductive homogenous and heterogeneous materials, geophysical investigations, methods of therapy, constant electric and magnetic fields are used as elements of the technological process. Justifying a particular research/study Because of this, the problem of the investigation of the influence of such fields on thermomechanical processes in electroconductive bodies arises. The solving of this problem stimulates development of the innovative approach of mechanics of deformable solids—electro-magneto-thermomechanics. Introducing the paper The suggested work focuses on the elaboration and formulation of the equations of mathematical models for description of interrelated mechano-thermo-electromagnetic processes in electroconductive homogenous and porous bodies. (MPM: 25)1

As can be observed, the ‘Justifying a study’ move in both abstract parts is rather implicit and has no distinct textual boundary (e.g. a new paragraph) that would separate it from the first move. Overall, the rhetorical development in both of these examples proceeds in a nonconflicting way gradually narrowing the field of the study (announced in move 1) to the topic of the paper itself.

Move 4, ‘Summarizing the paper’, is also rather similarly realized in English and Slavic texts. English abstracts provide a brief overview of the prospective presentation with the emphasis on the research framework and clarification of central notions or conceptual tools of the investigation. Their Ukrainian and Russian counterparts either follow the same strategy or, in addition, describe the logical parts of the paper in a consecutive order. In both groups, the paper summaries are structured with the help of descriptive meta-discourse, as in English (3) and Ukrainian (4) excerpts below:

(3) We describe several aspects of simulation-based medical planning systems including imagebased modeling, operative planning and three-dimensional and one-dimensional blood flow computational methods. A series of animal experiments are described where we test the accuracy of three-dimensional and one-dimensional finite element methods for modeling blood flow by comparing predicted flow rates in vivo measurements obtained using phase contrast magnetic resonance imaging. (WCCM: I, 58)

(4) The computational scheme for solving the formulated equations.has been elaborated. On this basis, the investigation of influence of the outer constant electric field upon the spread and interaction of transversal and longitudinal waves.has been conducted. (MNS: 228)

As the analysis of the corpus shows, English authors prefer to use both active metadiscursive constructions with animate (as in example 3) or inanimate subjects and passive constructions, whereas Ukrainian and Russian texts clearly favor meta-discourse with passive voice forms (see example 4). These results in the slightly different impressions the texts produce: English abstracts sound somewhat more assertive, while their Slavic counterparts appear to be neutrally factual. However, these differences are not radical, since assertiveness is not explicit in all of the ‘Summarizing the paper’ moves in English texts; furthermore, some of them seem to share many characteristics with the Slavic texts.

As to the final move, ‘Highlighting the outcome’, the differences here are more considerable and deserve closer scrutiny. First of all, far fewer English abstracts (21 only) contain this move, in contrast to their Slavic counterparts, 38 of which highlight the outcome of the research to be reported at the conference. Second, in English texts, this move is represented by one or two sentences, which only indicate the most important findings, usually with the use of the present or even future tenses. In contrast, Ukrainian and Russian texts are more specific about the results of the investigation and tend to present them with the use of the perfective aspect of the past tense thus adhering to a factual, reporting tone and style. Compare, for example, the following English (5) and Russian (6) excerpts:

(5) The results of extensive studies involving experimental calibration of the overall fracture mechanics framework will be briefly summarized. (WCCM: II, 363)   
(6) A considerable amount of numerical data has been obtained. Their analysis has shown that the temperature field may exert not only quantitative, but also qualitative influence upon the process of the strip’s coming off the base. Thus, if $\beta > 0$ , the number of contacting parts may increase, and if $\beta < 0$ , it may decrease in comparison with the analogous elasticity problem. (MPM: 48) However, despite this difference, the final moves often similarly display the signs of positive   
self-evaluation realized via the use of evaluative attributes, as in the above examples (‘extensive   
studies’, ‘considerable amount of data’) or even of explicit self-promotion, as shown below:   
(7) This model provides a fresh perspective on GYT dysfunction in the light of queuing theory. (ICIAM: 245)   
(8) The comparative analysis of the results obtained on the basis of the elaborated approaches confirms the efficiency and innovative character of the suggested approaches. (MPM: 150) As we may see, both language groups of abstracts are obviously inclined to advertise their   
findings.

The second dimension of the analysis focuses on formal layout of texts and involves consideration of their paragraph structuring, types and features of titles, and textual distribution of the moves. Let us begin with some quantitative characteristics of the paragraph structure of the texts. Table 2 below shows the number of paragraphs (range and average) in the texts of each group.

As can be seen from the Table 2, English texts have more extremes in their paragraph structuring (which ranges from one up to seven paragraphs) than their Ukrainian and Russian ‘genre-mates’, although the latter have a higher average number of paragraphs (four against three). These differences, however, do not seem to be significant. In both language groups of investigated texts, paragraphs show a tendency to be more or less equal in length.

As to the textual distribution of the moves, the following peculiarities were observed. In 15 out of the 25 applied mathematics, English abstracts, which contain the first two moves, these functional units occupy no less than one half of the textual space, and in another 10, no less than one third. In those English texts, which contain either the ‘Outlining the field’ or ‘Justifying a research’ move, the third and fourth moves textually dominate; however, the fifth move, ‘Highlighting the outcome’, is fairly short throughout this whole set. In the Slavic group, those conference abstracts (34 in number) which possess either one or both of the introductory moves, tend to give them less spatial prominence in textualization. In 23 texts, these moves occupy about one fifth or even lesser part of the text, in another seven, one third, and only in four abstracts are they realized by as much as one half of the total text. Thus, the final three moves obviously prevail in terms of their textual size in the Ukrainian and Russian abstracts.

Table 2 Paragraphs: quantitative data   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Number of paragraphs</td><td>English texts</td><td>Ukrainian and Russian texts.</td></tr><tr><td>Number of paragraphs in a text (range)</td><td>1-7</td><td>2-6</td></tr><tr><td>Number of paragraphs in a text (average)</td><td>3</td><td>4</td></tr></table></body></html>

Returning to the final ‘Highlighting the outcome’ move, it is important to emphasize that in the Slavic set the move is considerably longer, in 20 abstracts stretching up to one fourth of the text, and in another eight, up to one third. Since, more English abstracts contain the two initial moves, which are also more vividly presented and fewer of the texts possess the final, fairly short move, the following conclusion can be formulated: English conference abstracts in applied mathematics tend to lay more emphasis on the preface to the actual work and “scene-setting,” in Swales’ term (1996, p. 49), whereas Ukrainian and Russian texts pay more attention to the work itself as well as to its results.

As to the titles of the texts, they revealed more similarities than differences. Forty-four of the English titles and all of the Slavic ones have a syntactic structure of a nominal construction based upon a noun/nominalized verb phrase in the nominative case, for example:

(9) Application of Computational Dynamics in Cardiovascular Surgery (WCCM: I, 58) (10) Models of cyclic deformation of laminated elastometallic bodies (MNS: 102)

In this type of title, the noun (sometimes preceded by an adjective) indicates the theme of the presentation, while the post-modifying attributive or adverbial groups point at the scope of the study, as can be seen from the above examples. Such nominal titles possess a generally neutral, factual tone. Fifteen Slavic headings, however, have a feature represented only in three of their English counterparts: they include, as principal elements, the nouns which denote the character of research, such as ‘investigation’, ‘method’, or ‘elaboration’, for example:

(11) Method of direct integration of static equations of elasticity and thermoelasticity (MPM: 168)

These titles do not so much foreground the theme of the research itself, but emphasize the aspects of research being investigated by the author. There are six English titles in the corpus that contain quite different structural types: five titles each consisting of two parts separated by a colon, and one title in the form of an incomplete sentence beginning with the preposition on. However, titles of these types are not frequent, so they do not distort the general picture of similarities in structure and rhetorical features of the titles in both language groups.

Having considered the major characteristics of the titles, we will proceed to the final, linguistic level of contrastive genre analysis, although limited in this paper to the investigation of the use of personal pronouns I/we. Table 3 shows the quantitative data illustrating the number, occurrences and distribution of the two personal pronouns in the texts investigated.

As can be clearly seen from the table, only English texts $3 6 \%$ of them) adhere to a personalized style of presentation by choosing the pronoun ‘we’ to denote the persona of the author (it is necessary to remember here that that all the abstracts selected for investigation were singleauthored). This ‘we’ to express personal ideas and suggestions seems not to include addressees in the range of referents of the pronoun as in the following example and thus may be treated as exclusive authorial (Vassileva, 2000) or, in other terms, academic we.

Table 3 Distribution and occurrence of ‘I/we’ pronouns   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Pronouns</td><td>English texts</td><td>Ukrainian/Russian texts</td></tr><tr><td>I:</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>number of texts (out of 50)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>average number of occurrences in a text</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>We</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>number of texts (out of 50)</td><td>18</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>average number of occurrences in a text</td><td>2.5</td><td>1</td></tr></table></body></html>

(12) In particular, we propose a set of numerically evaluated low-energy basis functions calculated by solving a local elliptic problem on a regular reference element. (ICIAM: 163)

However, in hard sciences, the research reported at the conferences may quite often result from collaborative work, and, respectively, ‘we’ may be assumed to refer to a group of scientists rather than to a presenting author alone. It is therefore necessary to treat the function of ‘we’ with certain caution in this disciplinary set of texts.

In the abstracts where ‘we’ appears, it occurs fairly frequently (2.5 occurrences per text on average)and often throughout the whole text, in various moves. However, in the third (‘Introducing the paper’) and fourth (‘Summarizing the paper’) moves, it is present in all texts and performs, in fact, a metadiscursive function (see examples 3 and 11) by replacing textual organizers. The quantity of the English mathematical abstracts (32) without any personal pronouns is also rather considerable. It shows, together with the visible ‘we’-perspective in other texts, that somewhat-hedged (i.e. not explicitly manifested through the first person pronoun ‘I’) authorial presence is characteristic of this textual group. It is also worthhighlighting that none of the representatives of the English group use the ‘I’-perspective, which individualizes discourse and emphasizes the responsibility of the authors for their research and its results. Although it is possible to assume that Anglo-Saxon academic culture often labeled as individualistically oriented, or selfprominent (see, for example, Kassevitch, 1998), would show a tendency towards the manifestation of authorial persona through ‘I,’ this particular investigation provides no evidence in support of such a claim. It is thus possible to suppose that the use of the personal pronouns is more discipline—than culture-specific.

The Slavic abstracts, however, show a still stronger tendency for depersonalization by completely avoiding any personal pronouns. These texts stick to a strictly impersonal tone of presentation based upon the wide use of agentless passive constructions (see example 4) thus producing an effect of a highly objective scientific style. As we can see, the two groups of abstracts compared are somewhat different in their choice of perspectives, although they reveal a general tendency towards hiding or disguising the authors of the texts.

Since the consideration of personal pronoun use was the last stage of our contrastive genre analysis, it is now possible to summarize the results of this investigation. The major findings are thus provided in Table 4.

As Table 4 demonstrates, English and Slavic conference abstracts in applied mathematics share a number of similarities and possess certain differences. They are generally alike in the dominant rhetorical strategies of content presentation, overall format, types of titles, and the tendency towards depersonalization. The most striking differences are found in the distribution of moves within the textual space of the abstracts and, so to say, the level of depersonalization, which is higher in the Ukrainian and Russian set. These differences, however, do not seem to be radical. In fact, the major discrepancy between the English mathematical abstracts and their Slavic counterparts lies in the slightly more ‘scene-setting’ and promissory character of English texts, which tend only to outline the main aspects of the papers, and the reporting, factual, and impersonal manner of presenting research findings in their Ukrainian and Russian counterparts.

Table 4 Major features of English and Slavic (Ukrainian and Russian) conference abstracts in applied mathematics   

<html><body><table><tr><td>English conference abstracts in applied mathematics</td><td>Ukrainian and Russian conference abstracts in applied mathematics</td></tr><tr><td>Outline the research field by importance claim or reference to established knowledge Justify a particular research/study by offering a solution to the existing problem in the field or by extending</td><td>Outline the research field by importance claim or reference to established knowledge Justify a particular research/study by offering a solution</td></tr><tr><td>research in this area Introduce and summarize the paper to be presented with</td><td>to the existing problem in the field or by extending. research in this area Introduce and summarize the paper to be presented with</td></tr><tr><td>the extensive use of meta-discourse (prevalence of active constructions) Indicate the most important findings with positive self-</td><td>the extensive use of meta-discourse (prevalence of agentless passive constructions) Describe the research results with positive self-</td></tr><tr><td>evaluation Have a three-paragraph textual layout with the equal. length of paragraphs and spatial domination of the first</td><td>evaluation Have a four-paragraph textual layout with the equal</td></tr><tr><td>(Outlining the research field&#x27;) and second (Justifying a research&#x27;) moves</td><td>length of paragraphs and spatial domination of the summarizing the paper and highlighting the outcome</td></tr><tr><td>Possess titles in the form of nominal phrases that state the ultimate theme or subject of a paper Use we or impersonal style</td><td>moves Possess titles in the form of nominal phrases that state the ultimate theme or subject of a paper Use impersonal style</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.2. Cross-disciplinary comparison

Now it is possible to compare the results with those obtained in the field of applied linguistics (Yakhontova, 2002a), which are summarized in Table 5. As seen from the table, English and Slavic linguistic abstracts oppose each other in all of the most important rhetorical and textual features.

Surprisingly enough, Slavic linguistic texts have more features in common with English mathematical texts than the latter have with their English linguistic counterparts. In other words, three groups of texts—Ukrainian and Russian texts in applied linguistics, the texts of the same languages in applied mathematics, and English mathematical abstracts—have a number of essential similarities (such as justifying research in a non-conflicting way, tendency to weaken authorial presence or to use nominal titles), while English linguistic texts stand apart with their peculiar, highly promotional features. On the other hand, the texts of each language group retain a number of similar characteristics, such as spatial domination of the first and second moves in the English linguistic and mathematical texts, and the prevalence of the fourth move in their Slavic ‘genre-mates’.

Table 5 Major differences between English and Slavic (Ukrainian and Russian) conference abstracts in applied linguistics   

<html><body><table><tr><td>English conference abstracts in applied linguistics</td><td>Ukrainian and Russian conference abstracts in applied linguistics</td></tr><tr><td>Justify a particular research/study by indicating a gap in the previous research</td><td>Justify a particular research/study as a possible solution to the existing problem in the research field</td></tr><tr><td>Summarize the paper to be presented with a fair amount of meta-discourse and the emphasis on the novelty and originality of the research</td><td>Describe the content of the paper to be presented in a neutral manner and without meta-discourse</td></tr><tr><td>Highlight the research outcome by emphasizing its originality</td><td>Describe the significance of the findings in a declarative manner</td></tr><tr><td>Have an average three-paragraph structure with the equal length of paragraphs and spatial domination of the first (Outlining the research field&#x27;) and second (&#x27;Justifying a research&#x27;) moves</td><td>Have a multiparagraph structure with non-uniform length of paragraphs and spatial domination of the &#x27;Summarizing the paper&#x27; move</td></tr><tr><td>Possess diverse types of titles with the presence of &#x27;eye- catching&#x27;, appealing constructions Use I or inclusive we to denote the persona of an author</td><td>Possess titles in the form of nominal phrases that state the ultimate theme or subject of a paper</td></tr></table></body></html>

All these observations allow us to conclude that disciplinary context plays a very important, if not decisive role, in shaping textual features of the genre in question, which, in their turn, may be viewed as offering, in Hyland’s (2004, p. 5) terms, a window on the practices and ideology of appropriate discourse communities. In previous investigations, this context seems to reinforce the potential differences between the texts in English and those in Slavic languages, while in the present research it significantly weakens the discrepancies without, however, annihilating them. A more detailed discussion of the most prominent findings and implications is provided in Section 4.

# 4. Discussion: do we need to explain differences?

The results of this study lead us to the recognition of intracultural variation of academic discourse most probably caused by the specific influences of certain fields or disciplines. The importance of taking into account this factor in contrastive rhetorical studies has recently been emphasized in the literature (see, for example, Connor, 2004). On the other hand, it somewhat shifts from the traditional concern of contrastive rhetoric with differences in textual patterns to a focus on similarities, since in the case of mathematical abstracts the latter obviously prevail. Although disciplinary influence seems to be explanatory enough, it is still possible to provide somewhat deeper insights.

First, the presence of such striking similarities in the applied mathematics texts may be due to, at least partially, the universality of cognitive paradigms characteristic of hard sciences. Second, the development of these sciences has always involved exchange of ideas, awareness of the work of others, and mutually beneficial collaboration. Even during the Soviet times, for example, when the majority of Ukrainian and Russian scholars worked in isolation, the literature on mathematics and related fields published in the West was available in libraries, and certain, though limited, forms of international interaction existed. This important feature of the science of mathematics or, rather, a prerequisite for its successful development, may account for internationalized rhetorical conventions in the field and thus for almost the same choice of them in appropriate English and Slavic abstracts. At the same time, it is possible to assume that in linguistics which, like other disciplines in the humanities, is more subjective and consequently more sensitive to national contexts, textual patterns may show greater variability, yielding the considerable divergences observed, for example, in English and Slavic texts.

As to the differences revealed in the mathematical texts compared, of most interest are those which also consistently appear in the set of linguistic abstracts. This mainly concerns the textual distribution of moves, which is clearly different; in English texts it is marked by preliminary ‘scene-setting’, and in Slavic abstracts their constant focus is on the description of the paper’s content. Such a feature is most probably due to the genre expectations of the text-producers, often related in the literature to academic discourse community factors. The analysis of the four sets of abstracts from two methodologically opposite fields indicates that the vision of this genre is rather different in Ukrainian and Anglophone academic cultures. For Ukrainian authors, the genre seems to be very close to a research paper abstract, which usually provides a condensed factual account of the main points of a paper, while for English academic writers it is only an outline of some selected aspects of the future text, often in combination with explicit self-promotion (most expressive in linguistic abstracts). In more theoretical terms, here we are able to witness the deviations in the rhetorical purpose of the genre, which may be modified in accordance with certain national values and beliefs (Mauranen, 1993, p. 40).

A more complicated picture, however, arises if we attempt to explain this and the other differences by the influence of additional social factors. For example, the promotionalism of English linguistic abstracts and the absence of any self-advertisement in their Ukrainian and Russian counterparts might be linked to the presence or, respectively, absence of the influence of a market society with its constant demands for competitiveness, even in academic spheres. However, how could the explicit self-promotion of Slavic mathematical abstracts then be explained, given that it is equal to that revealed in the English ones?

In my mind, the most plausible general explanation for all the differences, which are usually labeled as ‘cultural’, is the inheritance of academic writing conventions, typical of this or that national culture, through various intertextual processes. Although discourses are socially constructed, the influence of societal factors seems to be more subtle and less straightforward in academic writing, which tends to adhere to rather stable discursive patterns. It may be assumed that certain textual structures with inherent semantic and pragmatic features were developed in different academic cultures under the impact of social and historical circumstances. In the process of historical and cultural evolution, these structures have also been shaping the existing and developing writing traditions that, in turn, have led to their further crystallization. Within relatively closed national academic communities in various fields, established conventions of writing seem to maintain their stability through intertextuality, imitation, and both implicit and explicit learning. This rather conservative character of written academic practice and the role of its intertextual and especially imitational inheritance, undoubtedly question the direct and immediate impact of sociopolitical factors on writing patterns.

On the other hand, the dynamic, developmental character of social and cultural practice constantly creates and maintains space for the modification of cognitive and writing structures and their linguistic representations, even though this ever-lasting, two-way process of culture and discourse interaction may be rather covert and subordinated to traditions established in various academic milieus and research fields. For example, the processes of globalization have made possible the rapid importation of English academic writing patterns and their further implantation in other cultures, as shown in Salager-Meyer et al. (2003) with respect to Spanish medical writing. Also, as Kretzenbacher (2001, pp. 454–456) suggests, the development of electronic media might trigger another cross-cultural exchange. Since, the hypertextual structure of the new media provides unlimited possibilities of digression and of jumping from link to link, it is quite opposite to the linear structure typical of English expository writing. Thus, English academic publications in the virtual space might develop a stylistic feature of digressiveness. This requires a degree of reader responsibility, which would be new for this culture, while coming closer to the model of academic communication in Central and Eastern European languages. The dynamism of these changes tends to weaken the role of national traditions in writing and to make them less powerful as an influencing factor. In fact, only large-scale comparative diachronic studies could more or less adequately show the interplay of conventions and changing sociohistorical circumstances in the shaping of writing styles in different societies.

The two contradictory tendencies outlined above seem to manifest themselves differently in different fields and thus make doubtful any general, straightforward explanations based on external determinants. Also, consideration of writing in the postmodernist spirit, on the level of individual identity and idiosyncrasy, inevitably undermines the homogeneity of explanatory approaches. For example, the fact that several English mathematical abstracts in the small corpus investigated are rhetorically and textually quite similar to their Ukrainian or Russian counterparts might suggest a need for a more careful and critical stance even though it does not make any culture-based explication unnecessary.

These implications together with the rather complicated issue of correlation between linguistic and rhetorical patterns seriously problematize the objectivity and validity of broad sociocultural explanations on a synchronous level and make them rather disputable, at least in pedagogy. It is worth recollecting here that contrastive rhetoric emerged as a response to the needs of learners in the field of second language writing. By providing comparative insights, this area of inquiry helps nonnative learners to master academic writing in English. While the demonstration of differences between English texts and those in other languages can indeed be of great help, the efforts to explain them in sociocultural terms may not be necessarily important. Furthermore, they could be perceived as excessively subjective or even unethical since they may involve interpretations arising from existing cultural stereotypes or biases. At the same time, the explanation based on the role of established traditions in this or that academic culture and influence of educational systems is usually accepted by learners and underscored by many researchers in the field (see, for example, Clyne, 1991; Le, 1999; Salager-Meyer et al., 2003; Shaw, 2003; Vassileva, 2000, 2002). Thus, whatever the individual attitudes towards elucidating the writing differences known as ‘cultural’ might be, it is clear that the role of potential factors influencing them remains one of the most contested issues in contrastive rhetoric.

# Appendix A. Books of abstracts

# Appendix A.1. Books of English abstracts

ICIAM 4th International Congress on Industrial and Applied Mathematics. Edinburgh, 5–9 July, 1999. (16).   
SolMec XXXI Polish Solid Mechanics Conference. Mierki n. Olsztynek, September 9–14, 1996. (2).   
WCCM 5th World Congress on Computational Mechanics. Vol. I and II. Vienna, 7–12 July, 2002. (32).

# Appendix A.2. Books of Ukrainian and Russian abstracts

BR nternational Scientific Conference ‘6th Bogoliubov Readings’. Kyiv, August 26–30 2003. (3).   
MPM International Scientific Conference ‘Modern Problems of Mechanics and Mathematics’. L’viv, May 25–28, 1998. (29).   
MNS 4th International Conference on Mechanics of Nonhomogeneous Structures. Ternopil’,

September 19–22, 1995. (3). SME 2nd International Symposium of Ukrainian Mechanical Engineers in L’viv. L’viv, May 4–6, 1995. (15).

# References

Ahmad, K. (1997). Research article introductions in Malay: Rhetoric in an emerging research community. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse. Trends in linguistics, studies and monographs 104 (pp. 273–303). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays, (C. Emerson M. Holquist Eds.), (V.W. McGee, Trans.) Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.   
Chesterman, A. (1998). Contrastive functional analysis. Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Clyne, M. (1991). The sociocultural dimension: The dilemma of the German-speaking scholar. In H. Schro¨der (Ed.), Subject-oriented texts: Languages for special purposes and text theory (pp. 49–67). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.   
Cˇ mejrkova´, S. (1996). Academic writing in Czech and English. In E. Ventola, & A. Mauranen (Eds.), Academic writing. Intercultural and textual issues (pp. 137–152). Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Cˇ mejrkova´, S., & Danesˇ, F. (1997). Academic writing and cultural identity: The case of Czech academic writing. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse. Trends in linguistics, studies and monographs 104 (pp. 41– 61). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Connor, U. (2004). Introduction. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3(4), 271–276.   
Duszak, A. (1997a). Analyzing digressiveness in Polish academic prose. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse. Trends in linguistics, studies and monographs 104 (pp. 323–341). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Duszak, A. (1997b). Cross-cultural academic communication: A discourse-community view. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse. Trends in linguistics, studies and monographs 104 (pp. 11–39). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Galtung, J. (1985). Struktur, Kultur und intellektueller stil. In A. Wierlacher (Ed.), Das Fremde und das Eigene (pp. 151– 193). Munchen: Iudicum.   
Golebiowski, Z. (1999). ‘Application of Swales’ model in analysis of research papers by Polish authors. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 37(3), 231–245.   
Hyland, K. (2004). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press.   
Kassevitch, V. B. (1998). Culture-dependent differences in language and discourse structures. In B. Caron (Ed.), Proceedings of the 16th International Congress of Linguists. Oxford: Pergamon (Paper No. 0003 [CDROM]).   
Kretzenbacher, H. L. (2001). Looking backward–looking forward–still looking good? On style in academic communication. In F. Mayer (Ed.), Language for special purposes: Perspectives for the new millenium (pp. 443– 458). Tu¨bingen: Narr.   
Le, E. (1999). The use of paragraphs in French and English academic writing: Towards a grammar of paragraphs. Text, 19(3), 307–343.   
Mauranen, A. (1993). Cultural differences in academic rhetoric: A textlinguistic study. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.   
Melander, B. (1998). Culture or genre? Issues in the interpretation of cross-cultural differences in scientific papers. In I. Fortanet, S. Posteguillo, J. C. Palmer, & J. F. Coll (Vol. Eds.), Genre studies in English for academic purposes: Vol. 1 (pp. 211–226). Castello de la Plana: Publicacions de la Universitat.   
Melander, B., Swales, J. M., & Fredrickson, K. M. (1997). Journal abstracts from three academic fields in the United States and Sweden: National or disciplinary proclivities?. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse. Trends in linguistics, studies and monographs 104 (pp. 251–272). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Nichols, J. (1988). Nominalization and assertion in scientific Russian prose. In J. Haiman, & S. Thompson (Eds.), Clause combining in grammar and discourse (pp. 399–428). Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Prozorova, L. A. (1997). If not given, then what? Things that come first in academic discourse. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse. Trends in linguistics, studies and monographs 104 (pp. 306–322). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Salager-Meyer, F. M., Ariza, A. A., & Zambrano, N. (2003). The scimitar, the dagger and the glove: Intercultural differences in the rhetoric of criticism in Spanish, French and English medical discourse (1930–1995). English for Specific Purposes, 22(3), 223–247.   
Shaw, P. (2003). Evaluation and promotion across languages. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(4), 343–357.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (1996). Teaching the conference abstract. In E. Ventola, & A. Mauranen (Eds.), Academic writing: Today and tomorrow (pp. 45–59). Helsinki: Helsinki University Press.   
Vassileva, I. (2000). Who is the author? A contrastive analysis of authorial presence in English, German, French, Russian and Bulgarian academic discourse. Sankt Augustin: Asgard.   
Vassileva, I. (2002). Academic discourse rhetoric and the Bulgarian–English interlanguage. Sofia: Tip-Top Press.   
Yakhontova, T. (2002a). ‘Selling’ or ‘telling’? The issue of cultural variation in research genres. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 216–232). Harlow: Longman.   
Yakhontova, T. (2002b). Titles of conference presentations abstracts: A cross-cultural perspective. In E. Ventola, C. Shalom, & S. Thompson (Eds.), The language of conferencing (pp. 277–300). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.