# Exploring the use of model texts as a feedback instrument in expository writing: EFL learners’ noticing, incorporations, and text quality

Long Quoc Nguyen a,b,\*,1 , Bao Trang Thi Nguyen a,2 , Hoang Yen Phuong c,3

a University of Foreign Languages and International Studies, Hue University, Hue City, Viet Nam b FPT University, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam c School of Foreign Languages, Can Tho University, Can Tho City, Viet Nam

# A R T I C L E I N F O

# A B S T R A C T

Keywords:   
Model   
Feedback   
L2 writing   
Expository writing   
Process   
Product

Model texts as a feedback instrument (MTFI) have proven effective in enhancing L2 writing, yet research on this domain mainly focused on narrative compositions over a three-stage task: i) composing, ii) comparing, and iii) rewriting. The impact of MTFI on learners’ noticing, in corporations, and text quality in expository writing, especially in the Vietnamese context, remains underexplored. To address these gaps, this study aims to investigate the effect of MTFI on 68 Vietnamese EFL undergraduates’ expository writing following a process-product approach. The participants were divided into a control group (CG, $N = 3 3$ ) and an experimental group (EG, $N =$ 35). Both groups attended stages one and three, but only the EG compared their initial writing with a model text in stage two. The results, derived from learners’ note-taking sheets, written paragraphs, and semi-structured interviews, revealed that despite the two groups’ comparability in stage one, the EG demonstrated significantly better text quality than the CG in stage three, particularly in content, lexis, and organization. Furthermore, while the EG largely encountered lexical issues at the outset, they primarily concentrated on content-related and organizational features in the subsequent stages. Based on the findings, recommendations for future research and implications for pedagogy were deliberated.

# 1. Introduction

Written corrective feedback (WCF), defined as “a written response to a linguistic error that has been made in the writing of a text” of a second language (L2) learner (Bitchener & Storch, 2016, p.1), has been employed by many scholars over the past decades to promote writing gains (for a review, see Crosthwaite et al., 2022). However, its efficacy is still under question. Indeed, there are concerns about the clarity of WCF (Ellis, 2009) and the excessive number of corrections that might be counterproductive (Lee, 2019). Furthermore, research indicates that WCF may have a marginal impact on learners’ writing (Truscott, 2007), which could be the reason why students keep making similar mistakes in their subsequent compositions (Lee, 2019). Additionally, Truscott (2007) questioned teachers’ capability to provide consistent and accurate feedback on learners’ writing, especially in large classes. Practically, this approach is time-consuming, potentially posing a burden on both teachers and students (Lee, 2019).

To alleviate these issues, an alternative to WCF has been adopted in L2 writing classrooms, which is the use of model texts as a feedback instrument (MTFI) (e.g., García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017; Hanaoka, 2007). There are three main stages in this instructional approach: i) students write a composition on a given prompt and note down the problems they encounter, ii) students compare their draft with one or two models, and iii) students rewrite their text. Unlike WCF which involves corrections of learners’ errors (Crosthwaite et al., 2022; Bitchener & Storch, 2016) in the form of negative evidence feedback, MTFI provides learners with positive evidence feedback (Cao & Mao, 2022) without addressing any specific errors in their writing. MTFI has been shown to be effective in facilitating L2 writing as it furnishes students with well-crafted samples of writing “for not just the specific sentence but the whole discourse as well” (Yang & Zhang, 2010, p. 480). Moreover, it can promote students’ metalinguistic awareness, foster their autonomy, and help them engage in deeper processing than WCF (Hanaoka, 2007; Hanaoka & Izumi, 2012). Providing learners with model texts after they have finished their writing for comparison may also bolster their selective attention to particular L2 components, especially to the problems they faced in the composing stage (Canovas ´ Guirao et al., 2015).

Despite its potential, MTFI is still in its infancy (Lazaro-Ibarrola, ´ 2021). To date, attention has largely been drawn to what problems L2 learners encountered (stage one), what features in model texts they noticed (stage two), and what noticed elements in models they incorporated into rewritten versions (stage three) (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). Exploring the changes in learners’ text quality between stages one and three has also been a primary focus in past MTFI research (e.g., Kang, 2020; L´azaro-Ibarrola, 2021). However, these studies mainly concentrated on narrative writing which was based on a sequence of picture prompts (e.g., Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). It remains unclear whether such findings can be obtained in expository writing, which is referred to as argumentative texts (Beers & Nagy, 2011), or compositions about causes, effects, or solutions of an issue (Lundine & McCauley, 2016). It is essential to investigate the effect of MTFI on EFL learners’ expository writing as this is an important genre in higher education (Yang et al., 2023). Moreover, different writing genres have varying requirements of language use (Chung & Ahn, 2021; Yoon & Polio, 2017), which might yield different outcomes (Kang, 2020). In addition, research on MTFI mostly focused on writing as a process (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021) or a product (e.g., Luquin & García Mayo, 2024; Tieu & Baker, 2022). Few researchers have approached MTFI as both a process and product which is needed to shed greater light on learners’ feedback processing (Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2020). Furthermore, previous MTFI studies largely involved young English as a Foreign Language (EFL) learners. Those conducted in the higher education setting, especially in the Vietnamese context, are still limited. Investigating how EFL learners in tertiary education make use of expository MTFI would offer a more holistic understanding of how this instructional strategy can be harnessed across diverse settings. These gaps highlight the need to have another study on expository MTFI as both a process and a product.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Theoretical foundations for the use of MTFI

Canovas ´ Guirao et al. (2015) conceptualized models as high-quality texts written by expert users of the target language, “bearing in mind the content and the genre of the composition, as well as learners’ age, proficiency level" (p. 65). Thus, it is pivotal that these texts be carefully composed and piloted prior to the full-scale study to assure their appropriacy. Indeed, research has shown that students might feel demotivated if models are difficult to comprehend (García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017). The use of model texts as a feedback facilitator is endorsed by both cognitive and sociocultural theories.

From a cognitive perspective, the use of MTFI can be explained in light of the Output Hypothesis (Swain, 1985, 2000) and the Noticing Hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990, 2001). Swain (1985, 2000) posits that output production could help learners recognize their linguistic problems (noticing) and encourage them to seek solutions to their knowledge gaps or holes. Via the iterative process of hypothesis confirmation and rejection (hypothesis testing), they reflect on their previously encountered issues to find the most suitable solutions (metalinguistic processing). This process can lead to learning gains (Swain, 1985, 2000), which is further supported by the Noticing Hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990, 2001) with the notion that learners’ noticing definitely facilitates L2 development. The three stages of MTFI mentioned earlier correspond with three functions (i.e., noticing, hypothesis testing, metalinguistic processing) of the Output Hypothesis (Swain, 1985, 2000). To illustrate, in stage one, students are required to compose their first draft on a given prompt (output), which helps them realize gaps or holes in their knowledge (noticing). In stage two, when comparing their writing with model texts, students draw their attention to features in the given models (noticing) and evaluate whether these features are useful or appropriate for solving their initial problems (hypothesis testing). In stage three, students endeavor to reflect on the noticed features in stage two and incorporate these aspects into their rewritten version. Such metalinguistic processing (the third function) could help students deepen their L2 knowledge and understand the connection between forms and meanings (Swain, 2000). Throughout these three stages, students’ noticing plays a crucial role in language development as individuals with higher levels of noticing are more likely to experience greater learning gains (Schmidt, 1990, 2001).

Alternatively, models can also be viewed as textually mediated tools (Hamano-Bunce, 2022) in the form of language, a component of sociocultural theory (Storch, 2018; Vygotsky, 1978), which provides learners with scaffolded assistance for their writing devel opment. Indeed, when learners compare their drafts with the given models, they engage with compositions written by more proficient users of the target language. This interaction allows them to confirm their knowledge or find ways to bridge their L2 gaps. Overall, MTFI can be deemed as a helpful tool for L2 learners’ writing development, either from a cognitive or a sociocultural perspective.

# 2.2. L2 learners’ noticing and incorporations in an MTFI task

Previous research on MTFI primarily focused on writing as a process, exploring L2 learners’ noticing and incorporations over the three stages. Most of these studies (e.g., Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; Hanaoka, 2007) employed narratives which required students to construct a story based on given pictures. Hanaoka (2007) laid the ground for MTFI by conducting an over-two-month study with the participation of 37 Japanese EFL learners at a women’s university. The results showed that these individuals were mostly faced with problems related to lexis $( 9 2 . 4 ~ \% )$ in stage one. Additionally, lexical aspects were predominantly noticed $( 6 5 . 4 ~ \% )$ in stage two and incorporated $( 6 0 . 3 \% )$ into subsequent revisions in stage three. These findings were confirmed by Baleghizadeh and Arab (2011) who performed an MTFI study with 34 EFL learners, working individually, at a university in Iran. The authors reported that lexis was mostly noticed and incorporated over the three stages (composing: $5 5 . 6 \%$ , comparing: $6 6 . 4 \%$ , rewriting: $6 0 . 3 \ : \%$ ). Subsequent studies (e.g., Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017) also showcased similar outcomes, with vocabulary being documented the most in all stages.

In a recent study, Luquin and García Mayo (2021) adopted a quasi-experimental design following a three-stage narrative writing task with the participation of 38 Spanish EFL learners (aged 11–12). The children were assigned into two groups: an MTFI group (10 pairs) and a control group (9 pairs). Whereas the former received a model to work with in the comparing stage, the latter self-edited their original drafts. It was found that the MTFI group encountered grammatical problems the most in the composing stage. However, in the second and third stages, they concentrated more on lexis and content while the control group paid attention to forms and mechanics. In Luquin and García Mayo’s (2021) study, although learners mostly paid attention to grammar in the first stage (due to the course’s focus on this aspect), they eventually shifted their concentration to lexis in the subsequent stages.

Insightful as these studies are, they only concentrated on narrative writing based on a set of pictures; very few have attempted to investigate what features L2 learners noticed and incorporated from models of other genres. It seems that only two studies, to date, concentrated on the writing process in an MTFI task employing the expository genre. One such study, conducted by Kang (2020), involved 40 EFL Korean high school learners, who were put into an experimental $( N = 2 0 )$ ) and a control $\left( N = 2 0 \right)$ ) group. In stage one, they wrote an argumentative essay about whether they supported the ban on smoking. In stage two, while the experimental group received two models for comparison, the control group self-edited their text. Following this, both groups were required to rewrite their essay. The author reported that the experimental group primarily drew attention to lexis over the stages: composing $( 6 3 . 3 ~ \% )$ , comparing $( 5 5 \% )$ , and rewriting $( 6 2 \% )$ . Although Kang’ (2020) study added great insights into the existing knowledge of MTFI, there was one limitation that needs to be noted. That is, the participants had a five-minute training session to brainstorm ideas for the essay prior to their first drafts. Such exposure might have influenced the learners’ noticing, especially regarding content-related features. In a more recent study, Wu et al. (2023) explored what 40 Chinese EFL undergraduates noticed during a three-stage argumentative writing task. The authors found that the participants attended to lexical aspects in the first $( 6 0 . 6 \% )$ and second $( 7 1 . 9 4 \% )$ ) stages. The study, however, did not address the incorporations in the rewriting stage. These shortcomings may obscure our understanding of how EFL learners notice and incorporate features from expository model texts, highlighting the need for additional research.

# 2.3. The impact of MTFI on L2 learners’ writing quality

A growing body of MTFI research has focused on measuring L2 learners’ text quality by comparing compositions in the first and third stages. For example, Villarreal and Lazaro-Ibarrola ´ (2022) compared drafts written by 13 dyads who were assigned to a modeling group (6 pairs, reading two models) and a control group (7 pairs, only rewriting their draft). The authors concluded that "none of the groups experienced a meaningful increase in the overall mark" (p. 11). Nevertheless, in a two-cycle longitudinal study with 60 Spanish EFL children (aged 11–12) who were put into three groups: control group (9 dyads, not receiving model treatment), short-term MTFI group (11 dyads, with model treatment for months one and six only), and long-term MTFI group (10 dyads, with model treatment for the whole six months), Luquin and García Mayo (2024) found that both MTFI groups, after exposure to a model text, outperformed the control group in terms of coherence in the first cycle’s posttest. Moreover, in the second cycle’s posttest, the long-term MTFI group performed better in cohesion than the other groups (medium-sized effect). These two studies, however, only examined narratives, so their findings may not be applicable to other genres such as expository writing.

Only a few studies have investigated the effect of MTFI on EFL learners’ expository writing quality. Kang (2020) reported that MTFI had a significant impact on 20 Korean EFL learners’ essay quality in terms of vocabulary and content. In another study, Kang (2023) measured the effectiveness of MTFI on the writing quality of 33 Korean EFL learners. Via a three-stage argumentative task with two models, Kang (2023) found a positive significant change in the total score of the model group’s drafts, outperforming the control group $( N = 3 4$ , self-editing their text), albeit with a small effect size. Similarly, Wu et al. (2023) examined whether MTFI enhanced writing quality of 40 Chinese EFL undergraduates. It was found that the experimental group (with exposure to two models), considerably improved their overall writing mark and scores in grammar, vocabulary, content, and organization. In the same vein, Tieu and Baker (2022) also found a positively significant impact of MTFI on Vietnamese EFL undergraduates’ argumentative essays in all these criteria. However, the effect sizes were not reported, so the magnitudes of the significance were not known.

Taken together, the above findings indicate that MTFI could be a potential tool to promote L2 learners’ writing, both as a process and a product; however, several drawbacks need to be mentioned. First, such studies are still limited, especially those on expository writing. Second, there is still a lack of reports on effect sizes, making it difficult to compare results across studies (Larson-Hall & Plonsky, 2015). Third, learners were given more time in the composing stage than in the rewriting stage (e.g., $3 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ in stage one and $2 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ in stage three in the study by Wu et al., 2023). This made the test conditions incomparable, which might have influenced the obtained outcomes. Therefore, future research is warranted to mitigate these limitations.

# 3. The present study

To fill the gaps analyzed in the literature review, this study aimed to explore Vietnamese EFL learners’ noticing, incorporations, and text quality in an expository writing task with three stages. In particular, it first examined what writing problems the learners encountered in the composing stage before investigating what features in a model text they noticed. Following this, incorporations of previously noticed features into rewritten drafts and changes in text quality were also analyzed. Therefore, four research questions (RQs) were formulated as follows:

1. What writing problems do Vietnamese EFL learners encounter while composing an expository text?   
2. What features do Vietnamese EFL learners notice while comparing their expository text with a given model?   
3. What noticed features in the comparing stage do Vietnamese EFL learners choose to incorporate into their rewritten text?   
4. Does MTFI significantly enhance Vietnamese EFL learners’ text quality in the rewriting stage?

In light of the reviewed literature, we hypothesize that Vietnamese EFL learners may encounter lexical problems the most in the composing stage (Hypothesis 1), consistent with previous studies (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; Kang, 2020). Furthermore, they probably draw most of their attention to features related to vocabulary in the comparing stage (Hypothesis 2) and predominantly incorporate lexical aspects in their rewritten draft (Hypothesis 3), following reports from prior research (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017). Additionally, as documented in past studies (e.g., Kang, 2020, 2023; Wu et al., 2023), it is hypothesized that MTFI could significantly enhance learners’ draft quality (Hypothesis 4).

# 4. Methodology

# 4.1. Participants

The present study was conducted at a Vietnamese university with the participation of 68 first-year undergraduates (aged 18–23, 14 females and 54 males). They came from two intact classes, taught by the same teacher (also the first researcher), of the same English Preparatory Course which was aimed to help them reach the B2 level (according to the CEFR) and also to write expository paragraphs effectively. On average, they had learned English for 9.88 years $( S D = 2 . 6 5$ ) without any prior overseas training. Their English pro ficiency levels ranged from B1 to B2 as determined by the Quick Oxford Placement Test (QOPT) (UCLES, 2001). Subsequent analysis with a Mann-Whitney U test (due to the scores’ non-normal distribution) revealed no significant difference in proficiency levels be tween the two classes $U = 5 7 7$ , $p = . 9 9 5$ , with the median score (34 out of 60 for both classes) equivalent to B1 (UCLES, 2001). Consequently, one class was randomly assigned as the control group (CG, $N = 3 3$ ), while the other was designated as the experimental group (EG, $N = 3 5$ ).

# 4.2. Design

Following previous MTFI research (e.g., Roothooft et al., 2022; Villarreal & Lazaro-Ibarrola, ´ 2022), the current study adopted a quasi-experimental design with two groups (CG, EG) over a three-stage task: i) composing (pretest), ii) comparing, and iii) rewriting (posttest). The only difference between the two groups was in stage two: the EG compared their text with a given model while the CG (without exposure to any forms of feedback) did not participate in this stage. This writing task also followed the process-product approach as it examined both the writing process (noticing and incorporations over the stages) and product (text quality).

# 4.3. Procedure and instruments

The study was conducted within a one-month timespan. In the first week, the students were informed of the research, signed their consent form, completed the biodata questionnaire, and took the QOPT. In the following weeks, they participated in a paper-based writing task in which no extra materials or discussions were allowed in all stages, as detailed below.

In the second week, all participants joined Stage 1 in which they were required to write a paragraph of at least 120 words on solutions to littering in large cities within $2 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ . The text and time lengths were established in accordance with the course’s syllabus, which proved suitable for the target learners through a pilot test conducted prior to the full-scale study. The writing topic (littering) was chosen because the students were learning about environmental issues at the time of research. Upon completion, the papers were collected before the students were provided with a Problematic Features Encountered (PFE) sheet adapted from Hanaoka (2007) (see Appendix A). They were instructed to note down, in either English or Vietnamese, any writing problems they encountered while composing the expository paragraph. The students completed the PFE in about $1 0 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ and returned the sheets to the teacher.

In the third week, Stage 2, the EG were given a copy of their first draft, a model text on the same topic in Stage 1 (see Appendix B), and a Features Noticed (FN) sheet adapted from Hanaoka (2007) (see Appendix C). The model text was written by the class teacher, modified by an American teacher who was experienced in teaching writing to Vietnamese students, and carefully reviewed by two other EFL teachers (all of them owning a Master’s degree in English Language Teaching) to assure that it was suitable for the target learners. Indeed, a pilot study on 10 students with a similar profile revealed that on a scale of 1.0 (very difficult to understand) to 10.0 (very easy to understand), the model was rated as comprehensible $M = 7 . 8$ , $S D = . 8 4 )$ ). The model was further analyzed via the Write&Improve with Cambridge website (https://writeandimprove.com/), and the yielded result was B2, the target level of the participants. Following Luquin and García Mayo (2021, 2024), we only employed one instead of two models because it helped increase the students’ focus, reduce their cognitive burden, limit the possible effect of working memory on their incorporations later (Kang, 2022), and cope with time restrictions in a classroom-based setting. The participants were required to read their text and the model as well as complete the FN sheet by writing down any similarities and differences between the two compositions, and anything they found useful in the model. They could take notes in either English or Vietnamese for as much time as needed. Upon their completion, which was about $3 0 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ , all materials were collected.

One week later, Stage 3, both groups performed the same writing prompt as in Stage 1, without prior notice and without access to any materials or support. After $2 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ , the participants submitted their papers to the teacher. Following this, ten students in the EG were randomly invited to join the individual semi-structured interviews conducted in Vietnamese to avoid any possible misunder standing and to encourage the interviewees to share their thoughts as much as possible. The interviews consisted of three main questions (see Appendix D), the first two revolving around what aspects students focused on in the comparing stage, what features in the model they chose to incorporate into their rewritten paragraph, and the reasons for their noticing as well as incorporations. The third item concentrated on their belief of the impact of the MTFI task on their paragraph writing. During the interview, the students were allowed to look at the model again when necessary to assist the recall of their noticing and incorporations. Each interview, about $1 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ , was organized in a private room and audio-recorded with the interviewee’s permission.

# 4.4. Data coding and analysis

The data included 68 PFE sheets, 35 FN sheets, 136 written paragraphs (in Stages 1 and 3), and 10 interview recordings. The first three types were coded into four main aspects including content, vocabulary, grammar, and organization, which were the key di mensions of writing, following previous MTFI studies (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023). Furthermore, the consistent use of these categories throughout the three stages of the writing task could enhance the interconnectedness of the focused aspects, thereby potentially increasing the reliability of the obtained outcomes. The coding process was delineated below.

# 4.4.1. The PFE sheets, FN sheets, and written paragraphs

For the PFE and FN sheets, the participants’ reports (their noticing) were grouped into five types: content, grammar, organization, vocabulary, and others (e.g., spelling, time) (for examples, see Table 1). However, we only counted unique features; for example, if a particular word such as “awareness” was mentioned twice, it was only counted once. To measure the features noticed and incorporated (FNI) (for a sample, see Table 2), the EG’s written paragraphs in Stages 1 and 3, together with their FN sheet in Stage 2, were examined. We also classified these features into content, grammar, organization, vocabulary, and others. Nonetheless, we did not consider the noticed features that were too general when coding the FNI. For instance, if a learner wrote “the vocabulary in my paragraph was quite limited while the one in the model was more diversified” in the FN sheet (Participant 48), this note was coded as an FN item (vo cabulary) but discarded in the process of FNI coding. Concerning text quality, analytic rating was adopted, and the paragraphs were graded using a rubric (from 0 to 5 points) with four criteria (content, vocabulary, grammar, and organization), which was based on Kang (2020, 2022) (see Appendix F) and carefully reviewed by the mentioned American teacher and two EFL teachers.

As for interrater reliability, the first researcher and a trained research assistant who had a master’s degree in Applied Linguistics coded three PFE sheets, three FN sheets, and three paragraphs together before working independently on 12 other PFN sheets, 6 other FN sheets, and 24 other paragraphs (about $1 8 \%$ of the data). The similarity percentages between the two coders were $9 0 \%$ for the PFE sheets, $8 6 ~ \%$ for the FN sheets, and $8 3 . 3 ~ \%$ for grading the paragraphs, indicating substantial agreements (McHugh, 2012). All differences between the coders were resolved via in-depth discussions. The first researcher then coded the remainder of the first three types of data.

# 4.4.2. Semi-structured interviews

As for the interviews, the first researcher listened to each recording and transcribed it verbatim. Subsequently, the transcripts were double-checked by the mentioned research assistant before being sent back to the interviewees for member checking to assure accuracy. In accordance with Creswell and Creswell (2017), content-based analysis was utilized for the examination of interview data.

Table 1 Examples of coded noticing in Stages 1 and 2.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Stage</td><td> Participants&#x27; notes</td><td>Category</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>i) I did not remember the English word for &quot;tap hop&quot; [gather]. (Participant 4)</td><td>Vocabulary</td></tr><tr><td>(PFE)</td><td>ii) I was confused about what tense to use when giving an example. (Participant 4) iii) I did not know how to organize my ideas in a logical way. (Participant 51)</td><td>Grammar Organization</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>iv) The evidence I wrote was not good enough. (Participant 53)</td><td>Content</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>v) I think that the time was too short. (Participant 2)</td><td>Others</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2 (FN)</td><td>i) The vocabulary in my paragraph was quite limited while the one in the model was more diversified. (Participant 48)</td><td>Vocabulary</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>ii) I mostly used simple sentences in my paragraph. I think I made many grammatical errors. (Participant 44)</td><td>Grammar</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>iii) My paragraph and the model both used &quot;First&quot; to introduce the first idea. (Participant 48)</td><td>Organization</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>iv) The model gave an example related to Singapore, but I forgot to include one. (Participant 61)</td><td>Content</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>v) I made a spelling error when writing the word &quot;awareness&quot;. (Participant 35)</td><td>Others</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. PFE: Problematic Features Encountered; FN: Features Noticed

Table 2 A sample of the coded incorporations over the three stages.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Type</td><td>Participant 34&#x27;s notes and texts</td></tr><tr><td>FNI</td><td>Original draft (tage 1) f h eole are not liste to he signs, the govment should make some law to unish thee pople. (no example given) Model text (Stage 2): In fact, in Singapore, the strets are impeccably clean because the fines for littring here are extremely high. FN sheet (Stage 2): I did not provide any examples in my paragraph, but i the model, there was an example about ltterig in Singapore Rewritten draft (Stage 3): For example, in Singapore, if someone litte, they wil have to pay fines, so they won&#x27;t do that again. FNI: Content (The Singapore example)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. FNI $=$ Features Noticed and Incorporated

The transcripts were deductively analyzed following three pre-identified themes in RQs 2, 3, and 4 (i.e., noticed features, incorporated features, impact of MTFI), along with the four categories corresponding to the coded FN sheets and incorporations (i.e., content, grammar, organization, vocabulary). This process involved iterative investigation and coding of the transcripts under the categories and themes. Regarding the reasons why the participants noticed and incorporated certain features as well as for their belief of MTFI impact, the responses were inductively examined. Initially, the segments related to the reasons behind the noticing and incorporations were highlighted and coded. Similar codes were then grouped together, allowing for the identification of recurring patterns and categories. These categories were further refined through iterative examination and comparison.

The first researcher and the research assistant coded two transcripts $( 2 0 \% )$ independently, and the agreement percentages were 90 $\%$ , $8 7 . 5 ~ \%$ , $1 0 0 ~ \%$ , and $8 9 . 7 ~ \%$ for the noticed features, incorporated features, MTFI impact, and the reasons, respectively, which indicated a substantial consensus (McHugh, 2012). All differences between the two coders were discussed and resolved before the first researcher continued to code the remaining transcripts. Frequencies of mentions were counted, and participants’ excerpts were translated into English by the first researcher and double-checked by the mentioned research assistant before being presented as il lustrations to triangulate quantitative data.

# 4.4.3. Statistical analysis

All data were inputted into an Excel spreadsheet before imported to SPSS version 27.0 for analysis. In response to the first three RQs about participants’ noticing and incorporations, descriptive statistics such as Mean (M), Standard Deviation (SD), and Percentage $( \% )$ values were employed. To answer RQ4, as not all data were normally distributed, non-parametric tests including Mann-Whitney U tests and Wilcoxon signed-rank tests were run to compare text quality between and within groups, respectively. Median (Mdn) values were also reported together with effect sizes $( r )$ calculated following Field’s (2018) guidelines $( \mathsf { Z } / \sqrt \mathrm { N } )$ . The effects ranged from small, medium, to large with $r$ values being about .25, .40, and .60, respectively (Plonsky & Oswald, 2014). The significance level was set at .01 following the Bonferroni adjustment for multiple (5) comparisons to mitigate Type I errors (Field, 2018).

# 5. Results

5.1. What writing problems do Vietnamese EFL learners encounter while composing an expository text?

Table 3 illustrates that both CG and EG encountered similar types of problems when writing their expository paragraph in Stage 1. Particularly, vocabulary was the most reported aspect, followed by content, grammar, organization, and others. The results between both groups were further compared via Mann-Whitney U tests (as not all data were normally distributed), which found no significant differences in vocabulary $( U = 4 5 0 , p = . 0 9 5 )$ , content $( U = 5 3 1 . 5 , p = . 5 5 3 )$ , grammar $U = 5 6 5 . 5$ , $p = . 8 7 5 )$ ), organization $\mathit { U } = 5 0 1 , p$ $= . 3 0 5 )$ , and others $U = 5 3 7$ , $p = . 5 7 7 )$ ). In other words, the problems that the CG and EG faced in Stage 1 were considerably similar, mainly about lexis.

To further demonstrate both groups’ reported problems in the composing stage, a sample was provided in Fig. 1. As can be seen, the most frequent challenge reported by both students in the composing stage was vocabulary (mentioned three times by Participant 21 and twice by Participant 43). They also reported grammar issues (mentioned once by Participant 21 and twice by Participant 43), but neither noted any problems related to content. A difference emerged in that Participant 43 was concerned with linking sentences (organization), while Participant 21 encountered spelling issues (others). Despite this small disparity, it could be indicated that the two

Table 3 Problematic features noticed by all participants in Stage 1.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="4">CG (N=33)</td><td colspan="4">EG (N=35)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>%</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>n</td><td>%</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>39</td><td>21.30</td><td>1.18</td><td>.98</td><td>36</td><td>21.05</td><td>1.03</td><td>.89</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>34</td><td>18.58</td><td>1.03</td><td>1.10</td><td>32</td><td>18.71</td><td>.91</td><td>.92</td></tr><tr><td> Organization</td><td>28</td><td>15.30</td><td>.85</td><td>.97</td><td>24</td><td>14.03</td><td>.69</td><td>.99</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>66</td><td>36.07</td><td>2.00</td><td>1.12</td><td>57</td><td>33.33</td><td>1.63</td><td>.84</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>16</td><td>8.75</td><td>.48</td><td>.51</td><td>22</td><td>12.88</td><td>.63</td><td>.73</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>183</td><td>100</td><td>5.55</td><td>2.20</td><td>171</td><td>100</td><td>5.05</td><td>2.01</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $\mathbf { n } =$ the number of problematic features

# Participant 21 (the CG)

# Participant 43 (the EG)

I have many problems with (vocabulary, grammar, and spelling)

I don't have rich kind of vocabulary [Vocabulary]

I have serious problems with "word formation"  [Vocabulary]. I really can't remember it all, and know how it works actually [Vocabulary], and just know to use common structures [Grammar].

About spelling, oftens get confused by simillar words [Others]

Vocabulary problem: don't have enough words with the same means to paraphrase [Vocabulary], such as "nhiing nguoi don ve sinh do thi" [city janitors] $= ?$ I don't know in English [Vocabulary]

Grammar problem: usually have problem with complex sentences [Grammar]

Content: I think I'm OK!

Organization: don't have enough realative clauses[Grammar] to link sentences [Organization]

Fig. 1. A sample of Problematic Features Encountered by both groups in the composing stage. Note. The italicized parts were the two participants’ own words.

students generally faced similar problems, mainly regarding lexis, in the initial stage.

5.2. What features do Vietnamese EFL learners notice while comparing their expository text with the given model?

Regarding the FN, Table 4 shows that the EG noticed a total of 325 features $( M = 9 . 2 9 $ , $S D = 3 . 7 5$ ) in the model. Particularly, they mostly focused on content $( 3 5 . 3 8 \% )$ and organization $( 3 3 . 2 3 \ : \% )$ ), vocabulary also being noticed yet at a lower rate $( 2 1 . 5 4 \%$ . They also attended to grammar and other features, albeit not much, at $7 . 3 9 \%$ and $2 . 4 6 \%$ , respectively.

For a demonstration of the EG’s FN in the comparing stage, a sample was presented in Fig. 2. As illustrated, Participant 43 took notes of 8 unique features in total when comparing his original draft with the model text. The breakdown for content, organization and vocabulary was 4, 3, and 1, respectively. Notably, there were no reported features related to grammar and others categories. In other words, in the comparing stage, the student primarily focused on content and organization.

Data from the semi-structured interviews also showed that most of the interviewees did notice features related to content $( n = 7 )$ , organization $( n = 8 )$ , and vocabulary $( n = 9 )$ whereas only half $( n = 5 )$ paid attention to grammar. One common reason why they focused on certain features in these four criteria $5 7 \%$ for content, $8 8 ~ \%$ for organization, $5 6 \%$ for vocabulary, $5 0 \%$ for grammar) was that they could recognize knowledge gaps when comparing their paragraph with the model. Examples could be found in the following remarks:

Only when I read the model did I realize the idea of providing more trash cans to limit littering. I had not thought about this in my first paragraph. (knowledge gap of content - Participant 57)

The model used a lot of synonyms to avoid repetition while I used the same words again and again in my paragraph. (knowledge gap of vocabulary- Participant 43)

I am used to writing in an indirect way in Vietnamese. When writing in English, I just followed this habit. However, as I read the model, I was surprised because it was written in such a straight-forward manner. (knowledge gap of organization - Participant 52)

Table 4 Features in the model noticed by the EG $\left( N = 3 5 \right)$ ) in Stage 2.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>n</td><td>%</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>115</td><td>35.38</td><td>3.29</td><td>1.55</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>24</td><td>7.39</td><td>.69</td><td>.68</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>108</td><td>33.23</td><td>3.09</td><td>2.23</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>70</td><td>21.54</td><td>2.00</td><td>1.73</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>8</td><td>2.46</td><td>.23</td><td>.55</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>325</td><td>100</td><td>9.29</td><td>3.75</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $\mathbf { n } =$ the number of noticed features

Instruction: Read your paragraph and the model text. Write answers to the following questions as detailed as possible.

1. What similarities did you notice between your paragraph and the model text?

- The similarities is about the measure [Content 1] (public awareness) [Vocabulary] - The difference is that my text just show 1 measure, the other show us more than 2 measure and give an example and mine doesn't have. [Not counted as these features were repeated in the following part]

2. What differences did you notice between your paragraph and the model text?

<html><body><table><tr><td>Your writing</td><td>The model text</td></tr><tr><td>Just give 1 measure [Content 2]</td><td>More than 2 measures [Content 2]</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Beginning indirectly [Organization 1]</td><td>Give us an example [Content 3]</td></tr><tr><td>Go straight on point to the topic [Organization 1]</td></tr><tr><td>Ending by an advice [Organization 2]</td><td>Ending by conclusion [Organization 2]</td></tr></table></body></html>

3. What have you learned from the model text?

Save your time (go straight on point into the topic) [Organization 1] Give more information to make your text more interesting [Content 4] Have a clear organize structure [Organization 3]

Fig. 2. Participant $4 3 ^ { \prime } s$ note-taking sheet the comparing stage (the EG). Note. The italicized parts were the participant’s own words.

I only used simple sentences in my paragraph. I think it is not good enough. I should use more complex sentences. (knowledge gap of grammar – Participant 42)

Besides this reason, many students also paid attention to content and vocabulary in the model because they found the ideas intriguing $( 5 7 ~ \% )$ , and the lexis effectively used $( 6 7 ~ \% )$ ). The remarks of Participants 34 and 61 demonstrated these points:

When I read the model, I found the example about littering fines in Singapore really interesting. (Intriguing ideas - Participant 34)

Well, I pay attention to the vocabulary because the model did not use complex words yet still effectively expressed the ideas. I understood almost everything. (Effective use of lexis - Participant 61)

However, $5 0 \%$ of the interviewees did not focus on grammar because they considered it a low priority, as in the sharing of Participant 47: “I did not pay attention to grammar. When I read the model, I tried to look for ideas and vocabulary”.

Table 5 The Features Noticed and Incorporated (FNI) by the EG $\left( N = 3 5 \right)$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>n</td><td>%</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>84</td><td>44.21</td><td>2.40</td><td>1.12</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>5</td><td>2.63</td><td>.14</td><td>.36</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>61</td><td>32.11</td><td>1.74</td><td>1.29</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>40</td><td>21.05</td><td>1.14</td><td>.94</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>190</td><td>100</td><td>5.43</td><td>2.77</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $\mathbf { n } =$ the number of noticed and incorporated features

5.3. What noticed features in the comparing stage do Vietnamese EFL learners choose to incorporate into their rewritten expository text?

Turning to Tables 5 and 6, the EG incorporated, on average, 5.43 ( $S D = 2 . 7 7 $ ) or $5 8 . 4 6 \%$ features that they noticed in the model in Stage 2 into their rewritten paragraph. Of the five categories in Table 5, content-related aspects were incorporated the most $( 4 4 . 2 1 \ \% )$ , followed by organization $( 3 2 . 1 1 \ \% )$ ) and vocabulary $( 2 1 . 0 5 \%$ ) while grammatical incorporations were very low, at a mere $2 . 6 3 ~ \%$ . Within each category (Table 6), the EG incorporated about two-thirds of the noticed features (Stage 2) regarding content but only over half for those related to organization and vocabulary as well as around one-fifth for grammar. Noticeably, none of the features belonging to the others category was incorporated in Stage 3. For a sample of the EG’s FNI, see Fig. 4 and the analysis that follows.

With respect to interview data, it was found that the majority of interviewees chose to incorporate aspects related to content $( n = 7 )$ , organization $( n = 8 )$ ), and vocabulary $( n = 9$ ). The main reason for the incorporations was that all of these participants wanted to bridge the knowledge gaps which they noticed in the comparing stage, as delineated below.

I incorporated the example about littering fines in Singapore because when I read the model, I realized that I needed an example. (bridging knowledge gap of content - Participant 63)

When writing the first paragraph, I wanted to convey “tiˆe\`ền phạt” [fines] but I did not know the English word. After reading the model, I realized the right word. So, in the rewritten paragraph, I used the word “fines”. (bridging knowledge gap of vocabulary - Participant 48)

I learned some linking words such as “as a result”, “in conclusion” to connect sentences. So, I reused them in my second paragraph to make my paragraph more coherent. (bridging knowledge gap of organization - Participant 47)

As for grammar, none of the interviewees implemented any features related to this aspect in the model into their rewritten paragraph. The reason was mainly due to the respondents’ forgetfulness $( 5 0 \% )$ or low prioritization $( 5 0 \% )$ of this category, as demonstrated below.

I did not remember anything about grammar in the model when rewriting my paragraph, so I did not reuse any grammatical features. (Forgetfulness - Participant 57)

I did not pay much attention to grammar when rewriting my paragraph. I only tried to recall ideas and vocabulary. (Low prioritization - Participant 52)

5.4. Does MTFI significantly enhance Vietnamese EFL learners’ text quality in the rewriting stage?

Comparisons of descriptive statistics of the students’ text quality in Stages 1 and 3 (Table 7) show that both groups’ scores in the pretest were quite similar (CG Total $M = 8 . 9 2$ , $S D = . 2 1 6$ ; EG Total $M = 8 . 9 6$ , $S D = 2 . 1 4 _ { . }$ ), being below the average point in each criterion $( < 2 . 5 0 )$ . However, in the posttest, the two groups achieved higher scores in all observed criteria (CG Total Gain $M = . 4 5 , S D$ $= 1 . 0 3$ ; EG Total Gain $M = 2 . 1 7$ , $S D = 1 . 9 4 _ { . }$ ).

To compare the results between the two groups, Mann-Whitney U tests were performed (Table 8). It was found that there were no significant score differences in all observed criteria by both groups in the pretest (all $p$ values $> . 0 1 $ ). However, in the posttest, the EG considerably outperformed the CG in content $U = 3 0 9 . 5$ , $p < . 0 0 1$ , $r = . 4 1 \cdot$ ), organization $U = 3 1 5 . 0$ , $p = . 0 0 1$ , $r = . 4 0 \AA$ ) and vocabulary $( U = 3 8 0 . 0 , p = . 0 1 0 , r = . 3 1 )$ , all with medium effect sizes. Although the grammar scores witnessed no significant differences $U = 4 5 7$ , $p = . 1 1 0 )$ between both groups, the overall scores by the EG were substantially higher than those by the CG $U = 3 2 0$ , $p = . 0 0 2 \mathrm { ) }$ , with a medium effect size $\left( r = . 3 8 \right)$ . Within-groups comparisons using Wilcoxon signed-rank tests (Table 9) revealed that whereas the CG did not significantly improve their writing from the pretest to the posttest $( p$ values $> . 0 1 $ ), the EG had substantial gains in all criteria $( p$ values $< . 0 0 1 $ ) with large effect sizes $( r$ values close to or greater than .60). Therefore, it could be indicated that MTFI significantly enhanced the students’ text quality, especially aspects related to ideas, coherence and cohesion, and lexis.

Interview data were in line with the quantitative outcomes of text quality. Indeed, the majority of the respondents believed that MTFI did have a positive effect on their paragraph writing, in terms of content $( n = 7 )$ , vocabulary $( n = 8 )$ ), and organization $( n = 8 )$ ). This was because these interviewees appreciated the model for it helped them bridge their knowledge gaps, which was underscored via the following excerpts:

Table 6 Relationship between FN (Stage 2) and FNI (Stage 3) by the EG $\left( N = 3 5 \right)$ ).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>FN (Stage 2)</td><td>FNI (Stage 3)</td><td>% (FNI/FN)</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>115</td><td>84</td><td>73.04</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>24</td><td>5</td><td>20.83</td></tr><tr><td> Organization</td><td>108</td><td>61</td><td>56.48</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td> 70</td><td>40</td><td>57.14</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>8</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>325</td><td>190</td><td>58.46</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 Descriptive statistics of text quality $( N = 6 8 )$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="6">CG (N=33)</td><td colspan="6">EG (N=35)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Pretest</td><td colspan="2">Posttest</td><td colspan="2">Gain</td><td colspan="2">Pretest</td><td colspan="2">Posttest</td><td colspan="2">Gain</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td></td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>2.21</td><td>.75</td><td>2.33</td><td>.74</td><td>.12</td><td>.45</td><td>2.24</td><td>.80</td><td>3.00</td><td>.75</td><td>.76</td><td>.72</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>2.24</td><td>.42</td><td>2.34</td><td>.41</td><td>.10</td><td>.23</td><td>2.23</td><td>.37</td><td>2.50</td><td>.40</td><td>.27</td><td>.39</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>2.20</td><td>.78</td><td>2.32</td><td>.73</td><td>.12</td><td>.33</td><td>2.23</td><td>.78</td><td>2.96</td><td>.74</td><td>.73</td><td>.70</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>2.27</td><td>.43</td><td>2.39</td><td>.42</td><td>.12</td><td>.30</td><td>2.26</td><td>.39</td><td>2.67</td><td>.40</td><td>.41</td><td>.43</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>8.92</td><td>2.16</td><td>9.38</td><td>2.05</td><td>.46</td><td>1.03</td><td>8.96</td><td>2.14</td><td>11.1</td><td>2.03</td><td>2.17</td><td>1.94</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. The maximum scores were 5.0 for each criterion and 20.0 for Total.

Table 8 Comparisons of the scores between the two groups over two testing times.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">CG-EG</td><td colspan="5">Pretest</td><td colspan="5">Posttest</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Mdn</td><td>U</td><td>z</td><td>p</td><td colspan="2">Mdn</td><td>U</td><td>z</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td>CG</td><td>EG</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>CG</td><td>EG</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>2.5</td><td>2.5</td><td>558</td><td>.25</td><td>.81</td><td>2.5</td><td>3.0</td><td>309.5</td><td>3.35</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>2.0</td><td>2.0</td><td>576.5</td><td>.13</td><td>.99</td><td>2.5</td><td>2.5</td><td>457.0</td><td>1.61</td><td>.110</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>2.0</td><td>2.5</td><td>558.5</td><td>.24</td><td>.81</td><td>2.5</td><td>3.0</td><td>315.0</td><td>3.27</td><td>.001</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>2.0</td><td>2.0</td><td>573.5</td><td>.05</td><td>.96</td><td>2.5</td><td>2.5</td><td>380.0</td><td>2.59</td><td>.010</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>8.5</td><td>9.5</td><td>566.5</td><td>.14</td><td>.89</td><td>9.0</td><td>11.0</td><td>320.0</td><td>3.17</td><td>.002</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. Significance value was adjusted at .01

Table 9 Comparisons of the scores within each group over two testing times.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Posttest - Pretest</td><td colspan="3">CG (N=33)</td><td colspan="2">EG (N=35)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>z</td><td>p</td><td>r</td><td>z</td><td>p</td><td>r</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>1.58</td><td>.114</td><td>.28</td><td>4.32</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>.73</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>2.26</td><td>.024</td><td>.39</td><td>3.40</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>.57</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>2.0</td><td>.046</td><td>.35</td><td>4.34</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>.73</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>1.99</td><td>.047</td><td>.20</td><td>4.06</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>.69</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>2.27</td><td>.023</td><td>.40</td><td>4.54</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>.77</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. Significance value was adjusted at .01

After comparing my paragraph with the model, I have more ideas for my writing. Moreover, I know how to develop each idea further. (impact on content – Participant 48)

Yes, I think that the impact is substantial […] I can clearly see the differences between my first and second drafts after participating in this writing task. It helped me realize the vocabulary I know but could not use effectively. (impact on vocabulary - Participant 52)

Participating in this writing activity helped me a lot […] I now know that I need to use cohesive devices to make the paragraph more coherent. (impact on organization – Participant 42)

However, only two out of ten interviewees thought that MTFI helped them recognize new grammatical structures, as in the sharing of Participant 37: “I have learned a lot of useful things from this writing activity […] I need to use more complex sentences”.

Table 10 Extracts from Participant 34′s paragraphs (the EG).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Stage</td><td>Participant 34&#x27;s paragraph extracts</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Net the   ple h  i d irg. th e  ith t d mak some l ot   r     cy h cet clean the beach.</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Second, the omt should make morel  unsh tering pe and ple more trash ca so th w ca ind the in tohow rhir. or pl, n  f   th    i won that hir st h  t  tach the tde ri s   ttll e    t ae . In conclusion, people should care about environment, make more law to punish people and teaching the students to stopping ittering.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. The paragraphs were presented in the participant’s own words

For a more concrete example of writing progress, the extracts of an EG participant’s initial and second drafts were provided in Table 10. As can be seen, in the first draft, the participant misused the linking words “Next” and “Second”, but after reading the model, s/he replaced them with “Second” and “Third”, which were more appropriate. Moreover, in Stage 1, there was a lack of examples and the concluding sentence, but in Stage 3, the participant reused the example about Singapore in the model and also added the concluding sentence by summarizing the key solutions. These are just a few instances to show the progress of incorporations that helped this learner gain a better score in his/her second draft. For additional examples of both groups’ whole-paragraph analysis, see Figs. 3 and 4 below.

Fig. 3 shows that during the composing stage, Participant 21 attempted to respond to the prompt but with limited success. In the first half of the paragraph, she discussed the problem and effects of littering, which did not align with the task requirements. In the latter half, she did mention some solutions, but these were merely listed without sufficient supporting details. Regarding organization, the paragraph lacked a clear topic sentence and cohesive devices. Instead of summarizing the key solutions, the student concluded the paragraph with advice. Additionally, the vocabulary was mostly composed of common words, with some inappropriate word choices (e.g., admiration) and spelling mistakes (e.g., petience). While a few complex sentences were used (e.g., which leading to, If …), grammatical errors were prevalent and sometimes hindered comprehension (e.g., it is not an easy more). In the rewriting stage, these errors largely persisted, showing little improvement from the first draft.

Fig. 4 demonstrated that Participant $4 3 ^ { \prime } s$ initial draft (the EG) contained errors similar to those made by Participant 21 (the CG) in the composing stage. Specifically, Participant 43 mostly focused on presenting ideas related to causes and effects of littering, which were not required by the writing task. Although he proposed one solution, this idea was not adequately supported and explained. The failure to meet task requirements, coupled with the lack of clear topic and concluding sentences, negatively affected the paragraph’s organization. Additionally, vocabulary was mostly common words, some with incorrect word choices (e.g., literration, social awareness) or spelling mistakes (e.g., uprade, inviroment). As for grammar, simple sentences predominated, with numerous errors (e.g., want …be polluted, is make).

In the rewriting stage, Participant 43 was able to address the task more appropriately by incorporating several features that he noticed in the comparing stage (see Fig. 2). Particularly, he focused more on solutions to littering rather than discussing its reasons and effects. He reused the idea about raising people’s awareness through education (incorporating Content 1), which he identified as a similarity between his initial draft and the model text. Moreover, he provided an additional solution to littering by adopting an idea in the model text: imposing fines on those who litter (incorporating Content 2). He also elaborated on each solution by providing more supporting details (incorporating Content 3). About organization, Participant 43 ended the paragraph with a clear concluding sentence by summarizing the key ideas (incorporating Organization 2). Although the concluding sentence was only written with partial success (lacking the idea of imposing fines) and there was still a lack of a clear topic sentence, the focus on solutions and the use of some

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">composing stage rewriting stage</td></tr><tr><td>Pollutant is becoming more and more Throwing trash randomly has become a huge important problem for the government problemin large city. This causes topollution, especially in big cities such as Ho Chi Minh which destroys natural environment. Littering city, Da Nang... Littering has already become is the reason of person&#x27;s awareness such as a extremely serious problem which leading to laziness, lack of education... To solve this pollution. In a big city as Ho Chi Minh city issue, we should conduct a survey in order to average wastes everyday is about up to 2 tons create laws for littering, have more lessons of garbage. If we don&#x27;t have any solutions for about environment saving, put trash cans at this, VietNam soon will be the &quot;country of convienient places that people can easily see. littering&#x27;. Therefore, we need to change our And most important is better ourselves try to admiration by very small things like throwing avoid littering. This is not only anyone&#x27;s work. trash at right place, avoid using plastic bags, recycling plastic bottles, use paper bags. It is life! not an easy more and can&#x27;t be done in just few</td><td>We save the environment, we save our own</td></tr></table></body></html>

# rewriting stage

Nowadays, people have a lot of choice on their foods. They can have meals in restaurant or take away. Many of them choose take away because it doesn't take lots of their time for meals and it is very convinient. Therefore, a lot of fast food, can foods, lunch box was invented. Follow that invention, the litteration is dramatic increasing day by day. There are many reasons for this problem. The bad social awareness is the main thing. For examples, people live in some big cities usually litter, then they covert the responsibility to the city's cleaner to clean their trash. That thought not only destroy the beauty of the city, but also harm our living environment. We have to do something right now to stop this problem. Just begining with the easiest thing, you and I should change that mind. Do you want our inviroment be polluted? Do you want your next generation live in a harmful world? Uprade your social responsibitity and your knowledge everyday is make your world be better.

Littering has become more serious than in the past. In many large cities, this problem has been warned by goverment. Social media and education systems try to make people undersanding the consequence of littering. However, the public awareness seems very low, it has a negative effect to a dramaticl increase in population. The goverment should has more fines for all of citizens who have a bad behaviour and low social responsibility. Especialy punishing into their finances, make sure everyone knows not only littering but also another activities which lead to polluted the enviroment is a crime. Beside that, we should have a revolution in educated project systems for the next generation who will experience our current enviroment. Teach them more about the affects of pollution, emission and human's activities that destroyed this world every day. In conclusion, stop littering, widen your knowledge and have a good behaviour with this pretty planet. The things you do now is the things you take in the future.

Fig. 4. Sample of Participant 43′s paragraphs in the composing and rewriting stages (the EG). Note. The paragraphs were presented in the participant’s own words.

cohesive devices (e.g., Beside that, In conclusion) helped enhance the coherence and cohesion of the paragraph. In addition, Participant 43 also used more prompt-related vocabulary to discuss solutions (e.g., fines, revolution) and even produced more correct word choices (e.g., public awareness) (incorporating Vocabulary) while avoiding the incorrect terms (e.g., literration). As for grammar, he could use more complex sentences, but errors were still prevalent (e.g., should has, that destroyed). Overall, Participant 43 incorporated a total of five features that he noticed in the comparing stage (five FNIs: three for content, one for organization, one for vocabulary) into his rewritten draft, which helped enhance his paragraph quality.

As observed, although both students made similar errors in the composing stage, Participant 43 performed better than Participant 21 in the rewriting stage. Indeed, while Participant $2 1 ^ { \prime } s$ initial errors persisted in the second draft, Participant 43 with the support of MTFI, was able to rewrite his paragraph in a more appropriate manner, mainly in terms of content and organization.

# 6. Discussion

The present study aimed to unveil what writing problems EFL learners encountered when composing a paragraph (RQ1), what features they noticed when comparing their draft with a given model (RQ2), what noticed features they chose to incorporate into their rewritten text (RQ3), and whether the MTFI task had a significant effect on their text quality (RQ4) in the rewriting stage. For a more comprehensive understanding, this section presents and discusses the findings related to the first three RQs collectively, followed by an examination of RQ4.

6.1. Vietnamese EFL learners’ problematic, noticed, and incorporated features over the three stages of an expository MTFI task

# 6.1.1. Lexical features

A notable finding in our study is that vocabulary was the most prevalent problem for the EG in the composing stage. This outcome confirms our first hypothesis and corroborates previous MTFI research employing either narrative (e.g., Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; Hanaoka, 2007) or argumentative (an expository genre) (Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023) writing which reported substantial rates of reported problems related to vocabulary. Lexis was the primary issue at this stage probably because L2 learners had a tendency to prioritize meaning, which was also the nature of the writing task, over form (VanPatten, 2004). Another possible reason may be due to their limited processing capacity which led them to look for content words to convey their intended message (VanPatten, 1996).

However, in the comparing and rewriting stages, we observed a shift in participants’ attention towards other aspects such as content and organization (to be discussed in subsequent parts) rather than vocabulary (around $2 1 ~ \%$ in both stages). This finding deviates from our second and third hypotheses as well as prior research on MTFI (e.g., García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017; Kang, 2020), which consistently reported that lexis was the predominantly noticed and incorporated feature in the last two stages. There are several factors contributing to these discrepancies. First, our study employed expository writing while narratives were adopted in García Mayo and Loidi Labandibar (2017) or Hanaoka (2007). In a narrative task, students were provided with a sequence of pictures and asked to describe the implied actions or items, which inherently directed their focus to vocabulary (Kang, 2020). In an expository task, nevertheless, such cues were absent. Second, while our study administered a single model paragraph (150 words), other research employing expository writing (Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023) provided two model essays totaling 400 words or more. The inclusion of two longer models may have played a role, as they offered more input and were thus more likely to assist learners in addressing problematic features (i.e., vocabulary) during the composing stage and in maintaining this focus in subsequent stages. Thirdly, the majority of interviewees in our study appreciated the comprehensibility of the model as it effectively conveyed the ideas without the use of complex words. Put differently, the model, which was carefully tailored to the learners’ characteristics, might have activated their passive vocabulary (Kang, 2023) and encouraged them to use their current lexical repertoire to express the intended message. This realization may have diminished the need to concentrate on vocabulary, resulting in lower rates of lexical noticing and incorporations during the comparison and rewriting stages. These differences underscore the importance of taking writing genres (Canovas ´ Guirao et al., 2015; Kang, 2020), model piloting, and model quantity into consideration when implementing or interpreting results from an MTFI task. Notably, the EG’s rates of vocabulary noticing and incorporations (about $2 1 \ \%$ ) in the comparing and rewriting stages, though lower than those in previous research, could still be considered substantial, especially given that the model was designed to align with the students’ abilities.

# 6.1.2. Content-related features

Another noteworthy point is that besides vocabulary, the EG also reported a fair number of problems related to content $( 2 1 . 0 5 \% )$ when composing an expository paragraph. Such a result was echoed in the studies by Kang (2020) and Wu et al. (2023) who employed expository writing, but differed from prior research using narratives (e.g., Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; Hanaoka, 2007). Unlike narratives based on a sequence of pictures, in an expository task, students were required to substantiate their ideas with argumentation and examples, which led them to focus on content (Kang, 2020).

In the comparing and rewriting stages, we observed that content surfaced to be the most noticed and incorporated features, which diverges from prior research on MTFI (e.g., Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023). This disparity could be attributed to the FN sheet; specifically, in our study the participants were instructed to note down any similarities and differences between their paragraph and the model while others, especially those using the expository genre, only asked learners to identify the differences. Indeed, a closer examination of the FN sheet in our study revealed that a large portion of reported similar features (see Appendix E) were related to content. Similarity recognition was important as it could help students to confirm their hypotheses and reinforce their L2 knowledge (Sachs & Polio, 2007). Another plausible reason lies in training sessions. Particularly, a session brainstorming ideas for the students was organized prior to their writing in Kang’s (2020), which was absent in our study. Such training might have provided content-related support for learners, which lessened the need to focus on ideas in the given models. Indeed, training was found to play an important role in MTFI research (Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2018; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). Thus, it is essential that noticing measures and training be considered in the design and understanding of MTFI research.

# 6.1.3. Organizational features

One more major finding in our study is that organizational aspects were not a prevalent problem for learners in the composing stage, which is in line with prior MTFI research (e.g., Kang, 2020; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). This is possibly because this dimension added little to meanings which were learners’ priority (VanPatten, 2004) at this stage. Nonetheless, it became the second most noticed $( 3 3 . 2 3 \ : \% )$ ) and incorporated $( 3 2 . 1 1 \ \% )$ features by the EG in subsequent stages. The observed high rates of noticing and incorporation of organizational features may be attributed to differences in writing styles between Vietnamese and English. Our interview data revealed that participants were accustomed to an indirect approach in Vietnamese compositions, contrasting sharply with the direct and concise style presented in the model. This significant disparity likely caught their attention and prompted in corporations during the rewriting stage since the adoption of a direct writing style could have facilitated faster completion of the target paragraph, especially in timed writing tasks. Such a finding is contrary to previous studies employing either narrative (e.g., Hanaoka, 2007; Luquin & García Mayo, 2021) or expository (Kang, 2020; Wu et al., 2023) writing which reported low rates of noticing and incorporations of this aspect. The difference could be due to the similarity reports, as mentioned earlier, in the FN sheet in our study when compared to the sole focus on differences in other studies. A fair portion of organizational features (e.g., cohesive devices) (see Appendix E) documented in the similarity section of the FN sheet could have contributed to more incorporations of this dimension in students’ rewritten paragraphs.

# 6.1.4. Grammatical features

Of all the four categories, grammar was the least focused over the three stages of the MTFI task, which resonates with findings in previous research (e.g., Coyle & Roca de Larios, 2014; Wu et al., 2023). There are several reasons why grammatical features received little attention from learners. First, the nature of the MTFI tasks employed in our study and others is meaning-focused, which inherently encouraged the participants to focus on meaning over form. Second, in a timed writing task, learners might have, according to the Trade-Off Hypothesis (Skehan, 1998), sacrificed form (accuracy) for meaning (fluency). Third, the interview data further showed that the participants considered this aspect as a low priority or forgot about it when rewriting their paragraph.

# 6.1.5. The relationship between learners’ noticing and incorporation

It is also notable that the EG incorporated about $5 8 \%$ of the features they reported in the comparing stage. This figure is greater than those in previous studies on MTFI using narrative writing (e.g., $2 6 . 5 \%$ in Canovas ´ Guirao et al., 2015; $4 6 \%$ in Luquin & García Mayo, 2021). These numbers indicated that noticing may not necessarily lead to incorporations, and that working memory capacity could play an integral part in this process. Indeed, an MTFI study by Kang (2022) revealed that higher working memory was significantly associated with better text quality. Another implication is that learners may need additional exposure to models or explicit instruction before they could turn noticing into incorporations. However, as our study appears to be the first to explore the relationship between learners’ noticing and incorporations in an expository MTFI task, future research is needed to reaffirm this point. Additionally, learners’ noticed features in the model (content> organization> vocabulary> grammar, where $" > "$ indicating greater attention) corresponded with their incorporations in the rewriting stage (content $>$ organization $>$ vocabulary $>$ grammar), which aligns with the Noticing Hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990, 2001) stating that more noticing would lead to more learning gains. This finding highlights the importance of noticing in promoting L2 development. Finally, it was found that model texts could channel EFL learners’ attention, particularly from the composing (predominantly vocabulary) to comparing (mostly content) stages. Luquin and García Mayo (2021) also observed such an effect, with their participants’ attention drawn to grammar in the first stage to lexis in the second stage. Thus, models might be used to direct learners’ noticing to a particular intended aspect (Canovas ´ Guirao et al., 2015).

# 6.2. The impact of MTFI on Vietnamese EFL learners’ text quality

The control and experimental groups in our study were comparable in terms of English proficiency levels, writing problems, and pretest scores at the outset; however, after being exposed to MTFI, the EG outperformed the CG in content, vocabulary, organization, and overall scores with medium effect sizes. These outcomes support our fourth hypothesis and are in line with previous MTFI studies using either narrative (e.g., Lazaro-Ibarrola, ´ 2021; Luquin & García Mayo, 2024) or expository writing (Kang, 2020, 2022; Tieu & Baker, 2022; Wu et al., 2023) that found positive significant differences in text quality between the MTFI and the control groups in the posttest. The explanation for these results is quite apparent: the EG noticed and incorporated many features in the model which functioned as comprehensible input or guides that helped them to achieve better writing. Insights from the interviews corroborated these arguments as most of the respondents embraced the positive impact of MTFI on the use of content, organization, and vocabulary in their writing. Data from learners’ paragraph extracts (see Table 10) also triangulated and strengthened the obtained findings. Such improvements were further supported by both sociocultural and cognitive theories. From a sociocultural perspective, exposure to model texts that were written by an expert user of the target language and tailored to learners’ proficiency levels provided the EG with scaffolded assistance to help them acquire the knowledge within their Zone of Proximal Development (Storch, 2018; Vygotsky, 1978). Indeed, MTFI was considered as a textually mediated tool (Hamano-Bunce, 2022) that promoted L2 gains. From a cognitive perspective, feedback processing coupled with the noticing and incorporations of features in the model text, could lead to the development of L2 (Schmidt, 2001; Swain, 2000).

However, our study found no significant improvement in grammar in the EG. This finding was similar to Kang (2020) who did not record any considerable gains in grammar in the MTFI groups’ posttest. This was because the participants did not focus much on this aspect in Stages 2 and 3. They might not have had the same conceptual needs for grammar as those in the study by Villarreal and L´azaro-Ibarrola (2022), as indicated by the interview data which showed that most respondents prioritized meaning over form. Another possible explanation was that they might not have enough attentional resources to incorporate too many kinds of features simultaneously (limited processing capacity, VanPatten, 1996) or that they could have forgot the grammatical features noticed in the comparing stage (as demonstrated in the interviews) and thereby had to use different structures in their own way to express their intended message. Thus, it could be indicated that MTFI may not be effective in fostering better use of grammar in expository paragraph writing.

Overall, MTFI could facilitate EFL learners’ noticing and incorporations of features in the given model into their subsequent expository draft, which probably resulted in writing improvement. Nonetheless, it should be noted that this positive effect was mainly applicable to rewritten drafts. Whether such gains can be transferred to a new writing task or not requires further investigation. Furthermore, the appropriateness of model texts (e.g., length, difficulty level, topic) should be taken into account when interpreting the obtained findings and implementing MTFI. This is because inappropriately composed models might negatively affect learners’ motivation and feedback processing (García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017).

# 7. Conclusion

The current study aimed to investigate the effect of MTFI on Vietnamese EFL learners’ writing, both as a process and a product, over a three-stage expository task. Analyses of their note-taking sheets, paragraphs, and semi-structured interviews revealed three important findings. First, in Stage 1, the participants mainly faced lexical problems while in Stages 2 and 3, they shifted most of their attention to content-related aspects. Second, whereas MTFI demonstrated effectiveness in enhancing students’ text quality in terms of content, lexis, and organization, it did not lead to significant improvement in grammar. Third, it was observed that students incor porated just over half of the features they noticed in the comparing stage.

There are several limitations of this study that need to be noted. To begin, the use of a single model text may not offer learners adequate input to address their challenges in Stage 1, which could have influenced their attention during Stages 2 and 3. Hence, future research should consider administering two model texts to expose learners to richer input sources, thereby mitigating their initial writing challenges. Moreover, it is important to acknowledge that the note-taking sheets utilized in our study might not compre hensively capture learners’ noticing during the comparing stage, as the note-taking process itself is often described as "slow and painstaking" (Kang, 2020, p.9). Consequently, future studies could address this limitation by incorporating additional noticing measures such as pair discussions or think-aloud protocols. In addition, this study only adopted a one-shot experiment, so the obtained impact was only short-term. The long-term effect of MTFI could be investigated through longitudinal studies (Roothooft et al., 2022). Besides this, the learning gains observed in our study were specific to the same writing prompt; whether these gains can be retained and transferred to a new expository task remains unknown and warrants more exploration. Another avenue for future expository MTFI research is to further examine the underlying process of learners’ increased focus on content-related features during the comparing and rewriting stages.

Despite these drawbacks, the present study entails three salient implications. Methodologically, it addressed the limitations in previous studies’ design (i.e., the insufficient focus on expository writing, unbalanced time in the pretest and posttest, the lack of model piloting, interview adoption, effect-size reporting, and draft-model similarity identification), which provided us with a more holistic understanding of MTFI’s efficacy. Theoretically, it contributes to the relatively limited literature in MTFI, especially its impact on L2 learners’ noticing, incorporations and text quality in expository writing. It also lends support to the Output Hypothesis (Swain, 2000), the Noticing Hypothesis (Schmidt, 2000), and sociocultural theory by showcasing that output, noticing, and models as textually mediated tools (Hamano-Bunce, 2022) could lead to more learning gains. Pedagogically, incorporating expository MTFI into classroom instruction is highly recommended for teachers aiming to improve students’ writing skills, particularly ideas and paragraph organization. Furthermore, teachers should furnish students with topic-related vocabulary or expressions before writing, as lexical issues were found to be the most prevalent during the composing stage. Additionally, as MTFI seems to direct learners’ focus to macro-level (i. e., content, organization) rather than micro-level (i.e., vocabulary, grammar) features, explicit instruction may be needed to help draw their attention to form-focused aspects. Moreover, it is essential that teachers compose or find model texts that are appropriate for their students regarding proficiency levels, ages, and lengths since challenging models may lead to a cost of learning motivation (García Mayo & Loidi Labandibar, 2017). Lastly, to augment the noticing process, students can be paired and encouraged to verbally share their comparisons in addition to taking notes, which helps promote deeper understanding of model texts (Luquin & García Mayo, 2021).

# Funding

This study has not been supported by any funding agency or institution.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Long Quoc Nguyen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Resources, Meth odology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Bao Trang Thi Nguyen: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Hoang Yen Phuong: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization.

# Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare no competing interests.

# Data Availability

Data will be made available on request.

# Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Dr. Shulin Yu, the handling editor, and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful feedback and sug gestions. We also wish to acknowledge the research panels at the University of Foreign Languages and International Studies (Hue University), Dr. Osamu Hanaoka, and Mr. Jack Butler for their valuable advice. A heartfelt thank-you to all the participants and research assistants involved in this project.

# Appendix A

# The Problematic Features Encountered (PFE) sheet.

When writing the paragraph, did you face any problems (vocabulary, grammar, content, organization, spelling, etc.)? Please report them as detailed as possible.

# Appendix B

# The model text.

To address the problem of littering in urban areas, a number of measures can be taken. First, it is important to raise public awareness of this issue through social media and educational campaigns. By informing people of the negative effects of littering, the government can encourage the public to avoid such behavior. Second, more severe punishments should be imposed on those who litter. This can be an effective way to make individuals think twice about the results of their actions. In fact, in Singapore, the streets are impeccably clean because the fines for littering here are extremely high. Finally, more trash bins and recycling facilities need to be placed throughout the cities. As a result, it would be more convenient for everyone to dispose of waste in the right places. In conclusion, we can solve the issue of littering in cities through education, strict punishments, and provision of trash cans.

# Appendix C

# The Features Noticed sheet.

Instruction: Read your paragraph and the model text. Write answers to the following questions as detailed as possible.

1. What similarities did you notice between your paragraph and the model text?   
2. What differences did you notice between your paragraph and the model text?

<html><body><table><tr><td>Your writing</td><td>The model text</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

3. What can you learn from the model text?

# Appendix D

The interview questions.

1. When reading the model text, what aspects (vocabulary/ grammar/ content/ organization/etc.) did you focus on? Why?   
2. Did you incorporate any features (vocabulary/ grammar/ content/ organization/ect.) from the model text into your rewritten paragraph? If yes, what aspects? If no, why not?   
3. In general, do you think the writing task using the model text had any impact on your paragraph writing? If yes, how? If no, why not?

# Appendix E

# Proportions of similarities in the Features Noticed Sheet in Stage 2 by the EG $( N = 3 5 )$ .

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>Total FNs</td><td>Similarities</td><td>% (Similarities/ Total FNs)</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>115</td><td>55</td><td>47.8</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>24</td><td>1</td><td>4.2</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>108</td><td>28</td><td>25.9</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>70</td><td>5</td><td>7.1</td></tr><tr><td>Others</td><td>8</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>325</td><td>89</td><td>27.4</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: FN $=$ Features Noticed

# Appendix F

Scoring rubric.

<html><body><table><tr><td>*</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>c</td><td>does not respond to the task in any way is not written in</td><td>barely responds to the task does not present a main idea</td><td>responds to the task only in a limited way presents a main idea, but it is not well-supported</td><td>partially responds to the task presents a main idea, but some supporting ideas may be inadequately</td><td>sufficiently responds to the task presents a clear main idea with adequate and relevant supporting ideas</td><td>fully responds to the task presents a clear main idea with relevant, fully extended and well supported ideas</td></tr><tr><td>v</td><td>uses words that do not convey meanings is left blank or not written in English</td><td>uses an extremely limited range of vocabulary shows no control of word formation</td><td>uses only basic vocabulary which may be used repetitively, or which may be inappropriate for the task has limited control of word formation and/or spelling</td><td>uses an adequate range of vocabulary for the task attempts to use less common vocabulary but with some inaccuracy makes some errors in</td><td>uses a wide range of vocabulary fluently and flexibly to convey precise meanings skillfully uses uncommon lexical items but there may be occasional inaccuracies in word choice and collocation</td><td>uses a wide range of vocabulary with very natural and sophisticated control of lexical features</td></tr><tr><td>G</td><td>has no regard for English grammar, mechanics, or usage is left blank or not written in English</td><td>cannot use sentence forms except in memorized phrases</td><td>reader&quot; uses only a very limited range of structures with only rare use of subordinate clauses uses some accurate structure but errors</td><td>uses a mix of simple and complex sentence forms makes some errors in grammar and punctuation but they</td><td>spelling and/or word formation uses a wide range of structures the majority of sentences are error-free makes only very occasional errors</td><td>uses a wide range of structures with full flexibility and accuracy produces errors only as</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>is not written in a paragraph structure is left blank or not written in English</td><td>has very little control of organizational features does not present the topic sentence</td><td>presents information and ideas but these are not arranged coherently and there is no clear progression uses some basic cohesive devices but these may be inaccurate or repetitive presents a topic sentence but with no controlling idea or with more than</td><td>arranges information and ideas coherently and there is a clear overall progression uses cohesive devices effectively, but cohesion within and/or between sentences may be faulty or mechanical presents a topic sentence with one controlling</td><td>logically organizes information and ideas; there is clear progression throughout uses a range of cohesive devices appropriately although there may be some under-/over-use&quot; presents a clear topic sentence with one relevant controlling idea</td><td>sequences information and ideas logically manages all aspects of cohesion well presents a clear topic sentence with one relevant controlling idea</td></tr></table></body></html>

\*C = Content; $\mathbf { V } =$ Vocabulary; ${ \bf G } =$ Grammar; $\mathrm { O = }$ Organization

# References

Baleghizadeh, S., & Arab, F. (2011). Comparing native models and peer feedback in promoting noticing through written output. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 5(1), 63–79. https://doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2010.517535   
Beers, S. F., & Nagy, W. E. (2011). Writing development in four genres from grades three to seven: Syntactic complexity and genre differentiation. Reading and Writing, 24(2), 183–202. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-010-9264-9   
Bitchener, J., & Storch, N. (2016). Written corrective feedback for L2 development. Multilingual Matters,.   
Canovas ´ Guirao, J., Roca de Larios, J., & Coyle, Y. (2015). The use of models as a written feedback technique with young EFL learners. System, 52, 63–77. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.system.2015.04.002   
Cao, Z., & Mao, Z. (2022). Studies on positive evidence feedback in second language writing: Status quo and implications. RELC Journal, 55(1), 209–218. https://doi. org/10.1177/00336882211072905   
Chung, E. S., & Ahn, S. (2021). The effect of using machine translation on linguistic features in L2 writing across proficiency levels and text genres. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 35(9), 2239–2264. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2020.1871029   
Coyle, Y., & Roca de Larios, J. (2014). Exploring the role played by error correction and models on children’s reported noticing and output production in a L2 writing task. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 36(3), 451–485. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263113000612   
Coyle, Y., & Roca de Larios, J. (2020). Exploring young learners’ engagement with models as a written corrective technique in EFL and CLIL settings. System, 95, Article 102374. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102374   
Creswell, J. W., & Creswell, J. D. (2017). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-methods approaches. Sage publications,.   
Crosthwaite, P., Ningrum, S., & Lee, I. (2022). Research trends in L2 written corrective feedback: A bibliometric analysis of three decades of Scopus-indexed research on L2 WCF. Journal of Second Language Writing, 58, Article 100934. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2022.100934   
Ellis, R. (2009). A typology of written corrective feedback types. ELT Journal, 63(2), 97–107. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccn023   
Field, A. (2018). Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics. Sage Publications.,.   
García Mayo, M. P., & Loidi Labandibar, U. (2017). The use of models as written corrective feedback in English as a foreign language (EFL) writing. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 37, 110–127. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190517000071   
Hamano-Bunce, D. (2022). The effects of direct written corrective feedback and comparator texts on the complexity and accuracy of revisions and new pieces of writing, 13621688221127643 Language Teaching Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688221127643.   
Hanaoka, O. (2007). Output, noticing, and learning: An investigation into the role of spontaneous attention to form in a four-stage writing task. Language Teaching Research, 11(4), 459–479. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168807080963   
Hanaoka, O., & Izumi, S. (2012). Noticing and uptake: Addressing pre-articulated covert problems in L2 writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 21(4), 332–347. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2012.09.008   
Kang, E. Y. (2020). Using model texts as a form of feedback in L2 writing. System, 89, Article 102196. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2019.102196   
Kang, E. Y. (2022). The role of working memory in the effects of models as a written corrective strategy. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 61(4), 1725–1753. https://doi.org/10.1515/iral-2021-0207   
Kang, E. Y. (2023). EFL learners’ perceptions and their association with the effectiveness of model texts as a feedback tool. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 18(1), 47–58. https://doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2023.2226144   
Larson-Hall, J., & Plonsky, L. (2015). Reporting and interpreting quantitative research findings: What gets reported and recommendations for the field. Language Learning, 65(S1), 127–159. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12115   
L´azaro-Ibarrola, A. (2021). Model texts in collaborative and individual writing among EFL children: noticing, incorporations, and draft quality. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 61(2), 329–359. https://doi.org/10.1515/iral-2020-0160   
Lee, I. (2019). Teacher written corrective feedback: Less is more. Language Teaching, 52(4), 524–536. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444819000247   
Lundine, J. P., & McCauley, R. J. (2016). A Tutorial on Expository Discourse: Structure, Development, and Disorders in Children and Adolescents. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 25(3), 306. https://doi.org/10.1044/2016_AJSLP-14-0130   
Luquin, M., & García Mayo, M. P. (2021). Exploring the use of models as a written corrective feedback technique among EFL children. System, 98, Article 102465. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2021.102465   
Luquin, M., & García Mayo, M. P. (2024). A longitudinal study of the effects of model texts on EFL children’s written production. System, 120, Article 103190. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2023.103190   
McHugh, M. L. (2012). Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochemia medica, 22(3), 276–282. https://doi.org/10.11613/BM.2012.031   
Plonsky, L., & Oswald, F. L. (2014). How big is “big”? Interpreting effect sizes in L2 research. Language Learning, 64(4), 878–912. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12079   
Sachs, R., & Polio, C. (2007). Learners’ uses of two types of written feedback on a L2 writing revision task. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 29(1), 67–100. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263107070039   
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11(2), 129–158. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/11.2.129   
Schmidt, R. (2001). Attention. In In. P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 3–32). Cambridge University Press.   
Skehan, P. (1998). A cognitive approach to language learning. Oxford University Press,.   
Storch, N. (2018). Written corrective feedback from sociocultural theoretical perspectives: A research agenda. Language Teaching, 51(2), 262–277. https://doi.org/ 10.1017/S0261444818000034   
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible output in its development. In S. Gass, & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in Second Language Acquisition (pp. 235–253). Newbury House.   
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypotheses and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). Oxford University Press.   
Tieu, L. T. C., & Baker, J. R. (2022). Using model essays in conjunction with noticing as a feedback instrument in IELTS writing preparation. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 17(2), 380–392. https://doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2022.2049799   
Truscott, J. (2007). The effect of error correction on learners’ ability to write accurately. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16(4), 255–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jslw.2007.06.003   
UCLES. (2001). Oxford quick placement test. Oxford University Press,.   
VanPatten, B. (1996). Input processing and grammar instruction in second language acquisition. Ablex,.   
VanPatten, B. (2004). Processing instruction. Lawrence Erlbaum,.   
Villarreal, I., & L´azaro-Ibarrola, A. (2022). Models in collaborative writing among CLIL learners of English in primary school: Linguistic outcomes and motivation matters. System, 110, Article 102922. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2022.102922   
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press,.   
Wu, Z., Qie, J., & Wang, X. (2023). Using model texts as a type of feedback in EFL writing. Frontiers in Psychology, 14, Article 1156553. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fpsyg.2023.1156553   
Yang, L., & Zhang, L. (2010). Exploring the role of reformulations and a model text in EFL students’ writing performance. Language Teaching Research, 14(4), 464–484. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168810375369   
Yang, Y., Yap, N. T., & Ali, A. M. (2023). Predicting EFL expository writing quality with measures of lexical richness. Assessing Writing, 57, Article 100762. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.asw.2023.100762   
Yoon, H.-J., & Polio, C. (2017). The linguistic development of students of English as a second language in two written genres. TESOL Quarterly, 51(2), 275–301. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.296

Bao Trang Thi Nguyen is a full-time lecturer and researcher in Applied Linguistics at University of Foreign Languages and International Studies, Hue University, Vietnam. Her research interests include task-based language teaching and learning, teacher cognition, L2 vocabulary acquisition, L2 speaking/writing development, language and culture, learner proficiency, and SLA.

Hoang Yen Phuong is currently an Associate Professor at the School of Foreign Languages, Can Tho University, Vietnam. She carries studies on language teaching approaches, students’ learning autonomy, self-regulated learning strategies, and teachers’ professional development. She published articles in different journals and is the editor of one Scopus-indexed book on alternative assessment in language teaching.