# BALEAP News

Somewhat prophetically, as it turns out, I wrote in the 2020 January issue of BALEAP News that ‘2020 is a significant year for BALEAP’. It certainly was a significant year, but not entirely as originally conceptualised. At that point, we were looking forward to our first European Professional Issues Meeting (PIM) and a joint conference with the Chinese EAP Association (CEAPA). Both events had been planned as face-to-face conferences and both had to be postponed. Ironically, I also noted that ‘BALEAP events are now also more likely to be live-streamed, reaching a wider audience’. This did mean that we were as well prepared as we could be for what was to be a lively year of online events coinciding with the emergence of the BALEAP Special Interest Groups (SIGs) which added to this activity and have significantly enhanced the possibilities for networking and building communities of expertise in different areas relating to EAP.

What SIGs lost in terms of face-to-face meetings, they gained by the technological advances there have been facilitating online meetings. Over the course of the year 20 webinars were offered by different SIGs in areas such as technology enhanced learning (TEL), testing and assessment, social justice, academic listening, transnational education (TNE), and the creative disciplines. There has been much digital interaction and SIGs have begun to forge connections with other related associations through online events and discussion. In this coming year we look forward to the relaunch of SIGs that have had to pause activity because of the challenges posed by Covid 19 and the launch of a new SIG devoted to Teacher Education in EAP.

Moving to online meetings during 2020 became the norm too for the Executive committee and in some ways was beneficial providing the opportunity to meet more frequently to carry out BALEAP business. One initiative that emerged from this was the establishing of a TEAP scholarship to reduce the financial barriers to BALEAP TEAP accreditation for EAP practitioners in the UK or overseas who would benefit from additional support. Up to five successful applicants for the award each year will have the fee for Associate Fellow accreditation covered. The award will also cover any mentoring fees, and in some circumstances may also cover the cost of a TEAP observation by an external assessor. EAP teachers are eligible to apply for this award if they are a BALEAP member and one or more of the following apply:

You are employed on a precarious contract   
You are not employed by a BALEAP member institution   
You are not employed in an EAP setting but can demonstrate elements of EAP practice (e.g. in FE)

For further details about this award or to apply, contact the BALEAP TEAP Officer, Paul Hendrie, at: TEAP@baleap.org.

The BALEAP Executive committee is also proud to be able to announce the introduction of the Gary Riley-Jones Memorial Lecture in honour of Gary, our colleague and committee member and an EAP practitioner who had considerable impact on the EAP community. Gary Riley-Jones was an EAP lecturer who worked at Goldsmiths, University of London for many years until his unexpected death in 2020. He was a dedicated member of BALEAP and served on the Executive committee for a number of years, first as Ordinary member and then as TEAP officer. He was particularly interested in criticality and in social justice and was completing a doctorate at the Institute of Education focusing on criticality in an EAP Arts context. To honour his memory, the Gary Riley-Jones Memorial Lecture will now be awarded to a talk, presentation or workshop at the BALEAP biennial conference that deals with research related to aspects of criticality in EAP or social justice issues. There will also be the opportunity of a guaranteed submission for the Conference Proceedings. More information about the lecture and selection criteria will be available during the year.

Finally, the EAP community as represented by BALEAP membership has seen some growth in individual member numbers with the total now at 308 (2020: 273) and has remained steady in institutional membership with 94 institutions currently belonging to the organisation (2020: 93). We are looking forward to our biennial conference which is going forward as planned but will be hosted as an online event by the University of Glasgow. The theme is Exploring pedagogical approaches in EAP teaching and the conference will be held over five days from 6th to $1 0 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ April 2021. (See https://www.baleap.org/event/ baleap-2021-glasgow for more information about the conference).

The AGM will take place during the course of the conference and will see the confirmation of election results for three officer positions on the BALEAP Executive committee. These are the Chair, Testing Officer and Events Officer.

Sarah Brewer University of Reading, UK E-mail address: chair@baleap.org