# (Mis)use of definition in Chinese EFL postgraduate students' academic writing: A local grammar based investigation

Yimin Zhanga, Hang Sub,\*

a Chongqing Jiaotong University, China b Sichuan International Studies University, China

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Definition   
Discourse act   
Local grammar   
Chinese EFL learners   
EAP writing pedagogy

Adopting a local grammar approach, the present study investigated Chinese EFL learners' use of the discourse act of definition in academic writing. A corpus of MA theses by Chinese EFL learners and a corpus of published research articles by expert writers in the field of Applied Linguistics were compiled for the current investigation. Instances of definition were retrieved by searching for a set of lexico-syntactic markers, and the subsequent local grammar analyses of these instances identified 26 highly frequent patterns associated with definition. Results showed that the Chinese EFL learners used substantially more definitions in their MA theses than expert writers did in research articles. Furthermore, subtle yet notable similarities and differences were observed between the two groups of writers' performance of definition at both the lexical-grammatical and discourse-semantic levels. It was argued that these observations not only bring us to a more nuanced understanding of the Chinese EFL learners' use of definition in academic writing, but also provide important insights into EAP writing research and pedagogy in EFL contexts.

# 1. Introduction

This study presents a local grammar based investigation into Chinese English as a foreign language (EFL) learners use of definition in MA theses. It belongs to an on-going project which systematicall explores Chinese EFL learners pragmatic performance of communicative or discourse acts in academic writing. The primary aim of the project is to diagnose Chinese EFL learners problems or difficulties i peforming such discourse acts and, ultimately,toprovide suggestions for EAP writing pedgogy in EFL contexts see also Su et al., 2022). Briefly, discourse acts here refer to those rhetorical or communicative functions (e.g, giving examples, defining terms/concepts and making comparison and contrast) that are frequently performed in academic writing contexts. Pragmatic performance as the term is used in the present study, reers to how writers use of discourse acts contributes to writer-reader interaction and, more importantly, the quality of their academic writing. We consider the use of discourse acts as pragmatic performance because the linguistic choices writers make to perform such acts will have an impact on the pragmatic or communicative efects between writers and readers.

Academic writing has always been a challenging task for EFL learners and thus has atracted much scholarly attention. Previous studies on EFL learners' academic writing mainly focused on lexico-grammatical features such as lexical bundles (e.g., Bychkovska & Lee, 2017; Wei & Lei, 2011), cllocation (e.g., Parkinson, 2015; Qian, 2019), and syntactic complexity (e.g., Atak & Saricaoglu, 2021; Ortega, 2015), which have deepened our understanding of EFL learners' development of lexico-grammatical competence in meeting the challenges of academic writing. Whil in recent decades there have also been numerous attempts researching into the pragmatic dimensions of EFL learners' academic writing, these studies have been mainly concerned with the interpersonal features such as stance and voice (e.g., Hyland, 2004 Ivanic & Camps, 2001; Wu & Palrige, 2021). In contras, relatively les attention has been paid to EFL learners' use or performance of discourse acts in academic writing. Ren (2022 p. 20), based on a comprehensive review of studies on L2 pragmatic competence, similarly pointed out that L2 learners' "writing pragmatic competence remains under-researched. To bridge this gap, we attempt to probe into ChineseFL learners pragmatic peformance of discourse acts in academic writing, aiming to explore the problems and challenges they might encounter in writing practice so as to seek possible solutions.

The rationale of the present study can be elaborated as follows. First, appropriate performance of discourse acts has been shown to be of paramount importanceto academic writing, as they are not only essential for the construction and dissemination of disciplinary knowledge but also a determinant of the persuasiveness and accessbilit of academic texts (see Hyland, 2007; Kaanta et al., 2018; Morton, 2020). Second, despite the importance, it has been often reported that EFL or novice writers tend to have problems or difficultie in performing such discourse acts. For instance, Hyland and Tse (2004) observed that students struggled with performing the act of expresing gratitude in acknowledgements of MA and PhD dissertations, primarily due to a lack of knowledge about the structures and expressons available to do so. Similarl, Hinkel (2004) and Paquot (2008) found that EFL learners rarely sucessuly employed the act of exemplification in writing tasks and had a far more imited repertoire of exemplifying phraseologies than their English L1 counterparts. In the case of definition, Nashaat-Sobhy and Llinares (2020) regarded it as a serious pedagogical concern, noting that students' performances of definition depend upon their knowledge of word meaning as well as the linguisic resources available odeine. One possible rson for thee dificties s that such dcoure at haveoly e osel ssd in xisting AP textbooks, ie, these discourse functions are just mentioned but without detailed decritio of their realisational patterns g, Fang, 2021; Jordan, 199; Kirszner & Mandell, 2017). In consequence, there is a pressing need to systematically document and describe the linguistic resources that are available to perform such discourse acts and, based on the description, to further diagnose what problems EFL learners may have when performing them in academic writing.

To that end, the present study draws on insights from recent advances in learner corpus research, in particular the call for a function-to-form aproach to analysing learner writing and a function-driven type of annotation of larner language (Calles, 2015; Durrant & Mathews-Aydnli, 2011). For example, Cllies (2015) argues that a function-to-form approach aims to \*link theoccurrence of particular language forms and the functions that they erve in discourse", thus making possible the identification and documen. tation of a near-complete inventory of lexico-syntactic means used to expres various communicative functions in discourse (p. 53) Also, he emphasises that afunction-driven annotation could deepen our understanding of \*form-function mappings in discourse by accounting for unexpected, interlanguage-specific structures that are bound to occur in leaner language" (Calles, 2015, p. 54). In a similar vein, Durrant and Mathews-Aydinh (2011) argue for a function-first approach to studying formulic language. They suggest that what language leaners need to know is not the word sequence per se, but rather the functions they need to express and the forms that most appropriately fulfil those functions. They then stress the need \*for an analysis which, rather than starting from linguistic forms, starts from semantic functions and works towards deriving the range of recurrent forms asociated with those functions ibid, p. 61).

Aligning with these lines of inquiries, the present study adopts a function-to-form approach, i.e., local grammar (see Section 2), to examine Chinese EFL postgraduate students pragmatic performance of discourse acts in academic writing, focusing specifically on the discourse act of definition. Acording to Dalton-Pufer, 2013, (p. 234), definition has the specific communicative intent of telling others \*about the extension of an object of specialist knowledge'. While the general consensus has been reached that definition is frequently peformed by academic writersto explain words, ideas, concepts or to elaborate abstract notions or technical terms, it is actuall complex concept (see also Barnbrook, 2002; Darian, 203; Flowerdew, 1992; Triki, 2019 Zhang & Su, 2022; Adel, 2006) Therefore, for the sake of simplicity and clarit, we slighly narrow down the scope of definition in the present study. Specifically, in this study we only consider as definition those instances which either ilustrate technical terms, abstract concepts or specify the meanings of words, and stick strictly to this defition. In other words, descritive or explanatory instances (g., DA is a research field Which atracts linguists both at home and abroad') are not considered as definition, although they might look like one.

We focus on definition, on the one hand, because it constitutes a core function in academic writing and the use of definition is a prevalent phenomenon in scintific/academic discourses (Swales & Feak, 2012; Triki, 2019; Adel, 2006). On the other hand, as Darian (2003, p. 47) pointed out, although defining words and concepts is one of the most important analytical skill, it has been \*taught haphazardly, if at ll'. Indeed, as indicated in the review fered by Triki (2019) and Zhang and Su (2022), despite it importance in academic writing, definition in high-stakes academic genres has not been wel researched and taught. Therefore, examining EFL learners' pragmatic performance of definition in academic writing is a worthwhile undertaking, which could offr important impli cations for the teaching of definition (and by extension other discourse acts) in EAP context.

We begin in the next section with a brief inroduction to the local grammar approach to contrastive discourse studies in academic contexts. In Section 3, we introduce the corpora used in the current investigation and the methods for data retrieval and analysis. We then present the main findings of the study in Section 4 and discuss it potential implications for EAP writing research and pedagogy in Section 5. Section 6 concludes this paper.

# 2. Local grammar approach to contrastive academic discourse studies

As aforementioned, the present study employs a function-to-form approach, i.e., local grammar, to analyse Chinese EFL learners academic writing. Local grammar, as noted in Hunston and Su, 2019, p. 571), \*is always a grammar of a discourse function'. Each discourse act, as mentioned at the beginning of the paper, roughly corresponds to one discourse function, hence the compatibility of using local grammars to account for discourse acts in academic writig. What makes local grammar particularly useful for exploring discourse acts i is use of context-specific and transparent functional terminologie to analyse corresponding formal or syntactic units of instances realising a target discourse act (e.g., Su & Wei, 2018; Su & Zhang, 2020). For example, the instance Antonymy refers to gradble opsites whic re full gdable nd inomatible . realises dntio, and its ocal grammar alysis is preented in Table 1.

Table 1 illustrates the mapping of functional-pragmatic terms onto syntactic units in local grammar analysis. Spcificall, Antonymy represents the term/concept being defined and gradabl opposites the way how the term is defined; thus, they can be labelled Definiendum' and Definiens, respectively. Meanwhile refers to functions to connect the two parts of this definition, and the which. clause specifies the limiting characteristics of the defined term, thus labelled Hinge' and Supporting statement, respectively see Table 6 for more discussion about the terminologies). In other words, local grammar analysis requires the analysts to decode the semantic relationship between syntactic units and then analyse each target syntactic unit, which may range from words, phrases to clauses, with a term that can explicitly relect its communicatie or discourse function. This is the way that local grammar analysis is performed.

There is by now a substantial body of research that has adopted the local grammar approach to document and describe the realisation of discourse acts in various contexts, including evaluation (Hunston & Su, 2019), disclaiming (Cheng & Ching, 2018), exemplification (Su & Zhang, 2020), and definition (Barnbrook, 2002; Zhang & Su, 2022). These studies have demonstrated that the resulting local grammars not only contribute to the description of language in use, but could alsobe usefully aplied to inform language teaching (Hunston & Su, 2019; Su & Zhang, 2020).

Of more relevance to the current investigation is local grammar's capacity to capture the underlying regularity of language use at the discourse-semantic level. Rather than simply counting the frequency of lexical markers that may signal a discourse act, local grammar is more concerned with the discourse-semantics of corresponding syntactic units in the context of the target discourse act. This kind of analysis on the one hand, has shown that instances co-occurring with the same marker could realise distinct local grammar patterns. In the case of defintion, for example, instances containing define relise several patterns, some of which are shown in Table 2.

On the other hand, instances coccurring with different lexical markers may be analysed using the same local grammar pattern. For example,all the instances provided in Table 3, though signalled by different definitional verbs (i.., rfer, mean, comprise, and define), realise the same local grammar pattern (Definiendum - Hing - Definiens - Supporting statement).

The point of the above discussion is that local grammar ofers a viable approach to quantify the realisational patterns of a given discourse act between diffrent groups of writers or across ifferent contexts, thereby facilitating contrastive academic discourse studies. For instance, Su et al. (2021) adopted the local grammar aproach to trace the changing patterns f exemplification in Linguistics research articles, which showed that academic writers of Linguistics nowadays tended to exemplify in simpler and more explicit ways. In a more recent study, Su et al. (2022) further explored how Chinese English-major MA students diffred from expert writers in their use of exemplification in academic writing. They found that, compared with expert writers, student writers showed a

Table 1 Local grammar analysis of definition.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Definiendum</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens1</td><td>Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td> Antonymy</td><td>refers to</td><td> gradable opposites</td><td>which are fully gradable and incompatible ...</td></tr></table></body></html>

1 s one reiewer pointed out, ther reachers might consider gadble oposite. and incompatible to be the efinies tht cn be divided into Superordnate andDisriminator omainain consistenc with our erlier work (hang u, 2022) owver, we retain the tems efiniens and Supporting statement in the present study. Se also Table 6 for more iscusson about the terminologie used for the local grammar analysis of definition.

Table 2 Local grammar analyses of definitional instances co-occurring with 'define'.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Scope</td><td>Definiendum</td><td colspan="2">Hinge</td><td>Definiens</td><td colspan="2">Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td>In this study,</td><td colspan="2">word form production</td><td colspan="2">was defined</td><td>as the ability</td><td colspan="2">to recall and spell target word forms correctly..</td></tr><tr><td>Source-external</td><td>Hinge</td><td colspan="2">Definiendum</td><td>Definiens</td><td colspan="2">Supporting statement</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Atkinson et al. (2007)</td><td>defined</td><td colspan="2">alignment</td><td>as &#x27;the complex means</td><td colspan="3">by which human beings effect coordinated interaction, and.</td></tr><tr><td>Definiendum</td><td></td><td colspan="2">Hinge</td><td colspan="2">Definiens</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td> Phraseological knowledge</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"> can be roughly defined</td><td colspan="2"></td><td>as knowledge of formulaic sequences or multi-word expressions (MwEs).</td></tr><tr><td>Definiendum</td><td colspan="2">Hinge</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">Definiens</td><td>Source-external</td></tr><tr><td>Difficult</td><td colspan="2">can be defined</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">as &#x27;needing skill or effort&#x27;</td><td>(Cambridge Dictionary)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Local grammar analyses of instances co-occurring with different definitional verbs.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Definiendum</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens</td><td>Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td>The so-called hard-context</td><td>refers to</td><td>the hardware of pedagogical context,</td><td>which is the material basis of teaching activities ....</td></tr><tr><td>&quot;Guys&quot;</td><td> mean</td><td>a group of people</td><td>who are intimate with each other.</td></tr><tr><td>Alignment</td><td>comprisese</td><td>the students&#x27; genre awareness</td><td>-the ability to use genre knowledge acquired in the course ...</td></tr><tr><td>Interactional competence</td><td>may be defined</td><td>as that competence</td><td>which is specifically needed to interact ...</td></tr></table></body></html>

preference for using exemplification to specify superordinate categories or abstract concepts but tended to underuse the other majo.   
strategy of exemplifying by citing relevant studies.

From a methodological point of view, the two studies reviewed above have demonstrated the usefulness of local grammar de scriptions in quantfying the realisational patterns of a given discourse act, facilitating contrastive investigation into the ways a discourse act can be performed across contexts or by different groups of writers. Therefore, the present study employs the local grammar approach to investigate Chinese EFL learners use of definition in academic writing, with expert writers use of defintion in published research articlesas reference for comparison (se Section 3). Our aim is to explore the extent to which Chinese EFL learners perform definition in ways that are similar to or diffrent from those by expert writer and to further discuss the pedagogical implications for the teaching of definition and by extension other discourse acts in EAP contexts.

# 3. Corpora and methodology

# 3.1. Corpora

For the purpose of this study, two corpora were compiled from academic texts in the field of Aplied Linguistics. One was compiled of 60 MA theses collected from the Applied Linguisics rogramme at universities in mainland China (hereafter CoMATAL). These texts were obtained from CNKI (China National Knowledge Infrastructure; htps://w.cnki.net/) where MA theses were uploaded after graduation and were made available to all subscribing universities, such that using these texts as data would not constitute any infringement fcopyright. We chose to collect MA theses in Applied Linguisics because MA theses in this programme are required to be written in English (note that this does not apply to the other programmes in Chinese universities, except for a few universities offering EMI courses) and represent the most substantial piece of academic writing for Chinese EFL learners at the master's degree level. More notably, since MA students are advanced EFL laners who are competent at producing grammaticlly well-formed sen tences and have relatively higher pragmatic competence, it can be argued that MA theses could provide useful data for investigating Chinese EFL learners' pragmatic performance of discourse acts in academic writing.

The other corpus, which was used as rferencefor comparison, was compiled of 100 published research articles by expert writers in the field of Applied Linguistics (herefter CORAAL) and published in the journal Aplie Linguistics (htps://academic.oup.com/applij/ ). We selected these texts partly because published research artices are \*commonly recognised as the model of academic writing" (Alangari et al., 2020, p. 4), and partl because the journal Alie Linguistics is regarded as one of the flagship journals and covers a wide range of topics in this discipline. The meta-information of the two corpora is given in Table 4.

At this point, it is worth pointing out that using MA theses and research articles as the data may raise issues concerning comparability. Specificall, there are two points of contras between the two corpora. One relate to genre and the other to proficiency level. While bearing in mind that some differences might beattributableto genre variation, the current investgation focuses on differences in proficiency. This i because our aim has been to diagnose the Chinese EFL leaners problems or diffculties in performing discourse acts and, based on which, to further provide suggestions for teaching them in the Chinese EFL contexts. Therefore, our choice of using expert writers' published research articles as reference for comparison can draw support from Adel (2006):

.. professional writing represents the norm that advanced learner writers try to reach and their teachers try to promote. In this respect, a useful corpus for comparison is one which offers a collection of what Bazerman (1994: 131) call expert performances'.

# 3.2. Data retrieval

We used Sketch Engine (htps://app.sketchengine.eu/ to proces the data and to retrieve instances of definition in the two corpora. First, drawing on insights from previous studies (e.g., Flowerdew, 1992; Pearson, 1998; Triki, 2019; Zhang & Su, 202; Adel, 206), we identified a set of lexical items and one syntactic construction that can signal the discourse act of definition. These lexico-syntactic markers of definition were clasified into four broad categories, i.e., definitional construction, definitional nouns, definitional verbs, and linking adverbials (se also Zhang & Su, 2022). We then searched for these items and their possile variants in the two corpora, and carefully examined the hits returned by the search to make sure that all the instances to be analysed are definitions. Log-likelihood values were tested using Paul Rayson's online calculator (htp://ucrel.ancs ac.uk/llwizard.hml) to identify statisical differentiation of the markers used by the Chinese EFL leaners and the expert writers The quantitative information of each marker is presented in Table 5.

Table 4 Meta-information of the two corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Corpora</td><td>No. of texts</td><td>No. of tokens</td><td>Average length</td></tr><tr><td>COMATAL</td><td>60</td><td>1,307,395</td><td>21,789.92</td></tr><tr><td>CORAAL</td><td>100</td><td>1,163,320</td><td>11,633.20</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 Markers of definition and their frequency in the two corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Markers</td><td colspan="2">COMATAL</td><td colspan="2">CORAAL</td><td>LL</td><td>LR</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed1</td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Definitional construction</td><td>&#x27;X BE Y&#x27; construction</td><td>543</td><td>415.33</td><td>95</td><td>81.66</td><td>+297.38 ****</td><td>2.35</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Definitional nouns</td><td>term (as noun)</td><td>23</td><td>17.59</td><td>25</td><td>21.49</td><td>0.48</td><td>0.27</td></tr><tr><td>concept</td><td>12</td><td>9.18</td><td>3</td><td>2.58</td><td>+4.78 *</td><td>1.83</td></tr><tr><td>definition</td><td>39</td><td>29.83</td><td>6</td><td>5.16</td><td>+23.34 ****</td><td>2.53</td></tr><tr><td>notion</td><td>8</td><td>6.12</td><td>5</td><td>4.30</td><td>+0.39</td><td>0.51</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="10">Definitional verbs</td><td>mean (as verb)</td><td>142</td><td>108.61</td><td>11</td><td>9.46</td><td>+118.22 ****</td><td>3.52</td></tr><tr><td>refer</td><td>481</td><td>367.91</td><td>96</td><td>82.52</td><td>+237.49 ****</td><td>2.16</td></tr><tr><td>consider</td><td>66</td><td>50.48</td><td>10</td><td>8.60</td><td>+39.89 ****</td><td>2.55</td></tr><tr><td>call</td><td>107</td><td>81.84</td><td>25</td><td>21.49</td><td>+45.74 ****</td><td>1.93</td></tr><tr><td> regard</td><td>55</td><td>42.07</td><td>8</td><td>6.88</td><td>+34.11 ****</td><td>2.61</td></tr><tr><td> define</td><td>149</td><td>113.97</td><td>63</td><td>54.16</td><td>+26.59 ****</td><td>1.07</td></tr><tr><td>consist of</td><td>44</td><td>33.65</td><td>6.</td><td>5.16</td><td>+28.36 ****</td><td>2.71</td></tr><tr><td>seen as</td><td>13</td><td>9.94</td><td>18</td><td>15.47</td><td>1.50</td><td>0.64</td></tr><tr><td>known as</td><td>20</td><td>15.30</td><td>12</td><td>10.32</td><td>+1.20</td><td>0.57</td></tr><tr><td>term (as verb)</td><td>26</td><td>19.89</td><td>4</td><td>3.44</td><td>+15.56 ****</td><td>2.53</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Linking adverbials</td><td>comprise</td><td>7</td><td>5.35</td><td>8</td><td>6.88</td><td>0.23</td><td>0.36</td></tr><tr><td>i.e.</td><td>15</td><td>11.47</td><td>33</td><td>28.37</td><td>9.18 ****</td><td>1.31</td></tr><tr><td>that is</td><td>1</td><td>0.76</td><td>23</td><td>19.77</td><td>27.61 ****</td><td>4.69</td></tr><tr><td>BE related to</td><td>2</td><td>1.53</td><td>2</td><td>1.72</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.17</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>BE concerned with Total</td><td>36 1789</td><td>27.54 1368.37</td><td>1 454</td><td>0.86 390.26</td><td>+38.14 **** +701.53 ****</td><td>5.00</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: $\mathrm { L L } = \mathrm { l o g }$ -likelihood value; $\mathbf { L R } = \log$ ratio; $\cdot _ { + } \cdot _ { = }$ overuse in COMATAL relative to CORAAL; $^ { \circ } - ^ { \circ } =$ underuse in COMATAL relative to CORAAL; $^ { * } =$ $p < 0 . 0 5$ $^ { \ast \ast } = p < 0 . 0 1$ $^ { * * * } = p < 0 . 0 0 1$ $\ast \ast \ast \ast = p < 0 . 0 0 0 1$ 1 The frequency was normalised per 1,oo,ooo million words throughout.

A few caveats need to be mentioned. First, since we used computerised search to retrieve data, we have not been able to consider covert defintions (i.., those not sigalled by any formal markers. Second, we observed that some defintional instances may contain two or more defintion markers for example, the instance Our defintion of colocational ccuracy refers to how accurate lners are in producing acceptable and expected multiword units (oRAAL) has definition' and 'refer'. To avoid repetition, such instances were analysed and counted only once.

With regard to these markers, Table 5 shows that the Chinese EFL learners used the majority of the markers statistically more frequently than the expert writers did, resulting in more definitions in cOMATAL than in CoRAAL. In particular, they relied heavily on the X BE Y construction and defintional verbs but were les aware of using linking adverbials such as i.e and that is when performing the act f defining. However as we discussed in Section 2, simply counting the frequency of these markers may not reliably quantify the realisations of definition at the discourse-semantic level (see also Su et al., 2022). Therefore, in the next step, all the retrieved instances of definition were subject to local grammar analysis.

Table 6 Terminologies for a local grammar analysis of definition (adapted from Zhang & Su, 2022)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Terminology</td><td>Explanation</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Definiendum</td><td>The syntactic unit that indicates the term or concept being defined..</td><td>Extrinsic modality refers to assessments of likelihood (Biber et al., 1999: 485).</td></tr><tr><td>Definiens</td><td>The syntactic unit that indicates how the term or concept is defined or refers to the superordinate term that is being specified by additional linguistic</td><td>Phraseological knowledge can be roughly defined as knowledge of formulaic sequences or multi-word expressions.</td></tr><tr><td>Source-internal</td><td>element. The syntactic unit that attributes the source of the definition to the current author(s).</td><td>(MWEs). We call the negative end of this dimension &#x27;Completed Events&#x27;.</td></tr><tr><td>Source-external</td><td>The syntactic unit that attributes the source of the definition to previous</td><td>Atkinson et al. (2o07) define alignment as &#x27;the complex means by which ...</td></tr><tr><td>Hinge</td><td>literature or other researcher(s). The syntactic unit that links different parts of a definition.</td><td>Slang is a nonstandard vocabulary ...</td></tr><tr><td> Initiator</td><td>The syntactic unit that indicates the act of definition is going to be performed.</td><td>The term &#x27;interaction&#x27; is used to describe the entire online engagement ..</td></tr><tr><td>Scope</td><td>The syntactic unit that delimits the extent to which the definition is valid or applicable.</td><td>In this article, we use the term storytelling to refer to a stretch. of talk to which ...</td></tr><tr><td>Supporting statement</td><td>The syntactic unit that further specifies the limiting features of the term or concept being defined or provides additional information.</td><td>Collocation is usually defined as a relation in which a collocate may be positioned either before or after the node and does not</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 An overview of local grammar patterns of definition identified in both corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Set</td><td>No. Pattern</td><td colspan="5"></td></tr><tr><td>Set 1</td><td>PA1</td><td>Definiendum Alignment</td><td>Hinge refers to</td><td>Definiens the students&#x27; ability</td><td colspan="2">Supporting statement to use their developing genre awareness to negotiate the conventions ..</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA2</td><td>Definiendum</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA3</td><td>A conceptual metaphor Definiens</td><td>is Hinge</td><td>a mapping between two domains of experience ... Definiendum</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA4</td><td>These open-window transition periods</td><td>are often known as</td><td> phase shifts.</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA5</td><td>Definiens Definiens This strategy</td><td>Hinge is called Supporting statement</td><td>Definiendum positive politeness Hinge</td><td colspan="2">Supporting statement Which is oriented toward the positive face of the hearer. Definiendum</td></tr><tr><td>Set 2</td><td></td><td>The process</td><td>where the learner attends to the linguistic features in the is called input during online comprehension and holds these in working memory</td><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA6</td><td>Definiendum Pan-familism</td><td>Hinge is</td><td>Definiens the expansion of cognitive models of FAMILY to the non-FAMILY collective groups</td><td>Source-external (Ren Hongshun, 2009).</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA7</td><td>Definiendum Variability</td><td>Hinge is defined</td><td>Definiens as &quot;the property of language</td><td>Supporting statement that defines the range of possibilities from which choices can be made&quot;</td><td>Source-external (Verschueren 1999).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA8</td><td>Source-external Cowie and Bell (1996)</td><td>define Hinge</td><td>Definiendum formative assessment</td><td>Definiens as &quot;the process</td><td>Supporting statement used by teachers and students to recognise and respond ...</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA9</td><td>Source-external According to Li &amp; Zhang</td><td>Definiendum individualism</td><td>Hinge is</td><td>Definiens the values of Western culture</td><td>Supporting statement largely embodied in the pursuit of free will.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>(2009), PA10 Source-external</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiendum</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Allport (1937)</td><td>used the term</td><td>nomothetic</td><td>to refer to</td><td>the study of that are shared by personality traits many people ...</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>PA11 Source-external Whaley (1997: 203)</td><td>defines Hinge</td><td>Definiendum tense</td><td>Definiens</td><td>as &quot;a grammatical expression of the relationship between two points in time&quot;.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>PA13 Source-external Rosenzweig (1986: 242)</td><td>Hinge coined the term</td><td>Definiendum idiodynamic</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>to refer to</td><td>his focus on events as key to understanding personality.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA12 Definiens</td><td></td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiendum</td><td>Source-external</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td> interlanguage (IL)</td><td>(Selinker, 1972: 214).</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Such a learner linguistic</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>has been called</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>system</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>PA14 Definiendum</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Hinge</td><td>Source-external</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Definiens</td><td>Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Face</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>by Brown and Levinson</td><td></td><td>that every member wants to claim for</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>is defined</td><td></td><td>as &quot;the public self-image</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>himself &quot;</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>PA15 Source-external</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Hinge</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Definiendum</td><td></td><td>Definiens</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>(continued on next page)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 (continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>No.</td><td></td><td colspan="2">Pattern In Modern Chinese edited by auxiliary verbs</td><td>are defined</td><td colspan="2">as those indicating possibilities.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Hu Yushu (1981:139) PA16 Source-external</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens</td><td>Definiendum</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Recanati (2002)</td><td>calls</td><td>these inferential enrichments</td><td> primary pragmatic processes.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>PA17 Source-internal</td><td>Definiendum</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens</td><td>Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>... we can generalize &quot;proverb&quot; as this:</td><td>proverb</td><td>is generally refer to</td><td>as brief, witty sayings or refinements of the wisdom of the.</td><td>that people find and ...</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA18 Definiens</td><td></td><td>Hinge</td><td></td><td> folk</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>This communicated but</td><td>is what</td><td>Source-external Grice</td><td>Hinge called</td><td>Definiendum conversational implicature.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA19 Definiens</td><td>unsaid material</td><td>Source-external</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>... a network of overlapping which he.</td><td></td><td>calls Hinge</td><td>Definiendum family resemblance.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Set 3</td><td>PA20 Initiator</td><td>similarities,</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>The notion of</td><td>Definiendum alignment</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>refers to</td><td></td><td>to the coherence between the students&#x27; criteria for judgment and the actual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>PA21 Initiator</td><td>Definiendum</td><td>Hinge</td><td>requirements ... Definiens</td><td>Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>The word</td><td>&quot;predication&quot;</td><td>refers to</td><td>to a basic process and result</td><td>which linguistically assigns certain</td></tr><tr><td>Set 4</td><td>PA22 Scope</td><td></td><td>Definiendum</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens</td><td>qualities to ...</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>And in this thesis,</td><td>the meaning loss</td><td>is defined</td><td>as the lost proportion of the</td><td>Supporting statement caused by the cross-cultural differences ....</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA23 Scope</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>original information</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Definiendum</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>In this case, PA24 Definiendum</td><td>compliments Hinge</td><td>are</td><td>complex speech acts.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Long words</td><td>are defined</td><td>Scope here</td><td>Definiens as any word</td><td>Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>whose length is greater than the mean. word length of the corpus.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>PA25 Definiendum</td><td> Scope</td><td>Hinge</td><td>Definiens</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>The Standard English</td><td>here</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>refers to</td><td>Standard English in the grammatical and lexical aspects.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Supporting statement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>PA26 Definiendum</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Definiens</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Scope</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Hinge</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Verb</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>that serves as the predicate of a sentence</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>in English grammar,</td><td></td><td>the word</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>refers to</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>...</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></table></body></html>

# 3.3. Local grammar analyses

For our analyses, we adapted the terminologies used in Zhang and Su (2022) which have been shown to be useful for local grammar analysis of defintion in Linguistc reearch artice (cf., Flowerdew, 1992; Babrook, 2002; Triki, 2019). The terminologies are listed and explained in Table 6.

As noted in Section 1, unlike Zhang and Su (2022) who les strictly defined definition, in the present study we narrowed down the scope of definition to those instances in which there is a technical term or abstract concept or specific word that is being explicated. This helped us to more easily rcognise genuine defintion instances. We then independently performed the local grammar analyses of all the defintion instances identified i the two corpora. As a way of crosschecking, frequent debriefing esions were held to resolve all our disagreement. In this way, the local grammar patterns of definition were established (see Table 7).

# 3.4. Statistical analysis

Results from the local grammar analyses of the two corpora were subject to comparison so as to pinpoint the similarities and difference etween the Chinese EFL learners and the expert writers use of definition in academic writing. To this end, we again used Paul Rayson's og-likeliood (LL) calculator (see also Section 3.2) to test if the differences between the two corpora were statistically significant. The greater the log-likelihood (LL) value, the more significant the difference is. In what follows, we present the major findings and then discuss the implications for EAP writing research and pedagogy.

Table 8 Distribution of local grammar patterns of definition between the two corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Pattern</td><td colspan="2">COMATAL</td><td colspan="2">CORAAL</td><td>LL</td><td>LR</td><td>Code</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Set 1</td><td>PA1</td><td>646</td><td>494.11</td><td>141</td><td>121.20</td><td>+294.76 ****</td><td>2.03</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA2</td><td>335</td><td>256.23</td><td>59</td><td>50.72</td><td>+194.97 ****</td><td>2.39</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA3</td><td>61</td><td>46.66</td><td>27</td><td>23.21</td><td>+9.81 **</td><td>1.01</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA4</td><td>15</td><td>11.47</td><td>3</td><td>2.58</td><td>+5.56 *</td><td>1.74</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA5</td><td>16</td><td>12.24</td><td>1</td><td>0.86</td><td>+14.27 ***</td><td>3.83</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Subtotal</td><td>1,073</td><td>820.72</td><td>231</td><td>198.57</td><td>+495.82 ****</td><td>2.05</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td>Set 2</td><td>PA6</td><td>20</td><td>15.30</td><td>27</td><td>23.21</td><td>- 2.02</td><td>- 0.6</td><td>similar use</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA7</td><td>52</td><td>39.77</td><td>19</td><td>16.33</td><td>+12.33 ***</td><td>1.28</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA8</td><td>82</td><td>62.72</td><td>16</td><td>13.75</td><td>+34.06 ****</td><td>2.04</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA9</td><td>80</td><td>61.19</td><td>9</td><td>7.74</td><td>+57.09 ****</td><td>2.98</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA10</td><td>60</td><td>45.89</td><td>9</td><td>7.74</td><td>+36.5 ****</td><td>2.57</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA11</td><td>30</td><td>22.95</td><td>9</td><td>7.74</td><td>+9.61 **</td><td>1.57</td><td> overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA12</td><td>14</td><td>10.71</td><td>6</td><td>5.16</td><td>+2.43</td><td>1.05</td><td> similar use</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA13</td><td>32</td><td>24.48</td><td>5</td><td>4.30</td><td>+18.96 ****</td><td>2.51</td><td> overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA14</td><td>9</td><td>6.88</td><td>4</td><td>3.44</td><td>+1.43</td><td>1.00</td><td> similar use</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA15</td><td>51</td><td>39.01</td><td>2</td><td>1.72</td><td>+50.9 ****</td><td>4.5</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA16</td><td>13</td><td>9.94</td><td>1</td><td>0.86</td><td>+10.85 ***</td><td>3.53</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA17</td><td>10</td><td>7.65</td><td>1</td><td>0.86</td><td>+7.53 **</td><td>3.15</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA18</td><td>4</td><td>3.06</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>+5.09 *</td><td>2.83</td><td>misuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA19</td><td>12.</td><td>9.18</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>+15.28 ****</td><td>4.42</td><td>misuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Subtotal</td><td>469</td><td>358.73</td><td>108</td><td>92.84</td><td>+203.36 ****</td><td>1.95</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td>Set 3</td><td>PA20</td><td>25</td><td>19.12</td><td>14</td><td>12.03</td><td>+1.99</td><td>0.67</td><td> similar use</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA21</td><td>28</td><td>21.42</td><td>14</td><td>12.03</td><td>+3.27</td><td>3.27</td><td>similar use</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Subtotal</td><td>53</td><td>40.54</td><td>28</td><td>24.07</td><td>+5.20 *</td><td>0.75</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td>Set 4</td><td>PA22</td><td>41</td><td>31.36</td><td>9</td><td>7.74</td><td>+18.61 ****</td><td>2.02</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA 23</td><td>41</td><td>31.36</td><td>9</td><td>7.74</td><td>+18.61 ****</td><td>2.02</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA 24</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>7</td><td>6.02</td><td> 10.55 **</td><td>- 3.98</td><td>underuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA 25</td><td>13</td><td>9.94</td><td>2</td><td>1.72</td><td>+7.78 **</td><td>2.53</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>PA 26</td><td>14</td><td>10.71</td><td>1</td><td>0.86</td><td>+11.98 ***</td><td>3.64</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Subtotal</td><td>109</td><td>83.37</td><td>28</td><td>24.07</td><td>+42.17 ****</td><td>1.79</td><td>overuse</td></tr><tr><td>Set 5</td><td>Other patterns</td><td>85</td><td>65.01</td><td>59</td><td>50.71</td><td>+2.18</td><td>0.36</td><td> similar use</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>1,789</td><td>1368.37</td><td>454</td><td>390.26</td><td>+701.53 ****</td><td>1.81</td><td>overuse</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4. Results and discussion

# 4.1. Overall results

Our analyses identified 98 local grammar patterns of definition in the two corpora. However, there were 72 patterns that occurred rather infrequently in both corpora i., les than five times per million word, and showed no statistically significant iference between the two corpora. Because of their ow frequency and idiosyncrasy, these pattens were simply grouped as Other patterns. The remaining 6 pattes were catgorisd int four sets according to ther protypicality and siilrit (seable 7). Briefly, the first set includes five patterns containing only the essential elements of definitions, i.., Definiendum, Definiens, Supporting statement, and Hinge. The second set includes 14 pattens where there is an additional element specifying whether the definition is drawn from other sources (labelled 'Source-external) or formulated by the current author(s (lbelled Source-internal). The third set includes two patterns in which thedfinitional act i intiated by dfintional noun., the te/ntion/oncept). he last set includes five pattens in which the definition is modified by an element 'Scope' delimiting the extent to which the definition is valid or applicable.

We then present the distribution of these patterns across the two corpora and the results of loglikelihood tests in Table 8. Based on the analyses, four codes were generated to describe the Chinese EFL learners performance of definition in comparison with that of expert writers, namely, similar use, overuse, underuse, and misuse. Smilar use refers to those cases in which there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups of writers $\mathrm { ( L L < 3 . 8 4 ) }$ , meaning that the Chinese EFL learners used these patterns as frequently as expert writersto perform the iscourse act of definition in academic writig. We used the other two codes overuse' and underuse to refer to those patterns whose frequency was significantly higher or lower in COMATAL than in CORAAL. Finall, those patterns which were frequently used by the learner writers but were not found in expert writing were coded as 'misuse'. At this point, a caveat should be mentioned though. Our categorisation of the learner writers' uses of definition into the aforementioned four types was mainly based on the statistica differentiation of the frequency of each local grammar pattern between the two corpora; as a consequence, the question of to what extent the use of each pattern was appropriate in specific co-text and context remains to be addressed in future research..

Below we discus some observations that can be tentatively drawn from our analyses. It should be cautioned that, as the current investigation focused specificaly on the Chinese EFL learners, the observations discussed here may only be alicable to this specific group of EFL leaners. First, it is evident that, overall, the Chinese EFL leaners performed the discourse act of defintion nearl four times more frequently in the MA theses than expert writers did in research articles 1,368.37 vs 390.26 per million words) and that the difference between the two groups of writers was extremely significant $( \mathrm { L L } = 7 0 1 . 5 3 $ $p < 0 . 0 0 0 1 $ . Additionally, Table 8 also shows that the Chinese EFL learners used more frequently the majority of the paterns identified than their expert counterparts, which in. dicates that the overall higher frequency of definition was not an effect of more frequent use of a few individual patterns. A similar observation was made in Adel, 2006, (p. 108) who, comparing EFL leaners with native speakers, found that EFL learners used "at least three times as many terms of this category [definition] as the native speakers".

The Chinese EFL learners' overuse of definition could be possibly explained by the average length, structural organisation, and different readership of the two geres. First, an MA thesis is approximately twice the length of a reearch article (ee Table 4) and, to EFL learners, definition is "a general writing strategy - a fller' strategy - to meet the size requirements of the writig task (Adel, 2006, p. 110. The second reason may be related to structural organisation. Specificlly, there is usually a chapter dedicated to introducing the theoretical framework used in Chinese EFL learners' MA theses. To organise such a chapter well requires the MA students tofrequently revisit and/or reinterpret the same theoretical concepts discussed by diffrent scholars, esulting inevitably more definitions. Third, as the target readers of MA theses are mainly institutionally designated thesis examiners, the greater use of definitions allows the thesis writers to display their acquired knowledge of the fundamental concepts in the field, thereby giving the thesis "a philosophical touch'" (Adel, 2006, p. 110) and presenting themselves as qualified MA graduates. In contrast, the potential readers of published research artice are usuall per rsearchers and professonals with shared specialist knowledge. Thus, there is less need for expert writers to discuss definitions which have already been acepted as common knowledge in the disciplinary community. Additionall, the heavier use of definition by the Chinese EFL learners may be attributed to their preference for giving word definitions (eg, " in Chinee originally means t fee r xres compassion as for other pples sufferings) or folk deintions (e., English is a member of th Indo-Eropean language family .), whereas these types of definitions were rarely found in expert writing. Ths finding corroborates Darian's (2003, p. 49) argument that \*the complexity of a definition depends on the age, interest, purpose, and background knowledge of the audience. The less expert the audience, the greater your need to define, but the les technical your definition can be".

In addition to the general tendency that Chinese EFL learners tended to overuse definition in academic writing, some subtle yet notable similarities and differences can be further observed from a closer scrutiny of the respective distribution of local grammar patterns across the two corpora, which will be discussed in the subsequent sections.

Table 9 Distribution of 'Source-external' and 'Source-internal' between the two corpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">COMATAL</td><td colspan="2">CORAAL</td><td>LL</td><td>LR</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td><td>Raw</td><td>Normed</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Source-external</td><td>459</td><td>351.08</td><td>107</td><td>91.98</td><td>+196.64 ****</td><td>1.93</td></tr><tr><td>Source-internal</td><td>10</td><td>7.65</td><td>1</td><td>0.86</td><td>+7.53 **</td><td>3.15</td></tr><tr><td>LL</td><td>+553.43 ****</td><td></td><td>+138.36 ****</td><td></td><td></td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>LR</td><td>5.52</td><td></td><td>6.74</td><td></td><td></td><td>-</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.2. Set 1: basic patterns of definition

The most frequent pattrns for both the Chinese EFL learners and expert writers are PA1 (Definiendum - Hinge - Definiens - Supporting statement) and PA2 (Definiendum - Hinge - Definiens) in Set 1. These two patterns are the simplest and most prototypical patterns to realise defition, in which Definiendum appears in the lft part and Definiens in the right part of a defintion clause and the two parts are linked by a Hinge' (se also Zhang & Su, 2022). However, the analyses show that the learner writers used these two patterns much more frequently than expert writers and the differences were extremely significant $\mathrm { ( L L = 2 9 4 . 7 6 }$ $\operatorname { L L } = 1 9 4 . 9 7$ $p <$ 0.0001), indicating that the Chinese EFL learners relied heavily upon these basic realisational paterns of definition and used them as default strategies to define terms or concepts in writing practice.

The other three patterns in Set 1, with Definiens' placed in the eft part and Definiendum' in the right part, were used relatively less frequently by the tw groups of writer. t was observed that th hinese F ners overuse all the pns at ifferent lels of statistical significance. It was particularly noteworthy that only one instance of PA5 (Definiens - Supporting statement - Hinge - Definiendum) was found in CORAAL (0.86 times per million words) but it ocurred 12.24 times per million words in COMATAL and the difference was statistically significant $( \mathrm { L L } = 1 4 . 2 7 $ $\begin{array} { r } { p < 0 . 0 0 1 \} . } \end{array}$ . In PA5, Definiens' and its 'Supporting statement' are presented as, in terms f Sstemic Functional Linuistics (FL; alliday & Mathiese, 2014), the Theme in the defintion clause, which serve as the point of dearture of the message. However, a illstrated in Example (1), such patten would result in a heavy head' of the sentence Arguably, this might explain why PA 5 was les favourable in professional writing and thus rarely found in cORAAL.

(1) .. The address forms used for both sides of the conversation to get further understanding are called unmarked address forms. (COMATAL)

# 4.3. Set 2: attributing the definition to a source

Set 2 contains patterns in which the source of a definition is specified, which allows the writers to acknowledge the human agency in knowledge construction (Ivanic & Camps, 2001). We categorised these patterns into two subtypes, one atributing a defintion to previous literature or other resarchers, labelled Sourceexternal, and the other to the authors themselves, laelled Source-intenal. To explore their respective uses of sources when performing the act of defining, we examined the distribution of local grammar patterns with Source-external' and those with Source-internal' across the two corpora, the results of which are presented in Table 9.

The results indicate that both groups of writers drew on definitions from external sources significantly more frequently than refer explicitly to themselves $( \mathrm { L L } = 5 5 3 . 4 3$ $\mathrm { L L } = 1 3 8 . 3 6$ A $p < 0 . 0 0 0 1 $ . The fact that both groups of writers preferred to draw on externally sourced definitions, on the one hand, may be due to the reiterative nature of knowledge construction in soft disciplines. That is scholarship in soft disciplines - in this case Applied Lingustics - often readdresses similar topics or issues in the field, so that re. searcher ften fee obliged torevisit and reinterret matrials previously studied and then take up a position i relationto the views of others (Becher & Trowler, 2001; Charles, 2006; Hyland, 2004). On the other hand, as Ivanic and Camps (2001) suggested, frequent references to previous literature and rearchers position the writers as relatively tenttive and deferential to the authority of thers while references to oneself using first-person pronouns $\left( I , \right.$ we, my, me, us, our) and expressions such as 'this author', would present the writers as self-assured, aserting their own right to display disciplinary knowledge and understanding. This might also account for the learners' heavier use of the external sources when defining in their MA theses, as compared with expert writers $( \mathrm { L L } = 1 9 6 . 6 4 $ 3 $p <$ 0.0001).

Moreover, we observed that for expert writers the most frequent patterns in this set are PA6 (Definiendum - Hinge - Definiens - Source-external) and PA7 (Definiendum - Hinge - Definiens - Supporting statement - Source-external), in which 'Source-external' occurs at the end of a definition, typicall in parentheses, forming a non-integral citation (Hyland, 199; Swales, 190). Surprisigly, however, PA6 was slightly less used by the Chinese EFL learners, though with no statistical difference $( \mathrm { L L } = 2 . 0 2 $ . Additionally, while the Chinese EFL learners used PA12 (Definiens - Hinge - Definiendum - Source-external) and PA14 (Definiendum - Hinge - Source-external Definiens - Supporting statement) similaly with expert writers, they overused PA8, PA9, PA10, PA11, PA13, PA15, PA16, and PA17 at various levels of statistical significance. One commonality of these patterns lies in that the source of the definition, either external or internal, i put at the initial position of a definition clause, which normall form integral citations (Hyland, 199, Swales, 1990) with the cited author within the sentence structure as subject (2), as part of a noun phrase (3), or as an adjunct (4).

(2) Chu (1998) defines a Chinese clause as "minimally consisting of a predicate of various forms'. (COMATAL) (3) Mey's definition as "Pragmatics studies the use of language in human communication as determined by the .. (COMATAL) (4) According to Ells (1994), crossinguistc influence usually refers to the incorporation of features of the L1 into the knowledge systems of the L2 which the learner ... (COMATAL)

The learner writers overuse of these patterns seems to suggest that they are inclined to recognise the human agents (e.g, other researchers or the writers themselves) as responsible for the definition of a given term or concept. Furthermore,a closer examination of our data revealed that i number of cases, the leaer writr tnded to presentthe source, either extenal or intenal, in the form of a coordinate clause preceding the definition clause, as shown in Example (5).

(5) The concept of dglossa was originally nroduced Ferson (1959: 336) with the folowing deintion: Diglosa is arelatiely stable language situation in which, in addition to the primary ... (COMATAL)

Strictly peaking, the clauses that indicate the source also contain other functional elements such as Definiendum', Initiator and Hinge'. However, considering that their primary function i to indicate the source to which the definition can be attributed, and in order not to complicate the analyses, we consider the whole clause as realising the source. Nevertheles, such practices of attribution, often resulting in lengthy definitions and lexical redundancy, were rarely found in CORAAL.

A third observation worthy of discussion relates to the Chinese EFL learner writers' misuse of two paterns in this set (PA18, and PA19), which were not found in expert writing $( \mathrm { L L } = 5 . 0 9 $ $\mathrm { L L } = 1 5 . 2 8 $ . These two patterns were characterised by 'Definiens' being in the initial position while Source being inserted into the clause as an adjunct between Definiens and Definiendum. The learner writers misuse of these two patterns could possibly be explained by thir limited discoursal capacity to manage the information organisation in academic writing. From the perspective of information structure in SFL (Halliday & Mathese, 2014), Definiens in these patterns normally carry the Given information while Definiendum' the New; however, the Given-New information flow in instances realising PA18 and PA19 was interrupted by an inserted element indicating the source, as ilustrated in Example (6). Such interrupted information flow might be a hindrance not only to the crafting of a cohesive and coherent discourse but also to the accessbility and readability of the text, which may be considered inappropriate and consequently never used by expert writers.

(6) .. there is also linguistic analysis at the discourse practice level that Fairclough call intertexual analysis. (coMATAL)

# 4.4. Set 3: introducing definition with an initiator

Set 3 includes two patterns (i.e., PA20 and PA21) in which the definition is introduced by an Initiator'. In our analyses, Initiator is usually marked by definitional nouns, such as concept, definitio, notion, etc. It was observed that the Chinese EFL leaner writers' and the expert writers' use of these two patterns was of similar frequency and no statistically significant difference was observed $\left( \mathbf { L } \mathbf { L } \right) =$ 1.99, $\mathrm { L L } = 3 . 2 7 .$ . One possible interpretation of this finding is that the learner writers might have adequately grasped the usage of the definitional nouns, so that they were able to appropriately deploy them to create ostensive definitions in their academic writing (Flowerdew, 1992).

However, a closer lok into instances of these two patterns revealed that, similar to what we have found about the use of Source, the Chinese EFL learner writers in some cases tended to realise Initiator by a coordinat lause receding the defintional clause rather than as part of a nominal phrase, which rendered their definitions unecessarily lengthy and lexicall redundant, as shown in Example (7).

(7) So the defintion can be revised as follows: Euphemism is both a figure of sech and an indirect sech act, which .. (coMATAL)

# 4.5. Set 4: delimiting the scope of a definition

The fourth set of analyses includes five patterns (i.e., PA 22, PA23, PA24, PA25, and PA26) in which the writers delimit the extent to which a given definition is valid or appicable through an element labelled Scope'. In our corpora, Scope' is usually realised by phrases such as in the presen study, inthis paper, in our study, etc. The use of Scope' allows the writers to hedge their definition, emphasising that a definition has only a local frence, not necesarily applicable on a wider scale (earson, 1998). It was found that those pattrns with Scope' were rather frequently employed by the Chinese EFL leaner writers (except for PA24), as compared with expert writers. This sms to suggest that these leaner writers tended to adopt a more tentative and les assertive voice by using more hedged definitions, which allowed them to acknowledge the possbilit of alternative interpretation and understanding. It i inter. esting to note that only PA24 (Definiendum - Hinge - Scope - Definiens - Supporting-statement) was significantly underused (or more precisely, never used) by the learner writers $( \mathrm { L L } = 1 0 . 5 5 $ $p < 0 . 0 1$ ). The peculiarity of PA24 lies in the location of Scope in terms of its sentential position. As previously reported in Zhang and Su (2022), Scope' may occur either in the initial or middle position of a definition sentence. Itis further shown in this study that when Scope ocurs in the midde osition, expert writers would flexibly place it either before or after the Hinge, whereas the learner writers tended to fix the position of Scope' before the Hinge, which may account for their underuse of PA24 and overuse of the other patterns in this set.

# 5. Discussion and implications

In Section 4 we discussed the major findings drawn from our local grammar based investigation into the Chinese EFL learners pragmatic performance ofthe discourse act of definition in MA thesis writing, with that of expert writers in published research artices as reference for comparison. Inthis section, we further discuss the implications of our findings to EAP writing reearch and pedagogy.

As with Su etal. (2022), the present study has further demonstrated that ocal grammar can be a viable approach to exploring EFL learner writers pragmatic performance of discourse acts in academic writing and diagnosing the problems they are likely to have. Specificall, Su et al. (2022) observed that the Chinese FL leaners were les aware of the strategy of exemplifying by citing relevant studis as wel as the sef fortivevrbs  ilstate exmplify whe pefomig the afxmplficin imily, depite the fact that the Chinese FL learners used much more frequently defintion in MA theses than expert writers did in research articles. the current investigation revealed that they also had several problems g., overuse of definitio, redundant realisation of Source and

Initiator, misuse of two local grammar pattrns) when performing definition in academic writing. Bringing these two studies together would suggest that Chinese EFL learners, to varying degrees, have difficulties performing discourse acts in academic writing, which may also be true for EFL learners of other 1 backgrounds. Given that appropriate performance of discourse acts is instrumental to the construction and dissemination of knowledge across disciplinary contexts, we thus argue that in EAP writing research more effrts should be made to explore how EFL learners of diffrent L1 backgrounds perform such discourse acts in academic writing practice. Research of this kind wll help unravel the problems and challenges EFL learners may encounter on their way to expert-like writing proficiency. Furthermore, findings of such research could have significant pedagogical implications in a wider context, which willbe discussed below.

First, the current investgation suggest that, in the teaching and learning of EAP writing, it is important for teachers to help students develop a critical awareness of genre variation and potential target readership and draw their atention to the pragmatic dimensions of academic writing, especially the appropriate performance of discourse acts. As discussed above, our findings show that the Chinese EFL learner writer used definition far more frequently than expert writers id, which might be atributed to the average length, structural ganisation, and different readership of the genres - published reearch article are for per resarchers/specialists Whereas MA theses are for thesis examiners. To raise FL leaners' awareness of genre variation and target readership, EAP instructors could, for instance, guide students to identify and count the defintions they find in their own writig, compare their definitions with those found in expert writing, and then criticlly discuss the similarities and differences between their uses of definitions. More importanly, leners ned o be guidd to distiguish guine dfitions from the les infmative or fake ones g. nguage is part of culture .) and to further explore how to define in more efective ways. We believe that such pedagogical practice has the potential to substantially promote EFL learners awarenes of genre and target readership, enabling the students to make appropriate adjustments in enacting the act f detion, rmove unnesary definions and rtan th proper ones), whichis crucial espeill when they attempt to transfer their MA theses into reearch artices or engage in more advanced writing tass. Such pedagogical practice can also be applied to the teaching and learning of other discourse acts, which can enhance their awareness of writer-reader interaction and ultimately help EFL learners improve their academic writing proficiency.

Second, our findings suggest that it is pertinent to raise EFL learner writers awareness towards the connection between meaning (or function) and pattening and, more importantly, the prototypicality of the paterns in realising a discoure act. In the case of definition, our investigation revealed both similarities and diffrences between the Chinese EFL learners' and expert writers discourse-semantic realisations of definition in academic texts. For example, we found that the learner writers used five local grammar patterns at a similar frequency with expert writers, most notably the two pattens that involve the use of definitional nouns, indicating their adequate control over these meaning-making resources; at the same time, the learner writers were observed to overuse 18 patterns, misuse two patterns and underuse one pattern, as compared with expert writers (see Section 4). Based on these findings, we suggest that EAP writing teachers not only provide students with lexico-grammatical items that are most frequent in academic discourses but also make explicit to them how these resources can be appropriately patterned to fulfil particular functions and what variations these patterns permit when fitted into specific contexts or different genres (see also Durrant & Mathews-Aydinl, 2011)

Additionally, our findings could provide fresh insights into EAP writing teachers provision of written corrective fedback (WCF). Previous discussion on L2 wCF was mainly concerned with issues such as logic, accuracy, or grammatical errors in student writing samples (see Kang and Han (2015) and Crosthwaite et al. (2022) for comprehensive reviews). Limited attention has been paid to the discoursal or pragmatic aspects. In this study, we are able to identify many places where the Chinese EFL learners use of definition could be improved by adopting or imitating the practices of the expert writers. In this regard, our findings are likely to lend a useful basis for the affordances of pragmaticll-informed WCF in academic writing contexts. For instance, in our study, the Chinese EFL learner writers were observed to misuse two local grammar patterns of definition intheir MA theses which never occurred in expert writing. In addition, they wereaso found to differ ignificantly from expert writer in the realisation of Source and Initiator" (see Section 4.3 and 4.4 for more discussion). Therefore, when providing WCF on student writing samples, teachers can highlight those undesirable patterns associated with a given discourse act in student writing and then offer alternative ones that are more frequently used by expert writr in the fd. Take Exampl6) as an xample. tdens can be advised to rise t into ntrtx nayis" eers to linguistics analysis at the discourse practice level (Fairclough, 1992), enacting PA6 which was more favourable in expert writing. Similarl, teachers can also underline student writers redundant use of Source and Initiator' and advise them to abridge their definitions into more succinct and concise forms. For example, Example(5) can be modified as The concept of diglossia was originally defined by Ferguson (1959: 336) as a relatively stable language situation in which ...

To recapitulate, raising EFL leaners' awareness of genre and target readership could help to enhance their awareness of writer. reader interaction; and providing them with the local grammar patterns associated with a given discourse act can equip them with the ways to perform that target discourse act in accord with the conventions of their disciplinary community. t i in these respects that we argue that employing a local grammar pproach to investigate EFL leaners pragmatic performance of discourse acts in academic writing could contribute to EAP writing research and pedagogy, especially in EFL contexts.

# 6. Conclusion

In this study we reported on a local grammar based investigation into Chinese EFL learners pragmatic performance of definition in MA thesis writing, with expert writers performance in published rearch articles as reference for comparison. Detailed local grammar analyse of the two corpora have unveiled both similritis and differences between the two groups of writers use of defintion in their academic writing. These observations not only bring us to a more nuanced understanding of the Chinese EFL learners' pragmatic performance of definition in academic writing, but also provide several new insights into EAP writing research and pedagogy. In particular, we highlighted the importance of raising EFL leaners' citical awarenes towards genre variation and target readership introducing them to the appropriateness and prototypicality of discourse-semantic paterns in performing the target discourse act, and providing them with pragmatically-informed wCF on their writing samples in practice.

As discussed in previous studies apropriate performance of communicative or discourse acts contributes substantially to the quality of academic writig and as such the teaching and learning of these acts is, and should always be, an indispensable component of EAP writing pedagogy (Fang, 2021; Jordan, 199; Kirszner & Mandell 2017; Widdowson & Allen, 1985). Findings of the current investigation, however, reinforce the observation made in previous research that EFL learners usually have problems performing discourse or communicative acts in academic writing (eg, Hinkel, 2004; Paquot, 2008; Su et al, 2022), which points to the need to systematically diagnose the problems or challenges EFL learners may have when performing such acts in writing practice. ince currently efort have only been madeto explore Chinese EFL lerners pragmatic performance of exemplification and definition, there is an urgent need for future research to inquire into other discourse acts and/or in other EFL contexts. Doing so could help portray a fuller picture of EFL leaners pragmatic performance of discourse or communicaive acts, findings of which could have important pedagogical implications for EAP writing research and pedagogy, as has been discussed in Section 5. We hope to have demonstrated in this paper that local grammars can be a possible and promising route via which these can be taken forward.

# Funding

Hang Su received financial support from the China National Social Science Foundation (Grant No. 19cyy044).

# Statement

The study reported in this paper has not been published previously or submitted for consideration in any other journals.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Yimin Zhang: Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Hang Su: Conceptualization, Funding acqui sition, Project administration, Writing - review & editing.

# Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

# Acknowledgements

We thank sincerely the editor and the reviewers for their constructive comments on earlier versions of this paper. Any remaining errors are ours.

# References

Adel, A. (2006). Metadiscourse in L1 and L2 English. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Alangari, , Jra, .  s . 2020s a f  h uf r i xert a wtin i h if nsis Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 43, 1-13.   
Atak,   2).c xt nri w  std h f g Writing, 47, 1-11.   
Barnbrook, G. (2002). Defining language: A local grammar of definition sentences. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
zan . 199) f     .)  c. -101 n Taylor and Francis.   
Becher, T., & Trowler, P. (2001). Academic tribes and territories. Buckingham: Open University Press.   
ychoka  J.017. th i l d   t  ti n  of is  e, 30, 38-52.   
Callies, . (2015. r os mtg.  . Gger,  qin, ner (Ed.), The ridg hook of r os h (. 35-56) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press..   
Charles, M. (206). The construction of stance i reporting clauses: A crossisiplinary study of theses. Applied Lingusics, 27(3), 492-518.   
Cheng, W., & Ching, T. (2018). Not a guarantee f future performance': The ocal grammar of isclaimers. Aplied Lingustics, 39(3), 263-301. on L2 WCF. Journal of Second Language Writing, 58, 1-16.   
Dalon-ufer, . 2013. f cive  tio   ainl i.  J f nic, () 16253   
Darian, S. G. (2003). Understanding the language of science. Austin: University of Texas Press.   
Drant .  1-s        1 2   
Fang, Z. H. (2021). Demystifying academic writing: Genres, moves, skills, and strategies. New York: Routledge.   
Flowerdew, J. (1992). Definitions in science lectures. Applied Linguistics, 13(2), 202-221.   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2014). Hallday's introduction to functional grammar. Routledge.   
Hinkel, E. (2004). Teaching academic ESL writing. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Hunston, S., & Su, H. (2019). Patten, constuctions, and local grammar: A case study of ealuation'. Applied Lingustics, 40(4), 567-593.   
Hyland, K. (199). Academic attribution: Citation and the construction of disciplinary knowledge. Alie ingusics, 20(3), 341-367.   
Hyland, K. (2004). Disciplinary interactions: Metadiscourse in L2 postgraduate writing. Jounal of Second Language Writing, 13(2), 133-151.   
Hyland, K (2007). Applying a gloss: Exemplifying and reformulating in academic discourse. Applied Linguisics, 28(2), 266-285.   
Hyland,K  . 200). wd ik t r  i  io  f p sic, 142) 259-275.   
Ivanic, R., & Camps, D. (201) I am how I sound: Voice as self-representation in L2 witig. Jounal of Second Language Wring, 10(1-2), 3-3.   
Jordan, R. R. (1999). Academic writing course: Study skills in English ( $3 ^ { \mathrm { r d } }$ ed.). Harlow: Longman.   
Kata, r 018   pti  i 9 64717   
Kang, E. 5i  ti       18   
Kirsner, L, & Mandell .R.(2017). Pttens for oll witing hetri der and gud (14th e.). oston/New York Bdford/tMartin's.   
oon,. 0.iv io  t e  g     f ti nd Research in Plurilingual and Pluricultural Education, 3(1), 7-17.   
Ortega, L. (2015). Syntactic complexity in L2 writing: Progress and expansion. Jounal of Second Language Writing, 29, 82-94.   
Paquot 00 r t ie  .), P   d teaching (pp. 101-119). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Parkinson, J. (2015). Noun-noun collocations in learner writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 20, 103-113.   
Pearson, J. (1998). Terms in context. Amsterdam: Johns Benjamins.   
Qin . 0  in 39362.   
Ren, W. (2022). Second language pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Su, H., & Wei, N. (2018). I'm really sorry about what I said': A local grammar of apology. Pragmatics, 28(3), 439-462. Academic Purposes, 43, 1-11.   
Su, H. hang, , & Chu, M. 2022. emplification in Chine nglish-major MA tudnts nd expert writers cd writing A l mar ased investigation. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 58, 1-12.   
Su, H g,    2021). pn  ar t th chn intif diore ac a wting The cf mpicatinin Linguistics research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 63, 120-133.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J.M. & Fk, C. B. (2012). Adic witin or gate stdents: ntl kils and tsks. An Arbor. Th University of MichiganPres.   
Triki N. (2019). Revisiting the metadiscourse aspect of defintions in academic writing. Journdl of English for Academic Puposes, 37, 104-116.   
Wei, Y., & Lei, L. (2011). Lexical bundles in the academic writing of advanced Chinese EFL learners. RELC Joumal, 42(2), 155-166.   
Widdowson   A . .. (1985). g h ntiv e f ish.  Jw (.),   P:  se d ee b n e development of English for science and technology (pp. 69-89). Oxford: Pergamon Press.   
W. B. 2021)txsi awin- rihi a  53 1-58.   
hang  .t Purposes, 59, 1-12.

int  as a    ti e    or Purposes, Applied Linguistics, and English for Specific Purposes.