# Epicene pronoun usage in the social sciences: The case of research articles

Ilyas Yakuta,\*, Bilal Gengb, Erdogan Badac

a Zonguldak Bulent Ecevit University, Department of English Language and Literature, Turkey b inonii University, Department of English Language Teaching, Turkey c Cukurova University, Department of English Language Teaching, Turkey

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Academic writing   
Epicene pronoun   
Diachronic corpus research   
Social sciences

Language is subject to change in almost all dimensions, albeit slowly in some dimensions and relatively quickly in others. With changes unfolding in society, the reflection of emerging linguistic shifts in the language employed in speaking and writing might be traced through language analysis. This study dealt with the latter with a specific reference to the use of epicene pronouns in English academic writing, i.e., its status in the early 2010s, how it progressed through the end of the decade, and its present status in the field. Therefore, we analysed five scholarly journals from the social sciences, all of which were indexed in the Web of Science between 2010 and 2019. All issues of these five journals were perused with a specific focus on the pronouns used to refer to gender-unknown individuals. The results indicate that a notable change has occurred in the social sciences, which suggests that the awareness of and sensitivity to this matter has invited the attention of both writers and editors in regard to observing gender neutrality.

# 1. Introduction

Languages can be clasified according to their genetic, phonological, morphological, and syntactic features. In addition to these main categorie, languages might also differ in terms of whether and how they represent gender differences, whether and how they represent nuances among colours, and how they have been influenced by the environments in which speakers of such languages have historicall lived. Among these minor diffrentiation points, the topic of how a language treats genders has been one of the most deated isues among linguistic crcles and specialists from other disciplines such as sociology, politics, economics, and thology for more discussion, see; Boroditsky et al., 2003; Holmes & Meyerhoff, 2003; Prewitt-Freilino et al., 2012).

The way that a language treats gender might partly be observed in the way that a language uses pronouns. For example, while Turkish is a gender-neutral language in regard to referencing because it avoids bias towards a particular se or social gender, English is a gender-specific language in the sense that i can indicate ender in third-prson singular pronouns, i.e, he and she, for persons whose gender is not specified. To this classfication, we may add another subcategory of gender treatment by discussing languages with a hermaphrodite pronoun, a bipersonal pronoun' or a unisex pronoun' (Nunn, 2015), or languages that are stil in search of one.

The issue of using appropriat pronouns for genders seems to occupy only a small portion in the realm of language-use research, which also includes topics such as the effect of various social factors (e.g., istance, status, and gender) on language varieties (e., dialect, registers, and geres), language maintenance and shift, and venacular and standard languages. However, trying to b fair to genders or deploying common pronouns to both sexes implies broader isues that are not concerned with pronouns but rather about having a balanced attitude towards genders.

It has been commonly accepted that during human history, women in patriarchal societies have been extensively mistreated, which might have afected the way those societies used language (Lakoff 1975; Tannen, 1990). Only during the last 150 years of this history have we heard the voices pleading against the manifest inequities in society's treatment of women. Verbal language, the primordial, unique, and a sine qua non of our lives cannot be considered a neutral communicative medium; language is a social instrument by which individuals and social groups express their views (and versions of reality) (Herrero & Marquez, 2016).

# 2. Gender neutrality in language use

Gender neutrality is a contentious subject that now has social and academic significance and implications. While the issue is extensively deated in socia circes it is scarcely dealt with in the educational arena. This is probably due to the relatively strict norm of writing academic papers specified in publication manuals regarding guidelines to be followed in a manuscript submission.

By including they as a nonbinary singular pronoun, the Merriam-Webster dictionary partilly addresses the problem (Wheeler, 2019). Academic journals wil likelycommence putting the matter at the core of their writing styles (Paterson, 2014; Stormbom, 2020). Wheeler (2019) stated that the use of they as a singular, neutral pronoun is widespread, particularly among people who identify as nonbinary individuals (Bronwyn, 2017). However, the move faces critiques by those who claim the usage is not grammatically correct' For instance, in a news article by Pasha-Robinson (2016), there is the story of a Canadian professor who rejects the use of nonbinary pronouns on the ground that such attempts are geared to control the ideological and linguistc territory'. The professor is certainly not alone in having such views. Oltermann (2019) reported on German authors, comedians, and academics who fiercely oppose gender-neutral language, calling for an end to gender nonsense' in an open letter published shortly before International Women's Day. In support of this move, as reported by Burgen (2020), The Royal Spanish Academy rejects gender-neutral language in Spanish, suggesting that it is grammatically unacceptable'.

One of the recent examples in English academic writing includes the usage of the generic he while referring to gender-unknown third-person singular referents. In an edited book on second language acquisition and technology, Llorca's tendency might be revealed through the adaptation of old school gender references in the following sentence: \*This implies that the student must engage himself more closely with the university and that he may lead his coursework more autonomously" (Llorca, 2016, p. 111).

In much of what we read and write, we usually encounter uncertainty regarding references to a student patient, doctor, nurse, etc. because the referent could be male or female, from a binary perspective. That is why usages such as s/he (Bada, 2010), she (Jaekl) 2018), he or se, him or her (Chadwick, 2019), or a mix-up f they and she (BBC News, 2019; Mahdawi, 2019) could emerge in different texts. Although the difficulty continues to exist in writing and goes without much questioning, the situation is not simple when someone is faced with a disturbing question such as Look, I am just trying to get my head around t . are you a man or woman? This was an actual question posed to a patient by a general practitioner (Davis, 2019).

The question about which pronoun to use to refer to third-person singular human referents, however is not a recent issue. In a diachronic study regarding the usage of the generic they, which refers to a third-person singular pronoun whose gender is not identified in English, Balhorn (2004) argued that there is sound evidence showing the widespread use of the generic they preceding the 20th century. Balhorn also claimed that the everyday usage of they resulted from internal developments in the language rather than from external development; that is, Old English and early Middle English periods witnessed the rise of they, which resulted in the loss of grammatical gender. Similarly, sociocultural factors in today's world have had a significant influence on the rise of the generic they again, and these social realities afect the language as a whole. In addition to Balhorn (2004), the findings of more recent studies also support the rise of the generic they, refrring to gender-unknown singular human referents, whereas the generic he used to be more common until recently (Balhorn, 2009; Bradley et l., 2019; Paterson, 2014; Stormbom, 2019, 2020). According to Stormbom (2019), the generic he has been decreasing in use ince the 1970s, which could be due to second-wave feminism. However, texts in the 2010s showed significant variation regarding pronoun preferences. Thus Stormbom concluded that such variation might indicate a language change in progress In addition, Bradley et al. (2019) explored whether English speakers accept nonbinary pronoun usage when referring to singular referents. The results revealed that the ingular they was predominantly found tobe grammatically apropriate by the participants when the pronoun referred to gender-unknown singular generic nouns. However, they also remarked that the par ticipants found the usage of they les grammatical when the pronoun referred to individuated antecedents of unknown or nonbinary gender. The authors concluded that gender attitude roles and personality might have significant impacts on the acceptability of nonbinary singular pronoun usage in English.

Finally, there i a list of guidelines by Noor (2020) that encourage and facilitate the use of gender-neutral, nonbinary they pronouns because gender-neutral language usage has been sugested as a way to reduce gender asymmetries. The bottom line of this lis is to keep using they/them, and soon it wil fee normal. The usage of they might not fee normal instantly, as Stormbom (2019) stated that language shift cannot happen overnight. Hence, users of the language might seesaw between prescribed language and gender neutral language for aconsiderable amount f time In addition, Martyna (1980) reported forty years ago that feminsts had been expressing the need for language reform to reduce the unfair representation of gnders and that such language change sms to be a long and slow process that i stil currentl ongoing in the English language. For this reason, Nor's suggestion might cause concern regarding the reality of the natural evolution of languages. While such an approach would probably invoke considerable criticism, as well as some attraction in particular circes, it would be undesirable to engineer human thinking in an Orwellian sense because it would be disturbing for some to meddle with the natural flow of linguisic evolution. I the same vein, McConnell-Ginet (2006) drew our attention to the fact that feminsts ttribute potency to language, and they also believe that linguistic forms themselves have real importance for society and culture. McConnell-Ginet's statement reminds us of the fact that just as society and culture do affct language, it isalso undoubtedly the other way round. Additionall, Martyna (1980) contended that a society's judgements and beliefs might be affected by the language spoken by members of that society.

A study by Chen (2016) provided a perfect example of the social realities affcting language as a whole. Chen cites two concrete examples from the Associated Pres in which murder stories were covered. When a woman committed a murder, she appeared as the subect of the headline (Houston mother kils ie children); however, when a man committed the same crime, he did not apear in the headline (Family of six dead in murder suicide). Such language differences in two headines extracted from the same newspaper could be considered sound evidence that women are discriminated against in English not only in terms of semantics but also in terms of syntax.

While this topic frequently emerges in non-academic environments, as mentioned previously, its recent situation has rarely been explored in academic writing. Based on our observations and investigation in this field, we thus embarked on thstudy hoping to shed more light on gender representation in academic journals in the social sciences, which generally deal with human subject. In our investigation, we sought responses to the following research questions:

Table 1 Journal list and abbreviations referred to in the extracts.   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Journal Title</td><td>Abbreviations used in the extracts</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Journal of English for Academic Purposes</td><td>SS2010-9(2)-1-JEAP SS2010-9(4)-2-JEAP</td><td>SS2015-20-1-JEAP</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>SS2015-18-2-JEAP</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2011-10(4)-1-JEAP</td><td>SS2016-24-1-JEAP</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2011-10(2)-2-JEAP</td><td>SS2016-22-2-JEAP</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2012-11(4)-1-JEAP</td><td>SS2017-30-1-JEAP</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2012-11(3)-2-JEAP</td><td>SS2017-28-2-JEAP</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2013-12(4)-1-JEAP</td><td>SS2018-36-1-JEAP</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2013-12(2)-2-JEAP</td><td>SS2018-34-2-JEAP</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2014-16-1-JEAP</td><td>SS2019-42-1-JEAP</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2014-14-2-JEAP</td><td>SS2019-38-2-JEAP</td></tr><tr><td>Journal of Marketing Management</td><td>SS2010-26(13-14)-1-JMM</td><td>SS2015-31(15-16)-1-JMM</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2010-26(13-14)-2-JMM</td><td>SS2015-31(15-16)-2-JMM</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2011-27(13-14)-1-JMM</td><td>SS2016-32(17-18)-1-JMM</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2011-27(13-14)-2-JMM</td><td>SS2016-32(17-18)-2-JMM</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2012-28(13-14)-1-JMM</td><td>SS2017-33(17-18)-1-JMM</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2012-28(13-14)-2-JMM</td><td>SS2017-33(17-18)-2-JMM</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2013-29(15-16)-1-JMM</td><td>SS2018-34(17-18)-1-JMM</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2013-29(15-16)-2-JMM</td><td>SS2018-34(17-18)-2-JMM</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2014-30(17-18)-1-JMM</td><td>SS2019-35(15-16)-1-JMM</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2014-30(17-18)-2-JMM</td><td>SS2019-35(15-16)-2-JMM</td></tr><tr><td>International Journal of Philosophical Studies</td><td>SS2010-18(5)-1-IJPS</td><td>SS2015-23(4)-1-IJPS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2010-18(5)-2-IJPS</td><td>SS2015-23(4)-2-IJPS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2011-19(5)-1-IJPS</td><td>SS2016-24(4)-1-IJPS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2011-19(5)-2-IJPS</td><td>SS2016-24(4)-2-IJPS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2012-20(5)-1-IJPS SS2012-20(5)-2-IJPS</td><td>SS2017-25(5)-1-IJPS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2013-21(5)-1-IJPS</td><td>SS2017-25(5)-2-IJPS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>SS2018-26(5)-1-IJPS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2013-21(5)-2-IJPS</td><td>SS2018-26(5)-2-IJPS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2014-22(5)-1-IJPS</td><td>SS2019-27(5)-1-IJPS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2014-22(5)-2-IJPS</td><td>SS2019-27(5)-2-IJPS</td></tr><tr><td>Political Theory</td><td>SS2010-38(6)-1-PT</td><td>SS2015-43(6)-1-PT</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2010-38(6)-2-PT</td><td>SS2015-43(6)-2-PT</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2011-39(6)-1-PT</td><td>SS2016-44(6)-1-PT</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2011-39(6)-2-PT</td><td>SS2016-44(6)-2-PT</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2012-40(6)-1-PT</td><td>SS2017-45(6)-1-PT</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2012-40(6)-2-PT</td><td>SS2017-45(6)-2-PT</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2013-41(6)-1-PT</td><td>SS2018-46(6)-1-PT</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2013-41(6)-2-PT</td><td>SS2018-46(6)-2-PT</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2014-42(6)-1-PT</td><td>SS2019-47(6)-1-PT</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2014-42(6)-2-PT</td><td>SS2019-47(6)-2-PT</td></tr><tr><td>TESOL Quarterly</td><td>SS2010-44(3)-1-TQ</td><td>SS2015-49(4)-1-TQ</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2010-44(3)-2-TQ</td><td>SS2015-49(4)-2-TQ</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2011-45(4)-1-TQ</td><td>SS2016-50(4)-1-TQ</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2011-45(4)-2-TQ</td><td>SS2016-50(4)-2-TQ</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2012-46(4)-1-TQ</td><td>SS2017-52(2)-1-TQ</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2012-46(4)-2-TQ</td><td> SS2017-52(4)-2-TQ</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2013-47(4)-1-TQ</td><td>SS2018-52(4)-1-TQ</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2013-47(4)-2-TQ</td><td> SS2018-52(4)-2-TQ</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SS2014-48(4)-1-TQ SS2014-48(4)-2-TQ</td><td>SS2019-54(4)-1-TQ SS2019-54(4)-2-TQ</td></tr></table></body></html>

1. What is the statistical distribution of epicene pronoun utilization in social science academic writing?   
2. How has epicene pronoun utilization changed over the years in social science academic writing?

# 3. Methods

In this study, we explored epicene pronoun usage in English when academic writers in the social sciences ss) refer to gender. unknown singular human referents in publications, and we determined how nonbinary pronoun usage has changed over the years in that discipline. corpus-based approach to diachronic changes in epicene pronoun usage was adopted to attain this aim. The corpus of the current study was constructed from research articles that were indexed in the Web of Science ccording to its 2017 impact factor and taken from the same five journals in S fields written in the last decade between 2010 and 2019 to compile data representing a broad cross-section of aademic practice. Two papers from each of the five journals in S fields were chosen, which made a total of ten articles from each year between 2010 and 2019; thus, the corpus comprised 100 papers with one million words in total. Tocarify this process, we present Table 1, in which the lft column lists the journals, and the right column shows the abbreviations used in the extracts in the results and discussion section. We formulated the abreviations in a way that ilustrates the publication year, volume, issue number, and name of the journal. Hence, the abbreviations read SSpublicationyear-volume(issue)-articlenumber journalname. For example, s2010-9(2)-1-JEAP stands for the first article chosen from the Journal of Englis for Academic Purposes in 2010 in volume 9 and issue 2.

Upon completing the data collection procedure, we used AntConc 3.5.8 (Anthony, 2019) to search each binary and nonbinary pronoun usage. The usage of each pronoun was then examined through an integrated reading to determine what the pronoun referred to in the text The usages of he and she and their possessie, object, and reflexive pronoun forms were eliminated when they referred to proper nouns. Aditionally, we excluded they and it derivatives i they referred to plural nouns. The results were presented in tabular forms using descriptive statistics. While corpus-base studies require inferenti tistics to interpret more frequent types, texts could explain why individual styles are prevalent in a specific discipline. For this reason, in addition to the log-likelihood (LL) rato, we also benefited from qualitative analysis to explore the textual contexts of examples. The frequency counts and nonbinary pronoun usage patterns were compared across the years to determine similarities and differences in the ss fields.

# 4. Results & discussion

With the release of APA 7 (Publication manual of the American psychological assciation, 2019), the nonbinary and gender-neutral they is expected to be used in academic writing to refer to gender-indefinite singular referents. However, it sems crucial to explore Whether expert researchers in the S fields have already started implementing they as an epicene pronoun in their academic writing. For this reason, the present study concentrated on how pronouns are used for gender-unknown singular human referents in research articles selected from prominent S journals published in the past decade, i.., between 2010 and 2019. Table illusrates theoveral distribution of the epicene pronouns they and $s / h e$ used to refer to gender-unknown third-person singular nouns in the SS corpus.

As shown in Table 2, they as a nonbinary pronoun referring to gender-indefinite singular nouns in SS academic writing was employed 175 time, accounting for 1.73 per 10,000 words. Scripts (1)(3) llustrate how they was employed as a nonbinary singular pronoun in the corpus:

(1) As we have seen, More allows the possbility for afree human being to morally develop in such a way that they lose indif ference of the will. (SS2019-27(5)-1-IJPS)   
(2) Thus, when using Concordance, Clusters, Collocates, and Concordance Plot, the user first has to input a search item that they want to investigate, and it is this user-defined input that enables the retrieval of information to answer the user's query. (SS2018-36-1-JEAP)   
(3) To comprehend what they are hearing, a listener must be able to receive auditory signals and break them up into linguistic units. (SS2016-24-1-JEAP)

In these example, they referred to a singular noun either used as an antecedent or a postcedent in the text. Furthermore, they was utilized as either an anaphoric [(1), (2)] or a cataphoric [(3] expression; the examples above indicate that they has already been actively used in sSfields. In addition to using they in the subject position as a gender-neutral pronoun, the authors of S articles used object and possessive pronoun forms of they. The scripts in (4) and (5) ilustrate their as a singular possesive pronoun to refer to a gender-indefinite singular referent:

(4) The student is required to integrate their resources with those of the higher education institution. (ss2012-28(13-14)-1-JMM)

Table 2 The overall distribution of they and s/he as a singular pronoun in the SS corpus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>They</td><td>s/he</td></tr><tr><td>Corpus size in words</td><td colspan="2">1,011,376</td></tr><tr><td>N</td><td>175</td><td>118</td></tr><tr><td>n/10,000</td><td>1.73</td><td>1.17</td></tr></table></body></html>

(5) However, there is evidence that a respondent's reported satisfaction level i a poor predictor of their uture repeat purchase or referral behavior. (SS2010-26(13-14)-2-JMM)

As displayed in Table 2, they was employed as an epicene pronoun in S articles, yet it was also observed in the table that s/he as a generic pronoun was also preferred to avoid the sexist approach to pronoun usage in SS academic writing.

According to the MacMillan dictionary (2020), the s/he or she or he pronoun is used when it is unknown whether the individual is male or female. Even though $s / h e$ (along with other versions including he or she, she or he, him/her, his/her, him/herself, etc.) does not indicate nonbinary pronoun usage, as it divides gender into male and female, it was observed in the corpus that S academic writers sometimes tended to use such forms, which might have helped them avoid excluding women in their academic scripts. As shown in Table 2, $s / h e$ usage was also prevalent in SS writings. Even though s/he was used 118 times in the SS corpus, we found that $s / h e$ usage was not as frequent as the usage of they as an epicene pronoun to refer to gender-unknown singular nouns; the ifference between the disribution of the two pronouns was statisticall significant at 11.16L value. This result showed that SS authors were more inclined to use they versus $s / h e$ to refer to singular nouns of unknown gender.

Although $s / h e$ is not a gender-neutral pronoun according to the Queer perspective, this pronoun was frequently employed by SS authors to refer to gender-unknown third-person singular pronouns. In (6)-(9), we can see how s/he was employed as a subject pronoun in SS:

(6) Whilestance features have a range of socio-pragmatic functions, one affordance these stance devices provide an author i the ability to present claims to an esteemed audience/readership with appropriate accuracy, caution, and humility as he/she seeks approval and acceptance of his/her claims. (Ss2019-42-1-JEAP)   
(7) Each student had identified a point of textual evidence (quotes from the story in itlics) that she or he was defending. (ss2018- 52(4)-1-TQ)   
(8) How does such a consumer define the organic notion? What does s/he specificall look for in eating organic? ss2013-29 (15-16)-1-JMM)   
(9) [..] namely, a stance through which an individual rases subjective claim to be treated justly in virtue of who he or she is-a being beyond reproach (Ss2011-39(6)-2-PT)

As shown in the examples, the academic authors of Ss articles tried to use inclusive language by employing $s / h e$ to refer to either nouns denoting to individuals, as in (6), (8), and (9), or indefinite singular nouns, as in (7), which is a usage that coincides with the findings of Baranowski (2002) and Paterson (2014). Even though s/he is generally employed to be inclusive, s/he excludes or mar. ginalizes other gender identitie eause  is binary. He, according to Bronwyn (2017), Quer indvidals might favour reectin all binary pronouns, including s/he, and promote singular they as a pronoun preference. Furthermore, recently coined pronouns, such as ze/zir and ze/hir, ciculate in English despite being relatively scarce. However, the singular they sms to be favoured, eecially when it refers to a gender-unknown hypothetical person compared to newly invented pronoun systems such as ze/zir because singular they is already a part of the English language (Bradley et al., 2019; Bronwyn, 2017).

The findings of this research revealed that various forms of $s / h e ,$ such as he/she, she or he, and he or she, appeared in the writings of the authors of S articles when they needed to refer to a gender-unknown singular human antecedent I addition to various forms ofs/ he in the subject position, we also observed object, possessive and reflexive pronoun forms of s/he with various formulations. The extracts selected from the SS research articles exemplify how s/he was formulated as an object pronoun, posessive pronoun, and reflexive pronoun in the text.

. Object Pronoun   
(10) The teacher has the choice between taking the role of primary knower' [..] or that of a secondary knower', assining the role of primary knower to the student and thus inviting him/her to present their knowledge and ideas. (ss2019-38-2-JEAP)   
(11) U&G explains how an individual uses media to satisfy his or her personal needs, llowing him or her to gain knowledge or engage in social interaction. (SS2017-33(17-18)-1-JMM)   
(12) Epistemic adverbs [..] and modals are particularly used when counter-claming, so as to soften the writer'scitical claim and engage the reader in a dialogue allowing her/him to think differently. (Ss2014-16-1-JEAP) . Possessive Pronoun   
(13) Tracking on a character and her or his processes can support literal understanding of story events and als offer opportunities for making inferences about characters' reactions and motivations. (ss2018-52(4)-1-TQ)   
(14) A member's enjoyment of fulflling experiences conveyed through interpersonal interactions with other community members might influence his or her satisfaction. (SS2017-33(17-18)-1-JMM)   
(15) The individual's personal beliefs, what he/she thinks about the self as well as how he/she would ike to be thought f, his/her roles in society, the audience's value system, and finally what he/she thinks others think now and how they might think in the future, all affect the way that individual constructs his/her impressions in society. (ss2015-31(15-16)-1-JMM)   
(16) Literature reviews (LRs) of PhD theses provide support for the writer's position and show the novelty of her/his work. (SS2014-16-1-JEAP) . Reflexive Pronoun   
(17) Using more or fewer Discourse Participant Themes (Davies, 1990), by which a writer her/himself enters explicitly into the discourse, can create an impression of outspokennes or of impartiality, respectively. (ss2012-11(3)-2-JEAP)

(18) [..] within the digital market space, consumer identity is authored by the owners of database technologies, not by the consumer him/herself. (SS2014-30(17-18)-1-JMM)

The scripts above indicate no unity among SS authors regarding both the formulation and sequencing of binary pronouns in their academic texts. For this reason, we came acros different formulations of s/he in each pronoun category, which shows that the authors were uncertain about how to employ s/he and its variations to refer to generic antecedents, such as a consumer, a writer, or a student.

As discussed above, there were several cases in which academic writers used they or $s / h e$ in their research articles. More frequent instances in which gender-unknown referents such as a student, an operator, a teacher, etc., co-occurred with third-person singular pronouns distnctly gendering generic individuals as either female or male. Table 3 ilustrates the overall distribution of gendered he and she usages, referring to nouns with unknown gender or low levels of individuation.

As shown in Table 3, the academic authors of S used he 436 times, while they used she 492 times to refer to singular nouns of unknown gender. This result sugets ess usage of the he pronoun compared to she pronoun usage, which does not correlate with Wilis and Jozkowski (2017), who found more prevalent he usage in research articles.

Female-oriented pronoun usage was more frequent among the SS researchers, yet the LL ratio test did not reveal a significant difference. In (19)-(23), the S authors prioritized he or she and their object or possessve variations by excluding the other gender when they referred to gender-unknown singular nouns:

(19) By accept', I mean that a person acknowledges that she has good reasons for regretting what she did. Accordingly, she should not resist or struggle against her regret. A person who acepts her regret holds onto' it as a painful reminder of her past action (s); she accepts that she is right to experience regret. (SS2017-25(5)-1-IJPS)   
(20) The human being is a being with needs insofar as he belongs to the sensible world, and to this extent his reason certainly has a commission from the side of his sensibility which it cannot refuse, to attend to its interest and to form practical maxims with a view to happiness in this life and, where possible, in a future life as well. (ss2012-20(5)-1-IJPS)   
(21) Now, on Davidson's view, truth conditions of these privileged sentence (whether individual terms or not) are determined by an interpreter when she and the sentence's speaker triangulate - or jointly extend to - objects in the World. (ss2011-19(5)-1- IJPS)   
(22) More specificall, in the context of repentant wrongdoers, I ee i as involving the adoption of a particular atitude towards a person who has taken steps to erase the moral relation between himself and his wrongful action. (ss2010-18(5)-1-IJPS)   
(23) Basicall, an agent has republican liberty in this sense when she is not under the subjection of another who would likely interfere at will with some of her potential choices. (Ss2010-38(6)-2-PT)

As shown in theexamples depending on the author(s) preferences, they chose either he or she to refer to a gender-unknown singular noun, such as a person in (19) and (22), the human being in (20), an interpreter in (21) and an agent in (23).

To find an answer to the second research question, we focused on the diachronic change of he, she, $s / h e$ , and they in ss. Table 4 illustrate the usages of he, he,s/he, and they, referring tosingular nouns of unknown gender with human referents in the SS research papers between 2010 and 2019.

From Table 4, we can see usage rates of each pronoun in the SS articles fluctuating across the years with varying numbers, which might indicate a language change in progres. While the authors in sS fields have employed they as an epicene pronoun, they have not abandoned either he or she usages in their academic writing when they rfer to third-person singular human referents. In addition to the usages of these three pronouns, $s / h e$ also appeared in the SS articles in all the years we examined.

The overall usage rates of they ${ \bf \Delta } ( { \bf n } = 1 7 5$ ) and the binary pronouns in the data revealed differences because both he $[ \boldsymbol { \mathbf { n } } = 4 3 6 )$ and she $( \mathbf { n } = 4 9 2$ ) were more frequently employed by the authors in the ss field. According to the L statistical comparison, the difference between they and he was statistically significant at the. $\mathbf { p } < 0 . 0 5$ level with an LL value of -115.56, and the difference between they and she was even more prominent with an LL value of. $- 1 5 6 . 9 1$

As seen in Table 4, despite the exception in 2012, either he or she as a generic pronoun was more frequently preferred by the sS authors compared to s/he and they. Hence, it is possible to state that gendered third-person singular pronouns, i., either he or she, which might lead readers to reckon that an antecedent in a text denotes a gender-specified noun, were used as a central linguistic resource o refer to gender-indeterminate singular nouns in intenational research artice in s. Our findings are different from those of Bradley e al. (2019) because their results proclaimed the preponderant acceptance of they as a singular pronoun when pointing to a non-individuated person.

The usage of the generic he is S across the years peaked in both 2011, with 99 occurrences amounting to 8.45 usages per 10,000 words, and in 2019, with 76 occurrences equalling 8.37 usages per 10,000 words. The fewest he usages were observed in 2015, followed by the occurrences f this pronoun in 2012 and 2018. To determine the level of change in the usage of he between the two quinquennial perio0ds, we compared he usages between the periods of 2010-2014 and 2015-2019; the result suggested that he was used more frequently in the first half of the decade compared to the second half. These results suggested a decline in he usage from the first five-year period to the second because the generic he was employed 279 times in the first half and 157 times in the second half, which amounts to 5.17 and 3.33 usages per 10,000 words, respectively. The log-likelihood statistical analysis also supported the descriptive results, yielding a $+ 2 0 . 0 1$ . The LL value indicated a significant difference between the two halves of the decade.

Table 3 The overall distribution of male- and female-oriented pronoun usages in the SS corpus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>he</td><td>she</td></tr><tr><td>Corpus size in words</td><td>1,011,376</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>N</td><td>436</td><td>492</td></tr><tr><td>n/10,000</td><td>4.31</td><td>4.87</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Distribution of he, she and $s / h e$ and they across the years in SS.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Year</td><td>Corpus size</td><td colspan="2">he</td><td colspan="2">she</td><td colspan="2">s/he</td><td colspan="2">they</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>n</td><td>n/10,000</td><td>n</td><td>n/10,000</td><td>n</td><td>n/10,000</td><td>n</td><td>n/10,000</td></tr><tr><td>2010</td><td>97,380</td><td>52</td><td>5.34</td><td>3.</td><td>0.31</td><td>7</td><td>0.72</td><td>5</td><td>0.51</td></tr><tr><td>2011</td><td>117,168</td><td>99</td><td>8.45</td><td>14</td><td>1.19</td><td>15</td><td>1.28</td><td>0.</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>102,896</td><td>18</td><td>1.75</td><td>3</td><td>0.29</td><td>3</td><td>0.29</td><td>18</td><td>1.75</td></tr><tr><td>2013</td><td>110,622</td><td>68</td><td>6.15</td><td>22</td><td>1.99</td><td>31</td><td>2.80</td><td>0</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>2014</td><td>111,997</td><td>42</td><td>3.75</td><td>19</td><td>1.70</td><td>13</td><td>1.16</td><td>28</td><td>2.50</td></tr><tr><td>2015</td><td>95,036</td><td>13</td><td>1.37</td><td>135</td><td>14.21</td><td>16</td><td>1.68</td><td>11</td><td>1.16</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>96,102</td><td>23</td><td>2.39</td><td>91</td><td>9.47</td><td>8</td><td>0.83</td><td>6</td><td>0.62</td></tr><tr><td>2017</td><td>94,307</td><td>27</td><td>2.86</td><td>90</td><td>9.54</td><td>19</td><td>2.01</td><td>14</td><td>1.48</td></tr><tr><td>2018</td><td>95,060</td><td>18</td><td>1.89</td><td>78</td><td>8.21</td><td>2</td><td>0.21</td><td>25</td><td>2.63</td></tr><tr><td>2019</td><td>90,808</td><td>76.</td><td>8.37</td><td>37</td><td>4.07</td><td>4</td><td>0.44</td><td>68</td><td>7.49</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1,011,376</td><td>436</td><td>4.31</td><td>492</td><td>4.87</td><td>118</td><td>1.17</td><td>175</td><td>1.73</td></tr></table></body></html>

Contrary to the distribution of he across the ten years, the most frequent generic she usage was observed in 2015, with 135 occurrences amounting to 14.21 usages in every 10,00 words. The lowest observed rate was in 2012, with 0.29 occurrences per 10,000 words. Furthermore, the use of she occurred 61 times in the first five-year period, while it was used 431 times in the second half accounting for 1.13 and 9.15 usage rates per 10,000 words, respectively. Such a large discrepancy yielded a statistclly significant difference between the two quinquennial periods at $\mathsf { p } < 0 . 0 5$ with $\mathrm { L L } = - 3 6 5 . 9 2$

The comparison of he and she between the two five-year periods yielded remarkable results. While he usage decreased from the frst half to the second, a dramatic increase in she usage was observed from the first quinquennial period to the second. Some possible explanations for this increase in usage include the rise of fourth-wave feminism (Evans, 2015, 2016), having strong traction in the USA and the UK in the 2010s (Chamberlain, 2017), an increase in female representation in the workplace, and shifting cultural values.

While we observed some changes in he and she usage acros the years, we also found that the usage of they referring to singular third-person human referents fluctuated across the years. The most dominant usage of they was oserved in 2019, with 7.49 occurrences per 10,000 words, but it was not used in 2013 as a gender-neutral pronoun, which suggests that 2013 was an exception. For this reason, the lowest ocurrence rate was observed in 2010, as they was employed only five times, ccounting for a 0.51 usage rate in every 10,000 word. Interesingly, the usage rate peaked in 2019, while the lowest rate was in 2010. The LL ratio test supported the descriptive analysis, as a statistically significant difference between 2010 and 2019 was observed at the $\mathtt { p } < 0 . 0 5$ level $( \mathrm { L L } = - 6 9 . 2 3 )$ This result revealed that during the covered investigation period, S academic writers became more aware and sensitive regarding the usage of they as a nonbinary pronoun referring to singular gender-unknown nouns in their research articles. Because we observed a significant change in the usage of they as a singular pronoun in a decade, we calculated the difrence between 2010-2014 and 2015-2019. The descriptive statistical analysis indicated that while SS authors employed they 61 times as a singular nonbinary pronoun in the first quinquennial period, they used this pronoun 124 times in the lattr part of the period, accounting for 1.13 and 2.63 frequency counts per 10,000 words, respectively. The decriptive results were also supported by the L ratio test as the difference was $- 3 1 . 3 2 $ between the two five-year periods. As with sheusage, we observed an increase in they occurrences quinquennially despite it not being as dramatic as the increase of she usages.

Despite the rise of nongendered singular they across the years, gendered singular pronoun usage was stil prevalent i SS research articles, which contradicts Stormbom's (2020) findings. Our findings partly correlate with those of Balhorn (2004; 2009) and Paterson (2014), as they revealed that the usage of they as a nongendered singular pronoun has increased in recent years. However, contrary to the findings of Balhorn (2004; 2009) and Paterson (2014), who observed a dramatic decrease in the generic he usage, gender definite pronoun usage was prevalent across the years in our study.

As seen in Table 4, s/he utilization was observed in all years with different frequency. The usage rate peaked in 2013, while the lowest rate occurred in 2018. While the usage rate of they as an epicene pronoun has increased over the years in s, the usage of $s / h e$ has decreased from the first five-year period to the second. According to the descriptive statistical analysis, $s / h e$ was more frequent in the first five-year period versus the second five-year period; the pronoun was used 69 times in the first half of the decade and only 49 times in the lattr part of the period, accounting for 1.28 and 1.04 occurrences i every 10,000 words, respectively. However, the difference across the two periods was not statistically significant at the $\mathtt { p } < 0 . 0 5$ level $\left( \mathrm { L } \mathrm { L } = + 1 . 2 3 \right)$ . Singular they and binary she usages were increasing in the second half of the 2010-2019 period, whereas the opposite was true for he and $s / h e$ pronouns.

According to Stormbom (2019), the heterogeneity of diffrent pronoun preferences in referrig to antecedents of unknown gender is expected because the shft from gendered pronouns to they as a singular pronoun in academic writing does not have a long history. Hence, the co-occurrence of both the, s/he, and gender-determinate singular pronouns in the texts might be an indication of authors confusion regarding pronoun choices as they might have to vacillate between opposite sides of pronoun use suggestions, i.e, prescriptie grammar editing against singular they since the 18th century (Bodine, 1975) and the new trend supporting the usage of non-binary singular pronoun. In adition to the possble efect of prescriptive grammar, Bradley et al. (2019) asserted that conservative and binary gender role attitudes might be of prime importance in pronoun selection. In addition, academic journals guidelines might blur pronoun preferences, as they might not explicitly inform authors to avoid gender-biased pronoun usage; such guidelines might favour prescriptive grammar, describing gender-neutral they as an inappropriate pronoun for a standard research article (see Stormbom, 2020).

# 5. Conclusions

In this study, we investigated gender representation in English SS academic writing between 2010 and 2019. Because gender neutralit has become a hot topic fllowing the 200s, we focused on academic journal articles published in the last ten years. Although Sunderland publicized the issue in 1992, the last decade has become a period when opinions and suggestions related to gender-neutral pronoun usage have appeared frequently in al genres of writing. In 1992, Sunderland argued that gender inequalities and linguistic sexism at the code level were identified at three levels:

. In the pronoun system ('generic' he, him, his, himself); 'generic' man.   
. Masculine and feminine equivalents are not so equivalent now, the feminine being ofen les prestigious and/or having sexual connotations (e.g., master/mistress, manager/manageress); under-lexicalization (\*husband-swapping party).   
Overlexicalization (e.g., the number of verbs used disparagingly for women talking and nouns referring t sexually active women) and 'male firstness' (men and women) (Sunderland, 1992, pp. 81-82).

In this study, we focused on linguistic sexism in the pronoun system in several social science academic journals. With some fluctuations, the usage of they as a nonbinary singular pronoun has moved from a small percentage (2010: $\mathtt { n } = 5$ $\boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } / 1 0 , 0 0 0 = 0 . 5 1$ ) to a noticeably larger percentage (2019: $\mathtt { n } = 6 8$ .A $\Pi / 1 0 , 0 0 0 = 7 . 4 9 _ { . }$ ) across the years examined in this research; our observations also showed that the usages of he (2010: ${ \bf n } = 5 2$ . $\boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } / 1 0 , 0 0 0 = 5 . 3 4$ ; 2019: $\mathbf { n } = 7 6$ . $\boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } / 1 0 , 0 0 0 = 8 . 3 7$ ) and she (2010: $\mathtt { n } = 3$ $\boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } / 1 0 , 0 0 0 = 0 . 3 1$ ; 2019: n $= 3 7$ $\Pi / 1 0 , 0 0 0 = 4 . 0 7 $ have maintained their dominance throughout 2010-2019 compared to they.

According to Martyna (1980), the necessity of eliminating or reducing gender asymmetries, generic he usage, and other biases in language has been suggested by feminist critics for long time. Researchers from various branches of science have shown that equal respect to gender i of utmost importance (Perez & Tavits, 2017; Tavits & Perez, 2019; Walby, 2004). Therefore, as  first step, a book on academic writing could handle the ssue as a substantial point instead of as an anecdotal topic. In addition, academic journals guidelines might need to mention inclusive language use and give authors explicit examples. Even though recent grammar and academic writing boks, as well s journal guideline, have generall rejected binary pronoun usage (Stormbom, 2020), they as a singular pronoun has not yet been commonly upheld in such pedagogical resources, which instead recommends avoiding the usage of binary pronouns through avoidance strategies (Paterson, 2014).

We believe that academic writers could preval with gender-neutral pronoun usage through the detailed presentation of inclusive pronoun usage in grammar and academic writing boos and guidelines.Corpora might be of great help in providing concrete and authentic usage f inclusive language in this respect. However, i addition to Stombom's (2019) findings, our results suggest that such a change in pronoun preference could not occur overnight, as language change is not a sudden linguistic resource alteration. Without the whole community'sespousal, there will always be objections to language shifts. For this reason, we do not agree with Noor (2020), as language change does not seem to occur by merely saying kee using a specific linguistic element, and it will change in the end'. According to this study's findings, authors in the social sciences who publish in notable academic journals prefer different pronouns when they refer to nonindividuated singular antecedents in the English language. For this reason, novice researchers and L2 English users might naturally shy away from using a specific pronoun to refer to gender-unknown singular nouns with human referents in thir written products unles they are trained explicitly in how to do so. In addition, such diversty in pronoun utilization might cause a dichotomy regarding the usage of gendered pronouns versus singular they when users of English, i.e, academic writers of English, need to refer to non-individuated singular persons in a context.

# Author statement

Ilyas YAkur: Formal analysis, Resources, Methodology, Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing, Investigation, Visualization. Bilal GENg: Conceptualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing. Erdogan BADA: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Validation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Project administration.

# Funding

This work was supported by Cukurova University [SBA-2019-109-53].

# References

Anthny,  019 t r. , J: . al 3..//y.twar.   
Bada 00        f , 26 88./.g 10.1016/j.pragma.2009.10.008   
Balhorn, M. (2004). The rise of epicene they. Journdl of English Linguistics 32(2), 79-104. https://doi.org/10.117/0075424204265824   
Balhon, . (2009. h ee prnu in contmpory wspaper prose. Amric peh, 84), 391413. htps:/oi.0r/10.1215/00312832009-031   
Baranowski,  (202).rr af th  r  w is.  f Susics (3, 378-397. s//.g/0.11/146- 9481.00193   
Bbc. (2019). Assisted dying: Australia cancer patient firs to use new law. Aug 5 htps://www.bc.com/news/world-australia-49230903.   
Bodine,  (1975. i n iimar i th x-ite h  r sh   ,  9146. /.g 10.1017/S0047404500004607   
Brk  P,   , . language and cognition (pp. 61-79). Cambridge: MIT.   
ra   r   e English Today, 35(4), 41-52. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0266078419000397   
royn,  17 ar hy dthtic rtio f gr i ish. s:  f ic, 21 113./i.g 10.5334/gjgl.374   
uge,. 20    i    /d0/jn/19 gender-neutral-language-battle-spain.   
Chadick, . 019.or c vi f  ste id th   11.Thdht/h.c/re/2019/g/1/ journalists-trumpism-el-paso-white-supremacy.   
Chamberlain, P. (2017). The feminist fourth wave: Affective temporality. Houndmills, UK: Palgrave MacMillan.   
Che i   . ICHSsR 2016. Retrieved from https://www.atlantis-press.com/proceedings/ichssr-16/25861703.   
Davis, N. (2019). Are yo a man or  woman? ns peple on GP care. eb 26. The Guardian htps:/.thadn.com/sciy/2019/eb/26/ns-man woman-gp-care-healthcare.   
ans,  015).h oi o th w i tiit, th  rin the. io ln.   
Eans, . (2016).What maks (third wve Inationl enst Jol of liic, 183), 409-428. ps:/oi.g/10.1080/14616742.2015.1027627   
Herer q 26.s i   t     pi. In M. L. Carrio-Pastor (Ed.), Technology implementation in second language teaching and tanslation studies (pp. 91-109). Singapore: pringer.   
Holmes, J, & Meyerhoff, M. (Eds.). (2003). The handbook of language and gender. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.   
Jaekl, . (018. The l he sod f yo o ice mks you crin. Ju12. Th ht//ha.c/i/201/l/2/te-eal reason-the-sound-of-your-own-voice-makes-you-cringe.   
Lakoff, R. (1975). Language and woman's place. New York: Harper and Row.   
Lorca, L. 016)f   h v f  uc   r d.) Technology implementation in second language teaching and translation studies (pp. 111-130). Singapore: Springer.   
Macmillan Online Dictionary. (2020). https://www.macmillandictionary.com. (Accessed 15 March 2020).   
Mahdawi,  019. H, sh, thy .  w n lf   s   a h . 3 The /an.m lifeandstyle/2019/sep/13/pronouns-gender-he-she-they-natalie-wynn-contrapoints.   
aryna,. 190 d he n c c t g  3, 2-9ie  /so.b317358 6632.1984.tb14764.x   
Nor, . 202  rien  h   4 /d/00/jan/4 janelle-monae-non-binary-pronouns-they-them.   
un, G. 015.  t  d    s p Ja3.T h/h./d-r-g/2015 jan/30/is-it-time-we-agreed-on-a-gender-neutral-singular-pronoun.   
ltma . (019.   d rs cl for d n ne Mr. Thed h/hd/019/ar/08/ german-academics-and-authors-call-for-end-to-gender-nonsense.   
Pas- /. independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/canadian-professor-criticised-gender-neutral-pronouns-a7402901.html.   
Paterson, 014 h  se io g sti  ft    ln. Science, 61(3), 715-727. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12290   
Pr and genderless languages. Sex Roles, 66, 268-281. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-011-0083-5   
Publctiomf e l in. 019. iomof te  iothe.. on.C American Psychological Association.   
Stobo 09) he  2 wig  cf  s   Esfc P 3,505. h/.g 10.1016/j.jeap.2019.02.001 esp.2020.08.001   
Sunderland, J. (1992). Gender in the EFL classroom. ELT Journal, 46(1), 81-91. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/46.1.81   
Tannen, D. (1990). You just don't understand: Women and men in conversation. New York: William Morrow.   
Tavit,   . 019.   m   ad alt.  of    of e, 16(34) 16781-16786. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1908156116   
Walby, . (204. he  n r t ti r r  c, (, ./.0.109//024   
Wheer, . (2019. Merriam-Westr dctinary dds they s noby proo. e. 18. The Guardian hp//.hdin.cm/scice/2019/sep/17/ merriam-webster-they-nonbinary-pronoun.   
Wili,  ki, 0  i  sic   h  xc 2, 137-4./. org/10.1080/00224499.2017.1346058

and Literature, Zonguldak Bulent Eevit Universt. His rearch interest areas cover Aplied Linguistics, Corpus Linguistics and Pragmatics.

L D  th  i t.      -k   f Pa and Education and Science.

dgan  t  tt f i t,   th t i t. t l L Journal.