Editorial

# Introduction to the special issue: Action research in english language and communication contexts in higher education

In this special issue (Sl) we aim not only to foreground a range of theoretical perspectives that have gained currency in the fields of English for Academic and English for Special Purposes (EAP/ESP), but t go further by interrogating how they might be implemented in classroom practic. These explorations are done from the perspectives of practitioners who have carried out action reseach, an approach to enqury that i alo gaining currency because of its application to practice. In so doing, one of our major aims in putting together this special issue was to contribute towards uniting, or at least bringing cloer together, the interes of scholarly reearchers and practitioners in the field of EAP/ESP, particularl those concerned about ways to bridge the perceived notorious gap between theory and practice/reearchers and teachers - an increasingly prominent theme in the literature. Within this cllection, readers wil find papers that integrate theoretical concepts, including translanguaging, genre-based pedagogy, Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL), intertextuality and plagiarism, per and teacher feedack, English as Medium of Instruction (EMI), teacher learning and expertise, and student capacity building and development with investigations of how these theories can be tested out i practical teaching contexts.

The Journal of English for Academic Purposes is a very relevant and appropriate venue for this special isse. Its interests lie in the sharing of ideas by scholarly researchers and classoom practitioners working in English Language and Communication Contexts in Higher Education, and the dissemination of content which enables practitioners of and researchers in EAP/ESP to keep current with and continually advance developments in this field. Usually, however, the received theoretical ideas in the field emanate from what researchers have to say and it is then anticipated and hoped that teachers willapply these new ideas in their courses. In this special issue, the roles are reversed. Here, we deliberately highlight practitioners as researchers who - by being actively involved in implementing changes based on theoretical findings - show that applying such new ideas in ther courses i often a challenging endeavour. In addressing these challenges, and simultaneously evaluating the succes f the implementation of conceptual ideas into ther courses, practitioners can inform more theoretically-riented reearchers. They can show what it takes to implement new methods and ap. proaches in teaching, not oly in trms of translating the des into practicalactivities, but aso in terms of ging the students or other stakeholders involved. In adopting their action research methodologies and utilising the various theoretical concepts as a basis, the authors of these papers problematise an area in ther course or their teaching, plan a change to the way they design/teach the course, and reflet on the outcomes. Such research not only leads to improvements in teaching and learning but aso informs and tests out the practicality of the theories.

Over the last three decades, educational action research has increasingly been recognised as a viable investigative approach, particularly because of its appeal to language practitioners and its location in their socially-embedded contexts of practice. While a considerable amount of research on EAP/ESP in higher education has emerged over this period of time (e.g., Belcher, 2012; Hyland, 2015; Hyland & Jiang, 2021), methodologically most of this research has been theoreticall grounded and informed by the traditions of the academy. It has been es the casethat the reearch of teacher practitioners themselves has been visible in this emerging body of literature. However, EAP/ESP teachers, usually working with international students from language backgrounds other than the dominant language of the academy, are in a unique position to undertake research directly relevant to their daily practices and to identify new and creative ways to support student learning based on documented evidence that can be shared with other practitioners. While the situation is slowly changing, such EAP/ESP teacher action research as exists tends to be ispersed across varied outlets from published research to local documents. Nevertheless collctions of such research across the last decade or so have become available. Among the most noticeable are the regular sets of papers published by the Cambridge English journal Research Notes, reporting on action research undertaken by ELIcos (English Language Intensive Courses for Overseas Students) in Australia (se for example, Issue 85, 2023), the edited papers emerging from the IAEL Research IG teacher research conferences (e.. Dikilitas et al., 2019), most of which are located in universty-based English language programs, and the various papers published in the few journals dedicated specificly to practice-oriented research by language teachers and teacher educators, such as Profil: sues in Teacher Professional Development, published by the University of Bogota.

The intrinsic value f action research in the endeavour of EAP/ESP lie centrally in its potential to unify localised theory, research and praxis. Action research enables practitioner insiders to research in and for their own contexts of practice. Such research is characterised by its embedding in the daily exigencies of classroom dynamics, the confrontation of real and realistic challenges and opportunitie, and the positionality of the teacher and students within the research as active agents of their own lived practices. Methodologicall also action rearch can adopt a wide range of empirical tols, drawing on recognised techniques of both qualitative and quantitative research, but also on the contingent resources of the classroom itself, such as emerging texts and interactions, opportunistic behaviours, reactions and responses, and critcally self-relectie observations and insights. Action research in such a situation actively sees change and agency through democratic, dialogic and participatory proceses and iterative cycles that can accommodate development and improvement Its ultimate goals are the search for collective and cooperative ways to modif, enhance and ilstrate efective EAP/ESP and other classoom experience. It also holds out the potential that scholarly research can legiti. mately be 'road-tested' through actual practice.

The papers in thi sI canvass theoretical perspectives to address range of challenging issues in the teaching and learning of EAP/ ESP and provide arich array of possibilities for scholars, rerchrs, teacher educators and practionersto follow up. They also create a varied set of illustrative examples that could provide possbilities and directions for other practitioners' EAP/ESP teaching and learning.

Starting with Bao, Chen, and Jiang's paper on the growth of teacher capacity and professional learning of EAP practitioners, the authors discuss how action research was able to empower a teacher in China. The irst author of this paper was struggling to transition from teaching General English courses to teaching English for Academic Purposes courses. In addressig the challenges presented by the transition, she used an action research design to systematicall identify the problems she faced, plan and implement interventions, and evaluate the changes. Through this systematic and iterative proces, she felt empowered to work through her struggles and to learn about her teaching. In this paper, the three authors demonstrate how the analytical framework of action research can guide EAP practitioners to reflect on and improve their classroom teaching.

In the same vein, Tan and Tan's paper illustrats how collaborative action research (CAR) can facilitate informal learning among new EAP teachers by fostering critical dialogue. Drawing on the retrospective reflections of thre teachers involved in a collaborative rubric development project, this paper shows how they created abackstage" seting for trusting, stimulating, and solution-oriented exchanges between critical riends. These exchanges prompted the three teachers to clarify and adjust their own beliefs and practices, reflect on the limits of using rubric to align their assesment standards, and experiment with different methods of disseminating the completed rubric. In the process, the rubric was reinvented as a dialogical tool that facilitates informal professional learning.

In a similar spirit but this time on students' scholarly capacity, Bedeker and Kerimkulova adopted Systemic Functional Linguistic (SFL) theory combined with an action research methodology to help their graduate ESP students develop their scholarly research dispositions. They employed a cyclical action rearch model tofacilitate the scaffolding of explicit formal, rhetorical, procdural, and strategic knowledge for their graduate students. This proces helped the students to move beyond just procedural act f research into engaging with authentic research practices. Their action research ilustrates the potentia to redeign supervision pedagogy so as to scaffold graduate students into communities of research practice.

Also looking at the graduate level, O'Neill's paper adopts the notion of the socialisation of students into the higher education discoursal community. His action research extended over a five-year period and involved cohorts of graduate students and their understanding of the role of source texts in their graduate-level writing. His aim was to reduce plagiarism through students use of illegitimate intertextuality y adopting a socilisation proces rather than through more traditional methods of identifying plagiarism and teaching discrete skils such as paraphrasing. Over that period of time, through successive cycles of action research implemented with several cohorts of students, O'Neill enhanced his own understanding of how a socialisation approach towards the problem of misuse of intertextuality could be implemented and, in the process also achieved improvements in his students writing.

Similarl, Kunkelstudy also focuses on graduate students' scholarly development and capacity building, and particularly on the use of feedback strategies. Kunkels action research study used teacher-student group conferences (TsGcs) as an intervention in her graduate level EAP writing classto help students benefit from giving and receiving feedack, both from the teacher and each other. Her intervention worked effectively as the students found rsGCs beneficial and apreciated the individualised feedback and diverse perspectives afforded to them. Kunkel alo highlights some challenges in the implementation of Tss as main feedback trategy and discusses the perceived disadvantages of this approach.

At the undergraduate level, Matikainen deploys an English as a medium of instruction (EMI) theoretical perspective to demon strate how a participatory action research approach could be adopted to reconstruct an academic writing support course in order to improve it efficacy. With systematic planning and careful design of the action reearch cycles, she shows how thinking, acting, and reflecting all of which are at the core of action reearch, are intrwoven in a teacher's role and actio. Her study reeals the aspects of academic writing that are most challenging for students in EMI programs, such as the realities of academic writing, the significance of sources, and audience awareness. She points out the importance of the necessty for close alignment between content courses and English language support course in EMI programs.

In relation to ESP, Shoecraft, Massa, and Kenway integrate approaches based on translanguaging theory into their action research conducted with first-year students enrolle in a large anatomy course at an Australian university. Drawing on input from the teaching team itelf, a translanguaging expert and past students, they implemented action research cycles of identifying the issue, planning interventions, implementing the action, evaluating data and reflecting on the next steps. Using translanguaging practices meant that the diverse language backgrounds of the students were seen as a resource rather than a deficit. Through the clection of both qualitative and quantitative data, and iterations of the research over several cycles, they experimented with ways that student engagement in anatomy learning could be supported through translanguaging perspectives and approaches.

Also in relation to ESP, Townley describes how he adopted insights from genre theory and content and language integrated learning (CLIL) o scaffold his students' development in an English for Specific Legal Purposes (ELP) course at a Turkish universty. His motivation for the syllabus changes he made traed back to his own experiences as a commercial law student and junior trainee lawyer which had not included any formal training in the textual and discourse demands of egal communication. Hisaction reearch spanned five years during which time he restructured the syllabus to foreground the functional organisation and lexico-grammatical properties of a legal contrct and engaged students in an oral advice roleplay activity and the writing of a ltter of advice to a hypothtical client.

Taken together, we believe the papers in this specialissue make a specific and noteworthy contribution to modifying, enhancing and illustrating effective EAP/ESP and other classroom experiences. It is hoped that the papers will engender further practitioner research development and inspiration as well as ideas for academic researchers, because involvement ultimately leads to deeper learning.

"Tell me and I forget, teach me and I may remember, involve me and I learn.--Benjamin Franklin.

# References

eer      .      p 535-551). John Wiley & Sons.   
Cambridge English Research Note, Vol. 85.htps://www.cambridgeenglish.org/english-reearch-group/published-reearch/reearch-notes. of English as foreign language (IATEFL). https://resig.weely.com/uploads/2/6/3/6/26368747/energizing_teacher research.pdf.   
Hyland, K 2015). ral d pfic AP.  K Hland, P. Shw ds.), Th ro hdook of Esh for dic e . 1729). Rt.   
Hyland, g, 021)r st f APh  i    h  E  e 49. /. org/10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100929. Article 100929.   
Profile: Issues in Teacher Professional Development https://revistas.unal.edu.co/index.php/profile.