# Towards a ‘pedagogy of connection’ in critical research education: A REAL story

Kate Cadman\*

Adelaide Graduate Centre, Integrated Building Program, The University of Adelaide, Level 1 Schulz Building, Level 13, 10 Pulteney, SA 5005, Australia

# Abstract

Despite increasing scholarly work on Advanced Academic Literacies (AAL) focussing on course curricula and genre materials, there has been little exploration of the classroom and personal relationships which are daily enacted in pursuit of the global and local aspirations of international research students. In this paper, I present aspects of my lived experience as a teacher of research English as an Additional Language (REAL) by telling a reflexive story of developing a critical pedagogy which privileges “connection” within an Australian AAL context. Prioritising interpersonal relationships over curriculum and content material requires a reassessment of the classroom as a teaching space, as well as of the roles of teachers and students. As this narrative indicates, it is my belief that such a pedagogy not only enhances students’ interrogation, and consequent manipulation, of the linguistic structures in which they have investment, but it also goes some way to fulfilling our hopes for AAL teaching as a site for transcultural dialogues and outreaches beyond language education.

$©$ 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: English for academic purposes; Advanced academic literacies; Critical research education; Connection; Teacher narrative

# 1. Introduction—a confessional narrative

In this paper, I should like to offer my own story of teaching advanced academic literacies (AAL), based on my experience and identity as an AAL teacher in a fairly typical Western context. In a recent discussion of teaching EAP, Watson-Todd (2003, p. 152) makes the comment that there is an evident “lack of academic cachet in writing about techniques, and an overall concern for more conceptual than procedural issues in teaching”. He suggests that this may be one reason why teaching moments are under-represented in EAP literature. My own observations would support the view that inspired ‘TEAP’ situations occur routinely though their characteristics are rarely shared with the academic community. Another reason for this may be that EAP teachers’ concerns are often, with consideration, dedicated primarily to students. In these contexts, theoretical principles are developed out of the accumulated community interactions of daily learning and teaching events rather than from published materials and debates.

It is across this gap that I hope to create a bridge in this paper by discussing my own teaching perspectives and practice at a micro-ethnographic level. Despite the valuable teaching insights in recent AAL textbooks based in genre theory (Cooley & Lewkowicz, 2004; Swales & Feak, 2000) and teaching materials (Cooley & Lewkowicz, 2003; Swales & Lindeman, 2002), Watson-Todd (2003, p. 149) still makes a strong case for neglect of “the ‘how’ of EAP.” He focuses on what he calls “methodology” and “techniques”, arguing that these are often treated “almost as an afterthought” (p. 154) even in contemporary textbooks and course descriptions. By this I think he identifies a scholarly reluctance in EAP to go into the living-and-breathing classroom, as writers prefer to focus on materials and teaching approaches rather than relationships (e.g., Flowerdew & Peacock, 2002; Paltridge, 2001).

My purpose here then is to share some of my own teaching experiences in response to a now well-recognised “autobiographical impulse in our theory-making” (Neilson, 1998, p. 266). In doing this, it is important for me to note that my experiences have been generated in a teaching context of collegial activity characterised by shared belief in holistic approaches to learning, as well as by team collaboration (of creativity, fact and affect), lots of discussion, and mutual respect and support. I see this environment as sustaining a culture of connection and I think it has been extremely influential on my work with students, especially in fostering the pedagogy of connection which is the basis of our team’s EAL work in research education.

# 2. Critical developments in REAL

In recent papers located in AAL (Cadman, 2002, 2005), I have outlined some of my own reasons for introducing critical pedagogy in a twelve-week Research English as an Additional Language (REAL1 ) program, run in my own Australian university. In AAL research there is now an increasingly significant and inspiring trend which reflects our various struggles to develop personalised “middle of the road” practices “between critique and accommodation” (Swales, Barks, Ostermann, & Simpson, 2001, p. 13; see also Allison, 2003; Johnston, 1999; Starfield, 2004). In my own practice, I have focussed on “engagement”, defined early by hooks (1994, p. 15) as “connection between ideas learned in university settings and those learned in life practices”, and later by Pennycook (1999, p. 340) who sees “such issues as gender, race, class, sexuality, and postcolonialism as so fundamental to identity and language that they need to form the basis of curricular organization and pedagogy”. My priority in promoting this pedagogic engagement has been, with hooks, to privilege opportunities for connecting—people, understandings, knowledges, feelings—in the diverse ways that a REAL teaching context makes possible (see Cadman & Ha, 2001).

# 3. Setting and characters

The educational program from which my experience draws is located in the Research Education Programs Unit of a research intensive Australian University in which a research degree generically requires no assessable structured coursework. Students’ education is guided almost exclusively through meetings with individual faculty supervisors. As I have described elsewhere (Cadman, 2002) this REAL program is institutionally mandated for international research students throughout the first semester of their candidature. It is a task-based program and one of its primary goals is to facilitate students’ academic language development through the production of the Literature Review and Research Proposal which are required by the institution. The students are mostly from EAL backgrounds in Asia, Africa and South America. Most are scholarship holders, mature academics and professionals in their own language cultures. Some have completed previous research degrees in English language contexts; others have never left their home countries before. Many are accompanied by their partners and/or children, but very few know other students in the institution when they commence. Consequently the academic challenges these students meet may be different for each of them, and, as the program begins immediately after their arrival, may often be accompanied by cultural readjustment issues.

# 4. A connecting classroom

I think that possibly the most immediate influence on students’ learning is their affective experience of the classroom itself. Most academic teaching contexts are characterised by institutional constraints of organisational structure and funding, so teachers or lecturers are inevitably mediators between students’ learning and institutional perceptions of success. Thus each teaching space must be a contested site. Nevertheless, it seems necessarily true that at the heart of all classroom environments is the personal philosophy of the teacher, including her level of commitment to equity and justice as well as to specific educational goals, what Bazerman (1994, p. 28) calls “the personal history that shapes the personality and competence and attitudes of the person who walks in front of the classroom”.

In my own case in order to promote a dynamic of connection, I began by envisaging the REAL teaching and learning process in a new way for me, not as based on a hierarchical teacher-learner relationship but as the formation of a community of international scholars, one of whom is an English language expert. Of course the extent to which this aim can be realized must always be compromised by the assessment and gate-keeping function required of me as a REAL lecturer. Nevertheless, if we as a group can see ourselves first of all as learners, we can work to make the “gaze” of authority as irrelevant as possible to mutual sharing of expertise.

For this goal to be facilitated the classroom itself must have very special characteristics. Above all it must be a welcoming, home environment, conducive to risking new connections, and not an alien place. Even though class members may be very different from each other, they can be encouraged to form their own community by being invited by the teacher to exert some personal and then collective ownership of the learning space, its furniture arrangement, lighting, practical protocols (like deciding when handouts, overhead transparencies or data displays are used, and for what, and who stands or sits where), as well as its expectations and its values. Ways of initiating this dynamic can include an activity like jointly negotiating some ground rules by which protocols for addressing issues such as demonstrating respect in disagreement, off-task activity, lateness to class, multiple language conversations and so on can be democratically established (often heatedly!) and monitored by members. In this way no two classes create the same learning environment because group priorities and patterns of interpersonal communication take different forms in each.

In trying to identify how this happens in my REAL classes, I have been inspired by Canagarajah’s (1997, 2004) development of language-based “Safe Houses in the Contact Zone” using postcolonial symbolism. Canagarajah (2004, p. 191) characterises a linguistic “safe house” in terms of its provision of nurture, safe haven or sanctuary and argues that the safety and creativity of the “house” depend upon its freedom from surveillance by authority and its unofficial, extra-pedagogical character. In my own classroom, insofar as I am a co-assessor of students’ research performance, we cannot escape aspects of the “contact zone”. Furthermore, my students rarely share linguistic or cultural histories to draw on for off-task, oppositional dialogues. What we can do, however, is to try to develop on-task protocols that almost transgressively welcome idiosyncratic responses, failures to comply, and criticism or rejection of the task itself. We create spaces where the students’ feelings about the task are prioritised as equally important as respected linguistic performances. In this way we work together towards building teacher– student relationships that do not require teacher surveillance, so that multiple identities and forms of English can be expressed and enjoyed.

The key to this kind of experimentation lies, in my view, in the unlocking of student agency, that is, in each student’s identity position in relation to their desire to perform appropriately. As Pennycook’s (1999) “pedagogy of engagement” advocates, students’ investment in their studies needs to be welcomed into the classroom. The big question is, how? What are the conditions appropriate for comfortable negotiation of desire, agentive stance, and multiple identity positions? Most importantly perhaps, the classroom culture needs to have the potential to embrace, and then value, the full human person and the multiple social roles of all students, and the teacher too. Such a practice can be quite radical: Hooks (1994, pp. 14–15) describes how she had to “overcome years of socialization that had taught me to believe that a classroom was diminished if students and professors regarded one another as ‘whole’ human beings, striving not just for knowledge in books but knowledge about how to live in the world”.

Connecting students’ identities and lives with each other, as well as with their research projects and their English, can be facilitated by targeted activities. Appendix A shows an introductory workshop task through which students get to talk to each other in groups about how they see themselves and what matters to them about their own identities. In introducing the task, I use myself as an example, explaining how and why, as a migrant to Australia, I prioritise certain aspects of my own self-concept. I also introduce my own research interests at this point to suggest how my life has led me to develop them. Then I can focus on conventional ways of expressing research in English as a question or problem by linking this practice to the identity data we have gained about the class group. In this way, students are encouraged to connect their own lived experience to their research and its expression in English, sharing all these with each other as far as they are comfortable to do. In my classrooms, this activity has opened up warm and fascinating dialogues, allowing students to get to know each other’s personalities and research directions with both intellectual interest and affective connection.

It has been powerfully argued by Janks (2002, p. 7) in her exploration of the effectiveness of critical literacy programs in schools, that certain influences on learning act “beyond reason”; in fact she stresses the “helplessness” of analysis and rationality in the face of “the non-rational investments that readers bring with them to texts and tasks”. One of the most powerful of these is humour, and Janks (p. 12) herself, along with others in different contexts (Nahas, 1998; Pastoll, 2002), recognises the unconsciously transgressive, pedagogic potential of humour. Anecdotally I understand it was Victor Borge who said, “Laughter is the shortest distance between strangers,” and it seems so to me. In my own teaching, I find that the classroom gains a sense of being home, and feelings of alienation dissipate more quickly, the more we spontaneously generate humour as a natural form of interchange between class members. And its potential seems to be increased if I direct humour against myself by characterising my blunders facetiously or providing examples of institutional expectations in humorous anecdotes. Through humour connection occurs at a level deeper than that of language exchange or classroom authority; laughter is a powerful way to interrupt the pedagogic surveillance construct and to make the classroom a place where students want to be.

# 5. The role of a connecting teacher

Thus a connecting classroom comes alive through the presence of a teacher as a feeling being as well as thinking one. And, importantly for this process, the traditional teacher’s authoritarian role as monitor of students’ learning goals, classroom behaviours and application to tasks needs to be relinquished. In order to do this in my own context I begin by getting students to collaborate on design of the curriculum.

Of course research students who have proved themselves successful in diverse academic environments may initially find a collaborative, non-directive approach to teaching unexpected and disturbing. Consequently, I have developed a “control wedge” model of curriculum design which allows the transfer of curriculum ownership to take place gradually (see Cadman, 2002, p. 99). Because the initial focus of the course is on the University’s mandatory assessment requirements for research students, the completing of set tasks is not negotiable. However, curriculum content and deadlines for task completion can be determined by the class. Thus the weekly syllabus may be different for each group, since the learning histories and profiles of members may be quite different. As I am the controlling facilitator at the beginning of the course, I create an activity that identifies and negotiates priorities for the group and we pencil these into a relatively empty timetable. With the assumption that all plans can be changed by negotiation throughout the semester, these research students are usually well able to assess the learning needs of the group as a whole, calculating the teaching and study hours we have available to us, working out appropriate deadlines for practice sessions and submission of draft texts, and raising questions about how, and at what points, my own particularly linguistic and inter-cultural experience can be most useful to them.

Of course, as Pennycook (1999) has succinctly noted, student-centred priorities and curricula are not of themselves critical; specific activities are needed to encourage students to be self-reflexive in considering the interests which underpin monolingual English research goals and methodologies. For critical success teachers clearly have a central role in opening up ideological critique of relevant issues and genres. In activities such as the student–supervisor pyramid discussion in Fig. 1 for example, students may be involved

# Outcomes of ‘Western’ research education for international students

What do you think are the three most important outcomes of a ‘Western’ research degree for an international student? Circle your choices from the list below:

1. the acquisition of transferable, practical skills   
2. working with internationally recognized experts in the field   
3. having contributed to the decentring of Western knowledge-making   
4. development of English language competence   
5. improved career prospects   
6. an original contribution to existing knowledge   
7. a widening of intellectual horizons   
8. contribution to the research culture of a Western university department   
9. improved access to research published in English   
10. experience of living in a different culture   
11. having gained the ability to contribute to the advancement of the student’s home country   
12. personal development as a researcher   
13. improved ability to communicate across cultures   
14. membership of an international research community   
15. opportunities to develop international research networks   
16. finding a solution to a worthwhile, practical problem   
17. papers published in first-class, international refereed journals   
18. the ability to see the world in new ways

Share your views with a partner, and, by arguing logically with each other, try to reach agreement on three outcomes. Repeat the process in groups of four, aiming to reach a small-group consensus. Then present this to the whole workshop with reasons for your agreements and disagreements.

in dialoguing with their supervisors about the extent to which their accommodation to Western research practices facilitates, impedes or is simply irrelevant to their personal goals.

Critical issues can also be opened up in the teaching of text structures, without rejecting the genre pedagogy which we have developed for teaching the traditional research genres of Literature Review, Research Proposal and thesis or dissertation. However, rather than restricting classroom objectives to understanding and reproducing the linguistic and rhetorical features of these target texts, if we privilege processes of connecting, we naturally explore implications beyond these. As Shor (1992, p. 202), a seminal critical educator, points out: ‘The first responsibility of critical teachers is to research what students know, speak, experience, and feel, as starting points from which an empowering curriculum can be built’.

In my own course in Humanities and Social Sciences, students give oral presentations to each other on the various ontological and epistemological assumptions underpinning textual justification of their project question(s), as, for example, in the “Creating a Research Space” (CARS) model recently demonstrated by Starfield (Swales, 1990 quoted in Starfield, 2003). However, justifying a research degree project appropriately depends also on socio-linguistic considerations such as feasibility, scope, generalisability and relevance. In connecting these criteria with students’ own subjectivities, it is a natural step to ask if they would like to engage with a more critical set of discussion questions, such as:

† How useful, or satisfying, is it for you personally to locate your research project in scholarly literature in English, and to justify its contribution within this academic tradition? Are there other traditions into which your research naturally fits? Whose expertise is most relevant for you as you evaluate the significance of the social or intellectual problem you have identified? How might you express a range of expert sources?   
† Do you think that there have been any constraints on your choices in relation to areas of study (fields, approaches, directions) that can be considered ‘relevant’ to become ‘suitable’ research projects for you?   
How do you feel about the position you find yourself in, as you work with your supervisor(s) to set up this research project? How much space is there for your own agency in this process? Are there any strategies you would like to develop to open up discussions of issues like these with your faculty academics and supervisor(s)?

Extending these questions to address writing, I try to avoid approaching target genres and communication practices as a believer in them, converted to their purposes, without offering scope for interrogation of their assumptions or potential critique of their conventional forms. This approach closes off opportunities for the production of alternative, more representative practices (see Canagarajah, 2001). My aim is rather to capitalise on students’ dialogues around epistemological diversity to suggest that they discuss and experiment with a variety of written text productions. In small groups they compose target genres together, and debate their own text approximations, expressing their reasons for the structures they have adopted and balancing these against their understanding of English language conventions for those texts. Above all, text analysis and composition are always yoked into the service of making connections. Later, stepping beyond written text, students often conduct joint evaluations of their own and each other’s disciplinary and departmental cultures. They may compare disciplinary publication practices, supervision methods and the lionised behaviours of good research students (often assessing how they feel they are perceived in their departments, giving themselves a perception score out of 10!). They suggest their own strategies for defending alternative practices, and share and practise strategic English expressions for doing this. Comfortable participants often ask each other to reflect on the values of their home culture’s academic heritages, so that differences among disciplines, across research paradigms and among students’ own diverse approaches to their research experience can offer opportunities for agency and self-extension.

As I have suggested earlier, in addition to the professional expertise required for development of curriculum and activities, enactment of holistic teacher identity is a key factor in a connecting pedagogy. It may be that as TESOL has become an increasingly professional and academic field, there has arisen a mistrust of classroom relationships that involve the teacher. Teacher control of an artificial classroom climate for learning linguistic genres seems to have become a source of professional confidence (see Johns, 2002). However, I am still an advocate of Bazerman’s (1994) classroom, which is “neither innately natural nor innately artificial” and “let[s] in more of the students” past, future, current reality, or imaginative and emotional privacies’ as well as both students’ and teachers’ “prior experience and inner life” (pp. 29–30). And one way I can begin to admit an unmediated “human” dimension into classroom relationships is to allow my own vulnerabilities, confusions and insecurities into decision-making (see Hooks, 1994, pp. 15–21). I am not an efficient organiser and students quickly realize that our joint enterprise proceeds much more effectively if they organise the technology, equipment and student contributions, leaving me arbitration over my areas of expertise in linguistic and cultural expectations. A rhetoric of connection is generated in this sharing of responsibilities and if this gradually becomes the natural dialogic mode of the learning space, hesitant or resistant students begin to take up the agency positions in English that they are accustomed to enacting in their own languages.

The ways in which the teacher can foster such classroom dialogues for critical as distinct from hierarchical outcomes has been explored in some detail in school contexts by Young (1992), and in a recent study by Kiely (2004) suggests that this work has a “particular resonance for the EAP context” (p. 214). Young contrasts traditional pedagogic “authority” with a “discourse classroom” where the learner is approached as a “partner in inquiry” who makes validity judgements based on their own life experience, and where the teacher–student relationship is collaborative at the level of analysis (pp. 116–117). In this process, teacher initiated activity is reduced; a “dialogic” classroom is “democratically open to student intervention” (Shor, 1992, p. 85) and I would add, in a REAL classroom, also to student appropriation and control.

# 6. Directing roles for students

We must acknowledge that the kind of classroom practices envisaged here may engage students in learning behaviours that they may not have met before in a formal educational environment. Some international research students are initially uncomfortable to find that in our Western faculty research contexts they are expected to take responsibility for their own learning directions. There are no set topics or reading lists, and after the first semester there are very few mandated rather than negotiated tasks; for us the research journey most often requires autonomous, self-managed learning and text production. Students need to be able to engage publicly with their desires and needs, to be willing to articulate these reflectively in their disciplines and to negotiate appropriate avenues for their own academic development. More than that, assessment by REAL lecturers and faculty supervisors is incrementally reduced as students are expected to take ownership of their research as leaders in their fields.

Thus it is important that the “control wedge” model of research education allocates from the beginning a specific time for student-generated sharing stories of our recent good and bad experiences, or for questions about events we have met. Student agency seems released at these times, and in fact, quite surprising results often occur.

In one class jointly planned for students to present their referencing and citation conventions, one student claimed immediate space to share her distress that her home-country friend and colleague, having been only six weeks in the country, had been in a car accident and was now on a life-support machine in a local hospital. The father, who was a Buddhist, had been flown out from their home because the hospital was now insisting that the machine had to be switched off. I asked the class whether they would like to proceed with the planned lesson and meet up later, or go out straight away for coffee and discussion. Without answering me they just carried on talking, asking every kind of question of their classmate, trying to clarify what they thought were the important issues for all parties. They offered hesitant personal suggestions on the lines of “What I think I’d do is.,” as well as practical help both for their colleague and for the family of her friend, in terms of transport, food, personal and academic support. In this discussion, I was something of an outsider, being the only one at home. As we left the class, we negotiated that I would make written comments on the students’ prepared materials for the class, and give feedback later.

On other occasions my perspective as an almost generic Australian has been quite strongly sought as when, half-way through a workshop activity on textual justification of a research project, a student half raised his hand and said, “Excuse me, but may I mention a very different issue?” He explained his dilemma to the class, who unanimously agreed that they should discuss his problem, and hear my Western view. It appeared that in share-bathroom accommodation, the student had accidentally walked in on two other students having sex in the shower. His own background forbade such practice and he was horrified to see that one of the participants was a person with whom his supervisor had paired him in a research initiative. He was due to eat with that person the same evening to discuss the project and he needed to know whether it would be wise for him to form a close working relationship with this person. Animated exchanges followed, during which a mature female student, with great politeness, took over from me the role of facilitator. Debate was centred on how far it is desirable to change your own values and behaviours, both personal and academic, when you are studying in another country. The discussion continued beyond class time and the students agreed that the remainder of the academic activity should be postponed to replace a less significant topic in another session.

In this kind of authentically dialogic and connecting classroom space, public as well as personal issues can be overwhelmingly demanding of students’ attention. On one occasion a fascinating political debate overtook a class rescheduled to avoid my Union’s strike day because students were very keen to understand and discuss the issues. And of course an inescapable example was evident in our first class after 9/11. Initially it was impossible to focus on our academic imperatives. It was palpably understood that the horror we had all experienced was shared, and discussion focussed gradually on issues we had in common, such as where we were and what we felt when we first saw the video clips, how strongly we identified with the victims and the bereaved, how quickly we had all rung family in our home countries. Differences in our perspectives emerged but were not elaborated; with what felt like a shared sense of community we seemed relieved to get back to the routine academic challenges that we could at least try to make sense of, so we returned quite quickly to our planned activity.

At times like these a fertile group dynamic emerges from a pedagogy of connection if we have been able to open up avenues for very different student positions to negotiate entry. Some students, however, are more comfortable to develop agency in individual rather than group situations, and we have found that the email medium has often facilitated this. Despite the fact that we lecturers do have a gate-keeping University assessment role, we make it clear that we welcome personalised communication so individual students often use their safe relationships with us to contest standard expectations. One student with a bubbling Latin sense of humour forwarded a joke narrative at his own expense to my colleague, his teacher, as preface to a personally flavoured request for a formal assignment extension:

By the way, May I hand in my Proposal by Tuesday? Next Monday I’ll have a meeting with [my supervisor] at $2 \ \mathrm { p m }$ , where I’d like to show it to him, and then I could incorporate his feedback after the meeting. What do you say? Say yes and I’ll love you more than yesterday and less than tomorrow. (Tenkyu)

Particular students with technological expertise have often shared transgressive images with us (and about us!), and again connecting through humour is the key.

Other significant email practices show students taking ownership of their developing REAL skills and balancing these against their disciplinary research pressures. They quite often want to acknowledge what may be REAL expectations in relation to the current status of their draft writing, and thus they critique their own work ahead of me. In the example below, a student shows he understands conventional features of target texts and the expectations of teaching but has decided against trying to implement some of them at this stage:

Subject: Literature Review Kate,

First of all, I’m really sorry for the delay in delivering this assignment. I am not satisfied at all with the work at this phase. Even though I had extended delivery date, I still run out of time.

I know the grammar is still awful as I didn’t got enough time to check it all   
I am not satisfied with the discourse either   
† I think there is still way too much repetition—narrow vocabulary $^ +$ too busy $=$ this is the result. However, I think that I can improve this   
† Logical flow of the story, linking paragraphs and issues together—I know I should improve. I am glad to have some feedback on this Content and Relevance—I think I have too much material, “I try to kiss the world” by solving all the problems for [data sources]. I know I should narrow the focus and concentrate on fewer theories and models, but so far just felt that I have not enough information to decide between them. † Own voice—I am afraid, that there is not too much “own voice” yet and when there is, I still think that the sentences are too simplistic. So I guess this was ‘self-critiquing’ instead of self-editing. However, all critic and feedback is still welcomed as I think I need it all.   
Cheers, .

This message shows a confidence and ownership of the language issues which I believe can develop for individuals through a critical REAL pedagogy that privileges connection without compromising the teaching of disciplinary research English.

For my own students this kind of connected confidence has gone on to generate some further rewarding and far-reaching, outcomes, beyond the scope of individual development or classroom dynamics. These include extra-curricular participation in national and international level presentations and publications2 , as students’ † a joint staff/student international publication (Cadman and Ha 2002).

relationships have extended beyond their course requirements and pragmatic goals. Where I have noticed that a particular student takes pleasure in organising group activities, it is a natural step to ask if they would like to be a social secretary to arrange lunch or tea gatherings. Then as group discussion focuses on shared interests, I have opened up questions to offer structure to some possible next steps (“Well, would you like to read/think/write/interview people about this?”). And so small research projects can be born if the dynamic goes that way, and once they are, they take on a life of their own.

Of course a recurring question which teaching to these kinds of outcomes raises is the extent to which it may justly be regarded as inappropriate use of research students’ precious REAL and candidature time. In practice my own experience does not lead me to doubt this, nor does it support the binary assumptions which divide contemporary language focus/social focus arguments in EAP. For me, in contrast to Turner (2004), a critical, connecting pedagogy does not replace linguistic goals with social or political ones; in fact, as I have shown, it has often increased students’ agency in the up-take and control of the genres they want. It is through processes of connection that we can hear what Pennycook (1997, p. 49) has called students’ own “insurgent voices”, voices that “speak in opposition to the local and global discourses that limit and produce the possibilities that frame their lives”, and we can hear them happening in English.

# 7. Open endings

In the context of the expanding internationalisation of research education, it seems vital for those of us involved, whether as providers or recipients of the educational process, to re-examine our roles in shaping its future. In our respective positions as sponsors, researchers, teachers and learners, we play vital parts in developing new social structures to accommodate the global changes which are shaping these trends and by which they are being shaped. World knowledges are growing exponentially. We all, but particularly those of us advantaged by belonging to white, male AngloCeltic academic traditions, can take personal responsibility for our part in their multiplicity, diversity and equity. For me this means connecting, personally as well as pedagogically, with each other as we do so. As international research educators and student researchers working in English, we hold, and will go on to hold, positions of power in many of the world’s communities and as a result our relationships with each other will become more and more significant in future directions. Sharing our perspectives in connecting and transforming research education may be one of the most productive ways for us to start.

# Appendix A

Initial activity connecting student identity with a Humanities and/or Social Sciences research project.

# Personal identity survey: task and homework

1. Complete the Personal Identity Survey form, thinking about how you would like to share your own identity with the class.   
2. Compare your results with a partner, explaining your personal characteristics and giving reasons for your choices. Keep a quantitative record of your pair’s survey results on the results sheet, and note the reasons given.   
3. Compare your paired results with another pair. Clarify similarities and differences in reasons for your choices. Give your group a name, and keep a quantitative record of the survey results for your group on the results sheet.   
4. Choose one group member to feedback to the class, giving your group’s quantitative survey results and some qualitative analysis of reasons given for choices.

5. Class discussion: Identity

† From the identity data we have gained from the whole class, what claims could we make about the identity choices of this group of people, and how they see themselves here at the start of their candidatures? How important is a person’s feeling of identity at the start of a research candidature?

6. Class discussion: Expressing a research goal as a question † Imagine: if this data had been collected as a part of a research project in the Social Sciences, what might a typical research question have been? How could we use the question form, especially noun and verb phrases, to convey appropriate focus and parameters, in relation to this data?

7. Homework:

† Now consider how your own research journey could best be expressed as a question, or a series of questions, for which your project will provide an answer, several answers OR a coherent argument. Prepare a clearly written, dated, overhead transparency (OHT). Think about how you would relate your own sense of identity to this project.

# Research Education Programs PERSONAL IDENTITY SURVEY FORM

# NAME:

From the list below, select the three items which you feel most strongly make up your personal identity. Write your own personal identity characteristic in the final comment box of the three you choose. I have done one for you as an example.

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td>a person with a regional identity (ie Middle Eastern/ Asian/ African etc)</td><td> me - I&#x27;m from the North of England</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>No</td><td>Identity item</td><td>Your personal characteristic</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>a woman/ man/ other</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2</td><td>a mother /father</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>3</td><td>a son/ daughter</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>4</td><td>a wife/ husband/ partner</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>5</td><td>someone with certain physical character-istics (ie a short/ fat/ blond etc person)</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>6</td><td>a person of colour (ie a black/ brown/ white/ yellow/ red/ [green?] etc person)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>7</td><td>a person with a specific national identity (ie Malaysian/ Nigerian/ Cuban etc)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td>a person with a regional identity (ie a Middle Eastern/. Asian/ African etc)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>9</td><td>a member of an ethnic group (ie an Aboriginal/ Chinese/ Westerner etc)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>10</td><td>a member of a religion (ie Hindu/ Moslem/ Christian etc)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>11</td><td>a specific first language speaker (ie a Bahasa/ Spanish/ Bengali speaker etc)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>12</td><td>a member of a social class or caste (ie the working class/ Royal Family/ Brahmin etc)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>13</td><td>a professional (ie a lecturer/ nurse/ accountant/ Government official etc)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>14</td><td>a member of a department or discipline (ie in Geography/ Education/ Economics etc)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>15</td><td>a person who has a particular skill (ie a musician/ tennis player/ trivia expert etc)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>16</td><td>other</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Allison, D. (2003). Authority and accommodation in higher degree research proposals. Hong Kong Journal of Applied Linguistics, 8(2), 155–180.   
Bazerman, C. (1994). Where is the classroom?. In A. Freedman, & P. Medway (Eds.), Learning and teaching genre (pp. 25–30). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton Cook.   
Cadman, K. (2002). English for academic possibilities: The research proposal as a contested site in postgraduate genre pedagogy. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1(2), 85–104.   
Cadman, K. (2005). Divine discourse: Plagiarism, hybridity and epistemological racism. In S. May, M. Franken, & R. Barnard (Eds.), LED: Refereed proceedings of the inaugural international conference on language, education and diversity 2003. Hamilton, NZ: University of Waikato Press [CDRom].   
Cadman, K., & Ha, T. H. (2001). Only connect: Transcultural supervision as ‘the rainbow bridge’. In A. Bartlett, & G. Mercer (Eds.), Postgraduate research supervision: Transforming [r]elations (pp. 215–232). New York, NY: Peter Lang.   
Canagarajah, S. (1997). Safe houses in the contact zone: Coping strategies of African-American students in the academy. College Composition and Communication, 48(2), 173–196.   
Canagarajah, S. (2001). Addressing issues of power and difference in ESL academic writing. In J. Flowerdew, & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for academic purposes (pp. 117–131). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Canagarajah, S. (2004). Subversive identities, pedagogical safe houses, and critical learning. In B. Norton, & K. Toohey (Eds.), Critical pedagogies and language learning (pp. 116–137). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Cooley, L., & Lewkowicz, J. (Eds.). (2003). Thesis and dissertation writing at postgraduate level: Theory and classroom practice (Special issue). Hong Kong Journal of Applied Linguistics, 8(2).   
Cooley, L., & Lewkowicz, J. (2004). Dissertation writing in practice: Turning ideas into text. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University.   
Flowerdew, J., & Peacock, M. (2002). The EAP curriculum: Issues, methods and challenges. In J. Flowerdew, & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for academic purposes (pp. 177–194). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Hooks, B. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. New York, NY: Routledge.   
Janks, H. (2002). Critical literacy: Beyond reason. Australian Educational Researcher, 29(1), 7–26.   
Johns, A. (Ed.). (2002). Genre in the classroom: Multiple perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Johnston, B. (1999). Putting critical pedagogy in its place: A personal account. TESOL Quarterly, 33(3), 557–565.   
Kiely, R. (2004). Learning to critique in EAP. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3(3), 211–227.   
Nahas, V. L. (1998). Humour: A phenomenological study within the context of clinical education. Nurse Education Today, 18, 663–672.   
Neilson, L. (1998). Knowing her place: Research literacies and feminist occasions. San Francisco, CA: Caddo Gap Press.   
Paltridge, B. (2001). Genre and the language learning classroom. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.   
Pastoll, G. (2002). Motivating people to learn. Cape Town, South Africa: Novalis Press.   
Pennycook, A. (1997). Vulgar pragmatism, critical pragmatism, and EAP. English for Specific Purposes, 16(4), 253–270.   
Pennycook, A. (1999). Introduction: Critical approaches to TESOL. TESOL Quarterly, 33(3), 329–348.   
Shor, I. (1992). Empowering education: Critical teaching for social change. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.   
Starfield, S. (2003). The evolution of a thesis writing course for Arts and Social Science students: What can applied linguistics offer? Hong Kong Journal of Applied Linguistics, 8(2), 137–154.   
Starfield, S. (2004). Why does this feel empowering?: Thesis writing, concordancing, and the corporatizing university. In B. Norton, & K. Toohey, Critical pedagogies and language learning. Cambridge Applied Linguistics series (pp. 138–157). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M., Barks, D., Ostermann, A. C., & Simpson, R. C. (2001). Between critique and accommodation: Reflections on an EAP course for masters of architecture students. English for Specific Purposes, 20(Suppl. 1), 439–458.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2000). English in today’s research world: A writing guide. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan.   
Swales, J. M., & Lindeman, S. (2002). Teaching the literature review to international graduate students. In A. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom: Multiple perspectives (pp. 105–120). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Turner, R. (2004). English as academic purpose. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3(2), 95–109.   
Watson-Todd, R. (2003). EAP or TEAP? Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(2), 147–156.   
Young, R. (1992). Critical theory and classroom talk. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.