# The reflective positioning of Japanese EFL students in the negotiation of their own emergent bilingual identities

Blake Turnbull

To cite this article: Blake Turnbull (2024) The reflective positioning of Japanese EFL students in the negotiation of their own emergent bilingual identities, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:7, 923-935, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2024.2307443

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2024.2307443

# The reflective positioning of Japanese EFL students in the negotiation of their own emergent bilingual identities

Blake Turnbull

Department of Intercultural Studies, Otani University, Kyoto, Japan

# ABSTRACT

Although the emergent bilingual status of foreign language (FL) students is often overlooked, that is not to say that students do not, on some level of consciousness, experience changes in their identity as a result of their emergent bilingualism. The continuous process of identity (re)negotiation, that is, the reorganising of one’s subject position in relation to contextualised linguistic and social factors, has a significant impact on FL students. The present study takes a multi-theoretical approach to investigate the factors involved in the negotiation of Japanese EFL students’ emergent bilingual identities through the use of a questionnaire. The results show that the majority of the participants perceived some level of change in their identity, unrelated to any specific determinants. Furthermore, those with longer EFL learning histories, higher proficiency levels, or those majoring in globally-minded studies were more likely to feel they belong to English-speaking (imagined) communities.

# ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 26 October 2022   
Accepted 28 December 2023

# KEYWORDS

Identity; emergent bilingualism; identity negotiation; multilingual identity; Japanese EFL education; Japanese identity

# 1. Introduction

Norton (2013) proposes identity to be ‘how a person understands his or her relationship to the world, how that relationship is structured across time and space, and how the person understands possibilities for the future’ (45). In this paper, identity is viewed as having both social and individual influences, and as an ongoing process that is continuously negotiated by the individual in relation to personal and social motivations. There is an array of (often competing) theoretical frameworks through which the construct of identity has been explored, including psychosocial, sociocultural, and poststructuralist perspectives. Recognising the interconnected nexus of these frameworks, Fisher et al. (2020) proposed a multi-theoretical approach that considers identity to be both individual and social, and as a process of self-transformation. This framework centres on the construct of a multilingual identity which results from an individual’s ‘dynamic interaction of sources of beliefs, experiences, and affective dispositions towards linguistic identity-related diversity’ (Fisher et al. 2022, 14). In other words, multilingual identity is one’s sense of self as a user of multiple linguistic resources. I adopt this framework for use in the present study as one that includes emergent bilinguals in the beginning stages of moving along the bilingual continuum, such as foreign language (FL) students. I also draw on the poststructuralist element of identity as a dynamic and ever-changing process that is influenced by language use (Duff 2015) and use this as an intersection point with the concept of emergent bilingualism, which understands students’ assimilation of new linguistic features as an ongoing process and highlights what they can already do with their complete set of language resources.

Research on Japanese identity construction exists from several different perspectives including the constructs of nationalism (e.g. Iida 2002), the ‘Other’ (e.g. Suzuki 2015), ‘coolness’ (e.g. Tamaki 2019), and teenage returnees’ identities (Kanno 2002). However, comparatively fewer studies have looked specifically at identity construction amongst the largest unrecognised group of bilinguals in Japan: EFL students (see Fotos 2001). Turnbull (2017) investigated the effects of English as a foreign language (EFL) education on Japanese university students’ perspectives of their own national identity and found that up to one-third of the study’s participants considered EFL education to result in a reduction of their national identity and a weakening of their sense of ‘Japaneseness’. While these results offer important insights for language educators and policymakers, Turnbull’s study focused predominantly on students’ sense of identity loss at the hands of the English hegemony in line with the nationalistic ideologies of the Nihonjinron discourse (see Befu 2009). It did not look specifically at how Japanese EFL students’ emergent bilingualism can affect, both positively and/or negatively, the negotiation of their identity or sense of belonging overall.

The term emergent bilingual has been used in place of English Language Learner in reference to students developing the dominant societal language to remove the connotation of deficiency associated with the notion of a ‘learner’ (García 2009). It is a term used to return a sense of social justice to linguistic minorities studying an established societal language. Turnbull (2018) expanded this concept to include FL students – namely, those studying a minority language as the majority speakers of a societal language – arguing them to possess a unique set of languaging practices that are inherently different to monolingual native speakers. Under this perspective, FL students are seen instead as possessing a single integrated linguistic system in which all of their linguistic features coexist harmoniously, and which they draw on selectively to make meaning of their bilingual worlds (see Otheguy, García, and Reid 2015).

In line with this perspective, the present study was conducted under a framework in which Japanese EFL students are thought of as emergent bilinguals despite their status as the linguistic majority group in society. The overall goal of this paper was to explore the factors that go into the negotiation of Japanese EFL students’ emergent bilingual identities from the perspectives of the self and imagined communities. To do so, the following two research questions were addressed:

(1) Do Japanese EFL students experience any change in their emergent bilingual identities when speaking Japanese and English?   
(2) Do Japanese EFL students identify with different (imagined) communities when speaking Japanese and English?

# 2. Literature review:

# 2.1. Identity construction and negotiation

The construct of multilingual identity is conceptualised as a person’s self-identification as being multilingual based on their understanding of their own linguistic repertoires (Fisher et al. 2020). In FL education, a multilingual identity is influenced by a speaker’s experiences of languages (i.e. their exposure to and use of languages both inside and outside the classroom), their evaluations of languages and their own language learning, and their emotions towards language learning (Fisher et al. 2022). While the present study addresses each of these issues as part of a larger project, this paper focuses only on students’ experiences and evaluations of their own language use and associated identity negotiation.

Varghese et al. (2005) assert that an individual’s identity is context-bound and related to the social, cultural and political contexts in which they are active, as well as the interlocutors with whom they speak. Fisher et al. (2020) argue that FL classrooms are key sites for the construction of multilingual identities which may positively influence students’ investment in the language learning process. Identity construction is thus embedded in the larger discursive and ideological practices with which an individual engages that includes not only demographic-type macro-sociological labels, but also local ethnographic, reflective, and interactional positionings (see Bucholtz and Hall 2010).

‘Positioning’, a term proposed by Davies and Harré (1990), refers to the use of discursive practices to position oneself in line with a particular subject (e.g. race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, affiliation etc.) through which one will view their surrounding world. Positioning can be both reflective, that is, self-representation, or interactive, whereby one individual positions another. Just like identity itself, these subject positions are not stable entities, but are open to the continuous process of change and to the creation of new positions. The term ‘negotiation of identity’ used throughout this paper can therefore be understood as the interplay between reflective and interactive positioning, and as the continued re-positioning of one’s subject in relation to contextualised linguistic and social factors in a speaker’s surrounding world.

# 2.2. Investment and imagined communities

Norton Peirce (1995) first used the term investment in reference to language learning based on Bourdieu’s (1991) sociological metaphor of language as having cultural and symbolic ‘capital’. Norton’s use of the term ‘investment’ shows the socially and historically-constructed relationship between language learners’ identity and their commitment to learning. One’s motivation to learn a language is therefore mediated by their investment in that language. When speaking the TL, learners are not only exchanging information, but also engaging in a complex process of re-organising a sense of self and how they relate to their social world; that is, their identity (Norton 2000; 2013). Investment in the target language (TL) is thus an investment in learners’ own identity, which is oriented towards their own imagined identity that they perceive as enriching their capital.

An extension to the concept of identity and investment is the imagined communities that learners may desire to join when learning a new language. The term ‘imagined community’ was first coined by Anderson (1991). He suggested that nations are imagined political communities, socially-constructed by those who perceive themselves to be part of a group. The term was taken up in identity research by Norton (2001), and has since been further developed in association with colleagues (e.g. Kanno and Norton 2003; Pavlenko and Norton 2007). In language learning, ‘imagined communities’ is used in reference to ‘groups of people, not immediately tangible and accessible, with whom we connect through the power of the imagination’ (Kanno and Norton 2003, 242). With imagined communities, there is a focus on the future, whereby learners imagine who they might become, and to which community they might one day belong. Although learners are not yet a part of these communities, their desire to one day join their imagined community has a significant impact on their investment in the language they are learning. In this sense, learners’ investment in TL-imagined communities is highly related to their own desired identities in the future.

# 2.3. Multilingual identity and foreign language learning

Language learners are ‘constantly organising and reorganising a sense of who they are and how they relate to the social world’ (Norton 2000, 11), and thus learning to operate in another language can have significant effects on an individual’s behaviour (Koven 2007). Language is a central element to identity construction (Bucholtz and Hall 2004), and language learning and identity construction has received considerable attention in the literature as a result (e.g. Block 2007; Duff 2015; Fielding, 2021; Fisher et al. 2020; Forbes et al. 2021; Norton 2013). Ehrlich (1997) emphasises the need to view language students not as abstract learners, but rather as individuals who are responsible for their own social positioning in relation to the target language. In this sense, negotiation of language learners’ identity refers to the continuous tension and (re)negotiation of their position in relation to various beliefs of language, sociopolitical and power arrangements, as well as language learners’ perceptions of themselves and others (Pavlenko and Blackledge 2003).

Some studies have looked at the identity negotiation of learners in FL education contexts. For example, Ritzau (2015) studied self-positioning in the beginning stage of FL learning. She collected written data from 49 Swiss university students of Danish as a FL about their early experiences with foreign language learning. The results showed that, despite their beginner status with some uncertainty, the participants were still able to identify themselves as highly-expectant, hard-working language experts. The author concluded that even beginner learners are able to self-position through a language they may not (yet) consider their own, and that identity construction thus occurs at all levels of language learning.

Gao et al. (2005), utilising a questionnaire survey, investigated the self-identity changes of 2,278 Chinese university students whilst learning EFL from six different perspectives: self-confidence, subtractive bilingualism, additive bilingualism, productive bilingualism, identity split, and zero change. They found that the learning of English exerted the greatest identity influence on learners’ self-confidence. The authors suggest that learners’ gender, college major, and the age at which they started learning English, had the most significant effects on the types of self-identity changes amongst the participants.

Forbes et al. (2021) examined the influence of a pedagogical intervention on the development of FL students’ multilingual identity in UK secondary schools. The authors compared a control group with two experimental groups that received knowledge about multilingualism and identityfocused activities that required them to reflect on themselves as multilingual language users to different degrees. The results of pre- and post-intervention questionnaires showed that students in the full intervention group experienced a greater increase in acknowledging their multilingual identities, as well as a positive increase in their beliefs about languages, the value of language learning, and about themselves as language learners. The authors suggested that an intervention to shift students’ orientation towards a multilingual identity may improve their overall engagement with the language learning process.

In a follow-up study, Rutgers et al. (2021) explored the relationships between UK secondary school students’ multilingualism, multilingual identities, and school attainment. Utilising a combination of school- and student-reported data, the authors found positive correlations between students’ self-ascribed multilingualism (i.e. the degree to which they believed themselves to be multilingual) and their overall academic attainment levels across a range of GCSE school subjects, regardless of whether students spoke English as an additional language or not.

Fisher et al. (2022) examined some of the key variables (namely, experience, evaluations, and emotions) influencing the construction of 1338 FL students’ multilingual identities in UK secondary schools through the use of a survey. The authors found that students’ multilingual identities was mainly influenced by their language experience and language self, more so than by their language beliefs or community beliefs. In other words, their multilingual identity was more strongly correlated with their direct experiential contact with language and social interaction.

Wang, McConachy, and Ushioda (2021) employed longitudinal qualitative interviews with five Chinese students studying Japanese (as their major) in addition to English at a university in Shanghai. The authors took an identity-focused perspective on students’ orientations towards each language and the subsequent effects this had on their overall motivation to learn. The findings highlighted a number of tensions in students’ multilingual identities, including the role of each language as linguistic capital at the global and regional levels, as a resource for leveraging one’s sense of identity as a Chinese national, and as a means to access different cultures and perspectives. Overall, the authors stressed the need to consider the influence of ideological discourses on students’ multilingual identity positions and their approaches to language learning motivation.

Studies such as these underscore the complex relationship between language learning and multilingual identity construction. They highlight the ongoing process FL students engage with to reposition themselves in relation to their developing linguistic repertoires, thus (re)shaping their multilingual identities and sense of self in relation to their social worlds. Furthermore, they emphasise the importance of recognising students as active agents in shaping their own identities and foreground the diverse array of factors and tensions that influence how individuals perceive and navigate this process. However, a review of the current literature found no studies have investigated the negotiation of Japanese EFL students’ multilingual identities as evidence of their emergent bilingual status.

# 3. Methodology

This paper places emphasis on students within a FL context, many of whom may not recognise their own bilingualism outright despite what the literature says of them (e.g. Fotos 2001; Turnbull 2018). Although Turnbull (2020) showed that, when asked directly whether they believe themselves to be bilingual, very few Japanese EFL students identified as such; but that is not to say that they do not, on some unconscious level, recognise there to be changes in their identity as a result of their own emergent bilingualism. However, a review of the current literature found no studies in which the identity negotiation of Japanese EFL students is reviewed from the perspective of emergent bilingualism. To fill this gap, the present paper analyses both qualitative and quantitative questionnaire data to explore the reflective positioning of Japanese EFL students in the negotiation of their own emergent bilingual identity.

# 3.1. Participants

The participants in the present study were 483 $( M = 2 1 6$ , $\mathsf { F } = 2 6 7$ ) native Japanese EFL students in Japan. All of the participants were students in their first or second year at one of two private Japanese universities, undertaking compulsory English language courses. The participants were all aged between 18 and 20 years old. The majority $( 5 9 . 6 \% )$ of the participants had been studying EFL for between 5–10 years; $1 8 . 6 \%$ had been studying for between 1–5 years, and $1 5 . 7 \%$ for between 10–15 years. The remaining $5 . 0 8 \%$ had been studying EFL for a total of between 15–20 years. Based on their own self-reports, $2 9 . 7 \%$ of the participants were of a beginner EFL proficiency level, $4 2 . 3 \%$ were of an intermediate level, and $2 8 \%$ were an advanced EFL proficiency.

These participants were selected because of their shared characteristics (such as educational status, EFL learning context, age, nationality, and native language) as well as their distinct individual variables that could be investigated as potential influences on the target phenomenon (including sex, EFL proficiency level, length of EFL study, and study majors). All participants agreed to partake in the project voluntarily. It was clearly explained to all, both in writing and orally, that completing the questionnaire was entirely optional, and that their choice to participate or not would have no effect on their course grades. To ensure that all participants felt this to be true, the researcher left the room while they completed the survey, allowing for those who did not intend to take part to do so freely and to retain their anonymity. Furthermore, as it has been shown that the more a questionnaire assures anonymity, the fewer socially desirable responses there will be (see Ong and Weiss 2000), maximum effort was taken to guarantee respondent anonymity. For example, all participants were informed that the survey was anonymous; no personal information such as names or contact details was collected so that the participants felt assured their responses could not be linked back to them; and, the participants were assured that all responses would be destroyed at the conclusion of the study.

# 3.2. Questionnaire

This paper reports on one-half of a larger project. A 50-item questionnaire was designed by the researcher in both English and Japanese based on Weedon’s (1987) view of language as a means of identity construction. It also views language students’ multilingual identities as fluid, multivoiced, and in a constant process of negotiation, renegotiation, and transformation. The concepts of investment and imagined communities were also adopted as theoretical frameworks in the design of this survey (Norton 2013).

The questionnaire was split into four sections, the first two of which are reported on in this study. Section 1 examined the participants’ beliefs about their own identity and any changes that occur in this when speaking Japanese and English. Section 2, grounded in the concepts of investment and imagined communities, sought the participants’ beliefs about their identity as members of Japaneseand English-speaking communities. Sections 3 and 4, which are not reported on in this study, investigated the participants’ beliefs about their identity and emotions in connection to their emergent bilingualism.

Although I recognise named languages to be products of the nation-state that exist purely as a harmonious collection of linguistic features inside a speaker’s expanded repertoire (see Otheguy, García, and Reid 2015), I also acknowledge that this is not how FL students will see them. Given that named languages have very real material effects on the lives of their speakers, the questionnaire employed in the present study employed the names of languages in order to ensure the study’s participants could clearly understand what was being asked of them to accurately assess the target phenomenon.

The questionnaire was mainly composed of Likert-style questions, but also included open perspective questions at the end of each section. A 6-point Likert scale was chosen over a 5-point one because it has been shown that East Asian students have a tendency to be conservative in their responses despite anonymity (Chen, Lee, and Stevenson 1995), and may therefore simply choose the neutral $' 3 ^ { \prime }$ (somewhat agree) as their default answer (Dörnyei 2010). To avoid this impartial hedge response, a 6-point scale was adopted to include the following options: (1) strongly disagree, (2) disagree, (3) slightly disagree, (4) slightly agree, (5) agree, and (6) strongly agree. Openended questions were also included to allow for a ‘greater freedom of expression’ on the participants’ behalf (Dörnyei 2007, 36). A reliability analysis for the questionnaire was conducted using the SPSS 27 software, and Cronbach’s Alpha Coefficient was identified as .872 and thus determined to be satisfactory overall.

# 3.3. Procedure and analysis

The questionnaire was developed on Google Forms where it could be easily accessed by the participants. An online platform was chosen for use over a paper-based survey due to its overall speed, reach, convenience, and efficiency (see Birnbaum 2004). An initial pilot of the questionnaire was tested with a small group of 10 first-year Japanese university students to give insights into the survey’s potential in its preliminary form. Afterwards, the researcher asked the pilot participants follow-up questions, such as ‘Were the instructions clear?’, ‘Did you find any questions difficult to understand or to answer?’, etc. Based on the students’ feedback, minor edits were made to the wording of several items to produce a more comprehensible, well-structured questionnaire overall.

The subsequent data analysis was two-fold. Firstly, a quantitative analysis of the Likert questions was completed, in which responses were assigned a numerical value from 1–6 in accordance with a set of predetermined variables. These values were entered into the SPSS 27 software, where independent t-tests and one-way ANOVAs were performed to determine any statistical differences between independent variables such as sex, study major, etc. Responses to the qualitative openended questions were grouped into theme-based categories (identity change and imagined communities) and the content analysed with subjective interpretation by the researcher. This method was selected because, as Heigham and Croker (2009) suggest, the researcher is the ‘primary research instrument’ (p. 11) in qualitative analysis. Furthermore, particularly with qualitative questions in which the data must ‘go through the researcher’s mind’ (Bodgan and Biklen 2007, 37), subjective interpretation plays a key role in the analysis process.

All quantitative answers that were written in Japanese were translated into English by the researcher and checked by a Japanese-native bilingual peer for accuracy. The researcher is a male, native English speaker from New Zealand with fluent Japanese, having studied Japanese for over a decade and using it regularly for daily life and at home.

# 4. Results

# 4.1. Changes in identity

The participants were first asked whether or not they believed their overall identity changed when speaking English. On a six-point scale, whereby one to three represents different extents of ‘disagreement’, and four to six represents different levels of ‘agreement’, $4 4 . 9 2 \%$ of the participants disagreed and $5 5 . 0 8 \%$ agreed with the idea $( \mathsf { m e a n } = 3 . 5 2$ , $\mathsf { S D } = 1 . 3 2 )$ . Based on the results of an independent t-test, it was concluded that the participants’ sex (male and female means respectively $= 3 . 5 3 $ , $\mathsf { S D } = 1 . 3 5$ vs 3.52, $\mathsf { S D } = 1 . 3 1$ ) was not a statistically significant factor affecting their opinions regarding identity change and speaking English, $\begin{array} { r l } { ( t ( 4 8 1 ) = } & { { } . 0 5 4 , } \end{array}$ $p =$ .957). Furthermore, a one-way ANOVA showed that their EFL learning history also had no effect $( \mathsf { F } ( 3 , 4 7 9 ) = 2 . 0 1$ , $p { = } . 1 1 1 \rangle$ ), nor did their EFL proficiency level $( \mathsf { F } ( 2 , 4 8 0 ) = . 7 9 4$ , $p = . 4 5 3$ ) or study major $( \mathsf { F } ( 8 , 4 7 4 ) = 1 . 5 9$ , $p = . 1 2 6 \AA$ ).

Next, the participants were asked whether they believed their personality changes when speaking English. Overall, the participants were less in agreement about changes in their personality compared to their overall identity. The majority of the participants $( 6 3 . 1 5 \% )$ disagreed with the idea that their personality changes when speaking English, with the remaining 36.85 agreeing to some extent (mean $= 2 . 9 6$ , $\mathsf { S D } = 1 . 4 9 )$ . Once again, the participants’ sex (male and female means respectively $= 2 . 8 9$ , $\mathsf { S D } = 1 . 4 7$ vs 3.00, $\mathsf { S D } = 1 . 5 0 )$ was not a statistically significant factor affecting their opinions $( t ( 4 8 1 ) = \ - . 8 4 3$ , $p = \ . 4 0 0 \rangle$ ), nor was their EFL learning history $( \mathsf { F } ( 3 , 4 7 9 ) =$ 1.24, $p = . 2 9 7 )$ , EFL proficiency level $( \mathsf { F } ( 2 , 4 8 0 ) = . 4 9 0$ , $p = . 6 1 3 )$ , or study major $( \mathsf { F } ( 8 , 4 7 4 ) = 2 . 1 0 ,$ $p$ $= . 0 3 4 )$ ).

Slightly more of the participants $( 5 2 . 8 0 \% )$ disagreed with the idea that they feel like a different person when speaking English, compared to those who agreed $( 4 7 . 2 0 \% )$ , with a mean agreement level of 3.36 out of 6 $S _ { Ḋ } \mathsf { D } = 1 . 4 4 ) _ { Ḋ }$ ). As before, the participants’ sex (male and female means respectively $= 3 . 3 9$ , $\mathsf { S D } = \ 1 . 4 7$ vs 3.34, ${ \mathsf { S D } } = ~ 1 . 4 2 )$ was not shown to be a statistically significant factor $\begin{array} { r l } { ( t ( 4 8 1 ) = } \end{array}$ .376, $p = . 7 0 7 $ ), nor was their EFL learning history $( \mathsf { F } ( 3 , 4 7 9 ) = 1 . 0 7$ , $p = . 3 6 2 )$ , EFL proficiency level (F $\left( 2 , 4 8 0 \right) = . 6 0 4$ , $p = . 5 4 7 )$ ), or study major $( \mathsf { F } ( 8 , 4 7 4 ) = 1 . 2 1$ , $p = . 2 8 9 \AA$ ).

Table 1 below shows the participants’ beliefs about how different aspects of their overall identity change or remain unchanged when speaking English:

Overall, relatively low levels of agreement were reported across the board for changes in the participants’ way of thinking, values, and confidence when speaking in English. However, it is interesting to note that the majority claimed to experience a higher sense of coolness and fashionability when speaking English (with $5 4 . 4 5 \%$ agreeing to some extent, and $4 5 . 5 5 \%$ disagreeing). Those participants who reported not feeling a change in their identity when speaking English focused their justification on their use of language being the object of change, unrelated to their overall identity, as seen in comments such as:

All that’s changing is the language, so there is no change in my identity.

I do not think I change my identity when I speak other languages because if languages change, who speak [sic] is ’me’, it does not change. I speak my thoughts in different languages.

Table 1. Beliefs about identity change when speaking English.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Descriptor</td><td>Min (1) (n)</td><td>Max (6) (n)</td><td>Mean (out of 6)</td><td>Standard Deviation</td></tr><tr><td>I feel less Japanese when speaking English</td><td>(106)</td><td>(22)</td><td>2.84</td><td>1.47</td></tr><tr><td>My way of thinking changes when speaking English.</td><td>(43)</td><td>(24)</td><td>2.88</td><td>1.42</td></tr><tr><td>I have different values when speaking English.</td><td>(95)</td><td>(19)</td><td>2.91</td><td>1.44</td></tr><tr><td>I feel more confident when speaking English.</td><td>(98)</td><td>(14)</td><td>2.73</td><td>1.44</td></tr><tr><td>I feel cooler and more fashionable when speaking English.</td><td>(50)</td><td>(71)</td><td>3.61</td><td>1.53</td></tr></table></body></html>

On the other hand, those who noted feeling some change in their identity as a result of their speaking English provided comments including:

I don’t think the fundamental issues, such as my values, personality and character, change. However, I find it difficult when I try to express my feelings directly in English, so I feel that my values and the content of my thoughts are a little different from the original when I think about expressing them in English.

I feel like my personality becomes more positive when speaking English, but my identity does not seem to change that much.

Those participants who recognised an out-right change in their identity when speaking English focused largely on the changes experienced in their way of thinking:

When speaking English, for some reason I come to think about things more deeply and more positively than when speaking my mother tongue.

I am bound by common sense when I speak Japanese, but I can think freely when I speak English.

However, many of the participants attributed their lack of vocabulary in the TL to be the reason behind the perceived change in their own identity, as seen through quotes such as:

I can only convey about half of what I want to say, so I think my identity changes because of that.

I tend to choose words that I can easily say in English, not my actual thoughts.

# 4.2. Identity and imagined communities

When asked if they felt they belonged to English-speaking communities, just over one-third of the participants $( 3 4 . 9 9 \% )$ said they agreed to some extent, with $6 5 . 0 1 \%$ disagreeing $( \mathsf { m e a n } = 2 . 8 9$ out of 6, $, \mathsf { S D } = 1 . 7 2 )$ ). It was concluded that the participants’ sex (male and female means respectively $= 2 . 7 6 ,$ , $\mathsf { S D } = 1 . 5 8$ vs 2.99, $\mathsf { S D } = 1 . 8 1 $ ) was not a statistically significant factor in this opinion $( t ( 4 8 1 ) = - 1 . 4 3 7 ,$ , $p = . 1 5 1 \mathrm { ! }$ ), nor was their EFL learning history $( \mathsf { F } ( 3 , 4 7 9 ) = 3 . 2 9$ , $p = . 0 2 0 \}$ or EFL proficiency level (F $( 2 , 4 8 0 ) = 4 . 8 0 4$ , $p = . 0 0 9 $ ). However, a statistically significant difference was found in regard to the participants’ study major $( \mathsf { F } ( 8 , 4 7 4 ) = 1 2 . 7 2 3 , p < . 0 0 1 )$ . A Tukey post hoc test revealed there to be significant variation between students majoring in International Relations vs majors of Economics, Law, Politics, and Sociology $( p < . 0 0 1$ on all accounts), as well as those studying Global Studies vs majors of Economics, Law, Politics, and Sociology $( p < . 0 0 1$ on all accounts). In other words, those students majoring in globally- and internationally-centred studies were significantly more likely to agree with the notion that they belonged to English-speaking communities than those students who majored in other subjects.

Next, the participants were asked whether they felt more connected to English-speaking communities when speaking in English. Overall, the participants rated their agreement a mean average of 3.76 out of 6 $( \mathsf { S D } = 1 . 6 4 )$ , with the majority $( 5 9 . 0 1 \% )$ agreeing, and $4 4 . 9 9 \%$ disagreeing. It was again found that the participants’ sex (male and female means respectively $= 3 . 7 6$ , $\mathsf { S } \mathsf { D } = 1 . 5 4$ vs 3.77, $\mathsf { S D } =$ 1.71) was not a significant factor affecting their opinions $( t ( 4 8 1 ) = - . 0 4 4$ , $p = . 9 6 5 )$ ); however, their EFL learning history was shown to have a significant impact on their self-perceived connection to English-speaking communities $( \mathsf { F } ( 3 , 4 7 9 ) = 4 . 5 3$ , $p = . 0 0 4 )$ . A Tukey post hoc test revealed there to be significant variation between those participants who had been studying EFL for 15–20 years vs those who has been studying for only 10–15 years $( p = . 0 0 3 )$ . In other words, studying EFL beyond 15 years had a significant impact on the participants’ perceptions of their own connection to English-speaking communities when speaking EFL themselves.

This finding was supported by a one-way ANOVA investigating the effects of participants’ EFL proficiency level on their self-perceived connection to English-speaking communities, which also revealed a statistically significant effect $( \mathsf { F } ( 2 , 4 8 0 ) = 7 . 2 1$ , $p = . 0 0 1 $ ). A Tukey post hoc test showed there to be significant variation between beginner-level students vs intermediate $( p = . 0 0 3 )$ and advanced $( p = . 0 0 2 )$ students, but not between participants of an intermediate and advanced level $\left( { p = 8 8 6 } \right)$ . In other words, those students of an intermediate or advanced proficiency level reported a significantly higher sense of connection to English-speaking communities when speaking English than those of a beginner proficiency level. There was also a significant effect of participants’ study major on their perceived connection to English-speaking communities $( \mathsf { F } ( 8 , 4 7 4 ) = 3 . 8 5$ , $p < . 0 0 1 .$ ), with significant variation found between participants majoring in Global Studies, and those majoring in Sociology $( p < . 0 0 1 )$ , suggesting again that those students majoring in globally-minded courses are significantly more likely to sense a stronger connection to English-speaking communities when speaking EFL themselves.

Further evidence for the participants’ connection to imagined communities can be seen in their overall agreement that they could live in an English-speaking community in the future $( \mathsf { m e a n } = 3 . 7 3$ (out of 6), $\mathsf { S D } = 1 . 5 4 )$ , their belief that the more they speak English the better they will fit into Englishspeaking communities $( \mathsf { m e a n } = 4 . 7 7 , \mathsf { S D } = 1 . 2 7 )$ , and that they feel like a more global citizen when speaking English (mean $= 3 . 5 9$ , $\mathsf { S D } = \mathsf { 1 } . 5 7 ,$ ).

Those participants who believed their speaking of English did not help them to feel connected to English-speaking communities provided comments such as:

I think that the identity connected with the community to which a person belongs does not change even if the language changes, because that country’s traditions etc. belong to that person, whether they speak Japanese or English.

There’s no change in my identity because I’m still the same inside no matter where I am.

However, the majority of the participants believed their ability to use English helped them to develop a sense of belonging in English-speaking communities, as seen in comments such as:

I think the number of communities you can belong to increases every time you learn a language, not just English, so I think your identity changes accordingly.

When I speak Japanese, I think of myself as one of the many Japanese people, but when I speak English, I think of myself as one of the world’s citizens.

# 5. Discussion

Whereas one’s multilingual identity in the classroom is a student’s sense of their social situation in relation to their holistic expanding linguistic repertoires, the concept of personality has been defined as ‘the more or less stable and enduring organisation of a person’s character, temperament, intellect and physique which determines his unique adjustment to the environment’ (Child 1986, 239). The participants in the present study noted differences in the way their use of language affected each concept despite their interconnectedness. The majority of the participants in the present study believed that their overall identity changed when speaking English (highlighting an awareness of their own multilingual identity). Although just over half $( 5 5 . 0 8 \% ) ,$ it is a significant figure in that it suggests one in every two students in a FL classroom may be working to renegotiate their emergent bilingual identities as they learn. Interestingly, the majority of the participants in the present study felt that their personality did not change when speaking English, nor did they feel like a different person. This suggests that the participants understand personality and a sense of being as separate constructs from that of identity, just as they are conceptualised in the literature.

In contrast to the results found by Gao et al. (2005), neither the participants’ sex, EFL learning history, EFL proficiency level, nor study major had any significant effect on their identity construction, suggesting that learners renegotiate their identity position in relation to localised personal factors. This is similar to Ritzau (2015), who found that identity construction occurs at all levels of language learning. The present study’s findings are also in line with Ehrlich’s (1997) suggestion that language students should be seen not as abstract learners, but rather as individuals responsible for their own social (re)positioning in relation to the TL and individual determinants.

Although the majority of participants believed there to be little effect of English on their way of thinking, values, and confidence, more than half of the participants believed their use of English resulted in a higher sense of coolness, suggesting an internal connection between fashionability and English-based Western language (and potentially thought, materials, culture, and customs by extension). Studies have shown that Japanese EFL students view the English language and the associated Western culture as ‘cool’ or ‘fashionable’ (e.g. Matsuda 2000; Murray 2008; Ryan 2009); but the findings of the present study take this one step further by showing that the participants view themselves as becoming cooler when speaking English, thus signalling the influence of the ‘cooler’ language on their overall identities. However, as Ryan (2009) alludes to, there is a limitation in having learners respond to a survey asking whether or not something is ‘cool’ in the difficulty of assessing whether the sentiment truly originates in the students’ minds, or whether they are simply following the wide-spread discourse that posits English as being cool and fashionable. This is noted in the present study as being a potential limitation to the findings due to the nature of questionnaire research, but is highlighted as a path for potential future research to build on the findings of the present study.

Finally, when considering how their speaking of English affected their identity in relation to (imagined) communities, the majority $( 6 5 . 0 1 \% )$ of the participants in the present study expressed a belief that they did not belong to English-speaking communities. This suggests that they may see language as a significant factor determining societal membership; however, the fact that those participants majoring in international relations and global studies were significantly more likely to believe they did belong to English-speaking communities perhaps suggests a narrow understanding of world society in those participants who disagreed with the notion (due to lack of study).

On the contrary, those participants who had been learning English for fifteen years or more, were of an intermediate or advanced proficiency level, and majored in globally-minded courses were statistically more likely to perceive a better connection to English-speaking communities when speaking English themselves. In other words, these students are more likely to reposition their stance to envision themselves living in a community in which English is spoken as the societal language despite not living there yet, thus signalling their renegotiation of identity to belong to an imagined community (see Norton Peirce 1995). The fact that the majority of the participants also believed that the more they speak English the better they will fit into English-speaking communities and feel more like global citizens is further evidence of the participants’ investment in learning the TL as a form of identity renegotiation.

Whereas no specific factors were shown to have a significant influence on the participants’ identity construction in the present study, it is interesting to note that the same factors did have an effect on students’ imagined communities. Thus, despite the connection between imagined communities and students’ imagined identities, in which one invites the other (see Norton 2001), the present study has shown that different factors may influence the construction of students’ identities and their perceived belonging to imagined communities.

Overall, the findings of the present study show that the Japanese EFL student participants considered the English language to be a factor that impacts their overall multilingual identity and affects their belonging to (imagined) communities. Given that these students did not grow up using English until around junior high school age on average, this suggests that the participants have repositioned themselves in relation to various social arrangements, beliefs about language, and their perceptions of themselves as speakers and users of those languages (see Pavlenko and Blackledge 2003) to accept English as a factor that can influence their everyday lives. In other words, they have renegotiated their multilingual identities.

Although this paper has not focused on the results from the emergent bilingual section of the survey that was conducted, the findings presented here are evidence to support the Japanese EFL participants’ status as emergent bilinguals, as it shows that they are drawing on their complete set of linguistic features (regardless of the named language to which they correspond) to renegotiate their identity, re-envision their position within the greater society, and to express themselves as whole people. An analysis of the data from the second half of the questionnaire may well work to further support this idea.

# 6. Conclusion

Although the present study investigated the identity (re-)negotiation of only a specific group of Japanese EFL students, the findings are significant in that they add to the literature on FL students’ multilingual identity from an emergent bilingual perspective, which has received relatively little attention in the field thus far. By adopting a stance in which Japanese EFL students are understood as emergent bilinguals, this paper has examined how these emergent bilinguals negotiate their multilingual identities and reposition themselves in relation to the English language from the perspectives of the self and imagined communities. The key findings suggest that (1) all Japanese EFL students, regardless of individual differences, are able to reposition their identity in relation to their speaking of English; and (2) a longer duration of study, higher proficiency level, and globally-centred majors are more likely to influence students’ sense of belonging to imagined communities in which the TL is spoken.

These findings have important implications for the FL classroom. Not only do they show the way in which FL students utilise and capitalise on their complete set of linguistic resources to express their true identities, but they also highlight the extent to which these linguistic resources have an impact on the lives of their speakers. FL students are not simply learners of the language; they are using their languages in ways that may not show on the surface, but that have very real effects on the way they live their lives and exist within their communities, well beyond the realms of the language classroom. It is hoped that the findings exhibited in the present study contribute to the reframing of FL learners as emergent bilinguals by showing how students’ integrated linguistic repertoires help them to reposition their multilingual identities and sense of belonging in the process of developing their emergent bilingual languaging skills.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

# Notes on contributor

Blake Turnbull is a lecturer in the Department of Intercultural Studies at Otani University, Japan. His research focuses on translanguaging and emergent bilingualism in foreign language education, particularly within a Japanese EFL context.

# ORCID

Blake Turnbull $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7930-2180

# References

Anderson, B. 1991. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London, UK: Verso.   
Befu, H. 2009. “Concepts of Japan, Japanese Culture and the Japanese.” In The Cambridge Companion to Modern Japanese Culture, edited by Y. Sugimoto, 21–37. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Birnbaum, M. H. 2004. “Human Research and Data Collection Via the Internet.” Annual Review of Psychology 55: 803–832. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.55.090902.141601.   
Block, D. 2007. Second Language Identities. London, UK: Continuum.   
Bodgan, R., and S. K. Biklen. 2007. Qualitative Research for Education. 5th ed. Boston, MA: Pearson A & B.   
Bourdieu, P. 1991. Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge, UK: Polity.   
Bucholtz, M., and K. Hall. 2004. “Language and Identity.” In A Companion to Linguistic Anthropology, edited by A. Duranti, 369–394. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.   
Bucholtz, M., and K. Hall. 2010. “Locating Identity in Language.” In Language and Identities, edited by C. Llamas, and D. Watt, 18–28. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.   
Chen, C., S. Y. Lee, and H. W. Stevenson. 1995. “Response Style and Cross-Cultural Comparisons of Rating Scales among East Asian and North American Students.” Psychological Science 6 (3): 170–175. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280. 1995.tb00327.x.   
Child, D. 1986. Psychology and the Teacher. London, UK: Cassell.   
Davies, B., and R. Harre. ́ 1990. “Positioning: The Discursive Production of Selves.” Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior 20 (1): 43–63. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5914.1990.tb00174.x.   
Dörnyei, Z. 2007. Research Methods in Applied Linguistics. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.   
Dörnyei, Z. 2010. Questionnaires in Second Language Research: Construction, Administration, and Processing. 2nd Ed. London, UK: Routledge.   
Duff, P. A. 2015. “Transnationalism, Multilingualism, and Identity.” Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 35: 57–80. https:// doi.org/10.1017/S026719051400018X.   
Ehrlich, S. 1997. “Gender as Social Practice: Implications for Second Language Acquisition.” Studies in Second Language Acquisition 19 (4): 421–446. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263197004014.   
Fielding, R. 2021. “A Multilingual Identity Approach to Intercultural Stance in Language Learning.” The Language Learning Journal 49 (4): 466–482. https://doi.org/10.1080/09571736.2021.1912154.   
Fisher, L., M. Evans, K. Forbes, A. Gayton, and Y. Liu. 2020. “Participative Multilingual Identity Construction in the Languages Classroom: A Multi-Theoretical Conceptualisation.” International Journal of Multilingualism 17 (4): 448– 466. https://doi.org/10.1080/14790718.2018.1524896.   
Fisher, L., M. Evans, K. Forbes, A. Gayton, Y. Liu, and D. Rutgers. 2022. “Language Experiences, Evaluations and Emotions (3Es): Analysis of Structural Models of Multilingual Identity for Language Learners in Schools in England.” International Journal of Multilingualism, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/14790718.2022.2060235.   
Forbes, K., M. Evans, L. Fisher, A. Gayton, Y. Liu, and D. Rutgers. 2021. “Developing a Multilingual Identity in the Languages Classroom: The Influence of an Identity-Based Pedagogical Intervention.” The Language Learning Journal 49 (4): 433–451. https://doi.org/10.1080/09571736.2021.1906733.   
Fotos, S. 2001. “Codeswitching by Japan’s Unrecognised Bilinguals: Japanese University Students’ use of Their Native Language as a Learning Strategy.” In Studies in Japanese Bilingualism, edited by M. G. Noguchi, and S. Fotos, 329– 352. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Gao, Y., Y. Cheng, Y. Zhao, and Y. Zhou. 2005. “Self-identity Changes and English Learning among Chinese Undergraduates.” World Englishes 24 (1): 39–51. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0883-2919.2005.00386.x.   
García, O. 2009. Bilingual Education in the 21st Century: A Global Perspective. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.   
Heigham, J., and R. Croker. 2009. Qualitative Research in Applied Linguistics: A Practical Introduction. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillian.   
Iida, Y. 2002. Rethinking Identity in Modern Japan: Nationalism as Aesthetics (Vol. 3). London, UK: Routledge.   
Kanno, Y. 2002. “The Development of Bicultural Identity: Japanese Returnees’ Experiences.” The Language Teacher 26 (6): 12–16.   
Kanno, Y., and B. Norton. 2003. “Imagined Communities and Educational Possibilities: Introduction.” Journal of Language, Identity, and Education 2 (4): 241–250. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327701JLIE0204_1.   
Koven, M. 2007. Selves in two Languages: Bilinguals’ Verbal Enactments of Identity in French and Portuguese. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Matsuda, A. 2000. Japanese attitudes toward English: A case study of high school students. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana.   
Murray, G. 2008. “Pop Culture and Language Learning: Learners’ Stories Informing EFL.” Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching 2 (1): 2–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/17501220802158792.   
Norton, B. 2000. Identity and Language Learning: Gender, Ethnicity and Educational Change. Harlow, UK: Longman/ Pearson Education.   
Norton, B. 2001. “Non-participation, Imagined Communities, and the Language Classroom.” In Learner Contributions to Language Learning: New Directions in Research, edited by M. Breen, 159–171. Harlow, UK: Pearson Education.   
Norton, B. 2013. Identity and Language Learning: Extending the Conversation. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Norton Peirce, B. 1995. “Social Identity, Investment, and Language Learning.” TESOL Quarterly 29 (1): 9–31. https://doi. org/10.2307/3587803.   
Ong, A. D., and D. J. Weiss. 2000. “The Impact of Anonymity on Responses to Sensitive Questions.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 30 (8): 1691–1708.   
Otheguy, R., O. García, and W. Reid. 2015. “Clarifying Translanguaging and Deconstructing Named Languages: A Perspective from Linguistics.” Applied Linguistics Review 6 (3): 281–307. https://doi.org/10.1515/applirev-2015-0014.   
Pavlenko, A., and A. Blackledge. 2003. Negotiation of Identities in Multicultural Contexts. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Pavlenko, A., and B. Norton. 2007. “Imagined Communities, Identity, and English Language Learning.” In International Handbook of English Language Teaching, edited by J. Cummins, and C. Davison, 669–680. Boston, MA: Springer.   
Ritzau, U. 2015. “Self-positioning Through Beginners’ Foreign Language.” International Journal of Applied Linguistics 25 (1): 105–126. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijal.12053.   
Rutgers, D., M. Evans, L. Fisher, K. Forbes, A. Gayton, and Y. Liu. 2021. “Multilingualism, Multilingual Identity and Academic Attainment: Evidence from Secondary Schools in England.” Journal of Language, Identity & Education, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/15348458.2021.1986397.   
Ryan, S. 2009. “Ambivalence and Commitment, Liberation and Challenge: Investigating the Attitudes of Young Japanese People Towards the Learning of English.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 30 (5): 405–420. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434630902928447.   
Suzuki, S. 2015. “The Rise of the Chinese ‘Other’ in Japan’s Construction of Identity: Is China a Focal Point of Japanese Nationalism?” The Pacific Review 28 (1): 95–116. https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2014.970049.   
Tamaki, T. 2019. “Repackaging National Identity: Cool Japan and the Resilience of Japanese Identity Narratives.” Asian Journal of Political Science 27 (1): 108–126. https://doi.org/10.1080/02185377.2019.1594323.   
Turnbull, B. 2017. “Learner Perspectives on National Identity and EFL Education in Japan: Report of a Questionnaire Study.” The Journal of Asia TEFL 14 (2): 211–227. https://doi.org/10.18823/asiatefl.2017.14.2.1.211.   
Turnbull, B. 2018. “Reframing Foreign Language Learning as Bilingual Education: Epistemological Changes Towards the Emergent Bilingual.” International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 21 (8): 1041–1048. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/13670050.2016.1238866.   
Turnbull, B. 2020. “Beyond Bilingualism in Japan: Examining the Translingual Trends of a ‘Monolingual’ Nation.” International Journal of Bilingualism 24 (4): 634–650. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006919873428.   
Varghese, M., B. Morgan, B. Johnston, and K. A. Johnson. 2005. “Theorizing Language Teacher Identity: Three Perspectives and Beyond.” Journal of Language, Identity, and Education 4 (1): 21–44. https://doi.org/10.1207/ s15327701jlie0401_2.   
Wang, Z., T. McConachy, and E. Ushioda. 2021. “Negotiating Identity Tensions in Multilingual Learning in China: A Situated Perspective on Language Learning Motivation and Multilingual Identity.” The Language Learning Journal 49 (4): 420–432. https://doi.org/10.1080/09571736.2021.1915366.   
Weedon, C. 1987. Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Theory. London: UK Blackwell.