# BALEAP News

2021 for BALEAP, in common with many other organisations, was a year of continuing digital rather than face-to-face activity. Meetings large and small, the Glasgow biennial conference, SIG activity and most of the BALEAP Accreditation Scheme assessment took place online. While this has been a loss in certain respects, it has been a gain in making the conference, Professional Issues Meetings (PIMs), and other professional activities more accessible to many members in the UK and overseas. We were fortunate, however, to be able to carry out one or two short face-to-face visits to institutions as part of the accreditation process giving some feeling that a return to in person activity might be on the horizon.

In the hope that we will be able to resume something of the old ‘normal’ in the coming year, the AGM for 2022 is currently planned to be a full day event hosted by a BALEAP member institution with provision for both face-to-face and live streamed sessions. It will take place on Saturday 2 April. As 2022 is the 50th anniversary of the establishing of SELMOUS (Special English Language Materials for Overseas University Students) later to become BALEAP, this event will be a celebration of the different aspects of the organisation that have developed over five decades. It is also an opportunity for us to showcase both our institutional and individual accreditation schemes, research and scholarship activity, and the work carried out by the SIGs.

The timing of the event coincides with the final phases of major reviews of the BAS and TEAP schemes. Teams of colleagues drawn from the BAS assessors and TEAP fellows have been working behind the scenes on a voluntary basis to consult with colleagues and update the schemes. Their work reviewing and testing the frameworks and criteria of each scheme and revising the Handbooks ensures that these will reflect the changing environment in which we work and recognises that teaching and learning contexts for ‘English for Academic Purposes’ are varied and complex and may differ across the sector both in the UK and overseas. The institutional scheme has been under review for three years and the new criteria having already been piloted at certain institutions are ready to be used more widely. The quality of the BALEAP Accreditation Scheme is recognised within HE (particularly in the UK) but also beyond, and the Executive Committee continues to build relationships with other organisations that provide accreditation such as the British Council and Equals leading to consultation and collaboration within and outside the UK.

Looking back over more recent weeks, since the last BALEAP News there have been two highly successful events, the ResTES on ‘Publishing in EAP’ held on 16 November and providing a forum to discuss matters related to writing for publication (https://www. baleap.org/event/restes-publishing-in-eap) and the BALEAP PIM on 19 November hosted by the University of York on ‘Ownership in EAP - Integrity, argumentation and authorial voice’. The talks from the PIM are now available on the BALEAP YouTube channel, (https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCntv6h3p8PBEEETtPUnqHnA).

The close of 2021 and the beginning of 2022 marks the delayed but now imminent publication of our first digital issue of the BALEAP Conference Proceedings – in fact by the time you read this, the Proceedings may already be available. The publication process, like much else over 2020–21, was hit by the various impacts of the Covid pandemic and the move away from paper to digital pub lication has had its own challenges. However, this is an exciting development for BALEAP and for anyone who publishes a conference paper in the Proceedings since the papers should now be locatable through an online search and thus more widely accessible. As always we have been very ably supported by our publishers Garnet Education and going forwards, the move to digital publication should mean earlier publication of each of the Conference Proceedings volumes.

BALEAP's other notable publication event for 2022 is, of course, the JEAP Special Issue ‘Practitioner voices, scholarship and practiceled research in the evolution of EAP: celebrating the 50th anniversary of the formation of SELMOUS/BALEAP and the 20th anniversary of JEAP.’ Papers for this special issue will be appearing during the course of the year. One paper by Maggie Charles on ‘EAP research in BALEAP 1975–2019: Past issues and future directions’ is already available and can be accessed at https://www.sciencedirect.com/ journal/journal-of-english-for-academic-purposes/special-issue/10S1K1NN1MN.

Finally, looking at other events over 2022 we will see some changes in the Executive Committee as I will be handing over the role of BALEAP Chair at the AGM to Conrad Heyns (currently Chair of BAS) and we will also see a new Treasurer taking office. Our first European PIM postponed from 2021 is due to take place in Luxembourg in June and there will be more events related to professional issues and to research and scholarship as well as the many and varied activities of the SIGs. We hope to be able to celebrate not only the fact that BALEAP has reached its 50th anniversary but further evidence that we are meeting our aims and supporting our membership.

Sarah Brewer BALEAP Chair 2019-2022 University of Reading, UK E-mail address: chair@baleap.org.