# Nataša Kostić\* The textual profile of antonyms: A corpus-based study

DOI 10.1515/ling-2015-0014

Abstract: Unlike the traditional approaches that describe and define antonymy on the basis of semantic properties of antonymous pairs in a language system, antonyms are in this paper considered with reference to their roles in actual language use. Antonymy has traditionally been regarded as a paradigmatic relation, but recent studies of antonym co-occurrence in electronic corpora of English and Serbian have identified two major and four minor functions of antonyms in discourse, with its accompanying lexico-syntactic patterns, matching the results of similar analyses in Japanese, Swedish, and Dutch. This paper aims to investigate the performance of three antonymous patterns in retrieving contrastive terms and the possibility to create the contrastive profile of given seed words in Serbian written discourse by means of those patterns. It also examines whether there is a relation between the markedness distinction between members of the antonymous pair and the position of the chosen seed word (i.e., whether it comes in the X or the Y position in the pattern). Results of the study show that it is possible to create the textual profile of antonyms using these lexico-syntactic constructions, and that the unmarked member has a richer contrastive profile in text.

Keywords: antonymy, language use, antonymous pattern, antonymous profile

# 1 Introduction

Antonymy is in some of the literature confined to binary opposition between contrary meanings in language, such as hot/cold, as opposed to complementaries (true/false) and other opposites in language, such as buy/sell or come/go (Lyons 1977; Lehrer and Lehrer 1982; Cruse 1986; Justeson and Katz 1991, 1992; Murphy and Andrew 1993; Mettinger 1994; Fellbaum 1995; Jones 2002; Löbner 2002). Unlike the traditional approaches that describe and define antonymy on the basis of semantic properties of antonymous pairs in a language system, the term antonymy is in this article used for all form–meaning pairings that occur in binary semantic contrast in language use. The traditional ways in which antonymy has been classified use the intuitive semantic criteria, but several investigations based on corpus revealed that antonymy is a language phenomenon receptive to categorization based on textual evidence. Empirical investigations of antonymy in Serbian electronic corpora (Kostić 2011) have shown that phrasal contexts in which antonyms are used in written discourse are relatively stable, and that at least some of the most frequent ones can be viewed as potential triggers of a contrast relation in discourse. This paper addresses the issue of whether some of those phrasal contexts could be used to generate the contrastive profile of a given seed word in written discourse. If they can, this research then creates the textual antonymous profiles of the chosen seed words. The analysis is based on examples taken from the representative Serbian electronic corpus,1 which is the largest electronic corpus of Serbian currently available. The paper is structured as follows: theoretical approaches to antonymy and an overview of textual functions of antonyms with accompanying patterns in written discourse are presented in Section 2. Sections 3 and 4 explain the aims and methodology of the research. Section 5 brings analyses of antonymous profiles of four seed words, as they are generated by the chosen patterns in the corpus of written texts. This is followed by the discussion in Section 6, and the paper ends with conclusions in Section 7.

# 2 Theoretical and corpus-based approaches to antonymy

The vocabulary and agenda of the Structuralist approach for the study of antonymy has been most influential in lexicological studies. Many theorists restrict the use of the term antonym to the subset of antonyms that are gradable and contrary (Lyons 1977; Cruse 1986; Lehrer 2002; Karaman 2008). Contrary opposition means that assertion of one entails the negation of the other (e.g., If the road is long, it means that it is not short) but also that a denial of $p$ does not lead to an assertion of $q$ (e.g., If the road is not long, it does not mean that it is short). Lyons (1977) defines the complementary type on the basis of entailment relations among the members of the pair: if X is $p$ , then X is not $q$ , and if X is not $q$ , then X is $p$ (e.g., If a man is alive then he is not dead and If a man is not dead then he is alive). Complementaries can also include nouns (e.g., human/nonhuman) and verbs (stay/go). Taxonomies of antonyms always include contrariety and complementarity, while the other most common types of antonyms include converse (e.g., parent/child, buy/sell, give/receive, above/below) and directional opposition (e.g., north/south, come/go, inside/outside). Structuralist theoretical work on antonymy identifies a number of types of antonyms among known antonym pairs, but it does not try to characterize antonyms from non-antonyms or identify new antonyms on the basis of the identified features.

Since the latter part of the past century, linguistics has witnessed a widespread reaction against seeing language as a stable system of contrasts within which we make choices. Murphy (2003) developed a theoretical model in which antonym relations, as well as all paradigmatic lexical relations, obtain between words in use. She defines antonymic relation on the basis of minimal difference formulated in the relational principle Relation by Contrast-Lexical Contrast (RC-LC), which states that, “A lexical contrast set includes only word-concepts that have all the same contextually relevant properties but one” (Murphy 2003: 170). Antonymy is a subtype of contrast, in that it is contrast within a binary paradigm (Murphy 2003: 9). It is not surprising that gradable adjectives provide some of the best examples of antonymy, since these words describe the same continuum in a symmetrical way. Such a definition of lexical contrast is able to encompass the whole range of semantic opposites. It takes into account the fact that the range of antonyms for any particular word is far greater than in a neutral context, since contextual cues may override semantic cues and canonical pairings,2 e.g., smooth/rough paper, smooth/bumpy journey, smooth/lumpy cake batter, smooth/grainy, smooth/ridged, smooth/sticky, smooth/difficult (Murphy 2003: 174).

Corpus-based approaches to antonymy are still relatively rare and mostly done in English. Justeson and Katz analyzed the use of adjectival antonymous pairs in the one million Brown corpus of English and showed, probably for the first time, that “adjectives do indeed tend to co-occur in the same sentence as their antonyms far more frequently than expected by chance” (Justeson and Katz 1991: 18). Fellbaum (1995) conducted the first large-scale corpus work that looked at a wider class of antonym pairs, including nouns and verbs. She looked at the co-occurrences of nominal and verbal antonyms in the Brown Corpus and found that antonyms in both groups co-occurred in the same sentence significantly more often than by chance. However, not much work seems to have been done on the relationship between syntactic frames and antonym co-occurrence. The largest and most systematic study of the discourse functions of English antonyms is provided by Jones (2002), who described the contexts in which 56 antonym pairs co-occurred in the corpus of 280 million words taken from the Independent newspaper in the period of eight years (1988–1996). Just like Fellbaum, Jones noted the existence of lexical and syntactic frames in which antonyms co-occur, but he also gave an in-depth analysis and classification of the discourse functions performed by antonyms in such frames. Since most of the antonyms freely occurred in several types of patterns, the patterns do not coincide with the traditional classification of antonyms. These discourse categories have been found in other genres (spoken English [Jones 2006, 2007]) and registers of English (child and child-directed speech [Jones and Murphy 2005; Murphy and Jones 2008]), and in other languages (Swedish [Murphy et al. 2009], Japanese [Muehleisen and Isono 2009] and Serbian [Kostić 2011]).

With an aim to identify phrasal contexts in which antonyms co-occur in Serbian written discourse, as well as to classify their main textual functions, Kostić (2011) offered a systematic description of phrasal contexts in which conventionalized antonyms co-occur in the Electronic Corpus of the Serbian Language.3 In Serbian written discourse antonyms are in almost one-half of all examples used to signal inclusiveness, i.e., to encompass the whole semantic dimension that the pair denotes. Another major function of antonyms in Serbian discourse is to act as lexical triggers of contrast, i.e., to be attached to another pair of words, phrases or clauses in the same sentence (which are not usually perceived as semantically opposed) with an aim to generate or enhance a larger contrast within the sentence. These sentences actually contain two contrasting pairs, and the function of antonyms is to draw our attention to the more important contrast in the sentence. In Serbian corpus, this antonym function is less frequent than the use of antonyms as signals of inclusiveness, accounting for about onethird of all examples. Nevertheless, it is one of the two most important ways that language users employ antonymy in discourse. None of the other four (minor) textual functions of antonymy identified in Serbian written texts account for more than $5 \%$ of all examples. The summary of all antonymous patterns identified in the corpus is presented in Table 1, in the order of frequency.

Table 1: Summary of antonymous patterns in Serbian written discourse (Kostić 2011).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Textual function</td><td>Associated antonymous patterns</td></tr><tr><td>To encompass the whole semantic dimension xiy &#x27;x and y,xili y&#x27;x ory&#x27;,ixiy &#x27;both x and that the pair denotes;</td><td>y&#x27;, ni x ni y &#x27;neither x nor y&#x27;, kako x tako i y both x &#x27;either x or y&#x27;, x kao i y &#x27;x, as well as y&#x27;, x ali i y &#x27;x, e.g., They can live in hot and cold areas alike&#x27;. and also y, bilo xiliy whether x ory, bilo x bilo y</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>but also y&#x27;, ne samo x, vec i y &#x27;not only x, but also y&#x27; To act as the main contrast generating device antonyms in parallel structures, sometimes</td></tr><tr><td>between another pair of words, phrases or clauses in the same sentence; e.g., &#x27;We have rich sportsmen and poor</td><td>accompanied by adversative conjunctions or the following words: kontrast &#x27;contrast, opozicija &#x27;opposition&#x27;, umesto &#x27;instead of&#x27;, dominacija &#x27;domination&#x27;, konflikt &#x27;conflict&#x27;, raslojavanje</td></tr><tr><td>To mark the parameters of the distinction, either literally or metaphorically, with an aim to emphasise the existence of some kind of difference;</td><td>&#x27;division&#x27;, naspram, protiv &#x27;against&#x27; razlika/razlikovanje/raslojavanje/granica/ linija/jaz/razmeda izmedu x i y &#x27;difference/ distiction/stratification/gap/line/border between x and y&#x27;; razlikovati/odvojiti x od y</td></tr><tr><td>e.g., It will abolish all the differences between the dead and the alive&#x27;. To mark the starting and ending points of a change, either from one place or time period to preceded by either a verb of transition or its another or from one state to another;</td><td>&#x27;to distinguish/to differentiate/to separate x from y&#x27; iz...u, sa...na, od...do, od...ka &#x27;from...to&#x27;, corresponding noun, e.g., prelaziti &#x27;to cross&#x27;, prenositi &#x27;to carry&#x27;, putovati &#x27;to travel&#x27;,</td></tr><tr><td>To help create comparison along the scale to</td><td>preobrazaj &#x27;change&#x27;, prelaz &#x27;transition&#x27;, put &#x27;journey&#x27; vise x nego y &#x27;more x than y&#x27; or a comparative make a point in the context in which antonyms form of a certain adjective can either precede</td></tr><tr><td>are used; than male competition&#x27;. e.g., There is greater interest for female rather by od than&#x27;</td><td>antonyms or appear between them, followed</td></tr><tr><td>To imply mutual exclusivity within the context x, a ne y &#x27;x, and not y&#x27; in which antonyms are used; e.g., &#x27;They needed war, not peace&#x27;.</td><td>ne x, (vec) y &#x27;not x, (but) y&#x27;</td></tr></table></body></html>

These results are comparable to Jones (2002), as the six textual functions of antonyms in Serbian written discourse match some of the eight new classes of antonymy that he identified in his English study. It suggests that contexts of antonymous usage may be structured similarly across languages and that

Jones’ functional framework provides a consistent description of discourse functions of antonymy.

# 3 Aims

The principal aim of this paper is to determine whether the antonymous patterns, discovered in the research that identified phrasal contexts in which antonyms co-occur in Serbian, could be used to generate the contrastive profile of a given seed word in written discourse. I will refer to the contrastive profile of a word in the text as its textual antonymous profile. This research has been motivated by several findings of different studies. First of all, it has been shown that in cohesive texts, words that co-occur tend to be close in meaning (Halliday and Hasan 1976), suggesting that when opposites co-occur within the sentence, they are likely to be used with senses that refer to the same category. Similarly, the findings of Justeson and Katz (1991) and later Fellbaum (1995), who argues that antonymous concepts, rather than words, tend to co-occur, also suggest that opposites found by means of patterns are likely to have contrasting rather than unrelated senses. If canonical antonym pairs in Serbian co-occur in antonymous patterns in the sentence more often than expected by chance (Kostić 2011), we could test whether other words can also serve as the X and the Y, and would they in such cases be essentially treated as antonyms. The next sections will therefore test the performance of some antonymous patterns in retrieving pairs of binary semantic contrast and creating textual antonymous profiles of the chosen seed words. In an attempt to create the textual antonymous profile of a given seed word, one of the aims will also be to comprise a list of all the terms that contrast with it in a text. If the chosen seed word has a context-neutral canonical or grammatical antonym, the aim will be to investigate how often it is generated by the antonymous pattern and whether the marked member of the pair is generated as frequently as the unmarked one, when both are tested as the seed word in both positions in the pattern.

# 4 Materials and methods

The investigation of phrasal contexts of antonym co-occurrence in text (Kostić 2011, 2013) has shown that discourse functions of antonyms are tied to certain lexico-syntactic patterns. For example, the function of inclusiveness in Serbian is typified by antonyms co-occurring in grammatical contexts, such as: X ili Y ‘X or Y’, i X i Y ‘both X and Y’, ni $X$ ni Y ‘neither X nor Y’, bilo X ili Y ‘whether X or Y’, X kao i Y ‘X and Y alike’. When antonyms fill the X and Y slots in these constructions, it is meant to indicate the exhaustiveness of the conceptual dimension involved, which neutralizes the difference between the usually opposed categories. This is the most frequent function of antonyms in Serbian written discourse. The second most frequent function refers to the ability of an antonymous pair to create a binary contrast relation within the context of the sentence, making two pairs of contrast terms, but this role does not tend to make use of any stable lexico-syntactic patterns. However, some minor textual functions of antonyms make use of relatively stable phrasal contexts. For example, the majority of sentences that use antonyms to mark the parameters of distinction (which is the most common of all minor textual functions) incorporate the phrases razlika/razlikovanje/raslojavanje/jaz između $X i ~ Y$ ‘difference/distiction/ stratification/gap between X and Y’. The phrase ‘between X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ is also employed by another minor textual function of antonyms, such as the one denoting direct confrontation (e.g., konflikt/borba/sukob/sučeljavanje između $X$ i Y ‘conflict/struggle/war/confrontation between X and Y’). Therefore, the pattern između X i Y ‘between X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ can be identified as a potential productive pattern. A number of sentences in which antonyms help create comparison along the scale or within the conceptual domain often feature the pattern više X nego Y ‘more X than Y’. In contexts in which they mark the starting and ending points of a change, a typical construction is iz…u, sa…na, od…do, od…ka ‘from… to’. Other, overtly contrastive, patterns belonging to a minor textual function of antonyms are X, a ne Y ‘X, and not Y’ and ne X, (već) Y ‘not X, (but) Y’, employed to imply mutual exclusivity within the context.

To investigate all the antonymous patterns would in most cases require a corpus much larger than the largest electronic corpus of Serbian currently available, which contains 122 million words.4 Therefore, this paper will restrict itself to three patterns that trial data suggest might prove productive, to a greater or lesser degree, in generating contrastive terms of a given seed word. The main criterion for the selection of patterns was their prominence in housing members of canonical antonymous pairs, as established in Kostić (2011). Two of them (X ili $Y ^ { \prime } \mathrm { X }$ or $\mathrm { Y } '$ and $i X i Y$ ‘both X and Y’) represent the two most frequent patterns found in the corpus of written texts, and belong to the major textual function of antonyms in Serbian written discourse. They have been identified as reliable signals of inclusiveness, collectively accounting for $8 0 \%$ of all the contexts of this textual function that can house antonyms of all five word classes (Kostić 2011). The third one (između $\textit { X i Y }$ ‘between X and Y’) is the most important pattern in the group of minor textual functions of antonyms, belonging at the same time to the most frequent of all minor functions, the one marking the parameters of a distinction (Kostić 2013). These three patterns have also been chosen because the textual functions they are typical of are among the most reliable in terms of lexical signaling.

The methodology consists of the following steps: automatic retrieval of the chosen patterns by placing a seed word in the X position first, which extracts all concordances that feature that word string from the corpus; as the corpus is not POS tagged, the next step consists of manual inspection of the items that occupy the Y position and elimination of the ones where X and Y are different parts of speech. The procedure is then repeated by placing a seed word in the Y position. Four words are placed first in the X, and then in the Y position, for each pattern. All the inflected forms of seed words (three genders, both numbers and seven cases) are searched for by means of a search symbol $( [ \mathsf { a } \mathrm { - } \mathsf { z } ] ^ { \star } )$ at the end of the seed word, which again requires manual elimination of the forms, such as derivatives or compounds.

The first two words will be canonical antonyms dobar ‘good’ and loš ‘bad’. They have been chosen for two reasons. Firstly, as they are familiar antonyms, it should become apparent whether the patterns chosen are productive in terms of retrieving contrast items. Secondly, this pair exhibits the marked/unmarked distinction. Lehrer (1985: 400) lists the most common ways in which neutralization occurs for antonymous adjectives, such as: the unmarked member is neutralized in questions and nominalizations (How tall/#short is he; warmth/ #coolth); the unmarked member appears in measure phrases and with ratios (three feet tall/#short; twice as old/#young); when there are affixed and nonaffixed forms, the affixed form is always marked (happy/unhappy); the unmarked member is evaluatively positive (the marked evaluatively negative) and denotes more of a quantity (good/bad; big/little), and if there are asymmetrical entailments, the unmarked member is less likely to be biased or committed (e.g., $X$ is better than $Y : X$ may be good or bad; $X$ is worse than $Y : X$ must be bad). Not every unmarked member has the same set of these properties, but whichever member of a pair displays the most unmarked characteristics, it is the unmarked member. Since dobar ‘good’ is positive and more neutral compared to loš ‘bad’, this pair can serve as a test item to examine how often the members generate each other in the patterns and whether the marked member of the pair co-occurs with the unmarked one as frequently as the unmarked one co-occurs with the marked one in the chosen patterns. The next seed word examined will be prirodan ‘natural’, which has been chosen in order to discover which terms are most commonly set up in semantic contrast to it in text (since it does not belong to the antonym canon, in a way that ‘good/bad’ does), as well as the frequency with which its grammatical antonym neprirodan ‘unnatural’ occurs in the X or Y place in its textual profile. Finally, the fourth seed word will be the noun uspeh ‘success’, which has been chosen to investigate, among other things, whether the chosen patterns are as useful when applied to nouns. Again, the purpose of the experiment will be to establish which terms are most commonly set up in semantic contrast to uspeh ‘success’ in text and establish the tendency with which its grammatical antonym neuspeh ‘failure’ occurs as part of its textual antonymous profile.

# 5 Analysis

# 5.1 Textual antonymous profile of dobar ‘good’

The adjective dobar ‘good’ is one of the highest frequency adjectives in the language, so it can reasonably be expected that this adjective will occur in the chosen patterns at a healthy rate. Each of the three antonymous patterns chosen will now be examined in turn, beginning with dobar ili $^ *$ ‘good or \*’ and \* ili dobar ‘\* or good’.

The word-string dobar ili \* ‘good or \*’ appears in 531 corpus sentences of which there are 335 examples where ‘good’ is followed by an adjective. In this group of examples there are a total of 307 examples in which this search string generated a contrast relation between words in the X and Y position. In 202 examples ‘good’ is followed by loš ‘bad’ (which accounts for $6 6 \%$ of all the examples). The string $^ *$ ili dobar ‘\* or good’ was generated on 95 occasions, and in 26 of these ‘good’ is preceded by an adjective. In 11 of the 20 sentences that contain the contrast relation (or $5 5 \%$ ) it is preceded by loš ‘bad’. Typical examples include: još ne znamo da li je to bila dobra ili loša odluka ‘we still don’t know whether that was a good or a bad decision’; svaka pojedinost, bilo loša ili dobra, pothranjivala mu je nadu ‘each detail, whether bad or good, gave him hope.’ All such contexts make use of antonyms as signals of inclusiveness and serve to exhaust the domain they refer to. As such, they are typical representatives of the most common textual function of antonyms and are expected to occur when antonymous words are put in the X and Y slots in the pattern tested.

A further 52 (or $1 7 \%$ ) of the 307 sentences generated $z a o ^ { 5 }$ ‘evil’ in the dobar ili \* ‘good or \*’ pattern, whereas this word appeared 7 times (out of 20, or $3 5 \%$ ) in the $^ *$ ili dobar ‘\* or good’ word string. For example: američka vlada – simbol dobra ili zla? ‘the American government – a symbol of good or evil?’; Ono što nije u našoj kontroli ne treba da bude okvalifikovano kao zlo ili dobro ‘The things we cannot control should not be qualified as either evil or good’. In all such contexts we can again identify the textual function of inclusiveness, and both the phrase dobar ili zao ‘good or evil’ and zao ili dobar ‘evil or good’ are used with an aim to identify the relevant conceptual domain and exhaust it, no matter whether the words function as adjectives or deadjectival nominals. The search generated another 46 sentences featuring the string dobar ili \* ‘good or \*’ in which dobar ‘good’ is followed by adjective rđav ‘bad’, and the same adjective precedes dobar ‘good’ twice in the $^ *$ ili dobar ‘\* or good’ pattern. The phrases dobar ili rđav ‘good or bad’ and rđav ili dobar ‘bad or good’ are in all the corpus sentences used with the same purpose as all the other examples of antonymous phrases in the textual function of inclusiveness (e.g., jedan posao može biti dobar ili rđav ‘a job can be either good or bad’).

The data presented so far testify that the pattern examined generates instances of antonymous pairs. The three adjectives generated in the position of an asterisk, namely loš ‘bad’, zao ‘evil’ and rđav ‘bad’, are all lexical antonyms of dobar ‘good’ and make excellent candidates for its textual antonymous profile. The total number of sentences featuring these three adjectives in the string dobar $i l i \mathrm { \Omega } ^ { * } \mathrm { \Omega } _ { \mathrm { { g o o d } } }$ or \*’ is 300, which comprises $9 8 \%$ of all the sentences with a contrast relation, and in the string \* ili dobar ‘\* or good’ amounts to 20, which equals a total number of all the occurrences of this word string in the corpus that contain the relation of contrast between the X and the Y positions. The occurrences of these three adjectives is expected and pleasing, if we know that the chosen pattern is the context of the most frequent textual function of antonymy in written discourse. Another 7 examples of the ‘good or \*’ string provide novel instances of antonymy, specific to the context in which it is created. In all those examples the antonymous pattern couples mutually incompatible items in the context provided so that the textual function of uniting the contrasted meanings can hold. These are listed below, together with the noun-head they modify:

(situacija je bila) dobra ili ružna ‘(the situation was) good or ugly’   
(da li je jesti meso) dobro ili štetno ‘(is eating meat) good or harmful’   
(roba je) dobra ili jeftina ‘(clothes are) good or cheap’   
(bilo da su uslovi) dobri ili nedobri ‘(whether conditions are) good or not   
good’

The remaining 28 occurrences of dobar ili \* ‘good or \*’ and 6 occurrences of \* ili dobar ‘\* or good’ cannot be said to contain any element of contrast between adjectives in the X and the Y position in the search pattern. The following examples will serve as an illustration:

(HDL je) dobar ili koristan (holesterol) ‘(HDL is) good or useful (cholesterol)’ (devojčice imaju) dobar ili odličan (uspeh) ‘(these girls have) good or excellent (marks)’ (ne ismevam ono što je) mudro ili dobro ‘(I never laugh at what is) wise or good’

These examples testify that the string pattern X or Y does not always reflect an obvious contrast. For example, dobar ‘good’ and koristan ‘useful’ can simply be coupled together without any overt element of contrast. All examples that belong to this group of sentences contain conjoined adjectives that simply give further attributes of the thing described as good. Nevertheless, the antonymous pattern $X$ ili $Y ^ { \bullet } \mathbf { X }$ or $\mathrm { Y } '$ seems to be highly successful in retrieving contrast items in positions X and Y. Judging from the examples analyzed, the word string dobar ili $^ *$ ‘good or \*’ generated 307 examples of a contrast relation out of a total of 335 sentences (or $9 2 \%$ ), which makes it extremely successful in retrieving contrast pairs and has a high potential to be used in assessing textual antonymous profile. The word string \* ili dobar ‘\* or good’ was also fairly productive in retrieving contrast terms, generating examples of inclusiveness in three quarters of all sentences examined. However, there is a marked difference in the number of examples (with a contrast relation) retrieved from the corpus, depending on whether ‘good’ occupies the X or the Y position in the pattern (307 in the X position compared to only 20 in the Y position), which might suggest that there is a preference for the unmarked member of the antonymous pair to favor the X position in the pattern, which then results in its greater productivity in retrieving a contrast relation.

The antonymous pattern $i X i Y$ ‘both X and Y’, when filled in with dobar ‘good’ as a seed word in each of the two positions, is about three times less frequently recorded in the corpus, generating a sum of 101 corpus sentences. The search string i dobar $i ^ { * }$ ‘both good and \*’ appears 86 times, of which there are 36 instances of dobar ‘good’ followed by loš ‘bad’, another 36 sentences of dobar ‘good’ followed by zao ‘evil’, 2 examples with rđav ‘bad’ and one example with nedobar ‘not good’. Typical examples include: imamo i dobre i loše muzičare ‘we have both good and bad musicians’; čovek je biće koje nosi u sebi i dobro i zlo ‘a man is a being that has in himself both the good and the evil’; on će odrediti i dobre i rđave strane igre ‘he will mark both good and bad sides of the game’. All these and other similar examples from the corpus contain antonymous adjectives or deadjectival nominals within the pattern of the textual function of inclusiveness, in which antonymous concepts are used in complementry distribution and signal the exhaustiveness of the domain. Collectively, there is a total of 75 sentences containing loš ‘bad’, zao ‘evil’ and rđav ‘bad’, which accounts for $8 7 \%$ of all sentences with this word string retrieved from the corpus. In about one tenth of all its occurrences in the corpus, the word string i dobar $i ^ { * }$ ‘both good and \*’ did not generate contrast terms. Some of those 11 examples are given below:

(to je donelo) i dobra i raznolika (prozna dela) ‘(it brought) both good and   
various (prose works)’   
(imamo) i dobre i uravnotežene (političke kontakte) ‘(we have) both good and   
balanced (political contacts)’   
(imamo) i dobre i slobodne (igrače) ‘(we have) both good and available (players)’   
(on je bio) i dobar i jak (čovek) ‘(he was) both good and strong (man)’   
(ona je) i dobra i verna (žena) ‘(she is) both good and faithful (wife)’

None of these concordances can be said to contain contrast terms for dobar ‘good’. In such contexts, it would appear that the pattern signals just further attributes of the nouns described as good. Contexts such as those differ from the ones with a contrastive relation because, in this case, coordinate conjunctions i...i ‘both…and’ conjoin the adjectives, with the second item providing an additional attribute of the noun that both adjectives modify (i.e., ‘N that are both Adj1 and Adj2’). On the other hand, in examples with a contrastive relation, coordinate conjunctions conjoin two noun phrases, meaning ‘both Adj1 [N] and Adj2 [N]’, and since adjectives are antonyms, the whole construction gets the meaning of inclusiveness, signaling the exhaustiveness of the domain.6

A search for all the occurrences of $i \ast _ { i }$ dobar ‘both \* and good’ yielded only 15 sentences, in which the asterisk position is 3 times occupied by loš ‘bad’, 6 times by zao ‘evil’ and once by očajan ‘disastrous’, which makes two-thirds of all examples retrieved. In another 5 examples there was no contrast relation between dobar ‘good’ and the term preceding it in the pattern, e.g.:

(oni su bili) i veliki i dobri (judi) ‘(they were) both great and good (people)’ (to je bila) i duga i dobra (priprema) ‘(that was) both long and good (preparation)’ (bio je to) i lep i dobar (život) ‘(it was) both beautiful and good (life)’

These examples again illustrate the use of i…i ‘both…and’ conjunctions to coordinate two adjectives without any element of contrast between them. This important syntactic information again proves crucial for distinguishing relevant from irrelevant examples of the construction $i \ X \ i \ Y$ ‘both X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ when the relation of contrast is concerned.

The difference in the number of sentences (with a contrast relation) retrieved from the corpus with ‘good’ in the X or the Y position in this pattern (75 in the X position compared to only 10 in the Y position) again seems to imply that there is a relation between the performance of the pattern in retrieving contrastive pairs and the position of the chosen seed word (i.e., whether it comes in the X or the Y position in the pattern). Before proceeding to investigate the textual antonymous profile of loš ‘bad’ in order to, among other things, answer the question whether the patterns also exhibit the same tendency with the marked antonym, the third pattern will be examined (između $X i ~ Y$ ‘between X and Y’).

The pattern između dobar $i \ *$ ‘between good and \*’ generated 84 sentences, with all the items occurring in the asterisk position set up in a contrast relation to dobar ‘good’. Loš ‘bad’ is used in 20 sentences, zao ‘evil’ occurs in 60, odličan ‘excellent’ is employed twice (in razlika između dobrih i odličnih rezultata ‘a difference between good and excellent results’), while koristan ‘useful’ (as in jaz između dobrog i korisnog ‘a gap between the good and the useful’) and vrhunski ‘top’ (in razlika između dobrih i vrhunskih sportista ‘a difference between good and top players’) each appear once. This is an interesting distribution, since it shows a marked difference from the ratio of dobar ili \* ‘good or \*’ as well as i dobar $i ^ { * }$ ‘both good and \*’, where loš ‘bad’ apears more often than zao ‘evil’. It raises the question of why the textual function of inclusiveness tends to favor the dobar/loš ‘good/ bad’ opposition, whereas the function of marking the parameters of a distinction seems to favor the dobar/zao ‘good/evil’ opposition. The answer could be that the scale of quality (‘good/bad’) is used more to signal inclusiveness (especially when referring to people), whereas distinctions are made more commonly between ‘good’ and ‘evil’ and in contexts in which these adjectives function as nominals, e.g., spoznavanje razlike između dobra i zla ‘an awareness of the difference between the good and the evil’ and zakon će napraviti razliku između dobrih i loših izvođača ‘the law will discriminate between good and bad performers.’

As far as the word string između \* and dobar ‘between \* and good’ is concerned, it generated a total of only 6 sentences in the corpus. In 5 sentences a contrast between dobar ‘good’ and zao ‘evil’ is made, whereas one example does not contain an item in contrast to dobar ‘good’. These data again confirm the suspicion that the Y position in the patterns is less suitable for the creation of a contrast relation when the seed word dobar ‘good’ is put in it. Whether it is related to the fact that ‘good’ has its canonical antonym ‘bad’ and is the unmarked of the two adjectives will be investigated when its textual antonymous profile is compared to the profile of loš ‘bad’.

The analysis of the textual antonymous profile of dobar ‘good’ has shown that it is possible to retrieve contrast pairs from the corpus using productive antonymous patterns. Collectively, the three patterns tested occurred on 552 occasions in the corpus. On 501 occasions the words occupying the X and the Y positions were set up in the relation of binary semantic contrast, which makes a total of $9 1 \%$ of all examples. Primary textual antonyms of dobar ‘good’ are loš ‘bad’ (in one-half of all examples), zao ‘evil’ (in one-third of sentences) and rđav ‘bad’ (in one-tenth of all contexts), which is not surprising and which testifies to the ability of the chosen patterns to retrieve antonymous pairs. The productive nature of the patterns has been further proved by the contrast relations established between dobar ‘good’ and other adjectives contrasted with it in text, such as nepoštena ‘dishonest (people)’, oštra ‘strong (word)’, nevaljala ‘naughty (children)’, ružna ‘ugly (situation)’, štetno ‘harmful (food)’ jeftina ‘cheap (clothes)’, nedobri ‘not good (conditions)’, očajan ‘disastrous (century)’, odličan ‘excellent (results)’, koristan ‘useful (things)’ and vrhunski ‘top (players)’. A collection of eleven context-bound opposites of ‘good’ testifies that ‘good’ is contrasted in text against both evaluatively negative and positive adjectives. The appearance of the negative ones is of course not surprising, especially in the context of inclusiveness, which makes them mutually incompatible and instantially contrasted to ‘good’. Although we would expect ‘good’ to contrast exclusively with negative items in language, it seems that some writers choose to exploit its latent contrast with more positive terms instead. However, it is important to note that the positive ones, i.e., ‘excellent’, ‘useful’ and ‘top’, all appeared in the context of making a distinction between the two noun phrases.

# 5.2 Textual antonymous profile of loš ‘bad’

The search for the pattern $X$ ili $Y ^ { \bullet } \mathrm { X }$ or Y’ with loš ‘bad’ in the X position yielded 35 examples and 233 hits with loš ‘bad’ in the Y position. The first observation one can make about the use of loš ‘bad’ in this antonymous pattern is that it is much more common in the Y place. In the output generated by a search for loš ili \* ‘bad or \*’, a contrast relation was generated with its canonical antonym ‘good’ in a total of 15 sentences, and once with the adjective preteran ‘excessive’, in the context of the possible causes of summer mycosis (which are attributed to bad or excessive hygiene). Therefore, the contexts with a contrastive relation collectively comprise about one-half of all examples. Some of the remaining 19 concordances are illustrated below:

(ta oranica je) lošeg ili srednjeg (kvaliteta) ‘(that arable land is of) bad or average (quality)’   
(problemi zbog) lošeg ili neurednog (grejanja) ‘(problems due to) bad or irregular (heating)’   
(otkaz zbog) lošeg ili neodgovornog (rada) ‘(a dismissal due to) bad or irresponsible (working)’

These examples illustrate the string pattern X or Y in cases when it does not reflect a contrast relation. All examples that belong to this group of sentences contain conjoined adjectives that simply give further attributes of the thing described as bad.

The output generated by a search for \* ili loš ‘\* or bad’ comprises 233 examples, out of which the adjective dobar ‘good’ occurs on 217 occasions, which makes $9 3 \%$ of all examples. In the remaining 16 sentences the pattern did not generate any contrast relation between ‘bad’ and an item preceding it. This leads to two conclusions: first, the chosen pattern has proved productive, since the vast majority of concordances contain contrast pairs; second, the pattern seems to produce many more instances of contrast relation when loš ‘bad’ appears in the Y position, because the X position is in those instances occupied exclusively by its canonical antonym dobar ‘good’. Since dobar ‘good’ is the unmarked and loš ‘bad’ is the marked member of the pair, we could speculate that this distinction might influence the richness of their textual antonymous profiles, in the sense that the unmarked member has a broader antonymous profile in text and occurs more frequently in the X position, while the marked member shares a strong antonymous profile with only the unmarked member, thus appearing more frequently in the Y position in the antonymous pattern. We shall examine this assumption in the next two patterns.

In the pattern $i \ X \ i \ Y$ ‘both X and Y’, loš ‘bad’ occurs on 120 occasions, 13 times in the X position and 107 times in the Y position. Once again, it is more often positioned in the Y place in the pattern. Eight occurrences of loš ‘bad’ in the X position are followed by dobar ‘good’, and the same is true in 102 examples in which loš ‘bad’ occupies the Y position. The remaining 5 examples of the word string $i l o s i ^ { * }$ ‘both bad and \*’ do not contain contrastive pairs but further attributes referring to the same noun. The same is true for 3 examples of the word string $i ^ { * } i l o s ^ { \times }$ ‘both \* and bad’. However, the pattern $i X i Y$ ‘both X and Y’ did not retrieve only the canonical antonym ‘good’, but also two near synonyms of ‘good’ that, in the given context, function as perfectly valid opposites of ‘bad’. These are: (imao je) i lepih i loših (dana) ‘(he had) both beautiful and bad (days)’ and (imamo) i svetle i loše (primere odnosa) ‘(there are) both outstanding and bad (examples of relationships)’.

The pattern između $X i Y$ ‘between X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ is the least frequent of the three examined, generating a total of 6 examples when loš ‘bad’ is put in the X position, and 20 with loš ‘bad’ in the Y position. Despite its lower frequency, the tendency of loš ‘bad’ to appear in the Y position is more often maintained, as well as its strong connection to dobar ‘good’ in the X position, since all 20 examples of između $* _ { i l o } { \check { s } }$ ‘between \* and bad’ contain dobar ‘good’ in the X position. On the other side, in the 6 examples of the između loš $i ^ { * }$ ‘between bad and \*’ word string, a distinction is made at more extreme points on the scale of quality. The four examples of this word string set up a contrast pair between loš ‘bad’ and gori ‘worse’, and another two examples between loš ‘bad’ and manje loš ‘less bad’. These contexts in fact distinguish between bad and something worse than bad. The use of comparative forms of loš ‘bad’ in the context of making a choice between two alternatives makes these forms mutually incompatible and instantially contrastive, and it is therefore possible for us as readers to create a contrast relation between the values on the same (negative) side of the scale identified. Although we would expect loš ‘bad’ to contrast with positive items in language, it seems that some writers choose to exploit its contrast with more negative terms instead. Moreover, the pattern ‘between X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ continues to retrieve only contrast terms.

Collectively, the search for all the occurrences that contain loš ‘bad’ in both positions in the three antonymous patterns generated 414 examples, of which 371 have a contrast relation, among which 362 (or $9 7 \%$ ) contain dobar ‘good’ in either the X or the Y position. The chosen patterns again proved productive in retrieving contrast terms, no matter whether loš ‘bad’ appears in the X or the Y position. The output also indicates that loš ‘bad’ shares a very strong antonymous profile with dobar ‘good’, since the other terms it contrasts with in text are extremely rare (only 9 examples, or $3 \%$ ). The statistics of all instances of contrast relation in all three patterns with dobar ‘good’ and loš ‘bad’ in both positions is provided in Table 2.

Table 2: Statistics of dobar ‘good’ and loš ‘bad’ in antonymous patterns.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Position</td><td colspan="3">X or Y</td><td colspan="3">Both X and Y</td><td colspan="3">Between X and Y</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Raw freq.</td><td>%</td><td>x2 (p)</td><td>Raw freq.</td><td>%</td><td>x (p)</td><td>Raw freq.</td><td>%</td><td>x (p)</td></tr><tr><td>DOBAR</td><td>x</td><td>307</td><td>94</td><td>251.893</td><td>75</td><td>88</td><td>49.706</td><td>84</td><td>94</td><td>70.124</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;GOOD&#x27;</td><td>Y</td><td>20</td><td>6</td><td>p&lt;0.0001</td><td>10</td><td>12</td><td>p&lt;0.0001</td><td>5</td><td>6</td><td>p&lt;0.0001</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>total</td><td>327</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>85</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>89</td><td>100</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>LOS&#x27;BAD&#x27; X</td><td></td><td>16</td><td>7</td><td>173.395</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>82.286</td><td>6</td><td>23</td><td>7.538</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Y</td><td>217</td><td>93</td><td>p&lt;0.0001</td><td>104</td><td>93</td><td>p&lt;0.0001</td><td>20</td><td>77</td><td>p=0.0060</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>total</td><td>233</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>112</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>26</td><td>100</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

The data presented in Table 2 testify that the tendency of the unmarked member to occur more frequently in the X position and the marked member in the Y position, in all the tested patterns, is statistically significant. The textual antonymous profile of the unmarked member is also more varied than the one of the marked member. Since the marked member appears in the Y position significantly more often than by chance, and at the same time shares a strong antonymous profile almost exclusively with the unmarked member, other terms are unlikely to be contrasted with it in the chosen antonymous patterns.

# 5.3 Textual antonymous profile of prirodan ‘natural’

The next adjective whose textual antonymous profile will be assessed is prirodan ‘natural’. This adjective does not have its canonical pairing, and it will be interesting to investigate whether there is a tendency for it to be contrasted with its grammatical antonym neprirodan ‘unnatural’ in written texts.

In the pattern $X$ ili $Y \ ^ { \prime } \mathrm { X }$ or $\mathrm { Y } '$ prirodan ‘natural’ occurs 157 times in the X position and 31 times in the Y position. In the first case, there are 145 instances of contrast relation between prirodan ‘natural’ and another term that follows it, and 12 instances without any contrast relation. In the second case, there are 28 instances of contrast relation and 3 examples without it. Being the underived form, prirodan ‘natural’ qualifies as the unmarked member of the antonymous pair if compared to neprirodan ‘unnatural’, and this again seems to hold significance for the tendency of the antonymous pattern to retrieve contrast pairs when the unmarked member occurs in the X position. However, before reaching safe conclusions in this case, the data obtained by the other two patterns have to be taken into account.

In the pattern $i X i Y$ ‘both X and Y’, prirodan ‘natural’ occurs 24 times in the X position and 12 times in the Y position. With prirodan ‘natural’ in the X position, the pattern generated a contrast relation 19 times, whereas in the other 5 examples there was no contrast relation between this adjective and another one following it. On the other hand, in the Y position in the same pattern, prirodan ‘natural’ was set up in a contrast relation 11 times, whereas only one example yielded a non-contrastive relation.

In the third pattern, između $X$ and Y ‘between X and Y’, prirodan ‘natural’ occurs 10 times in the X position and twice in the Y position. All the occurrences of između prirodan $i ^ { * }$ ‘between natural and \*’ yielded contrastive terms, as well as both examples of između \* i prirodan ‘between \* and natural’. The summary of all instances of contrast relations in all three patterns relative to both positions of prirodan ‘natural’ in the patterns is given in Table 3.

Table 3: Statistics of prirodan ‘natural’ in antonymous patterns.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Position</td><td colspan="3">X or Y</td><td colspan="3">Both X and Y</td><td colspan="3">Between X and Y</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Raw freq.</td><td>%</td><td>x (p)</td><td>Raw freq.</td><td>%</td><td>x (p)</td><td>Raw freq.</td><td>%</td><td>x (p)</td></tr><tr><td>PRIRODAN X</td><td></td><td>145</td><td>84</td><td>79.127</td><td>19</td><td>63</td><td>2.133</td><td>10</td><td>83</td><td>5.333</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;NATURAL&#x27; Y</td><td></td><td>28</td><td>16</td><td>p&lt;0.0001</td><td>11</td><td>37</td><td>p=0.1441</td><td>2</td><td>17</td><td>p=0.0209</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>total</td><td>173</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>30</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>12</td><td>100</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

The data in Table 3 show that the tendency of prirodan ‘natural’ to be used in the X position in the chosen patterns is statistically significant for $\mathbf { \epsilon } ^ { \prime } \mathbf { X }$ or $\mathrm { Y } '$ and ‘between X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ patterns, but not for the ‘both X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ string pattern. This could be interpreted to mean that the relation between the markedness status of an adjective and its position in the pattern might not be a straightforward one. However, although the chi-square test shows that the p value for the ‘both X and Y’ pattern is in this case not statistically significant for making safe conclusions $( p > 0 . 0 5 )$ , one has to bear in mind the fact that, unlike dobar/loš ‘good/bad’, prirodan ‘natural’ and neprirodan ‘unnatural’ almost never share the same antonymous profile. This is proven by an extremely rare occurrence of neprirodan ‘unnatural’ in the tested patterns, in which it was retrieved only three times. The 11 instances of the ‘both X and Y’ pattern in which ‘natural’ occupies the Y position contain 11 different adjectives that are set up in contrast to prirodan ‘natural’ (none of them being neprirodan ‘unnatural’), disregarding the marked/unmarked distinction that is postulated to obtain between morphological antonyms. It will be of interest to see whether the aforementioned distinction and the position in the antonymous pattern will be relevant in uspeh ‘success’/neuspeh ‘failure’ examples.

Prirodan ‘natural’ as the seed word in all the patterns in both the X and the Y positions generated a total of 236 examples, of which there are 215 (or $9 1 \%$ ) with contrastive relations, which again confirms the ability of the antonymous patterns to retrieve contrast terms from the corpus. Based on that data, the following textual antonymous profile of prirodan ‘natural’ emerged:

prirodan ‘natural’ stands in contrast to veštački (uzroci, cveće, koža, klasifikacija, itd.) ‘artificial (causes, flowers, leather, classification, etc.)’, in 74 examples $( 3 4 \% )$ ;   
prirodan ‘natural’ stands in contrast to kultivisano (poreklo) ‘man-made (origin)’, in 32 examples $( 1 4 \% )$ ;   
prirodan ‘natural’ stands in contrast to kulturno (nasleđe, vrednosti) ‘cultural (herigate, values)’ in 18 examples $( 8 \% )$ ) prirodan ‘natural’ stands in contrast to društvene (nauke, poredak) ‘social (sciences, order)’ in 12 examples $( 5 \% )$   
prirodan ‘natural’ stands in contrast to sintetički (materijali) ‘synthetic (materials)’ in 9 examples $( 4 \% )$   
prirodan ‘natural’ stands in contrast to nasilni (procesi) ‘violent (processes)’ in 5 examples $( 2 \% )$   
prirodan ‘natural’ stands in contrast to zakonski (monopol) ‘legal (monopoly)’ in 4 examples;   
prirodan ‘natural’ stands in contrast to neprirodan ‘unnatural’ in 3 examples; each of the following occurred once or twice in contrast to prirodan ‘natural’: gradski (predeli) ‘urban (environment)’, matematički (skup) ‘mathematical (set)’, humanitarne (katastrofe) ‘humanitarian (disasters)’, politička (kataklizma) ‘political (cataclysm)’, natprirodan ‘supernatural’, humanističke (discipline) ‘humanities (disciplines)’, moralni (zakon) ‘moral (law)’, objavljena (religija) ‘revealed (religion)’, dodatno unetih (hormona) ‘supplemental (hormones)’, prerađeni ‘processed’, nuklearni ‘nuclear’, hemijski ‘chemical’, medicinski ‘medical’, stečeni ‘acquired’, farbani ‘dyed’, gazirano ‘sparkling’, eksperimentalno ‘experimental’, reciklirani ‘recycled’, industrijski ‘industrial’, etc.

As these examples testify, the textual antonymous profile of prirodan ‘natural’ is very diverse. However, there is a pattern and a tendency for prirodan ‘natural’ to be commonly set up in contrast to veštački ‘artificial’ (in one-third of all occurrences) and, to a lesser degree, to kultivisani ‘man-made’. Both of these terms make excellent contrast words for ‘natural’, even without appropriate contextual boosting, which suggests that they share a strong antonymous profile with it. Given the appropriate context, ‘cultural’, ‘social’, ‘synthetic’ and ‘violent’ make easily recognizable opposites. All the other terms appear only once or twice (with the exception of zakonski ‘legal’ that was retrieved four times) and are heavily context-bound. For example, društveni ‘social’ and humanistički ‘humanities’ are both valid in the context of the common academic distinction between natural sciences on one side, and social sciences or humanities, on the other. The majority of contrast terms provide examples of contextually supported lexical rather than morphological antonyms for prirodan ‘natural’. Out of the context, neither nasilni ‘violent’ nor humanitarni ‘humanitarian’ present themselves as obvious antonym candidates for prirodan ‘natural’ because neither of these words describe a single property that evokes an antonym schema in any salient and obvious way. In the sentences where they occur they are contextualized through procesi ‘processes’ and katastrofe ‘disasters’ respectively, which constrain the delineation of the pairs as opposites in a lexico-syntactic construction that promotes opposite readings and at the same time highlights their different conceptual anchoring. The same is true for all other contrast terms retrieved: ‘natural’ and ‘legal’, in the context of monopoly, ‘natural’ and ‘urban’, in the context of environment, ‘natural’ and ‘mathematical’, in the context of mathematics, ‘natural’ and ‘political’, in the context of cataclysm, ‘natural’ and ‘supernatural’, in the context of powers, ‘natural’ and ‘moral’, in the context of law, ‘natural’ and ‘revealed’, when talking about religion, and so on. Within the appropriate context, contrast terms need not be restricted to single words, as one of the examples testifies. In a sentence in which the writer aims to make a distinction between the two types of hormones in a human body, putting them in complementary distribution and at the same time drawing the reader’s attention to their dissimilarities, the contrast between prirodan ‘natural’ and dodatno unetih ‘supplemental’ (literally: ‘additionally supplied’) is perfectly valid.

An extremely rare occurrence of neprirodan ‘unnatural’ (only three times in 215 examples) is surprising. Being its morphological antonym, and probably the first one to come to mind if asked to provide the antonym for prirodan ‘natural’, one would expect to find it put in textual opposition with prirodan ‘natural’ more often. These two words do co-occur in the chosen patterns, once in the signal of inclusiveness (‘both natural and unnatural’), and twice in the context of making a distinction (‘between natural and unnatural’). This reveals an unexpected fact about prirodan ‘natural’: that there is a tendency, at least in written discourse, for it to be used in contrast with its lexical antonyms, rather than morphological. This is supported by an observation that the word string prirodan i/ili neprirodan ‘natural and/or unnatural’ occurs 6 times in the corpus, whereas prirodan i/ili veštački ‘natural and/or artificial’ appears 103 times. When tested as the seed word in the chosen patterns in both the X and the Y positions, the output again generated only three occurrence of neprirodan ‘unnatural’ in the Y position, and in the same examples retrieved when searching for i prirodan $i ^ { * }$ ‘both natural and \*’ and između prirodan $i ^ { * }$ ‘between natural and \*’. It means that, at least in the patterns chosen for the purpose of this research, the only term that neprirodan ‘unnatural’ contrasts with in the corpus of written texts is its morphological antonym. It would be of interest to establish whether the nouns that will be examined in the next section follow the same trend of favoring non-morphological antonyms.

# 5.4 Textual antonymous profile of uspeh ‘success’

If asked to provide an antonym for uspeh ‘success’ all native speakers of Serbian would most probably opt for neuspeh ‘failure’ (literally ‘non-success’), i.e., its morphological antonym. In exploring the textual antonymous profile of uspeh ‘success’ it will be of special interest to check whether the corpus data, which reflect real language use, support this intuitive knowledge.

In the pattern X ili $Y ^ { \bullet } \mathrm { X }$ or Y’ uspeh ‘success’ occurs 66 times in the X position and 7 times in the Y position of which there are two instances of generated contrast. Within the uspeh ili \* ‘success or \*’ word string, there are 56 instances of contrast relation between uspeh ‘success’ and another term that follows it, and 10 instances in which there is no contrast relation (such as uspeh ili sreća ‘success or happiness’, uspeh ili dobit ‘success or income’, uspeh ili popularnost ‘success or popularity’, uspeh ili radost ‘success or joy’). Since, as the underived form, uspeh ‘success’ qualifies as the unmarked member of the antonymous pair, it seems that this again holds significance for the ability of the antonymous pattern to retrieve contrast pairs when the unmarked member occurs in the X position.

In the pattern $i X i Y$ ‘both X and Y’, uspeh ‘success’ occurs on 17 occasions in the X position and 7 times in the Y position. With uspeh ‘success’ in the X position, the pattern generated contrast relations in 10 examples (in 9 cases with its grammatical antonym neuspeh ‘failure’ and once in contrast to problemi ‘problems’), whereas in another 7 examples there were no contrast relations between this noun and another one following it (rather a nearly synonymous relation, e.g., i uspeh i afirmacija ‘both success and recognition’ and i uspeh i zadovoljstvo ‘both success and satisfaction’). In the Y position in the same pattern, 6 examples yielded contexts without any element of contrast, whereas in one example uspeh ‘success’ was set up in contrast to problemi ‘problems’ again. In one of the examples uspeh ‘success’ was used as a part of a wider contrast, the one between napada i kriza ‘attacks and crisis’ on one side, and priznanja i uspeha ‘awards and success’ on the other.

Examples of the third pattern, između $X$ and $Y$ ‘between X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ , were found in two corpus sentences with uspeh ‘success’ occupying the X position, both of which yielded contrastive examples (razlika između uspeha i neuspeha ‘a difference between success and failure’ and birati između uspeha i mira ‘to choose between success and peace’). None of the two examples of this pattern with uspeh ‘success’ in the Y position were contrastive. A relatively small number of examples retrieved by means of this pattern is in line with the observations made by Fellbaum (1995), who found that, although both nominal and verbal opposites in the one million Brown Corpus of English co-occurred in the same sentence significantly more often than by chance and in the same patterns as adjectival pairs, they did not co-occur with the same regularity as adjective pairs. In relation to our work, this implies that pattern-based methods of finding opposites can perform better at finding the ones expressed by adjectives rather than nouns, and that in a large enough corpus, examples of nominal opposites would be more numerous.7

To sum up, uspeh ‘success’ as a seed word in all three patterns, in both the X and the Y positions, generated a total of 101 examples, of which there are 71 (or $7 0 \%$ ) with a contrastive relation. This again confirms the ability of the antonymous patterns to retrieve contrast terms from the corpus, for both adjectives and nouns. Based on the corpus data, the following textual antonymous profile of uspeh ‘success’ emerged:

uspeh ‘success’ stands in contrast to neuspeh ‘failure’ most commonly (in 62 examples or $8 7 \%$ );   
each of the following occurred at least once in contrast to uspeh ‘success’: krah ‘disaster’, propast ‘disaster’, pad ‘fall’, mir ‘peace’, šteta ‘damage’, promašaj ‘failure’, problem ‘problem’.

These data suggest that the textual antonymous profile of uspeh ‘success’ is not particularly diverse and that it shares a very strong antonymous profile with neuspeh ‘failure’, which appears in more than three quarters of all examples. In order to test whether neuspeh ‘failure’ behaves similarly in the same patterns, it was tested in both positions in all three patterns in the corpus, which produced a total of 75 examples. The search for the $\mathbf { \epsilon } ^ { * } \mathbf { X }$ or $\mathrm { Y } '$ string pattern generated 5 instances of neuspeh ‘failure’ in the X position and 56 instances in the Y position. In this group of examples there are 2 instances of contrast relation with neuspeh ‘failure’ in the X position and 50 instances with neuspeh ‘failure’ in the Y position. The pattern ‘both X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ generated 13 hits, 3 of which had neuspeh ‘failure’ in the X position and 10 in the Y position, providing 9 examples of contrast in the latter group of examples. The search for ‘between X and Y’ produced one example with neuspeh ‘failure’ in the Y position only. The only term that neuspeh ‘failure’ contrasts with in all the sentences where the pattern yielded the relation of contrast (a total of 62 or $8 3 \%$ ) is its morphological antonym uspeh ‘success’. The statistical summary of all examples of contrast relation with uspeh ‘success’ and neuspeh ‘failure’ in both positions in all the patterns is provided in Table 4.

The tendency of the unmarked or underived antonym to precede the marked or derived one is not statistically significant in the case of the ‘between X and Y’ pattern $( p > 0 . 0 5 )$ , presumably because of a very small number of retrieved examples. Still, having in mind the statistical significance of the more numerous examples in the other two patterns, it seems that the markedness distinction may play a role in ordering antonyms within antonymous patterns. As in the case of ‘good/bad’, the marked member once again exhibits a much less diverse textual antonymous profile than the unmarked one, sharing its antonymous profile exclusively with the unmarked member. On the other hand, various terms set up in contrast to uspeh ‘success’ present examples of contextually supported lexical, rather than morphological, antonyms. Each of them is contextualized in the sentence where it occurs. Thus, uspeh ili krah ‘success or disaster’ appears in the context of a business enterprise, uspeh ili propast ‘success or disaster’ in the context of a theatrical performance, uspeh ili pad ‘success or fall’ when talking about people’s expectations regarding the outcome of their endeavors and između uspeha i mira ‘between success and peace’ in the context of the choice one has to make between being a celebrity or living an ordinary, uneventful life. The role of these contexts is to constrain the delineation of the pairs as opposites in an antonymous pattern that supports binary semantic contrast and at the same time highlights their different conceptual anchoring.

Table 4: Statistics of uspeh ‘success’ and neuspeh ‘failure’ in antonymous patterns.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Position</td><td colspan="3">X or Y</td><td colspan="3">Both X and Y</td><td colspan="3">Between X and Y</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Raw freq.</td><td>%</td><td>x (p)</td><td>Raw freq.</td><td>%</td><td>x (p)</td><td>Raw freq.</td><td>%</td><td>x (p)</td></tr><tr><td>USPEH</td><td>x</td><td>56</td><td>96</td><td>50.276</td><td>10</td><td>91</td><td>7.364</td><td>2 100</td><td></td><td>2.000</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;SUCCESS&#x27; Y</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>p&lt;0.0001</td><td>1</td><td>9</td><td>p=0.0067</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>p=0.1573</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>total</td><td>58</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>11</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>2 100</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NEUSPEH</td><td>x</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>44.308</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>9.000</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1.000</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;FAILURE&#x27;</td><td>Y</td><td>50</td><td>96</td><td>p&lt;0.0001</td><td>9</td><td>100</td><td>p=0.0027</td><td>1</td><td>100</td><td>p=0.3173</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>total</td><td>52</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>100</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# 6 Discussion

The range of contrast pairs found with antonymous patterns surpasses the limited number of well-established antonyms commonly discussed in the theoretical approaches on antonymy. In particular, the pattern-based method can find not only canonical antonyms like dobar/loš ‘good/bad’, uspeh/neuspeh ‘success/failure’, but also less conventional pairs like prirodan/veštački ‘natural/artificial’, uspeh/pad ‘success/fall’, non-typical domain-specific contrast pair like prirodan/društveni ‘natural/social’ (sciences), prirodan/sintetički ‘natural/synthetic’ (materials) and highly context-dependent pairs like prirodan/dodatno unet ‘natural/supplemental’ (hormones in the human body) or uspeh/mir ‘success/peace’ (an analogue of eventful/uneventful life). Although such pairs are used in the corpus in a way similar to the canonical pairs, nontypical context-dependent contrast pairs have been neglected in theoretical classifications. Our results provide evidence that antonymy includes a much wider range of pairs than has previously been recognized. One reason why the antonym of a word can vary according to context is the fact that words are polysemous, and different senses of a single word may require different antonyms; such is the case for a number of antonyms of prirodan ‘natural’ retrieved in this research (e.g., ‘natural/artificial’, ‘natural/man-made’, ‘natural/synthetic’, ‘natural/social’, etc.). Murphy and Andrew (1993) gave experimental evidence that people recognize different antonyms for adjectives according to the nouns that the adjectives modify. For example, the antonym of the sense of ‘fresh’ in ‘fresh fish’ is different from that in ‘fresh bread’ or ‘fresh shirt’. For many of these, we might say that the antonym is associated with a particular sense of the given adjective, in which case semantic considerations are as important as pragmatic ones; the role of the context is to point out which sense is relevant. However, not only does the relation of contrast vary by word sense (as is noted in the literature), but it can also vary by context, regardless of sense variation. In contrast to, say, uspeh ‘success’, language users can put a very unrelated noun, like mir ‘peace’, if ‘success’ and ‘peace’ are in complementary distribution in some context, thus occupying the same type of linguistic context in which we find other cases of binary semantic contrast. The only difference here is that the contrast between ‘success/peace’ is dependent upon contextual knowledge in a way that the opposition between ‘success/failure’ is not.

The method of finding contrast pairs by means of antonymous patterns is useful as a simple method that requires no preprocessing of the corpus and that can identify contrast pairs within the same syntactic category with high precision. Although this corpus-based study gives insight into the range of antonyms for a given word, the main shortcoming is that the pairs as well as the patterns used were identified manually. It is therefore not clear whether, for example, patterns of the coordinating type are more useful than other patterns for identification of antonym pairs. However, the method can be improved in two important ways. Firstly, the findings show that a patternbased method for finding contrast pairs automatically is a plausible way to pursue. Devising an algorithm for automatic extraction of contrast pairs would be superior to manual identification because it requires less time and provides flexibility within different genres and languages, besides having the advantage of not being influenced by biases and intuitions of the researcher. And secondly, automatic retrieval of semantic opposites need not be restricted to word pairs from the same syntactic category, as Fellbaum (1995) found that cross-categorical antonym pairs (e.g., ‘to begin/ endless’, ‘death/to live’) also co-occurred significantly more often than by chance in the same sentence, suggesting that antonyms do not have to belong to the same syntactic category.

In the cases of antonymy in the textual function of inclusiveness, or in the function of making parameters of a distinction, antonyms tend to cooccur in particular lexico-grammatical patterns that require a contrast between the X and Y elements. The frame itself ensures that items within it are interpreted as being mutually incompatible, in order that the discursive function of uniting the contrasted meanings or pointing to the opposite meanings can hold. For example, pairs like ‘natural/revealed’ or ‘natural/ supernatural’, would unlikely be recognized as antonyms at all were it not for the support of the ‘between X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ pattern. Part of the meaning of the između $X i ~ Y$ ‘between X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ construction is that it draws our attention to the distinctions between contrasting categories; part of the meaning of $X$ ili Y ‘X or $\mathrm { Y } '$ or $i X i Y$ ‘both X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ constructions is that it unites and neutralizes contrasting categories. In that way they make it possible for any two words that appear in these constructions to be interpreted as antonyms. In order for the coordinated structure to have the effect of neutralizing differences between incompatibles, the coordinated items must be interpreted as incompatible in the given context. Still, patterns in which antonyms are coordinated can be used in contrastive as well as non-contrastive ways. Not every use of coordinating conjunctions is contrastive by nature: for instance, when coordinating adjective phrases, the pattern ‘both X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ simply conjoins two attributes and cannot be interpreted as contrastive. It means that the definitely contrastive use of the i $X i ~ Y$ ‘both X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ construction has to be distinguished from other uses. The observation that certain antonymous patterns are associated with particular semantic-discourse contributions supports the view (proposed by Jones et al. [2012]) that they could be treated as contrastive constructions, in the sense of Construction Grammar approach to language.8

# 7 Conclusion

The research presented in this paper has tried to answer the question of whether it is possible to create the textual antonymous profile of a word by means of antonymous patterns, i.e., phrasal contexts of antonym co-occurrence in written discourse. A number of those patterns could have been chosen, but this study investigated the performance of three common constructions: ‘X or Y’, ‘both X and $\mathrm { Y } '$ and ‘between X and Y’. The output generated by all three patterns, using as test items the adjectives dobar ‘good’, loš ‘bad’, prirodan ‘natural’ and the noun uspeh ‘success’, strongly suggests that the chosen patterns are abundant. Subsequent analysis of contrastive pairs established in those contexts gave evidence to the claim that it is possible to create the textual profile of antonyms using these lexicosyntactic constructions. The position of a word in the antonymous pattern is important when there is a markedness distinction between members of the antonymous pair. The tendency seems to be that the unmarked member is more often set in the contrastive relation when it appears in the X position in the pattern and, at the same time, it is the one with a broader (i.e., more diverse) textual antonymous profile. On the other hand, the marked member exhibits the tendency to establish a contrast relation when it occurs in the Y position, but its textual antonymous profile is not at all diverse. Therefore, the unmarked member has a richer antonymous profile in text.

The creation of textual antonymous profiles by means of antonymous patterns enlarges our understanding of this relation and has implications as to which pairs can be treated as antonyms. The antonymous patterns with part of speech information may find a larger number of semantic opposites that include not only already known pairs, but also novel instances of binary semantic contrast that are usually not studied or discussed by theoretical linguists, as well as those that are contrastive only in certain contexts and domains. Contrast pairs found with antonymous patterns would be useful for many computational applications, such as automatic identification of Contrast, for which it is more useful to identify context-bound opposites in certain domains or a specific register than to rely on a set of well-established thoroughly studied canonical opposites. Results of the study support the cognitive semantics approach that views antonymy as a conceptual relation dependent on the conceptual dimension that unites the antonyms on the occurrence of use.

Acknowledgements: I wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments that have contributed to the quality of the manuscript.

# References

Cruse, David A. 1986. Lexical semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Fellbaum, Christiane. 1995. Co-occurrence and antonymy. International Journal of Lexicography 8(4). 281–303.   
Goldberg, Adele. 1995. Constructions: a Construction Grammar approach to argument structure. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.   
Halliday, Michael A. & K. Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Cohesion in English. London: Longman.   
Jones, Steven. 2002. Antonymy: A corpus-based perspective. London & New York: Routledge.   
Jones, Steven. 2006. Antonym co-occurrence in spoken English. Text and Talk 26(2). 191–216.   
Jones, Steven. 2007. ‘Opposites’ in discourse: A comparison of antonym use across four domains. Journal of Pragmatics 39(6). 1105–1119.   
Jones, Steven & M. Lynne Murphy. 2005. Using corpora to investigate antonym acquisition. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 10(3). 401–422.   
Jones, Steven, M. Lynne Murphy, Carita Paradis & Caroline Willners. 2012. Antonyms in English. Construals, constructions and canonicity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Justeson, John S. & Slava M. Katz. 1991. Co-occurrences of antonymous adjectives and their contexts. Computational linguistics 17. 1–19.   
Justeson, John. S. & Slava M. Katz. 1992. Redefining antonymy: The textual structure of a semantic relation. Literary and Linguistic Computing 7. 176–184.   
Karaman, Burcu I. 2008. On contronymy. International Journal of Lexicography 21(2). 173–192.   
Kostić, Nataša. 2011. Antonymous frameworks in Serbian written discourse: Phrasal contexts of antonym co-occurrence in text. Poznań Studies in Contemporary Linguistics 47(3). 509–537.   
Kostić, Nataša. 2013. Antonimija u diskursu [Antonymy in discourse]. Podgorica: University of Montenegro Press.   
Lehrer, Adrienne. 1985. Markedness and antonymy. Journal of Linguistics 21(2). 397–429.   
Lehrer, Adrienne. 2002. Gradable antonymy and complementarity. In David A. Cruse, Franz Hundsnurscher, Michael Job & Peter R. Lutzeier (eds.), Handbook of Lexicology, 498–506. Berlin: de Gruyter.   
Lehrer, Adrienne & Keith Lehrer. 1982. Antonymy. Linguistics and Philosophy 5(4). 483–501.   
Löbner, Sebastian. 2002. Understanding semantics. London: Arnold.   
Lyons, John. 1977. Semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Mettinger, Arthur. 1994. Aspects of semantic opposition in English. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Muehleisen, Victoria & Maho Isono. 2009. Antonymous adjectives in Japanese discourse. Journal of Pragmatics 41(11). 2185–2203.   
Murphy, Gregory L. & Jane M. Andrew. 1993. The conceptual basis of antonymy and synonymy in adjectives. Journal of Memory and Language 32(3). 301–319.   
Murphy, M. Lynne. 2003. Semantic relations and the lexicon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Murphy, M. Lynne & Steven Jones. 2008. Antonyms in children’s and child-directed speech. First Language 28(4). 403–430.   
Murphy, M. Lynne, Carita Paradis, Caroline Willners & Steven Jones. 2009. Discourse functions of antonymy: A cross linguistic investigation of Swedish and English. Journal of Pragmatics 41(11). 2159–2184.   
Room, Adrian. 1988. A dictionary of contrasting pairs. London: Routledge.