# Evaluation and promotion across languages

Philip Shaw\*

Engelska Institutionen, Stockholms Universitet, S-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden

# Abstract

Many academics write both in their mother tongue and in English. Their rhetoric is influenced by the general national culture, the culture of their national scientific community, their perception of their audience, and, in English, by their language proficiency. This study examines rhetoric, and specifically evaluation, in three sets of published economics articles: one set in Danish, the second by the same authors in English, and a third by international authors from the same journals as the second. Despite the many similarities among all three, there are Danish norms in terms of use of the Gap move, use of personal pronouns, and other features, some of which the Danes carry over into their writing in English. However, the features carried over are within the norms of writing in English and are probably not perceptible to international readers: Danish writers in international journals merely tend to cluster at the less promotional end of the spectrum.

$©$ 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

eywords: Economics; Genre; Academic writing; Danish; Contrastive

# 1. Introduction

# 1.1. Evaluation

Studies of the differences in the rhetoric and style of academic articles in different cultures and languages have focused on a variety of linguistic and rhetorical features such as the use of metalanguage (Mauranen, 1993), the role and realisation of the various moves in the introduction (Taylor & Chen, 1991; Burgess, 2002), the use of ‘boosting’ language (Lindeberg, 1997), and first-person pronouns (Vassileva, 2000).

Most of the features used have in common that they are not basic disciplinary content or relations (Moreno, 1998), but overt expressions of evaluation in the sense of Hunston (2000). In her model, evaluation may be on the interactive plane, concerned with the evaluation of propositions or ‘discourse-entities’ (Thetela, 1997) or the autonomous, concerned with evaluation of ‘world-entities’. In It may be true that the moon is made of cheese, it may be true evaluates on the interactive plane, and in The moon is an important source of cheese, important does so on the autonomous plane. On either plane evaluation ascribes a status and a value, (although the analysis below does not attempt to distinguish these systematically). The status of proposition as averred fact, an averred assessment, or an assumption is indicated by adjectives, projecting clauses etc, in the text segment that expresses it and each type of status has the potential for a particular set of values, positive or negative, one of which may be ascribed by a later text segment. Thus a recommendation may be ascribed positive value by showing what good consequences may come from it, and a hypothesis may be ascribed negative value by citing counter-evidence. On the autonomous plane a ‘world-entity’ can be given a particular status by its lexicalisation—to refer to something as a sect or as propaganda is to evaluate it—and this status can be given value as important, valuable, effective, etc. by subsequent text segments.

Myers (1991) distinguishes between a ‘narrative of nature’, typical of popularisation, and ‘narrative of science’, typical of research-reporting articles. In discussions of evaluation this corresponds to a distinction made by Thetela (1997), dividing entities and value-ascription on both Hunston planes into research-oriented and topic-oriented categories. Thus one will have research-oriented entities such as an investigation by Brie and topic-oriented ones like the composition of the moon. One can ascribe topic-oriented value (importance) to one’s topic by saying that it threatens to cause problems for the world economy, for example, or one can ascribe research-oriented value to it by saying that there has been a lot of research on it. Similarly one can ascribe topic-oriented status by attributing a statement to a realworld actor, and one can ascribe research-oriented status by attributing it to a researcher. Table 1 illustrates this.

# 1.2. Types of difference

Academic texts from different countries and languages differ systematically, often in terms of evaluation. Several factors have been identified which may account for this. The first is what Okamura (2000) calls ‘national culture’—our expectation that members of different cultures have learned different ways of expressing themselves generally and that these affect academic writing in the same way as other registers or genres. Keeping to European examples, this is the implication when Mauranen (1993) shows that Finnish scientists have a somewhat more writer-oriented style in both English and Finnish than Anglos, and Vassileva (2001) shows that Bulgarian linguists express their claims more directly than Anglos in both their mother-tongue and English. However, it is clear, as Burgess (2002: 209) has shown, that ‘variation in discourse conventions is not solely the result of the language background of the writer’.

Table 1 Orientations and planes   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Orientation</td></tr><tr><td>Plane</td><td>Research</td><td>Topic = world/policy</td></tr><tr><td>Autonomous</td><td>A great deal of research</td><td>A major policy debate</td></tr><tr><td>Interactive</td><td>Smith (1998) claims</td><td>Politicians often claim</td></tr></table></body></html>

The second is the local disciplinary culture or community—the conditions of production of the texts in question (Melander, 1998). This is what Okamura (2000) calls ‘national science’ (vividly illustrated by Casanave, 1998). It has been suggested, for example that high levels of ‘boosting’ (Lindeberg, 1997) of one’s research contribution are a response to a more competitive research environment and that by contrast less competitive environments produce less overt evaluation. Thus boosting has been found to be less present—or less obvious—in some Scandinavian academic writing than in English (Frederickson & Swales, 1994), and Yakhontova (2002) ascribes some of the differences between Anglo and Ukrainian abstracts to the more collectivist tradition of Ukrainian research. ‘National science’ presumably leads to preference for certain rhetorical forms which may not be fully deliberate or conscious. This level may also be deeply affected by physical conditions such as the availability of books and materials (Canagarajah, 2002).

The third is rather more specific—the audience for which the text is produced. This may be conflated with the second factor (cf. Burgess, 2002), but it can be distinguished, at least logically. If Ukrainians or Scandinavians always write in a certain way they may do so because of some inherent feature of their scientific culture, but if they write in one way for a local academic audience in their own language and in another for an international they presumably do so because they perceive different rhetorics or styles as appropriate for the two audiences. We can distinguish two dimensions of audience difference: degree of localism and degree of specialisation. Many academics write for a local audience in one language and for an international one in another (often English). Simultaneously, at least in applied disciplines, many write sometimes for an audience of practitioners and sometimes for an audience of academics (Hemais, 2001). The use of different rhetoric for different audiences, if it occurs, is likely to be a more or less conscious decision.

Of course discipline is an important factor, and it may interact with national science. Not only do style and rhetoric differ across disciplines (virologists do not write like linguists (Hyland, 2000)), but also there are ‘national science’ or cultural differences in one discipline and not in another. Thus Melander, Swales, and Fredrickson (1997) examined abstracts by Americans writing English, Swedes writing Swedish, and Swedes writing English across three disciplines, and showed that their rhetoric was uniform in plant pathology, different in medicine probably because the Swedish-language articles aimed at a different audience, and different in linguistics because of national science.

Finally, where writers have to write in a language which is not their mother tongue they might write in a specific way because of limitations of language proficiency, perhaps including L1 transfer (articles in Granger, 1998 contain examples). Both limited proficiency and difference of rhetoric are cited by Deneire (2002) as restricting the opportunities of researchers who are L2 speakers of English.

Writers themselves are conscious of many of these factors. In a survey (cf. Petersen & Shaw, 2002) of one group of bilingual academics—Danish applied economists—respondents disagreed as to whether academic economics articles in English written by Danes differed consistently from their equivalents written by Anglos. About half the 82 questionnaire respondents thought they did not, $40 \%$ thought they did, and $1 0 \%$ ‘didn’t know’. Suggested reasons for there being no difference were: that internationalisation has meant that ‘Anglo rhetoric/style’ is not meaningful; that the processes of reviewing and editing erase differences; that the field uses mathematics and verbal formulae; and that all participants in the field are immersed in the same style and register of English. Suggested reasons why there might be a difference were: that limited language proficiency leads to ineffective ‘style and flow’; that Danes have a different style or rhetoric due to a national habit of thought or expression; and, more generally, that there are differences in disciplinary cultures among nations. The notion of audience difference also arose, in discussions of the purpose of writing in Danish or English.

Earlier work attempted merely to establish differences among sets of texts, but, as shown above, writers have more recently become interested in the reasons for differences (Melander et al., 1997; Mauranen, 2001; Burgess, 2002). This involves rather careful construction of corpora for comparison, so that disciplinary culture, audience, and language, for example are not confounded. If the research focuses on sets of texts without reference to their writers this is problematic. Thus Burgess (2002), Yakhontova (2002), and Vassileva (2001) all compare sets of texts in a given discipline written in a given language with articles by speakers of that language written in English. In these circumstances we know we are dealing with different audiences, but not whether we are dealing with the same disciplinary culture. Do the people who write their articles and abstracts in English share the rhetorical values of those who write in the mother tongue? Since we are looking at averages, is it not quite likely that the average rhetorical values of the two groups are different?

The purpose of this paper is to use a rather strictly controlled corpus to unravel the various types of difference that can exist among texts by comparing evaluative language in article introductions in applied economics in Danish, in English by Danes, and in English by others. Evaluative language is chosen not only because it has been so widely examined by related investigations, but also because a common cultural stereotype (in Scandinavia) is that Scandinavians dislike showing off and therefore their academic writing makes less use of ‘boosting’ than Anglo writing.

# 1.3. Research questions

Currently, introductions to academic articles often conform more or less to Swales’ CARS model (1990) and therefore show the importance of the general topic and particular issue concerned, outline the gap to be filled, and make the article purpose explicit. This provides a framework for asking questions about evaluation at both the rhetorical and linguistic levels

I therefore ask first of all a general question:

How are the categories of evaluation mapped onto the CARS moves?

Then two contrastive-rhetoric ones

Are there differences between the sets in the realisation of any particular   
move, particularly the gap, purpose, and outline steps discussed by previous writers?   
Does evaluation focus on a narrative of research rather than on a narrative of the world/policy to the same extent in all three sets?

Then a contrastive-style one

Do the sets of articles use the same evaluative vocabulary at the same points?

# 2. Materials

The texts examined are published articles in applied economics. One set is in Danish written by Danes who also publish in English, the second is in English written by the same set of Danish writers, and the third is in English written by what I will call Anglo writers. These are researchers based in institutions in the US, Britain, or New Zealand (as it happens) where at least one member of each authorial team has an Anglo-Saxon name. Whether or not the third set constitutes ‘nativespeaker’ writing it is probably not characterised by a specific non-Anglo culture in rhetorical terms. This kind of three-way comparison using Danish writers is possible in principle because in Denmark an academic Danish-language economics journal— Nationaløkonomisk Tidsskrift—survives. Our interviewees agreed that publication in this journal has some academic prestige, although it only reaches a local audience.

The corpus for analysis was constructed by finding papers in the Nationaløkonomisk Tidsskrift written as far as possible by scholars who had been interviewed for the survey mentioned above (Petersen & Shaw, 2002), checking bibliographies for publications in English by the same authors, and then checking the journals in which these had appeared for Anglo publications (as defined above). This produced a corpus of ten articles by Danes in Danish (set DD), ten by the same set of Danes in English (set DE), and ten Anglo articles in English from the same journals (set EE). All articles have comparable topics and disciplinary orientation, and broadly similar expectations of reader expertise. DD and DE have similar author backgrounds and differ in language and audience. DE and EE have the same language and audiences and differ in author background.

Table 2 Sources and authorship of articles investigated   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Codes for authors in Nat Ok</td><td>Authorship of corresponding English-language article</td><td>English-language journal of publication (Danes and Anglos)=</td></tr><tr><td>QR</td><td>QR</td><td>Labour</td></tr><tr><td>PQ</td><td>QS</td><td>Oxford Economic Papers</td></tr><tr><td>K</td><td>K</td><td>Environmental &amp; Resource Econ&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>AG</td><td>AG</td><td>Energy</td></tr><tr><td>J</td><td>J</td><td>Energy Policy</td></tr><tr><td>BCDE</td><td>ACD</td><td>Energy Policy</td></tr><tr><td>CDE</td><td>CDF</td><td>Scandinavian Economic History</td></tr><tr><td>CD</td><td>ABD</td><td>Journal of Consumer Politics</td></tr><tr><td>GH</td><td>XYZQR</td><td>Scandinavian J of Economics</td></tr><tr><td>BCDE</td><td>A</td><td>Energy Economics</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 shows the journals from which the articles came. It also shows that many articles had multiple authorship and so the paired English-language and Danishlanguage articles do not always have exactly the same authors. Nevertheless the authors of DE and DD come from the same ‘discourse community’.

# 3. Results

These introductions have here been analysed, adapting Swales (1990), in terms of six units. To suit these texts I have re-analysed Swales’ ‘Move 1’ into ‘Topic’ and ‘Issue’. The topic is the general area to be investigated. The issue is an area within it of particular importance or controversy. I have also limited ‘outlining purpose’ to the initial statement and introduced ‘Expansion of purpose’ for whatever comes after this statement, whether it discusses aims, dataset (as is often the case), or results. Although some of these units are close to those of Samraj (2001), they are chosen merely to simplify discussion of evaluation and rhetorical contrasts, and no theoretical status is claimed for them. This is illustrated in Table 3.

The gap unit, if present, is identified by a sentence (occasionally more) containing an assertion that something is missing in the literature, preparing the way for or justifying the purpose. It is one particular realisation of Move 2, one which Swales describes as involving a strong knowledge claim and thus intense evaluation.

In several cases the article began with Move 3 and in these and other cases there was often a gap statement after the statement of purpose. Since Purpose and Gap are defined by their content (and not their position) this is unproblematic. However, a structure similar to a gap statement sometimes occurs as part of the issue unit, introducing what is in fact Swales’ ‘reviewing items of previous research’, a summary of the literature, and I have called this a pseudo-gap. Thus one can find a proposition like Little has been written on this field followed by This article therefore proposes to . . .—a true gap because it functions as Move 2, but the same proposition can be followed by Schmidt 1995 has shown that’ and in this case it is treated as a pseudo-gap. It would be possible to regard the ‘pseudo-gap’ as introducing Move 2 ( and thus having repeated gap moves as in Samraj, 2001); this is not done here because sequences pseudo-gap $^ +$ literature $^ +$ gap $^ +$ purpose occur, and the aim is to focus on the gap which ‘promotes’ the purpose.

Table 3 Analysis of article introductions   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move 1</td><td>Topic (Claiming centrality&#x27;?)</td><td>&#x27;Strategic trade policy through the last decades has become increasingly incompatible with. international legislation</td></tr><tr><td>Move 2</td><td>Issue (&#x27;making topic generalisation&#x27;+) &#x27;reviewing items of previous research&#x27;). Establishing a niche (one realisation</td><td>These issues are mainly analysed in the well-known and powerful Brander-Spencer framework. So far there has been no attempt to investigate...</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>of which is indicating a gap)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Move 3</td><td>Outlining purpose</td><td>The purpose of this paper is to...</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Expansion of purpose</td><td>These data enable us to</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Indicating RA structure</td><td>In Section x we present...</td></tr></table></body></html>

In this results section I discuss selected features of these units and show in which areas there were differences among the three sets. Table 4 shows that fewer of the articles from National Økonomisk Tidsskrift (DD) began with a sentence oriented to research than of the other two sets. This reflects a rhetorical choice, not the content of the articles, for similar numbers in all three sets eventually focused on a narrative of research in the topic section.

The topic was typically ascribed value on the autonomous plane. Table 5 shows the explicit devices that were judged to do this. It shows that a majority of the topic moves in each set of articles did contain overt evaluative language and that broadly similar categories were used throughout.

The issue unit often shows evaluation on both the interactive and the autonomous plane. As with the topic, the various sets of articles used comparable autonomousplane evaluative vocabulary. Table 6 lists interactive-plane devices judged to function evaluatively (normally to discuss a debate either in the research world or in the real world of policy) and shows that there are no major differences among the sets here either. It is possible that the Danes are more inclined to use evaluative adjectives than the international writers and the use of direct questions (How then should. . .?) might be a Danish preference.

Table 4 Orientation of content of first sentence of the article   

<html><body><table><tr><td>First sentence orientation</td><td>DD</td><td>DE EE</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>To research There is now a large body of empirical work indicating that...</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>To policy/debate Energy efficiency and economic efficiency are both in vogue internationally</td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>To world Consumers around the world are collecting air miles</td><td>4</td><td></td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Eventual orientation to research in introduction</td><td>5</td><td>3 5</td><td>6</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 Types of autonomous-plane vocabulary used in ’topic ’unit   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>DD</td><td>DE</td><td>EE</td></tr><tr><td>Importance one of the main recent environmental concerns</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Change increased very fast</td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Much discussed publicly intensified debate ona</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Much researched most widely used model</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Others in vogue, surprising, complicated</td><td>6</td><td>0</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Total containing explicit evaluative items</td><td>7</td><td>9</td><td>7</td></tr></table></body></html>

An interactive-plane evaluative feature occurring principally in the issue and gap units is citation. Table 7 gives selected details of the 111 citation points in the 30 introductions and shows that the three sets had comparable numbers of citations, but somewhat different distribution among the possible forms. The major difference was that a majority of the Danish citations were of the type see Schmidt 1986 or cf. Schmidt 1986, while very few of the Anglo ones were of this type. By contrast a majority of the Anglo citations were non-integral citations as in The moon is made of cheese (Brie, 1995) and this form was much less common in the Danish articles. The DE set was distributed much more evenly among form categories and thus was intermediate between the other two.

Move 2 can be realised by several alternative steps, of which the ‘Indicating the Gap’ is the one in which evaluation is most concentrated. Table 8 shows that the Anglo set has more examples of gap moves and suggests that the Danes made less use of the move in either language. In at least one case the gap seems to have been deliberately downplayed: in an article in Scandinavian Economic History by a Dane there is a footnote which reads To our knowledge there are no studies analysing post war convergence in regional income in Nordic countries. By contrast, its randomlychosen Anglo counterpart from Sc. Ec. Hist. contains an elaborate gap paragraph prominently placed before the issue unit, which includes phrases like surprisingly little economic literature, This confounds $x$ with $y$ and wrongly suggests that. . .; these deficiencies in the economics literature. . .

Table 6 Types of interactive plane vocabulary used to highlight issue   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>DD</td><td>DE</td><td>EE</td></tr><tr><td>Modals: may, could</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Reporting verbs: argue, claim find</td><td>4</td><td>6</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Metalinguistic nouns: claim, theory, finding, result</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Adversatives: however, although,nevertheless</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Modal adverbs: probably</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Attitude disjuncts: certainly,surprisingly</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Evaluative adjectives: striking, surprising, sceptical,</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Addition markers: furthermore</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Direct questions</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total containing explicit evaluative items</td><td>7</td><td>9</td><td>7</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 Percentages of citations which have a certain form   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>DD</td><td>DE</td><td>EE</td></tr><tr><td>Total number of citation points in this set (M)</td><td>31</td><td>43</td><td>37</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage (rounded to whole numbers) of N with the given form non-integral: (Schmidt, 1985)</td><td>6</td><td>26</td><td>76</td></tr><tr><td>subject: Schmidt (1986) found</td><td>16</td><td>21</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>non-subject: it is argued by Schmidt that, see Schmidt (1986)</td><td>61</td><td>23</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>Others: a Nash-Cournot equilibrium, Blau&#x27;s approach (1992)</td><td>16</td><td>31</td><td>6</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 9 shows that the three groups use linguistically similar types of value ascription devices if they have gap sections. The gap is often pre-announced by a statement that there is a lot of literature on something, which sets up the classic but surprisingly little on something else.

In Move 3 (purpose and outline) the feature examined was the use of the firstperson pronouns I, my, we, us, our. There were no examples of ‘editorial we’; individual writers used I/me if they used a first-person pronoun. Most instances of we were exclusive, referring to the writers rather than both writer and reader. Table 10 shows that only one case of we occurred in the introductions before the Purpose move, and this was an inclusive one—. . .even if we believe $X$ we should not $Y .$ . In the Purpose section there were sharp differences among the three sets of articles, with first-person pronouns little used in Danish, a minority feature among Danes writing in English, and present in a majority of the Anglo articles. The single use in Danish illustrates why one might take first-person pronoun use as ascribing value: a clause translatable as Furthermore we will introduce a data series which. . . contrasts the inferior data used by previous writers with ‘our’ superior material. Many cases listed under ‘expansion’ represent contrasts of what ‘we’ shall do with what ‘they’ did before. The outline sections of the Anglo and Danish-language sets show a sharp contrast. Danish-language outline sections normally use a construction to be translated ‘. . ..is given/presented/discussed etc. in Section $x '$ where the original uses a rather handy inflected passive, while the international writers use an active voice with the author or the text as agent. Danes writing in English adopt the text-asagent form more than the author-as-agent form, but also make use of the translation-equivalent of the Danish form.

Table 8 Gap realisation   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>DD</td><td>DE</td><td>EE</td></tr><tr><td>Explicit gap precedes purpose (so that purpose appears to evaluate gap)</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Explicit gap after purpose (so that gap appears to evaluate purpose)</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Pre-gap introduces review (with or without a real gap later)</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>No explicit gap in introduction</td><td>6</td><td>6a</td><td>3</td></tr></table></body></html>

a One of these has a gap in a footnote!

Table 9 Evaluative devices in the gap (number of articles showing one of this type)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td>DD</td><td>DE</td><td>EE</td></tr><tr><td>Pre-gap: &#x27;many&#x27;, a large number.</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Negative or quasi-negative quantifiers: few, little, no</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical negation: lack of, deficits, ignored.</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>To date&#x27;: so far, earlier studies.</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Negation in the verb phrase: does not recognise</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Adversative: however, although.</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>3</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 10 Purpose and outline: number of texts showing particular uses of first-person pronouns and text agency   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Location</td><td>Example</td><td>DD</td><td>DE</td><td>EE</td></tr><tr><td>Before Purpose</td><td>Even if we believe X we should not Y.</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Purpose</td><td>I|we in initial purpose statement in this study we examine...</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Expansion of Purpose</td><td>I seek to identify</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Outline</td><td>In the fifth section we briefly present...</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Alternatives to I/We n the Outline movea Passive + prep + section ... are presented</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>7</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>in Section 4 Section as subject ... the first part of the paper presents</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>7</td><td>6</td></tr></table></body></html>

a This move was present in all the Danish-language articles, 9 out of 10 English-language/Danishauthor and 8 out of 10 Anglo.

# 4. Discussion

A number of similarities among the articles in the three sets were found, which show how the categories of evaluative language can be reliably used to identify the units of an introduction:

The topic is typically assigned value by autonomous-plane evaluation—it is important, for example. The three sets of introductions did this with similar frequency and used a similar vocabulary.   
The issue can be distinguished from the topic by the appearance, alongside autonomous-plane evaluation, of interactive-plane evaluation, either research-oriented (A large number of studies suggest. . .) or topic-oriented (throughout the years, some politicians have claimed that. . .). Again, the three sets of introductions did this with similar frequency and used a similar vocabulary.   
Citations occurred with comparable frequency in all three sets.   
Wherever the gap was present it was expressed in similar (and similarly forthright) language.

To answer the first research question, these results tend to suggest that Hunston’s evaluative categories can be predictably mapped onto Swales’ CARS model for introductions. Of course, every proposition has status by definition, and presumably so does every entity. However many propositions have relatively unmarked status as factual averrals, and many entities are lexicalised in uncontroversial ways. Table 11 is intended to suggest types of evaluation which are likely to be lexically marked in the various moves of the CARS model.

Table 11 Introduction structure and evaluation   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Swales move</td><td></td><td>Orientation,</td><td>Prominent evaluation plane</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Topic</td><td>Topic/researche</td><td>Autonomous</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Issue</td><td>Topic/researche</td><td>Interactive + autonomous</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Niche</td><td>Research</td><td>Autonomous</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Purpose</td><td>Research</td><td>Interactive</td></tr></table></body></html>

While the topic is normally ascribed value mainly on the autonomous plane in terms of its popularity as a research field or its real-world importance the specific issue is often also highlighted by devices which ascribe status on the interactive plane (such as while some have suggested. . .) and evaluate this status. The niche is by definition a research-oriented entity and it is typically evaluated in autonomous-plane terms of the need for more research, the existence of a gap, etc. The purpose, on the other hand, is a proposition which can be ascribed interactive-plane evaluation in terms of writer commitment.

The three sets of introductions are similar in generic and disciplinary terms. Nevertheless there are some differences among them, which appear to be relatable to the different factors discussed above.

Two are on the rhetorical or discourse-structure level. First (to answer the second research question), although the articles were remarkably uniform in containing Purpose and Outline moves, they differed in how the niche for the present research was created, with the Danish writers less inclined to use the ‘gap’ move, particularly when writing in Danish. On this parameter DD and DE seem to pattern together, with EE markedly more inclined to use a ‘gap’. Danes seem to be following the same rhetorical norm in both languages, and the international writers following another norm. In the Nationaløkonomisk Tidsskrift articles this might be ascribed to features of national science; perhaps Danish economists are likely to know their colleagues well, and do not need to profile themselves in the same way. This can hardly apply to the articles from international journals, and application of this norm would seem to be based on transfer from a situation which justifies it to one which does not. But of course there are Danes who present highly evaluative gaps1 and international writers who do not realise the niche-creation move at all, so there is nothing particularly odd about the DE articles. It is just that the Danes are more likely to align themselves with the minority of international writers in English who do not realise ‘gap’ than with the majority who do, and I suggest that this is carried over from their ‘home’ rhetorical environment.

Second (to answer the third question), there was a difference in initial orientation. Articles may begin by discussing research, policy, or real-world trends. Fewer of the articles in the Nationaløkonomisk Tidsskrift than of those in English began with a ‘narrative of research’ even though a similar proportion eventually based their account of the topic in a research narrative. This fairly clear difference distinguishes DD from both DE and EE in a dichotomous way.

This must be due to the difference in audience. When we asked the writers why they published in Nationaløkonomisk Tidsskrift, they said that it was a medium which reached not only all economists in Denmark but also Treasury officials. That is, the audience includes practitioners who are likely to respond best to topics whose importance is based on real-world debates and consequences rather than research issues. Hemais (2001) notes that articles in ‘practitioner journals’ like the Harvard Business Review tend to have more ‘phenomenal’ (real-world) grammatical subjects than article intended for an audience mainly including researchers.

Three other differences appear to be on the style level. First, the Danes writing in Danish very frequently introduced supporting references with the equivalents of see or cf., while the international writers seemed generally to use non-integrated references for this function. The Danes writing in English seemed to use both these forms equally frequently. There is thus a cline here from DD to DE to EE.

This is a minor point, with no particular rhetorical implications. The form with see or cf. is unmarked in Danish but in international English usage it seems to be used to indicate a text with related information or a comparable approach, rather than simply the source of cited material. It seems likely that some Danish writers have simply not noticed any difference and taken over the Danishlanguage norm into English, so that here we have a simple transfer of language norm.

Second, the Danes writing in Danish did not use first-person pronouns to ascribe interpersonal status to a significant extent. The international writers quite often did this, and the Danes writing in English occupied an intermediate position, with markedly less use of the strategy than the international writers. Again there is something of a cline, although DE is not quite central.

Both personal and impersonal expressions are of course completely grammatical in both languages. This seems to be a transfer of rhetorical norms. This is an area which is quite often discussed and the writers may well be conscious of it as a stylistic issue. The cline would then arise from some Danes writing in English following what they perceive as international or native-speaker-of-English norms, and other sticking to their own. It is tempting to speculate that the Danish norm is due to the influence on ‘national science’ of national culture, the janteloven which is said by Scandinavians to prevent them putting themselves forward. But this would be incorrect. Vassileva (2000) shows that linguistics articles in English have, on average, some three times as many instances of $I / w e$ as corresponding articles in French, German, Russian and Bulgarian. In her data $I$ was very much more common in English than in any other language, and even editorial we was more frequent than in German and French. Thus it is international or native English that is out of step here; the Danes are merely staying with the general rhetorical convention and there is no need for an explanation other than that their national science supports a different norm of impersonality.

Third, in the ‘indicating RA structure’ step the Danes writing in Danish did not ascribe agency to texts or text sections but used passives (In section 6 $X$ is analysed). The international writers used actives, either with first person subjects (In section 6 we analyse $X$ ) or giving agency to text segments (Section 6 analyses $X$ ). The Danes writing in English used all three strategies, thus regularly using some passive structures (In section $6 \ : X$ is analysed) which were not common in the ‘international’ articles. This can also be regarded as a cline from DD via DE to EE.

This appears to be interaction between simple rules of the language and rhetoric. It is said not to be good Danish to ascribe agency to text sections,2 and the use of the passive (which is a single word) in this context is economical and elegant. It is not particularly good English to use the passive where shorter and more economical forms with the same function are available. Danish thus really only has one way of expressing this, while English has two, one personal and one impersonal. Some Danes writing English adopt one or other of these, some of them perhaps avoiding the personal, others translate the Danish phrase into something perfectly correct but not very frequent.

These similarities and differences are explicable in terms of the academic ‘community’ which produced the writing (described in more detail in Petersen & Shaw, 2002). This is one in which the English and Danish languages are thoroughly interwoven, in which a high proportion of disciplinary input comes through English and from the US, and yet in which most feedback and evaluation comes from fellownationals—working papers written in English are discussed with colleagues in Danish, conferences held in English often have a high proportion of fellow-Scandinavians as participants, etc. We thus have academics who use two languages in close connection with one another and constantly switch from one to another as they switch medium or audience. They probably internalise a good deal of their rhetoric from international publications in English, and are ultimately subject to sanctions by international editors if they depart too far from the expected norms. Yet in practice many of their interactions in either language are with fellow-Scandinavians.

This bilingual environment, partly very open, partly somewhat closed, accounts for the findings of the contrastive style/rhetoric investigation. In disciplinary terms, the writings of Danish business economists do not differ from those of their Anglo peers because they are part of a global research scene. On the level of rhetoric or style the situation is interesting. Because Danish writers do much of their writing, in either language, for their own local colleagues and get much of their feedback from them, conditions exist which allow ‘Danish norms’ for features like first-person use and Move 2 realisation to apply to either language. But because the ultimate outlet for their work in English is international journals, these norms cannot conflict too much with the expectations of their editors. The ‘Danish norms’ that can survive are those which fall within the fairly broad range of the international norms. International readers and editors are after all attuned to their own reading, which includes both (for example Danish) articles which do not use first-person pronouns and others that do. Even if see Schmidt 1989 is a relatively marked form in Anglo writing, it is not particularly difficult to find an example or two, and correspondingly even if In this section we discuss and This section discusses are normal in international writing, it is not difficult to find an article which uses In this section ....is discussed. In these areas Danish norms and preferences can be maintained but are invisible to the international audience. Rhetorical or stylistic difference does not necessarily imply difficulty in communication or publication. For the world-wide English-reading disciplinary ‘community’ as a whole, what matters is whether the feature frequencies of a particular group lie inside or outside the range of the whole ‘community’.

# 5. Conclusion

Describing the CARS model in terms of different types of evaluation seems revealing. The boundaries between moves or steps often seem to be clearly marked by the onset of a new type of evaluation.

This study confirms once again that academic writers from different countries have different average frequencies of evaluative rhetorical and stylistic features. Above four factors were identified as possible explanations of such differences: audience, national science, language proficiency, and national culture. The pattern of differences suggests that nearly all the factors mentioned in the literature are in operation. It is clear that writers consciously adapt their rhetoric (and style) to their audience. National science, that is such factors as the degree of competition, patterns of communication, and the number of disciplinary writers in the country, but also simply inherited conventions, gives writing in the mother tongue and for the local audience particular characteristics. If these characteristics are within the fairly broad parameters of English-language publication they may well be transferred to writing for a wider audience, even if they are no longer functional at that level. Purely linguistic or stylistic features of the first language can give rise to stylistic characteristics of the second one. Possibly because Danish culture is not much different from Anglo, the factor that is least easy to identify in these results is national culture.

# References

Burgess, S. (2002). Packed houses and intimate gatherings: audience and rhetorical structure. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 196–215). London: Longman.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). A geopolitics of academic writing. Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press.   
Casanave, C. P. (1998). Transitions: the balancing act of bilingual academics. Journal of Second Language Writing, 7(2), 175–203.   
Deneire, M. (2002). English and the politics of recognition. Paper presented at the ESSE Conference, Strasbourg. August 2002.   
Fredrickson, K., & Swales, J. (1994). Competition and discourse community: introductions from Nysvenska studier. In B.-L. Gunnarsson, P. Linell, & B. Nordberg (Eds.), Text and talk in professional contexts (pp. 9–22). Stockholm: ASLA.   
Granger, S. (Ed.). (1998). Learner English on computer. London: Longman.   
Hemais, B. (2001). The discourse of research and practice in marketing journals. English for Specifc Purposes, 20(1), 39–59.   
Hunston, S. (2000). Evaluation and the planes of discourse: status and value in persuasive texts. In S. Hunston, & G. Thompson (Eds.), Evaluation in text: authorial stance and the construction of discourse. Oxford: OUP.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses. London: Longman.   
Lindeberg, A. -C. (1997). Promotional rhetorical steps and linguistic signalling in research articles in three disciplines. In Proceedings of the 11th European Symposium on LSP, Copenhagen 18–22 August 1997. Helsinki.   
Mauranen, A. (2001). Descriptions or explanations? Some methodological issues in contrastive rhetoric. In M. Hewings (Ed.), Academic writing in context (pp. 43–54). Birmingham: University of Birmingham Press.   
Mauranen, A. (1993). Contrastive ESP rhetoric: metatext in Finnish–English economics texts. English for Specific Purposes, 12(1), 3–22.   
Melander, B. (1998). Culture or genre? Issues in the interpretation of cross-cultural differences in scientific English. In J. F. Coll, I. Fortanet, J. C. Palmer, & S. Posteguillo (Eds.), Genre studies in English for academic purposes (pp. 211–226). Castello de la Plana: Universitat Jaume 1.   
Melander, B., Swales, J., & Fredrickson, K. (1997). Journal abstracts from three academic fields in the US and Sweden: national or disciplinary proclivities. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse (pp. 251–272). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Moreno, A. (1998). The explicit signaling of premise–conclusion sequences in research articles: a contrastive framework. Text, 18(4), 545–585.   
Myers, G. (1991). Lexical cohesion and specialised knowledge in science and popular science texts. Discourse Processes, 14, 1–26.   
Okamura, A. (2000). The roles of culture, sub-culture and language in scientific research articles. PhD thesis, University of Newcastle upon Tyne.   
Petersen, M., & Shaw, P. (2002). Disciplinary differences and language of publications in a biliterate environment. World Englishes, 21/3, 357–374.   
Samraj, B. (2001). Introductions in research articles: variations across disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 21(1), 1–17.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: CUP.   
Taylor, G., & Chen, T. (1991). Linguistic, cultural, and subcultural issues in contrastive discourse analy sis: Anglo-American and Chinese scientific texts. Applied Linguistics, 12(3), 319–336.   
Thetela, P. (1997). Evaluated entities and parameters of value in academic research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 16(2), 101–118.   
Vassileva, I. (2000). Who is the Author? A contrastive analysis of authorial presence in English, German, French, Russian and Bulgarian academic discourse. Sankt Augustin, Nordrhein-Westfalen: Asgard.   
Vassileva, I. (2001). Commitment and detachment in English and Bulgarian academic writing. English for Specific Purposes, 20(1), 83–102.   
Yakhontova, T. (2002). ‘Selling’ or ‘telling’: the issue of cultural variation in research genres. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 216–232). London: Longman.