Book review

# Academic writing with corpora: A resource book for data-driven learning, Tatyana Karpenko-Seccombe. Routledge, Abingdon/New York (2021). p. 217þxxvi, 2449780367181772, 9780367181789, 9780429059926.Hardback: UK₤96/US\$128, Paperback: UK₤27.99/US\$35.96, EBook: UK₤27.99/US\$35.96.

Karpenko-Seccombe’s book clearly responds to the call for technology integration in current second language education (Chun, Kern, & Smith, 2016). It is a crucial reference book for teachers of English for Academic Purposes (EAP), and a strategic toolkit for researchers (e.g. research students) whose primary language is not English but who need to write and publish in the medium of English. It enables English language learners to fully use technological tools and learn to independently develop their academic writing skills. It also provides EAP teachers with a rich resource bank of corpus tools, schematic diagrams for corpus search and well-designed tasks for learning to write with corpora, which can be used to guide language learners through the process of searching, observing, evaluating, and internalizing authentic academic writing usage. The book has five major components. It opens with an introduction to corpus tools, moves on to three sections that detail and exemplify data-driven learning for writing - presented in order of increasing difficulty - and ends with appendices containing answer keys and a glossary of corpus terms. The following comments focus on the first four components of the book.

The ‘Introduction to Corpus Tools’ section gives detailed descriptions of the key functions of four web-based concordancers: Lextutor concordancer, BNC-English corpora (British National Corpus), SkELL (Sketch Engine for Language Learning) and MICUSP (Michigan Corpus of Upper-level Student Papers). It needs to be noted that all the web-based tools are available for free access, reflecting Karpenko-Seccombe’s conscientious selection of accessible learning resources for all language learners with Internet access. In each subsection, she elaborates on the most essential features of each tool, such as doing exemplary keyword search in context (KWIC) and showing search results. The how-to instructions are arranged in a pattern that contains a graphical overview and illustrations of each feature and focused searching tasks, accompanied by screenshots from the software interfaces. In so doing, Karpenko-Seccombe gives readers step-by-step instructions for using all four corpus tools in a highly encouraging, non-intimidating manner. She also highlights different advantages of each tool in the foreground writing. Lextutor, for example, features the concordance lines. Results from KWIC search of research sorted to the left enable readers to note the adjectives most frequently used with the noun, like ’comparative, complete, comprehensive’ (p. 5), while the same search sorted to the right shows the most common verbs used in research verb collocations to be ’examines, explores and focuses’ (p.6). The user-friendly BNC-English corpora, while similar in function to Lextutor, highlights different types of genres that situate lexis in use. The chart search of the word awful results in a bar chart that warns writers in a visual manner against the use of the word in academic setting (see pp.26e27).

The section ‘Observing and Using Language Patterns’ is presented in a problem-solution format in which KarpenkoSeccombe demonstrates how to deal with common challenges in lexico-grammatical patterns utilizing the online tools. From years of experience in EAP teaching, Karpenko-Seccombe demonstrates keen insight into student-writers’ confusion and puzzles in learning. By sequencing related tasks of varying complexity, she facilitates readers’ efforts to resolve a variety of well- documented challenges common to language learners in academic writing at lexical and syntactic levels. These challenges include the use of prepositions, verb-noun collocations, word choices in context in shades of precise meaning, formality and habitual use, tense-aspect system, subject-verb agreement, and showing logical connections within and between sentences. In addition to the systematic treatment of all these writing challenges on the whole, Karpenko-Seccombe demonstrates an awareness of what helps language learners to engage with these challenges for writing development. She designs reasonably self-contained learning tasks, which we believe are useful for individual readers to complete at their own pace as they work to overcome these language issues in their own academic writing. As an example, a doctoral student in Applied Linguistics who is struggling with using adjectives to describe the technique(s) adopted in the research article could refer directly to the subsection of Enrich your vocabulary and follow the instructions for a search in the BAWE and Academic General corpora (pp. 43e44). The student could learn from concordance lines a number of modifiers, critically analyze their respective meanings, and then determine the most appropriate ones for use.

The section ‘Using Corpora to Write for Different Academic Purposes’ includes tasks to practice argumentation, stance and style. Karpenko-Seccombe has again selected well-designed tasks highly relevant to the key functional aspects of successful academic writing that enable readers to meaningfully engage with well-assessed academic texts in corpora and develop critical academic writing skills such as how to present a claim, how to support and evaluate arguments and how to employ counter-argumentation strategies. Readers will learn how to enliven academic texts with rhetorical strategies such as comparison and contrast, causality or problem- solution. They are also invited to consider the issue of expressing stance and voice in academic writing, skills that can pose considerable problems for second language writers (Hyland, 1998). As a result, beginning writers can model their writing on a vast array of examples of hedging devices, employing modal verbs like can, might, may, or verbs such as seem, appear, suggest to ’tone down the assertiveness’ or to ’avoid overgeneralization’ (p.81). In another example from the book, student writers of Physics, with help from a KWIC search in Lextutor or BNC-English corpora, can learn to avoid using the first- person pronouns I and we. Student writers may find that they can choose inanimate subjects, including ’this study, this research, the findings and this analysis’ (p.91) in order to sound objective in their writing.

The section ‘Writing Research Papers with Corpora’ is informed by views on move-structure analysis (Swales, 1990) and organized around a sequence of rhetorical units to show readers how a research article is generally structured. KarpenkoSeccombe purposefully focuses on the conventional IMRD format (introduction and literature, methods and methodology, results or findings, discussion and conclusions) to make the text relevant to a wide readership. In addition, she includes important tasks to help readers use multiple online resources to strategically appropriate the patterned language for achieving their own communicative purposes in academic writing. For example, readers may undertake a search of discussion in corpora and learn to arrive at conclusions with tentative language, such as would exhibit, partially confirm (p.143), instead of presenting concluding remarks with absolute certainty.

In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the fact that this book has compiled many useful materials for L2 academic writers. We used some of the exercises in the process of writing this review and found them very helpful. The heuristic procedures in task-based design encourage student-readers to conduct self-directed learning through guided use of different free online resources, and the ’Independent work’ at the end of each subsection is exceptionally helpful for struggling academic writers. Given the current emphasis in language education on the use of disciplinary-specific language, the book ensures that its users are learning to develop academic writing skills appropriate to their specific subject areas. However, we are rather concerned that the price of the book will limit its readership, and since we believe that it is a must-have resource for academic writers learning to write in English and their EAP teachers, we strongly recommend that the publisher find ways to make it more affordable. We also suggest that the author consider developing an online course on how to use these types of resources in developing academic writing. We believe that such a resource would be a useful addition to this book publication.

# Author statement

Jing Chen: Her research interests are in the areas of second language acquisition, academic literacy and language pedagogy. Xuesong (Andy) Gao: His research and teaching interests are in the areas of language and literacy, language education policy, issues in language education, and language teacher education.

# References

Chun, D., Kern, R., & Smith, B. (2016). Technology in language use, language teaching, and language learning. The Modern Language Journal, 100, 64e80. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12302 Hyland, K. (1998). Boosting, hedging and the negotiation of academic knowledge. Text, 18(3), 349e382. https://doi.org/10.1515/text.1.1998.18.3.349 Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.