# A phraseological exploration of university lectures through phrase frames

Chen-Yu Liua,\*, Hao-Jan Howard Chenb

a Ming Chuan University, 250 Zhong Shan N. Rd., Sec. 5, Taipei, 111, Taiwan b National Taiwan Normal University, 162, Section 1, Heping E. Rd., Taipei City, 106, Taiwan

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Phrase frames   
University lectures   
Cross-disciplinary   
English for academic purposes

While a recent trend in corpus-based analysis on phraseology has increasingly emphasized the role of phrase frames (p-frames) in developing learner awareness and literacy of academic genres, especially academic writing, p-frames in academic speech still remain understudied. To explore the phraseological profile of academic speech and extend the current efforts in creating lists of academic expressions for pedagogical use, this study aims to derive a list of cross-disciplinary pframes for university lectures. A combination of corpus statistics along with manual filtering and instructor evaluation results in 117 five-word p-frames and 29 6-word p-frames, with a great majority of them $( 9 3 . 2 \% )$ being considered potentially pedagogically useful. Structural and functional analyses of the resulting p-frames further reveal genre-specific features, highlighting phraseological differences between academic speech and writing. The findings of this study can provide implications for research on academic formulaic language and the teaching and learning of English for academic purposes (EAP).

# 1. Introduction

The notion of language as phraseology" has inspired a large body of research investigating language formulaicity across different registers and genres (Hunston, 2002, p. 137) It posits the phrase as a fundamental unit of meaning, instead of individual words (Romer, 2010). As investigations of rcurrent phraseological items may provide insights of the formulaic nature of a text, one research direction that received great attention is recurrent word sequences, also referred to as mult-word sequences Biber et l., 2004). They can be generated by corpus toos as either continuous units or discontinuous units. The frequent and continuous units investigated along with the criterion of dispersion across multiple texts in a corpus are commonly known as \*lexical bundles,e.as you can see (Biber e al., 199). On the ther hand, the rurrent dscontinous units are generall rerred to as \*phase frames" (p-frames), which are defined as "sets of n-grams which are identical except for one word", e.g. it is $^ { * } t o$ where the open slot may be filled by different potential variants such as important, essential, and key (Romer, 2010, p. 98).

In the recent two decades, corpus-based studies on recurrent word sequences have greatly expanded our understanding of the notion of language as phraseology, allowing reearchers to reveal phraseological features of and formulaic variations across ifferent genres, registers, and disciplines (e.g., Biber & Barbieri, 2007; Hyland, 2008; Lu et al., 2021a; Simpson-Vlach & Elli, 2010). These findings not only highlight the importance of acquiring recurrent word sequence in understanding academic genres, but also provide pedagogical insights into the teaching and learning of Englishfor academic purposes (EAP). As noted by Nesi and Basturkmen (2006), unable t recognize and note the functions of recurrent word sequence in lectures may lead to additional cognitive processing burden for students, further inrasing the difficlty for listenig comprehnsion. t is alsocrucial for EAP students to become familiar with the recurrent word expressions in different academic genres to develop their academic literacy and become a member of their own disciplinary communities.

The importance of lists of academic multi-word expressions has therefore been highlighted, resulting in the generation of many pedagogically useful lists, such as the Academic Formulas List (AFL) (Simpson-Vlach & Elis, 2010), and the Phrasal Expression List (PHRASE List) (Martinez & Schmitt, 2012). Yet, most f the existing lis only include recurrent word sequences that are continuous (i. e. lexical bundles), without considering the potential pedagogical value of discontinuous word sequences (i.. p-frames). Despite their increasingly-recognized pedagogical relevance, p-frames stil deserve more investigations, as the exploration of their patten variability and variants can help provide a more comprehensive view of the phraseological profile of a particular genre (Romer, 2010). Studies on p-frames have primarily focused on written genres especially research articles (e.g., Cunningham, 2017; Golparvar & Barabadi, 2020; Lu et al., 2018), while variations in terms of p-frames between spoken and writen genres have been well documented (Gray & Biber, 2013). P-frames in academic spoken genres deserve further research in order to provide a broader understanding of the formulaic nature of academic genres. In this study, we intend to fill the research gap by exploring p-frames in an academic spoken ee, universit lectres, and lso drive it of p-ram for the geatoexandth rrnt fforts of doing lis of aademic expressions for pedagogical use. By doing so, we hope to contribute to the current understanding of the phraseological profile of the academic spoken genre, university lectures, as well as to provide pedagogical help for EAP teaching and learning.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Phraseology in EAP

As the role of lists of academic multi-word expressions in facilitatig the acquisition of such expressions and the understanding of different gres has been well-recognized, list of such expressions have been systematcally established through corpus-ased studies. Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (2010) derived the Academic Formulas List (AFL) from a large corpus of academic speech and writing. The AFL includes continuous sequences of three to five lexical items which were also categorized into diffrent discourse functions to provide pedagogical help. The establishment of the AFL was methodologicall novel as the researchers adopted both frequency and mutual information (MI) index (the extent to which words are bound together) for generating the list Human raters were alo included in the process to decide on the teaching worth of the formulas. The formulas icluded in the AFL were, therefore, considered of greater pedagogical worth.

However, extracting multi-word sequences based on MI cores can be problematic (Biber, 2009). Martinez and Schmitt (2012) also questioned the validity of Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (2010) approach, indicating that only a small part of th formulas in the AFL were analyzed by the human raters. Incorporating geat qualitatie analyses and manual selection, Martinez and Schmit further introduced the PHRASal Expressins List (PHRASE List) It includes frequent non-transparent multi-word expressions in speaking and writing. These expressions were considered "clearly enhanced pedagogically', despite the "extremely time and labor intensive" analysis process (p. 310).

A similar efort was done by Hsu (2014), where the researcher extracted 475 most frequent semanticll non-transparent formulaic sequences from a large corpus ofcollege textbooks across 40 subject areas. The list was of great pedagogical use as it captured phrases with opaque meaning. That is they cannot be understood by the literal meanings of the lexical components. These sequences were believed to be facilitative for EAP students' reading comprehension.

Seeing the connections between rhetorical structures and lexical bundles, Cortes (2013) further aligned lexical bundles with rhetorical moves and steps in research article introductions. It extended the pedagogical value of lists of multi-word sequences by connecting the discourse functions of phraseological items with rhetorical functions conveying specific communicative purposes of a genre.

Taken together, these studies emphasized the important role of phraseological items in understanding different academic genres and highlighted the necessty for creating list of academic multi-word sequences for facilitating AP teaching and learning. However, most studies on multi-word expresons in academic genres have primarily focused on continuous units Phrase frames, dicontinuous word sequences with a variable slot, are also of pedagogical value and therefore deserve more attention. Analyses of academic phrase frames may further expand the current understanding of academic genres.

# 2.2. Phrase frames

Different from continuous invariable multi-word sequences such as lexical bundles (e.g., as can be sen), p-frames are discontinuous multi-word units with a variable slot in the internal or boundary positions (Biber, 2009; Gray & Biber, 2013; Romer, 2010). The slot can be filled wit variale words s fillers (Ren, 2021). For example, the p-frame in the \*f can be filled by various variants such as middle, end, and beginning.

P-frames are generally identified through two approaches: the bundles-to-frame approach (e.g., Biber, 2009; Cunningham, 2017; Romer, 2010) and the full inductive approach (e.g., Grabowski, 2015; Gray & Biber, 2013; Lu et al., 2018). The bundles-to-frame approach assumes the close association between lexical bundles and p-frames and thus derives p-frames from lexical bundles by compounding overlapping sequences. Yet, this approach was problematized by Gray and Biber (2013), as they found that not all p-frames were ssociated with lexical bundles, thus noting that such approach may fail to capture meaningful p-frames with variants that are highly-variable ut infrequent. Such finding thus argued for the full inductive approach, which considers al continuous lexical combinations for identifying p-frames in order to avoid missing important p-frames that fil to meet the frequency threshold.

The investigation of p-frames not only can facilitate our understanding of the formulaicity of agenre but have pedagogical potential for EAP instruction. The exploration of patten variability and variant of p-frames could faclitate the differentiation of \*productive pframes and unproductive ones' (Golparvar & Barabadi, 2020, p.4) allowing a broader understanding of the formulaic nature of a text (Cunningham, 2017). For example, Cuningham (2017) found 38 key p-frames core to mathematics research articles. Golparvar and Barabadi (2020) explored key p-frames in the discusson section of research article of higher education. In terms of pedagogical po. tential of p-frames, L t al. (2018) aued the bfit for including -frame lists in AP instruction and cratd  lis of p-frames based on social science research article introductions which they considered to be pedagogically useful.

P-frames can also reveal diffrent formulaic features acros registers and genres. For example, Gray and Biber (2013) found var. iations of p-frames between conversations and academic prose in terms of pattern variability, structure, and frequency, with conversation containing a higher number of and relatively fixed p-frames than academic writing. It was also revealed that p-frames in conversation were predominantly comprised of verb or verb phrase structures, while those in academic writing were primarily composed of function words.

Moreover, Cunningham (2017) suggested that variants of a p-frame can vary acrossrgisters and genres. The learning of the forms and functios f p-frames can help students acquire knowledge regarding .. how the language works and what expectations certain linguistic forms bring" (p. 73). Lu et al. (2018) further aded that lists f -frames should be considered as beneficial aditions to the existing list of academic formulaic expressions, such as the AFL (Simpson-Vlach & Ells, 2010), to enrich our understanding of the phraseological features on academic genres and to better facilitate the teaching and learning of EAP.

The importance of p-frames in improving EAP students' understanding and production of different academic genres has been well recognized (g., Cunningham, 2017; Golparvar & Barabadi, 2020; Lu et al., 2018). As sugested by Lu et a. (2018), phrase-frame ists can be a pedagogically useful component enriching the existing list of academic formulaic expression. The creation of p-frame lists in different academic gres is therefore needed. Yet although there has been an increasing number of p-frame lists being created, almost all of them were based on academic written genres (e.g., Cunningham, 2017; Golparvar & Barabadi, 2020; Lu et al., 2018). Thereis a paucity of research on p-frames of academic spoken genres. As p-frames and their variants may potentially vary across genres (Cunningham, 2017; Gray & Biber, 2013), p-frames in academic speech are likely to be very diffrent from the ones in academic writing. To expand the current understanding in terms of language formulaicity in academic speech and provide pedagogically insights into EAP teaching and learning, the current study aimed to establish a list of crossdisciplinary p-frames in universit lectures. Structural and functional analyses of these p-frames were also conducted to explore the formulaic nature of the genre.

# 3. Method

# 3.1. Corpus

For the current analysis, we employed the 4.38-million-word corpus that was previously built for the investigation of lexical bundles in university lectures in Liu and Chen (2020b). The corpus was comprised of 565 lecture transcripts gathered from the MITOpenCourseware, Yale Open Courses and Youtube channels of universities in the United States. These transcripts were collected from 71 courses delivered by 77 lecturers between 2004 and 2014. These lectures were delivered in regular classessions with live student audience. That is, they were not recorded specifically for online courses.

The lecture transcripts in the corpus were from four main disciplinary groupings, with each grouping containing four subject areas. The four groupings and consisting subject areas were: Engineering (Materials Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engi. neering, and Computer Science), Humanities and Art (History, Literature, Philosophy, and Music), Science (Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, and Physics) and Social Science (Economics, Political Science, Psychology, and Law). Table 1 summarizes the current corpus.

# 3.2. Procedure

# 3.2.1. Phrase-frame identification

For the identification of p-frames, there were several methodological decisions needed to be made. First, with respect to the approach for identification, as discussed previously, the bundle-to-phrase aproach may fail to capture all the meaningful p-frames (Gray & Biber, 2013). To avoid such limitation, this study therefore adopted the fully inductive approach, which considers all continuous lexical combinations for identifying p-frames. The second issue was associated with the length of p-frames. Although many previous studies explored four-word p-frames (e.g., Grabowski, 2015; Gray & Biber, 2013; Romer, 2010), the pedagogical value of p-frames of that length was questioned as they were generally incomplete units (Lu et al., 2018). It wasargued that extracting p-frames with increased length (five- or six-word) may be able to generate p-frames which are more semantically complete as well as more genre-specific. This study therefore decided to follow Lu et al. (2018) and identified five- and six-word p-frames for the current analysis.

Table 1 Summarization of the corpus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Disciplinary Grouping</td><td>Number of Lecture Transcripts</td><td>Word Counte</td></tr><tr><td>Engineering</td><td>122</td><td>1,095,741</td></tr><tr><td>Humanities and Arts.</td><td>169</td><td>1,080,227</td></tr><tr><td>Science</td><td>144</td><td>1,116,366</td></tr><tr><td>Social Sciencee</td><td>130</td><td>1,086,521</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>565</td><td>4,378,855</td></tr></table></body></html>

Another methodological isue was about the set f frequency threshold and dispersion criterion (i.. how many texts a p-frame occurs in. The threshold setting was a crucial step as frequency cut-off help narrow down the number of potentialp-frame candidates for further manual analysis, while the dipersion criterion can avoid individual idiosyncraies. That is it prevents ap-frame from being considered representative because it was employed repetitively in a single text.

Yet, the decision was unavoidably arbitrary as it largely depended on the nature of the investigated corpus and the research focus. Generally speaking, the frequency threshold was set between 10 and 40 times per million words. To determine an ideal combination of frequency and dispersion thresholds appropriate for the size of the current corpus and to keep the data in a manageable size for further manual analyis, preliminary analyses were conducted using a range of combinations of cut-off points following Gray and Biber (2013) and Lu et al. (2018). After several preliminary analyses, this study finlly decided to extract five-word p-frames that appeared more than 20 times per million words, and ix-word p-frames that met the frequency threshold of 10 times per million words. Additionally, the p-frames needed to appear in four or more texts, and at least one text in each f the four disciplinary groupings for the inclusion of the current analys. As the creation of lists f general, non-disciplinary academic multi-word expressions was well recognized and it was revealed that academic seech actuall contained a higher proportion of cross-isciplinary multi-word expresions than academic writing (Liu & Chen, 2020a),this study thus aimed to extract p-frames that were cross-disciplinary in the hope to be more pedagogically useful for EAP teaching and learning.

To identify the p-frames in the current corpus, the analysis tool KfNgram (Fletcher, 2012) was employed. The tool can help generate a comprehensive lit of possible p-frames along wit all the variants of individual p-frames. The results would also include the token of each p-frame, and the token of individual variants.

After the criteria regarding frequency and dispersion were applied, the remaining p-frames were further filtered manually following several criteria. This procedure was carried out with the employment of the corpus analysis tool, AntConc 3.5.9 (Anthony, 2020) for detailed concordance analysis.Following Romer (2010) and Garner (2016), the p-frames with a slot at the boundary position (i.e. initial and final positions) were discarded, as many of them crossed phrasal or clausal boundaries (e.g., that we're going to \* something like that and \*), or could be more suitably represented as lexical bundles (e.g, f you look at \*, on th other hand \*). The p-frames that were considered not meaningful by both researchers were also excluded (e.g., this is \* this is). The five-word p-frames were also carefully examined to idenify frames that could be subsumed under larger frames. For instance, the five-word p-frames is the \* of the and this is the \* of were discarded as they were part of the ix-word p-rme this i the \*f the. Finally, list of 117 five-word p-frames and 29 six-word p-frames was identified for further analysis.

# 3.2.2. Structural and functional classification

As information withrespect to structures and functions of p-frames may further facilitate the usefulnessof p-frame lis (Lu et al. 2018), the final list f the current p-frames was further analyzed structurally and functionally. Gray and Biber's (2013) taxonomy was adopted to catgorize the current p-frames into three stuctural categories a)verb-based frames frames that contain at least one ver, e.g. you have $a \ast _ { o f ) }$ , (b) other-content-word frames (frames that contain at least one content word except verbs, e.g. the \* side of the), and (c) function-word frames (frames that only contain function words, e.g. in the \* of the).

For functional classfication, Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (2010) taxonomy was employed for the current analysis as their taxonomy was developed to represent functions of multi-word expressions in both academic speech and academic writing. It was considered suitable for categorizing the current p-frames identified in university lectures, an academic spoken genre. The taxonomy contains three primary categories: referential (specifying attrbute, identifing and focusing ideas, comparing), stance (conveying viewpoints and attitudes), and discourse organization (introducing and elaborating ideas), with each function containing multiple sub-categories

The categorization process involved a considerable amount of concordance analysis. Both researchers carefully examined the concordance lines of each p-frame and their variants before assigning individual p-frames into different functions independently. The categorizations by the two researchers were then compared, resulting in an inter-rater agreement of $9 3 \%$ As for the discrepancies, the researchers reexamined the concordance lines of the p-frames along with their variants and discussed until agreement was reached.

It should be noted that as many previously studies on p-frames (e.g., Lu et al., 2018; Romer, 2010), this study also adopted a variant-based approach for p-frame classfication, which consiers the variants of frame whil assging catories. ome rearchers (e.g. Grabowski, 2015) maintained that p-frame, like lexical bundles, can be analyzed independent of it variants, and argued for a fixed-frame-based approach where p-frames are to be clasified based on \*the nature of their fixed components rather than the semantics of sot-filler and/or longer chunks f texts within a given frame (p. 271). Yet as variants fa p-frame may vary acros genres (Cunningham, 2017), it is believed that p-frames categorized based on both frames and their variants can provide a clearer picture in terms of how discourse functions were realized textually through p-frames in specific text types. Therefore, it was considered suitable to take variants into account for the functional categorization of the current p-frames.

# 3.2.3. Instructor review

Instructors or experts were generally consulted in establishing pedagogical value of a list (e.g., Lu et al., 2018; Simpson-Vlach & Ellis, 2010). An explorative intructor survey was conducted to examine if the identified p-frames may be useful pedagogically Four experienced instructors were invited to assessthe pedagogical value of the identified p-frames. Among them, two raters were EFL teachers and were doctoral candidates with rich research experiences in EAP in a TESOL program, and the other two were lecturers offering EAP courses in universtie. They were provided with the ful list of the identified 5-word and 6-word p-frames.In terms of each p-frame, they were also provided with information regarding frequency, the number of variant types, the number of disciplines in which it occurred, and a sampl of the top twenty actual variants of the p-frame. For the asessment, the four-point Likert scale proposed by Lu et al. (2018) was adopted for the current review, as follows:

$^ { 1 } =$ the pattern of a p-frame was not recognizable and was not considered useful $2 =$ the pattern of a p-frame was recognizable but was not considered useful $3 =$ the pattern of a p-frame was recognizable and was considered somewhat useful $4 =$ the pattern of a p-frame was recognizable and was considered very useful

As indicated by Lu et al. (2018), the usefulness and pedagogical value of p-frames are likely to greatly vary with the users level of experience and expertise. Therefore, we decided to follow Lu e al. (2018) and not to include or exclude p-frames in our list based on the raters' opinions. Instead, we were more interested in knowing the preliminary opinions of the raters in terms of the potential pedagogical value of the p-frames. In analyzing the asessment result, Lu et al.s (2018) criterion were adopted. That is a p-frame was considered useful if it received an average score of 2.5 or more from the raters. In total, $9 3 . 2 \%$ of the p-frames received an average score above the threshold. This result suggested that an overwhelmingly majority of the current p-frames may be potentiallypedagogically useful for instructors.

# 4. Results

A total of 117 five-word p-frames and 29 six-word p-frames were identified from the procedure. The results of structural and functional categorization of the identified p-frames are presented in the following section, with the frst subsection detailing the structural clasification of the p-frames based on Gray and Biber's (2013) taxonomy, and the second subsection displaying the functional classification of the p-frames based on Simpson-Vlach and Ellis' (2010) taxonomy.

# 4.1. Structural categorization

The $\mathbf { p }$ frames were categorized according to their structures into three types of p-frames: (a) verb-based, (b) other-content-word, and (c) function-word frames. Table 2 summarizes the structural distribution of the five-word and six-word p-frames. Overall,verb based p-frames accounted for the largest proportion ( $6 2 \%$ $\mathbf { n } = 9 0 $ ), followed by other-content-word p-frames ( $2 2 \%$ ${ \bf n } = 3 3$ ) and function-word p-frames ( $. 1 6 \%$ $\mathbf { n } = 2 3$ ). In terms of five-word $\mathbf { p }$ -frames, over half of the p-frames were verb-based ( $5 5 \%$ $\begin{array} { r } { \mathbf { n } = 6 4 , } \end{array}$ , while similar proportion of p-frames identified as other-content-word ( $2 5 \%$ $\mathbf { n } = 3 0 $ ) and function-word p-frames ( $2 0 \%$ ${ \bf n } = 2 3$ ). In terms of six-word p-frames, a majority of the p-frames were verb-based ( $9 0 \%$ $\mathbf { n } = 2 6$ , while other-content-word p-frames accounted for a very small proportion ( $1 0 \%$ $\mathfrak { n } = 3$ . No six-word p-frames were comprised of function words only. This result may not be too surprising, as longer word sequence would increase the likelihood to include content words (Lu et al., 2018).

Examples of p-frames of individual structural categories are presented below, along with the possible variables that could fill the slots in individual p-frames displayed in square brackets.

a. Verb-based p-frames:

I'm going to [show, ask, give, tell, let] you what we [need, want, have, like, try] to do is   
b. Other-content-word p-frames: one of the [ways, features, purposes, advantages, elements] of from a [logical, moral, practical, theoretical, statistical] point of view   
c. Function-word p-frames: with the [idea, size, exception, help, study] of the of the [sum, mass, size, structure, nature] of the

# 4.2. Functional categorization

Based on Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (2010) taxonomy, the p-frames were categorized into three primary functions and further into

Table 2 Structural distribution of the p-frames.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Length</td><td>Verb-based</td><td>Other-content-word</td><td>Function-word</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Five-word</td><td>64 (55%)</td><td>30 (25%)</td><td>23 (20%)</td><td>117</td></tr><tr><td> Six-Word</td><td>26 (90%)</td><td>3 (10%)</td><td>0 (0%).</td><td>29.</td></tr><tr><td> All</td><td>90 (62%)</td><td>33 (22%)</td><td>23 (16%)</td><td>146</td></tr></table></body></html>

several subfunctions. Table 3 presents the distribution of the p-frames by the three primary functions. For five-word $\mathbf { p } \mathrm { . }$ -frames, referential p-frames accounted for the largest proportion ( $3 5 \%$ $\mathbf { n } = 4 1$ ), followed by multifunctional p-frames ( $2 9 \%$ ${ \mathfrak { n } } = 3 4 { \mathrm { . } }$ ) and stance $\mathbf { p }$ -frames ( $2 3 \%$ $\mathbf { n } = 2 7$ ). A relatively small proportion of the p-frames were discourse organizing p-frames ( $1 3 \%$ $\mathbf { n } = 1 5$

For six-word p-frames, however, the primary function that the $\mathbf { p }$ -frames performed was discourse organizing function ( $4 1 \%$ $\mathbf { n } =$ 12), while referential p-frames turned out to account for the smallest proportion $( 7 \% ,$ ${ \mathfrak { n } } = 2$ . The proportion of stance p-frames ( $2 4 \%$ $\mathbf { n } = 7 \mathbf { \cdot }$ ) and that of multifunctional p-frames ( $2 8 \%$ ${ \mathfrak { n } } = 8 { \mathfrak { n } }$ ) were actually quite similar.

In the following section, some examples of p-frames in different functions and subfunctions are provided. Due to the word restraint we only present one p-frame from the largest subcategory of each primary function with the highest frequency. The complete list f the identified p-frames and their sample variants are presented in the Appendix.

# 4.2.1. Referential $p$ frames

As presented in Table 3, most of the p-frames were categorized as referential expressions. Table 4 summarized the distrbution of eferentil -frames in fie subcategorie. No p-frames were classfied a vagueness markers (expressions indicating mprecision, e.g. or something lk that). The largest functional subcategory was specification of atributes. P-frames performing this subfunction specified specific attributes of the following entities or concepts, as illustrated in example 1.

Example 1. of the [sum, size, value] of the 1a. .. a length of a vector can be obtained in terms of some of the [sum] of the squares of its components .. 1b. ... this is a very good predictor of housing prices as a function of the [size] of the house, right?

Identification and focus was the second largest functional subcategory. These p-frames functioned to highlight certain information or to draw attention, as illustrated in Example 2.

Example 2. one of the [things, reasons, ways] that 2a. One of the [things] that I will be stressing this semester is intuition. 2b. This is one of the [reasons] that he writes The Reason of Church Government, this intense sense of obligation that he feels.

# 4.2.2. Stance $p$ frames

Stance p-frames were further categorized into four subcategories, with a majority of stance p-frames identified as intention/volition prediction $( 6 8 \% )$ (see Table 5). P-frames of this subcategory accounted for the largest proportion in both five-word and six-word stance p-frames. Intention/volition prediction p-frames primarily performed the function to show what the speaker was about to do or to indicate what might be happening next, as illustrated in Example 3.

Example 3. I'm going to [show, tell, give] you 3a. So I'm going to [show] you kind of damping called Rayleigh damping, OK? 3b. So I'm going to [give] you a cluster of views.

4.2.3. Discourse organizing p-frames

Overall only a relatively small proportion of p-frames performed the discourse organizing function. They primarily functioned to introduce topics and focus attention $( 7 4 \% )$ (see Table 6), as illustrated in Example 4.

Example 4. the [point, question, event] I want to 4a. But the [point] I want to stress today was that in terms of medical philosophy he was a sensualist. 4b. Here's a picture of the [event] I want to tell you about, as described by Manzoni, acting as a historian.

Metadiscourse and textual reference was the second largest subcategory of discourse organizing p-frames. They were usually used b the lecturer to provide an outline of the course, informing the student what to expect in the following semester or course goal of th day, as illustrated in Example 5.

Example 5. to [talk, say, think] a little bit about 5a. The last thing I'm going to show you today is to [talk] a little bit about parameter passing. 5b. So what I want to do in the final few minutes of the course is to [say] a ittl bit about some distinctive features f the clas.

Table 3 Functional distribution of the p-frames.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Length</td><td>Referential Expressions</td><td> Stance Expressions</td><td>Discourse Organizing Functions</td><td>Multifunction</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Five-word</td><td>41 (35%)</td><td>27 (23%)</td><td>15 (13%)</td><td>34 (29%)</td><td>117</td></tr><tr><td>Six-word</td><td>2 (7%).</td><td>7 (24%)</td><td>12 (41%)</td><td>8 (28%)</td><td>29</td></tr><tr><td>All</td><td>43 (29%)</td><td>34 (23%)</td><td>27 (19%)</td><td>42 (29%)</td><td>146</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Distribution of referential p-frames by subcategory.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Length</td><td>Specification of Attributes</td><td>Identification and Focus</td><td>Deictics and Locatives</td><td>Contrast and Comparison</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Five-word</td><td>25 (61%)</td><td>11 (27%)</td><td>4 (10%)</td><td>1 (2%)</td><td>41</td></tr><tr><td>Six-word</td><td>0 (0%)</td><td>2 (100%)</td><td>0 (0%)</td><td>0 (0%)</td><td>2.</td></tr><tr><td>All</td><td>25 (58%)</td><td>13 (30%)</td><td>4 (9%)</td><td>1 (3%)</td><td>43</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 Distribution of stance p-frames by subcategory.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Length</td><td>Epistemic Stance</td><td>Ability and Possibility</td><td>Obligation and Directive</td><td>Intention/volition, prediction</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Five-word</td><td>1 (4%)</td><td>1 (4%)</td><td>6 (22%)</td><td>19 (70%)</td><td>27</td></tr><tr><td>Six-word</td><td>1 (15%)</td><td>1 (14%)</td><td>1 (14%)</td><td>4 (57%)</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>All</td><td>2 (6%)</td><td>2 (6%)</td><td>7 (20%)</td><td>23 (68%)</td><td>34</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 Distribution of discourse organizing p-frames by subcategory.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Length</td><td>Metadiscourse and Textual Reference</td><td>Topic Introduction and Focus.</td><td>Topic Elaboration</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Five-word</td><td>4 (27%)</td><td>10 (67%)</td><td>1 (6%)</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td>Six-word</td><td>2 (17%)</td><td>10 (83%)</td><td>0 (0%)</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>All</td><td>6 (22%)</td><td>20 (74%)</td><td>1 (4%)</td><td>27</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.3. Instructor ratings

To explore the potential pedagogical value of the current p-frames, four experienced instructors rated each of the $1 4 6 { \mathfrak { p } }$ frames on a four-point Likert scale proposed by Lu et al. (2018), where 4 points were given if ap-frame was recognizable and was considered very useful while 1 point was given if ap-frame was not recognizable and was not considered useful. Fllowing Lu et al's (2018) criterion, an average score of 2.5 was adopted as a threshold for a p-frame to be considered pedagogically useful. Overall, the instructors opinions were notably positive, with an average rating of the p-frames at 3.25. 136 p-frames $( 9 3 . 2 \% )$ received an average score above the threshold, indicating that a considerable number of them were considered to contain pedagogical value. Only $1 0 \ \mathrm { p }$ frames fell below the threshold in the current study.

A further examination of these p-frames in conjunction with the explanatory comments provided by the intructors highlighted the importance to leave room for instructors and students to judge whether or not certain p-frames are suitable or useful based on their particular teaching contexts and learning neds, as also argued by Lu et al. (2018). Specificall, one reviewer commented that instructors may rat a few p-frames dfferently considering the learning needs and the disciplines of their students, as she deemed some p-frames more commonly-used in particular disciplines. That is istructors' opinions on the usefulnes of the p-frames may to some extent be affcted by their students disciplinary backgrounds. Instructors facing students of different discilines may find one -frame more useful than another. Also, another reviewer explained on giving a low rating to a particular p-frame that although she did consider it to be common in daily if, she did not often use such p-frame in her cass and had difficulty fiing it into her teaching context. Yet, the other raters gave a relatively high rating to the p-frame and indicated its usefulnesand high frequency in their teaching.

Although overall a majority of the p-frames rceived notably high ratings from the reviewers, there were till variations among the reviewers to some degre. What should be noted was that the variations were the result of different considerations regarding students learning needs, disciplines, and pedagogical contexts, as evidenced by the comments from the reviewers. Therefore, as also suggested by Lu et al. (2018), it may not be the optimal solution to remove candidate p-frames that incurred different opinions among a panel of reviewers, as many criteria (e.g., students learning needs, isciplines, pedagogical contexts) may actually play a part in the decision process.

# 5. Discussion

This study identified 117 five-word and 29 six-word frequent p-frames in university lectures and further categorized them based on structures and functions. The structural categorization revealed that lectures relied primarily on verb-based p-frames, with $6 2 \%$ of the identified p-frames containing verbs. This finding further aded to our understanding of the differences betwen academic spoken and written genres. The structural distrbution of the lecture p-frames was quite different from those found in the previous studies on academic writing where other-content-word p-frames actually dominated (Golparvar & Barabadi, 2020; Lu et al., 2018). The current structural distribution was actually more similar to another spoken genre, conversation (Gray & Biber, 2013), with verb-based being the primary structural category. This further demonstrated the style of spoken genres of being primarily verbal, instead of nominl (Biber et al., 1999, 2011). The juxtaposition highlighted the verbal nature of university lectures. That is, although both university lectures and research artices are information-intensive and meant to deliver knowledge, universty lectures semed to rely more on verbs or verb phrases to move along the dialogue whil research articles tended to leave the focus to the subject itself without emphasizing the action so much.

The functional categorization revealed that referential p-frames actually accounted for the largest proportion in lectures $( 2 9 \% )$ demonstrating the focus of the genre to deliver informational content. This result was in ine with previous studies on p-frames in academic writing (Golparvar & Barabadi, 2020; Lu et al., 2018), where referential p-frames were also found to be the predominant category. Similarly, lectures and research articles (Lu et al., 2018) shared the same largest subfuntction of referential $\mathbf { p } \mathrm { . }$ frames, specificationf atiute. Base onthe funtions predminanly serve by the current p-frames, the findings frthr hghlight the hared nature of content delivery and the focus of framing ideas of the two genres.

Interestingly, different features between the two geres may be revealed from the distribution of the subfunctions of other primary functions. For example, despite being the second largest primary functional category in both lectures and academic writing, the most frequent subfunction that the stance p-frames peformed were actuallyquit different between the two genre. According to Lu et al. (2018), the largest subcategory in academic writing was evaluation, while in lectures, no p-frames were solely categorized in this subcategory. Although four p-frames were found to serve the evaluative function, they may also perform other functions, and therefore were categorized as multi-functional p-frames. The largest subcategory in stance p-frames of the lectures was intention/volition, pre diction, which, interestingly, was a subfunction that was not performed by the p-frames in academic writing.

The differences may further highlight the different features of the two genres as well as how p-frames may contribute further to the understanding of a genre. As one key elements in rearch articles was to evaluate existing ideas as wellas the new findings proposed in the artice, it was not surprising to seeso many p-frames serve the evaluation subfunction. On the other hand, as the nature of lectures is instructional, it was not surprising to see many p-frames serving the intention/volition, predictin subfunction. They helped the instructor to move along the course and highlight the subsequent actions or events, as a way to direct students attention and organize the course. As the focus of research articles was ideas, instead of actions, the absence of p-frames performing the intention/volition, prediction subfunction was expected. These diffrences highlighted the different features of the two genres. Despite both aiming to deliver knowledge, the functional distribution of the p-frames revealedthe instructional nature of lectures and the ealuative feature of research articles.

Interestingly, while no lexical bundles were found to perform evaluative functions in Liu and Chen's (2020a) research on university lectures, this study did identify several multi-functional p-rames that serve evaluative along with ther functions. This suggested that compared to fixed formulaic sequences (i.e. exical bundles), investigating p-frames and their potential variants may help further reveal the nature of a genre and the roles of formulaic equences in constructing a discourse. As the convention and the variability can both be observed from p-frames, studying p-frames may help capture possbly mising features when variability is retricted (i.. fixed formulaic sequences).

Moreover, the distribution of p-frames was similar between lectures and academic writing in terms of primary functions, considering their shared nature of information delivery. Yet, interestingly, the lexical items employed to achieve the functions were actually quite different, as p-frames in lectures were mostly verb-based while those in academic writing were primaril comprised of other content words. In fact, a comparison of the items in the current $\mathbf { p }$ -frame list with those in Lu et al.'s (2018) list for academic articles resulted in a very low overlap, with only 11 p-frames $( 1 . 8 \% )$ shared by the two lists. Although the shared p-frames performed similar functions in the two genres, the variants fllowing them were actually quit different. For example, the shared p-frame with the \*of the pefomedthe same unction in the two genes (spifying atributes of an entity), but its top ten variants in the two gres were all different. The result was somewhat expected as variants of p-frames are likely to vary acros different genres and text types (Cunningham, 2017). Yet, it importantly noted the great differences between academic spoken and written genres in terms of the employment of individual p-frames.

Together, the findings suggested the similarit between lectures and research artice i terms of functions performed by p-frames, but highlighted thedifference etween the two genres in employing different type of lexical itms to fulfll communicatie purposes. The need to establish different p-frame lists for academic speech from academic writing is thus called for.

As for the pedagogical potential for the identified p-frames, evaluation by the experienced instructors indicated the potential pedagogical value of these p-frames, as an overwhelmingly majority of them were considered useful $( 9 3 . 2 \% )$ . As the current p-frames received very positive fdback from the experts, i is believed that ths it may be of potential help for AP teaching and leaning. The list can be considered an addition to the current understanding of academic spoken genres, more specificall, the genre of university lectures, as it further revealed language features that characterize the genre.

Many previous studies employed experts (e.g., intructors, publishers, testers) opinions as absolute criteria in deciding whether a p-frame should be included or excluded (e.g., Ackerman & Chen, 2013; Martinez & Schmitt, 2012). We acknowledge the benefits of involving a large number of experts with different academic backgrounds in the reviewing proces as it does provide invaluable insights and a prliinry sse of the pdaggicalalu f th idified items. t, it may ot nessril rflect the edagogical needs of ll EAP teachers and students, given the many criteria (e.g., disciplines, learning needs, pedagogical contexts) involved in determining the pedagogical value of a candidate p-frame, as also confirmed by our reviewers. Therefore, we agreed with Lu et al.'s (2018) proposition that the nds of the user of academic expresions may not be adequately reresented by a small group of experts, as it may be better to leave room for EAP teachers and learners to make their own judgment based on their specific pedagogical contexts and learning needs." (p. 84). We thus deem it essential to not deprive the potential wider users of the p-frame list of the opportunities to determine what is suitable and useful to their pedagogical needs.

With their fixed word sequences and variant, p-frames may seem similar to lexical bundles and collocations. Yet, it should be emphasized that p-frames can provide insights into patterns and thir variability of a genre further revealing its degre of formulaicity (Biber, 2009; Forsyth & Grabowski, 2015; Romer, 2009). The variants of individual p-frames can also provide information regarding how meaning is constructed with syntactic patterns and co-occurring words in different genres and disciplines. Moreover, as the creation of p-frame lists was mostly on academic written genres, this p-frame list was able to reveal the use of p-frames in the lesser-known academic spoken genres, and therefore can be considered a useful adition to the current list of academic p-frames e., Cunningham, 2017; Golparvar & Barabadi, 2020; Lu et al., 2018).

# 6. Conclusion

This study has identified frequent five-word and six-word p-frames in university lectures that can be of pedagogical help for EAP teaching and learning. The analysis on the structures and functions of the p-frames further characterizes the spoken and instructional nature of lectures, and demonstrates the shared knowledge-delivering and content-focused features between lectures and academic writing. The findings have added to the current understanding of the academic spoken genre of university lectures in terms of its phraseology. The creation of th frequent p-frame list in university letures can aso sere as a useful reource that potentially hel EAP learners develop awarenes and repertoires regarding the genre. The list allows EAP teachers to illusrate the convention and vari. ability in university lectures, with the fixed structural patterns and potential variables, which may further improve learners' literacy and competence regarding the specific genre.

Considerations, however, are needed when applying the current list as identifying cos-dscilinary p-frame in universit lectures comes with itstrength and limitations. While the identified p-frames may be useful for integrating into courses with a goal of leaning English for general academic purposes, they may not be sufficient for understanding university lectures of specific disciplines, as variations may occur across ifferent disciplines in terms of the use of p-frames. This preliminary study mainly aims to provide a general picture of p-frames in university lectures and create a list that may be a useful resource to facilitate the understanding of the genre of university lectures. We call for future reearch on further analyzing p-frames across ifferent disciplines, to reveal potential disciplinary variations in terms of the types and variants of p-frames. As a recent work conducted by Lu e al. (2021b) already revealed disciplinary variations in terms of p-frames in academic writing, similar research on academic speech can be essential to further complement our understanding of academic genres. It should also be noted that we only sampled lectures from the U.S. A corpus containing lectures from a wider range of sources is desired to better represent and capture the features of the lecture genre. MeanWhile, we also expect to see empirical studies on the application of the current ist in class to further examine the feasibility and usefulnes of the current it and inform the pedagogical practices in using it. Another area that deserves further explorations is the alignment between p-frames and rhetorical functions in academic speaking, which can be a valuable addition to the recent eforts to match p-frames to rhetorical functions in academic writing (Lu et al., 2021a), and provide further insights into genre-based EAP pedagogy.

# Author statement

Chen-Yu Liu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing. Hao-Jan Howard Chen: Conceptuliz. tion, Formal analysis, Resources, Data Curation

# Funding information

This work was supported by Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (MOsT) [grant number 110-2410-H-130-002].

Appendix. The complete phrase-frame list for university lectures and the top ten frequent variants of individual p-frame!

Symbols and markup

Group A. Referential p-frames   

<html><body><table><tr><td>*</td><td>the variant slot</td></tr><tr><td> bolded word</td><td> multi-functional p-frame</td></tr></table></body></html>

A1. Specification of attributes   
a little $\ast$ of a   
a little bit \* a   
a little bit \* the   
a lot of \* and   
a lot of \* in   
a lot of \* to   
bit, piece, short, section   
of, like, in, about, as, just, with, sometimes, maybe, but   
about, of, on, in, like, more, to, and, but, into   
time, money, men, males, things, stuff, sex, places, information, them   
interest, people, times, children, ones, detail, time, material, stuff, money   
work, money, attention, stuff, things, time, ways, pressure, people, evolution (continued on next page)

(continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>about the * of the and the * of the as a * of the at the * of the by the * of the for the * of the from the * of the from the * to the in the * and the in the * of a in the * of the in the * of this is the * of a of * with respect to of the * and the of the * in the of the * of a of the * of the on the * of the so the * of the that the * of the the * of the class the * of the day the * of the world the * part of the the * side of the the * thing to do the first * of the the kind of * that. there * a lot of there are a * of to * a lot of to be a * of</td><td>nature, mechanics, harmony, history, location, structure, abilities, development, meaning rest, sum, end, fact, idea, name, mass, velocity, middle, authority function, result, member, gift, consequence, generalization, percentage, part, matter, return end, beginning, top, bottom, time, center, level, start, back, heart end, side, rest, product, standards, length, sum, decrees, middle, value rest, sake, immortality, good, end, coming, existence, benefit, remainder, dignity standpoint, perspective, rest, top, end, nature, beginning, back, education, time base, planet, ground, hyperplane, initial, hot, environment, first, inputs, ought Iliad, fund, world, morning, middle, class, center, function, course, notes form, case, middle, range, context, existence, midst, creation, direction, presence middle, case, course, history, wake, direction, context, center, form, rest middle, course, context, absence, rest, midst, case, expansion, domain, subdifferential definition, size, value, production, area, length, max, equation, form, height variable, this, reaction, inertia, mass, velocity, utterance, something, course, change city, electron, north, mind, atom, soul, house, few, star, glass forces, people, electron, atoms, world, students, participants, pass, state, laws columns, inverse, range, entries, value, idea, qualities, length, determinant, definition squares, sum, mass, size, members, rest, structure, nature, value, end part, surface, application, size, order, side, basis, bottom, outside, floor length, sum, idea, slope, derivative, mass, dimension, rest, majority, energy sum, energy, length, summation, radius, mass, size, price, design, determinant end, rest, mechanics, name, beginning, start, reputation, techniques, theme, point end, course, rest, standards, views, topic, reign, government, god, order rest, end, history, view, top, study, image, state, nations, bottom first, second, other, perpendicular, latter, main, top, next, early, only other, left, right-hand, right, left-hand, north, opposite, same, reverse, back right, best, first, easiest, efficient, just, optimal, natural, moral, appropriate part, half, day, decade, column, order, line, movement, section, row thing, things, stuff, problems, language, self-perfection, friendship, signals, music, song are, was, were, is, there&#x27;s, though, weren&#x27;t, been, aren&#x27;t, but, maybe, isn&#x27;t lot, couple, number, bunch, variety, series, ton, set, few cause do, have, get, make, spend, produce, write, be, hear, know kind, sort, part, generalization, bunch, function, heck, price, member, lot left, right, other, end, female, Iliad, middle, next, intensity, law end, study, rest, mass, top, average, size, sum, left, value lot, set, bunch, couple, variety, sort, kind, series, concept, change value, direction, meaning, nature, slope, cost, definition, square, source, purpose idea, size, rows, exception, help, study, needs, leaves, inspiration, story have, get, need, see, had, hear, find, put, know, make bunch, lot, set, function, sense, couple, piece, series, kind, division.</td></tr></table></body></html>

A2. Identification and focus   
A3. Contrast and comparison   

<html><body><table><tr><td>and this is * the and this is the * of going to be the * of has * to do with of the * that we one of the * of one of the * that</td><td>called, where, in, on, not, what, by, exactly, always, when. set, number, kind, example, beginning, sort, situation, power, point, schematic sum, length, kind, focus, power, number, min, deflection, basis, choice nothing, something, everything, more, not, had, most, much things, fact, poets, material, brain, ways, questions, concepts, idea, problem ways, features, lessons, purposes, advantages, greatest, heroes, sort, elements, founders</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>all the way * to and the * of the at * end of the at the * of the at the end * the by the * of the from the * to the in the * and the in the * of a in the * of the in the * of this in the middle * the. on the * of the the * of the class the * of the day the * of the world the * part of the the * side of the to the * and the to the * of the</td><td>up, down, back, out, over, around, through, in rest, sum, end, fact, idea, name, mass, velocity, middle, authority the, this, one end, beginning, top, bottom, time, center, level, start, back, heart. Of, and, because, to, on, that&#x27;s, is, by, anyway, for end, side, rest, product, standards, length, sum, decrees, middle, value. base, planet, ground, hyperplane, initial, hot, environment, first, inputs, ought Iliad, fund, world, morning, middle, class, center, function, course, notes form, case, middle, range, context, existence, midst, creation, direction, presence middle, case, course, history, wake, direction, context, center, form, rest middle, course, context, absence, rest, midst, case, expansion, domain, subdifferential of, between, and, like, on, that, or, cancels, at, in.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Group B. Stance p-frames

<html><body><table><tr><td>B1. Hedges</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>a little * of a</td><td>bit, piece, short, section.</td></tr><tr><td>a little bit * a</td><td>of, like, in, about, as, just, with, sometimes, maybe, but</td></tr><tr><td>B2. Epistemic stance</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>from * point of view</td><td>the, that, this, his, x&#x27;s, our, your, my, a, their.</td></tr><tr><td>from a * point of view.</td><td>moral, practical, logical, theoretical, biological, mathematical, demographic, new, statistical, simple</td></tr><tr><td>from the * of the</td><td>standpoint, perspective, rest, top, end, nature, beginning, back, education, time</td></tr><tr><td>is * to be a</td><td>going, supposed, thought, seen, like, understood, typed, known, better, assumed</td></tr><tr><td>is * to be the</td><td>going, meant, supposed, defined, taken, thought, assumed, considered</td></tr><tr><td>B3. Expressions of ability and possibility</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>be able to * the</td><td>describe, calculate, find, do, use, write, get, understand, tell, see</td></tr><tr><td>is * to be a</td><td>going, supposed, thought, seen, like, understood, typed, known, better, assumed</td></tr><tr><td>is * to be the</td><td>going, meant, supposed, defined, taken, thought, assumed, considered</td></tr><tr><td> you * to be able to</td><td>have, need, want, ought, going, used, start, happen, needed</td></tr><tr><td>you can see * the</td><td>that, how, from, in, on, what, by, here, it&#x27;s, now.</td></tr><tr><td>B4. Evaluation</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>and this is the * of</td><td>set, number, kind, example, beginning, sort, situation, power, point, schematic</td></tr><tr><td>is * going to be</td><td>not, just, also, always, still, it, actually, you&#x27;re, this, probably</td></tr><tr><td>is going to be * to</td><td>equal, able, related, devoted, proportional, useful, lost, parallel, impossible, limited</td></tr><tr><td>the * thing to do</td><td>right, best, first, easiest, efficient, just, optimal, natural, moral, appropriate</td></tr><tr><td>this is * to be</td><td>going, supposed, meant, thought, presumed, getting, about</td></tr><tr><td>B5. Intention/volition, prediction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>and * going to be</td><td>that&#x27;s, it&#x27;s, we&#x27;re, you&#x27;re, I&#x27;m, there&#x27;s, they&#x27;re, what&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>and * I&#x27;m going to</td><td>then, so, now, what, today, again, therefore, finally, here, them</td></tr><tr><td>and * we&#x27;re going to</td><td>then, now, so, what, today, as, if, again, here, especially</td></tr><tr><td>and then * going to</td><td>we&#x27;re, I&#x27;m, you&#x27;re, it&#x27;s, they&#x27;re, there&#x27;s, he&#x27;s, variable&#x27;s, what&#x27;s, everyone&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>going to * a little bit.</td><td>talk, be, spend, do, get, move, use, read, say, unpack</td></tr><tr><td> going to be * and</td><td>less, posted, increasing, there, computationally, convex, quasiconvex, feasible, reliable, fertile</td></tr><tr><td> going to be * the</td><td>in, on, along, at, reading, so, using, for, just, actually</td></tr><tr><td> going to be the * of</td><td>sum, length, kind, focus, power, number, min, deflection, basis, choice</td></tr><tr><td>going to do is * going</td><td>we&#x27;re, I&#x27;m, you&#x27;re, he&#x27;s, it&#x27;s.</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m * to show you</td><td>going, trying, about</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m going to * a</td><td>put, do, make, have, get, talk, take, use, give, draw</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m going to * it</td><td>do, call, write, mention, put, make, say, give, draw, stop</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m going to * that</td><td>assume, use, take, do, plug, write, leave, put, suggest, label</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m going to * the</td><td>take, put, do, get, use, make, give, set, draw, let</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m going to * this</td><td>do, call, use, write, put, change, say, get, draw, take</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m going to * to</td><td>have, try, go, talk, get, turn, move, return, switch, check</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m going to * you</td><td>show, ask, give, tell, leave, let, read, teach, put, have, offer, warn</td></tr><tr><td>is * going to be</td><td>not, just, also, always, still, it, actually, you&#x27;re, this, probably</td></tr><tr><td>is going to * a</td><td>be, become, play, have, choose, look, get, yield, make, equal</td></tr><tr><td>is going to * the</td><td>be, have, determine, cover, affect, represent, play, remain, equal, maximize</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>equal, able, related, devoted, proportional, useful, lost, parallel, impossible, limited</td></tr><tr><td>is going to be * to</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>so * is going to be so * we&#x27;re going to</td><td>this, there, variable, that, equilibrium, elasticity, it what, today, now, here, as, anyway, then, on, ultimately, where</td></tr></table></body></html>

(continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>so what * going to do</td><td>we&#x27;re, I&#x27;m, she&#x27;s, you&#x27;re, he&#x27;s, it&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>that * going to be</td><td>is, we&#x27;re, are, it&#x27;s, you&#x27;re, there&#x27;s, I&#x27;m, was, that&#x27;s, they&#x27;re</td></tr><tr><td>the * I&#x27;m going to</td><td>way, things, one, reason, class, result, equation, example, beginning, argument</td></tr><tr><td>the * is going to be</td><td>class, course, average, nucleus, answer, frequency, result, sub-gradient, field, final</td></tr><tr><td>the * we&#x27;re going to</td><td>way, class, time, things, language, end, folks, course, questions, enlightenment</td></tr><tr><td>this * going to be</td><td>is, was, one&#x27;s, isn&#x27;t, improvisation, we&#x27;re, stuff&#x27;s, there&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>this is * to be</td><td>going, supposed, meant, thought, presumed, getting, about</td></tr><tr><td>to do is * going to</td><td>we&#x27;re, I&#x27;m, you&#x27;re, he&#x27;s, it&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>we&#x27;re going to * a</td><td>have, spend, talk, do, take, see, get, use, make, put.</td></tr><tr><td>we&#x27;re going to * about</td><td>talk, think, learn, go, feel, forget</td></tr><tr><td>we&#x27;re going to * the</td><td>take, do, use, have, make, model, change, measure, follow, ask</td></tr><tr><td>we&#x27;re going to * to</td><td>have, listen, try, need, get, come, return, go, stick, turn.</td></tr><tr><td>what I&#x27;m * to do is</td><td>going, wanting</td></tr><tr><td>what I&#x27;m going to * is.</td><td>do, try, write, mean, find, give</td></tr><tr><td>what we&#x27;re * to do</td><td>going, trying, wanting, supposed, seeking, allowed, planning, required</td></tr><tr><td>what we&#x27;re going to * is. B6. Obligation and directive</td><td>do, see, find, use, consider, plot, have, ask, calculator, estimate</td></tr><tr><td>all * have to do is</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>and you can * that</td><td>you, we, I, should, they see, do, check, use, imagine, carry, believe, prove, measure, turn</td></tr><tr><td>what * do is you</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>what you * is you</td><td>you, we</td></tr><tr><td>what you do * you</td><td>do, want, see, find, get, mean, have, imagine.</td></tr><tr><td> you have to * a</td><td>is, when, now, it, if, almost, thank, or.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>have, be, make, put, do, know, get, send, solve, store</td></tr><tr><td>you have to * the</td><td>take, have, do, know, understand, read, pay, see, use, differentiate</td></tr></table></body></html>

Group C. Discourse p-frames

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">C1. Metadiscourse and textual reference</td></tr><tr><td>a little bit * the</td><td>about, of, on, in, like, more, to, and, but, into</td></tr><tr><td>going to * a little bit</td><td>talk, be, spend, do, get, move, use, read, say, unpack</td></tr><tr><td>I * to talk about</td><td>want, wanted, start, forgot, have, like.</td></tr><tr><td>I want to * about</td><td>talk, say, make, think, know, note</td></tr><tr><td>of the * that we</td><td>things, fact, poets, material, brain, ways, questions, concepts, idea, problem</td></tr><tr><td>so * we&#x27;re going to</td><td>what, today, now, here, as, anyway, then, on, ultimately, where</td></tr><tr><td>so what * going to do</td><td>we&#x27;re, I&#x27;m, she&#x27;s, you&#x27;re, he&#x27;s, it&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>talk a little * about</td><td>bit, more, later</td></tr><tr><td>to * a little bit about</td><td>talk, think, say, you, know, speak, highlight, change, understand, me</td></tr><tr><td>to * a little bit of</td><td>do, spend, get, be, read, talk, use, take, make, just</td></tr><tr><td>we&#x27;re * to talk about</td><td>going, about, beginning</td></tr><tr><td>we&#x27;re going to * about</td><td>talk, think, learn, go, feel, forget</td></tr><tr><td>what I&#x27;m * to do is</td><td>going, wanting</td></tr><tr><td>what we&#x27;re * to do</td><td>going, trying, wanting, supposed, seeking, allowed, planning, required</td></tr><tr><td>what we&#x27;re going to * is</td><td>do, see, find, use, consider, plot, have, ask, calculate, estimate</td></tr><tr><td>C2. Topic Introduction and focus</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>and * I want to</td><td>what, now, then, so, say, all, if, again, today, since</td></tr><tr><td>and * I&#x27;m going to</td><td>then, so, now, what, today, again, therefore, finally, here, them</td></tr><tr><td>and * we&#x27;re going to</td><td>then, now, so, what, today, as, if, again, here, especially</td></tr><tr><td>I * to show you</td><td>want, wanted, forgot, have, need, used.</td></tr><tr><td>I want to * a</td><td>do, make, talk, spend, get, say, have, write, take, be</td></tr><tr><td>I want to * the</td><td>find, know, get, do, spend, draw, compute, write, discuss, use</td></tr><tr><td>I want to * you</td><td>show, give, tell, remind, ask, leave, point, introduce, offer, warn</td></tr><tr><td>if * look at the</td><td>you, we, I</td></tr><tr><td>if you look * the</td><td>at, in, to, around, on, after, here, how.</td></tr><tr><td>if you want to * a</td><td>have, be, get, solve, make, know, run, pick, replan, use</td></tr><tr><td>if you want to * the</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>so * I want to do</td><td>know, use, take, see, impress, resist, have, measure, reduce, compute what, if</td></tr><tr><td>so if you * a</td><td>have, take, get, had, want, put, make, saw, were, see</td></tr><tr><td>so if you * to</td><td>want, were, wanted, go, had, happen, needed, need, have, come</td></tr><tr><td>so what * want to do</td><td>I, we, you, they</td></tr><tr><td>so what I * to do</td><td>want, wanted, have, need</td></tr><tr><td>the * I want to</td><td>point, question, thing, reason, way, following, situation, discussion, things, board</td></tr><tr><td>the * I&#x27;m going to</td><td>way, things, one, reason, class, result, equation, example, beginning, argument</td></tr><tr><td>the * we&#x27;re going to</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>what * want to do is</td><td>way, class, time, things, language, end, folks, course, questions, enlightenment</td></tr><tr><td>what I * to do is</td><td>I, we, you, they want, have, wanted, need, know, tend</td></tr><tr><td>what I want to * is</td><td>do, say, see, use, suggest, stress, happen, find, learn, know.</td></tr><tr><td>what I&#x27;m going to * is</td><td>do, try, write, mean, find, give</td></tr><tr><td>what we * to do is</td><td>need, want, have, like, try</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">(continued)</td></tr><tr><td>you look at the * of.</td><td>number, structure, rest, history, norm, map, average, back, world, prices</td></tr><tr><td>C3. Topic elaboration</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>be able to * the</td><td>describe, calculate, find, do, use, write, get, understand, tell, see</td></tr><tr><td>in order to * the</td><td>get, make, explain, keep, understand, do, find, rebut, prove, disprove</td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Ackman,   Ch, H 013) g the a lion is (AL- driven and xper jud pc Jo f Eis for A Purposes, 12, 235-247.   
Anthny, 0) (V.r ., J  s.  f //.t/twar.   
Biber, D. (2009). A corpus-driven approach to formulaic language in English. International Jounadl of Corpus Linguistics, 14, 275-311.   
Biber, D., & Barbieri,F. (207). Lexcal bundes in universt poken and written registers. English for Specific Pupose, 26(3), 263-286.   
Biber, D., Conrad, Cortes, V. (2004). If you ook at. xcal bundes in university teaching and textooks. Aplied Lingustics, 25, 371-405.   
Biber ., Gra, ., & Poon,  (201. huld we ue charcteristic f covertion to mere gmatica mplexity in 2 witing deloment? Quarterly, 45(1), 5-35.   
Biber, D., Leech, G., Johansson, S., Conrad, ., & Finegan, E. (1999. Longman grammar of spoken and writen Englis. London: Longman.   
Core, . 213.   st t hti  f hc  12 33-43.   
g01       r.   r e, 25, 71-83.   
Fletcher, W. H. (2012). KfNgram. Annapolis. MD: USNA.   
Forsyth, R. s., & Grabowski, L. (2015) Is there a forula for formulaic language? Ponan Studies in Contemorary Linguisic, 51(4), 511-549.   
arer, . 016). h a ti h n  win a ici e. il Jo of  ous Research, 2(1), 31-67.   
olparar,   radi,  2020) y e rme  hessi ci f  ie f highr tio. , 236, Arte 0804.   
aweski 1.   ih rif  13(3) 266-291.   
Gray, B., & Biber, D. (2013). Lexical frames in academic prose and conversation. Intenational Joundl of Corpus Lingusics, 18(1), 109-136.   
Hsu, w. (2014). The most frequent opaque formulaic sequences in English-medium college textbooks. System, 47, 146-161.   
Hunston, S. (2002). Corpora in applied linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Hyland, K. (2008). As can be seen: Lexical bundles and disciplinary variation. English for Specific Purposes, 27(1), 4-21.   
L,  th r    58 122-137.   
Liu, C. Y., & Chen, H. J.H. (2020b). Functional variation of lexical bunde i academic ectres and ED talks. Rgister Sudes, 2), 176-208.   
Lu,    e,. 018 pe- ist r s  ie ti.  of sh for  e, 36, 7685.   
Lu   ei       , 63-83.   
L       n five social science disciplines. System, 100, Article 102543. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2021.102543   
Martinez, R., & Schmitt, N. (2012). A phrasal expressons ist. Aplied Lngustics 33(3), 299-320. htps://doi.org/10.1093/applin/ams010   
ei, H & rkm (206). l de dr siglin i ai e. io Jo of s usic, 11(, 283304.   
e . 1).t af  n f t a c    or Purposes, 50, Article 100968.   
Romer, U. (2009). The inaraiity of lexs and grmmar: Corus lingustc perctives. Anl Rview f ntive Linguistic, 7(1), 140-162.   
Rmer, U. 010). tlishng the pgil pol of axt t Th strction f m in  bk iws. ngish ext cton 31) 95-119.   
Simpson-Vlach, R., & Elis, N. C. (2010). An academic formulas list: New metods in phraseoogy rearch. Applied Lingustic, 31(4), 487-512.

Cheu  i   the  t.  hn ic h r i purposes, and vocabulary acquisition.