# Chapter 7 How Much Do Students Benefit from Attending Private Tutorial Schools? A Case Study of the Hong Kong Shadow Education System

David Coniam

Abstract This chapter describes a case study of students attending a fee-paying private supplementary school in order to resit the Hong Kong Year 11 English language public examination. The study reports the students' grade in the 2009 examination, their anticipated grade in the 2010 examination, and the actual grade obtained in the 2010 examination. While, in their responses, the students hoped for a gain of at least one level on the public examination, they achieved only a gain of a third of a level, on average. While this gain was statistically significant, and does indicate a positive outcome for the cost of a year's further study, it does not translate into the gains many students had wished for as only one-third achieved the one-level gain in grade they aspired to. The study suggests that schools in the shadow education system may be promising more than they are able to deliver.

Keywords Tutorial schools $\bullet$ Gain $\bullet$ Public examinations

# 1 Introduction

This chapter describes a study examining private supplementary tutoring in a fee-paying private school in the shadow education system, outside the government education system in Hong Kong. Specifically the chapter reports on a case study of a 'famous teacher' tutorial school.' The study investigates the study rationale and the relative success of a cohort of students attending such an 'exam cram' school.

In his extensive UNESCO report, Bray (2009) discusses private schools outside the government's provision under the umbrella of a 'shadow education system' and cogently outlines the implications these may create for government policy in a particular country. Bray states that 'tutoring commonly creates and perpetuates social inequalities, and it consumes human and financial resources which perhaps could be used more appropriately in other activities' (1999, 18).

Bray (ibid.) further notes that the shadow systems have not, hitherto, received a great deal of attention, despite the social and economic implications they may have for governments. In part, Bray suggests this is because tutorial schools are an underresearched phenomenon, because the shadow system is much harder to access than the mainstream education system.

Bray and Kwok (2003) state how private tutoring has been 'a neglected topic for analysis'. In the context of academic (i.e. not extracurricular or sports activities) subjects, they provide details of the percentage of primary and secondary students worldwide who receive supplementary tutoring. They cite countries with high rates of participation that include, for example, South Korea, where data indicates that $7 2 . 9 ~ \%$ of primary students received private tutoring; Japan, where over $90 \%$ of children in urban areas receive tutoring; and Latvia, where they report a figure exceeding $90 \%$ of students in Years 7 and 8.

The reasons why children attend tutorial schools are numerous and complicated. One factor -- discussed by James (1993) in the context of private schools that parallel public schools - is that in some countries (e.g. Kenya, Brazil, the Philippines), government education provision may simply not be sufficient; private schools then cater for the under-provision that exists in the state system. In discussing the reasons for attending private supplementary schools, Bray and Kwok (ibid.), Bray (2009), and Kwok (2004) cite various economic, cultural and educational factors, namely,

1. The system does not meet all their perceived needs.   
2. The supplementary system provides a different curriculum from the mainstream.   
3. Teachers in the mainstream only teach part of the curriculum and require payment   
for the remainder (taught outside formal class hours).   
4. They serve as de facto childminding facilities when the parents are at work.   
5. They are a result of peer pressure (among students themselves or among parents).   
6. They serve as a social space to make or meet friends.   
7. They offer the opportunity for students to improve their examination results.

The case study investigates the final factor in the above list. It explores the reasons why a cohort of Secondary 5 (Year 11) students studying English language attended a tutorial school in Hong Kong. Specifically, the study attempts to ascertain the extent to which attendance makes a difference in terms of improved examination grades. English in Hong Kong, as Bray and Kwok (ibid., 614) observe, is probably the subject with the strongest demand for supplementary tutoring since not only is it a key academic subject, it is also the medium of instruction for other subjects in many schools.2

English as a subject in the shadow education system has received comparatively little attention in the research literature. Lee (2010) investigates university students' preuniversity exposure to English instruction in Korean tutorial schools, exploring the extent to which tutoring shapes learning outcomes. He notes that when high school graduates entered university, their levels of English varied substantially as a result of their private English learning experiences (2010, 80). Hamid et al. (2009) - in the context of a study of secondary school students receiving supplementary private tutoring for English in Bangladesh - report students' unanimous perception of the usefulness of private tutoring, despite the reality that no student in the study obtained their desired result in the public examination. Hamid et al. (2009) conclude by commenting on the need for research which informs the public about the realistic expectations of private tutoring. The current case study expands our understanding of English in the shadow system by providing a picture of how far results obtained match up to expectations.

# 2 The Hong Kong Education and Examination System

This case study investigates students taking (or retaking) the Hong Kong Certificate of Education examination (HKCEE), administered at the end of Year 11, as stated. The total candidature for the HKCEE English language examination in 2010 was just under 114,000, of whom approximately 73,000 were first-time school candidates. The HKCEE English language consists of four papers - Speaking, Reading, Writing, Listening and Integrated Skills. There is a fifth component, School-Based Assessment, which accounts for $15 \%$ of the subject mark (see http://www.hkeaa. edu.hk/en/hkcee/). Overall grades awarded on the HKCEE English language paper are standards-referenced, with seven levels - 0 (unclassified) to $5 ^ { * }$ . Level 2 is the level classified as a pass. Levels 3 to $5 ^ { * }$ are benchmarked against the International General Certificate of Secondary Education (IGCsE) examination, whereby HKCEE English language Level 3 equates to IGCSE English language Grade 3, up to HKCEE $5 ^ { * }$ equating to IGCSE Grade $\mathbf { A } ^ { * }$ (see http://www.hkeaa.edu.hk/en/ir/ Standards_of_HKEAA_qualifications/IGCSE/).

The English language education system in Hong Kong may be viewed from a number of perspectives, depending on the education provider. First, there is the statesupported school system, where English language is taught systematically from primary school, with public examinations at specified intervals. Second, there are different varieties of external, supplementary support through the shadow education system. Kwok (2004) presents a cogent description of the different types of supplementary teaching available in Hong Kong - which may be perceived as constituting five broad categories.

Category one comprises private established institutions with an international reputation such as the British Council. Support schools such as Kumon with their 'guided learning theory' approach (Ukai 1994), or Sylvan with its balanced approach to reading instruction' (see http://tutoring.sylvanlearning.com/documents/database/ CenterDocument_5175_ctrTblMgmt_298.pdf) where students receive targeted support, comprise category two. Category three consists of individualised tuition (often provided by teachers or older students) where students are tutored either individually or in small classes relative to their own needs. Category four consists of small supplementary schools which cater mainly to lower form students (usually Primary and Secondary 1-3 [Years 7-9]), for example, helping them with their homework.

The final category comprises the famous teacher' tutorial schools. These are effectively 'exam cram', 'exam tip' schools and are as much businesses as they are schools. They advertise in eye-catching ways on large billboards, on TV and on the backs of buses with images of trendily dressed, good-looking young men and women along with slogans such as 'Grade A, the easy way', 'Are we the best? You bet'. The famous teacher' appellation ('star tutors' in Bray's [2007, 40] terms) does not refer to the quality of the teacher being advertised but reflects the fact that lavish amounts of publicity are often spent on promoting themselves and their tutorial schools. The famous teacher' tutorial schools cater to both part-time and full-time students. Part-time students attend classes in the evenings or at weekends - generally as a supplement or alternative to their day-time classes. Full-time students are generally repeater students who attend classes in standard full-time day-school mode.

# 3 Teaching Methods in Hong Kong's Private Tutorial Centres

The brief snapshot now provided has been gleaned through discussion with teachers who teach in tutorial schools and well as through ethnographic observation through the researcher sitting in classes in a number of tutorial schools. The researcher has also conducted a document analysis of teaching materials to which he has had access.

All classes in tutorials schools essentially follow a transmission-type methodology of teacher-fronted pedagogy - a methodology of examination practice and question spotting, the teacher being the 'imparter of knowledge'. Typically this means that the teacher will lecture at the front of the class about the subject matter, irrespective of whether this relates to how a particular item of grammar or structure functions in English, or how a student may perform better in a performance situation such as a group oral test by 'making more eye contact' or 'interrupting appropriately' in a discussion. Time is not provided for productive student practice since many students perceive this as time (if not money) wasted.

Teachers in tutorial schools produce elegant handouts, with detailed analyses of past public examination question papers. They attempt to detail how the published examination syllabus relates to examination questions and attempt to question spot, e.g. by predicting essay topics. Some tutorial schools even provide students with essays or essay templates to memorise, although if memorisation is identified during the marking process in Hong Kong, candidates are heavily penalised and receive a score of zero.

The \*surface' learning approach of the tutorial schools (Biggs 1985, 1989) conflicts with the methodologies advocated by the Education Bureau (see, e.g. Hong Kong Education Bureau 2001) which prefers a 'deep' learning approach (Biggs, ibid.).

# 4Impact of Attending Tutorial Classes

Few studies have managed to collect systematic data of the impact of attendance at such schools. Bray (2010) attributes the paucity of research on this issue to the difficulties inherent in the collection of data on the shadow education system -- mainly because it lies so far outside the main, public structure.

In a survey of over 3,000 Year 6, 11 and 13 students in the UK in 2003, Ireson and Rushforth (2005) indicated that tutoring appeared to have little or no impact on GCSE results for white students although a more positive effect was shown for nonwhite students. There was some indication that tutoring had a positive effect on the mathematics grades of boys although not of girls.

Smyth (2008), in a multilevel regression study of upper secondary students in Ireland, concluded that despite spending a lot of time engaged in private tuition, students gained very little from their attendance in terms of enhanced academic performance.

In his review of the little available research undertaken in several countries, Bray (1999) reported mixed results. He concluded that tutoring does not always translate into higher achievement and that more research was needed. Bray further suggests that 'while mass tutoring systems in Japan and Hong Kong may be inexpensive, they may also be limited in the extent to which they achieve gains in learning' (2007: 63).

In Hong Kong, a number of small-scale studies have been conducted to investigate how many and for which reasons students attend tutorial classes; see, e.g. Lee (1996). In Lee's study (ibid.), the main reason cited was students' perceived inadequate academic performance with $71 \%$ responding that they felt their academic performance \*was not very good' (Lee 1996, 15).

While still comparatively small scale, Bray and Kwok's (2003) study presents a generally representative picture of supplementary tuition experienced by students in secondary schools in Hong Kong. In the six schools investigated, which broadly encompassed the Hong Kong socioeconomic spectrum with a range of academic abilities, it was found that the higher the school grade, the higher the number of students that received private tutoring. At Secondary 4-5 (Years 10-11 - the focus of the current case study), this was $4 6 . 6 \%$ , while in Secondary 6-7 (Years 12-13) it was $7 0 . 3 ~ \%$ . In response to a questionnaire reflecting the factors laid out above, Bray and Kwok (2003) reported Secondary 5 (Year 11) level students predominantly citing preparation for examinations as their major reason for attending tutorial classes and broadly echoing results reported by Lee (1996).

This case study augments the literature with regard to the tutorial school system in Hong Kong in two ways. It extends Lee's (1996) study by investigating - in addition to why students attend English language tutorial school classes - how far repeater students feel they benefit from such schools and how the methodologies utilised in the tutorial schools compare with those in their previous schools. In the context of Japanese education, the concept of failing students repeatedly resitting college entrance examinations is a common feature. Such students are referred to as 'ronin' (see Amano 1986).

In line with Bray's (2007) observation about the little gain in learning achieved by students at tutorial schools, and with a view towards supplementing the paucity of research in this area, the current case study also reports to what extent students' grades improved on a Hong Kong public English language examination after spending an academic year at a tutorial school.

# 5Hypotheses

There are two linked hypotheses in the current case study:

1. Students' HKCEE English language results will, on average, not improve by one level in the HKCEE re-examination.   
2. Students' HKCEE English language results will show no significant improvement in the 2010 retake of the examination.

# 6The Current Case Study

This case study is centred on a famous teacher' tutorial school in Hong Kong. The school is situated in a densely populated residential area, conveniently located near a mass transit railway station for easy access. While the school provides supplementary classes in the evening to Secondary 1 to Secondary 3 (Years 7-9) students, a major target is students who are taking (or retaking in the majority of cases) the Secondary 5 (Year 11) HKCEE or Secondary 7 (Year 13) public examinations. The school operates full-time classes during the day time -- as do regular schools in the Hong Kong education system - as well as in the evening and at weekends where students attend on a part-time basis. The day-school mode operates on a curriculum parallel to the official system - albeit with a single, tight focus on examination preparation -- with a 1-year programme where students take at least seven subjects, as in the government-overseen system.

As the tutorial schools are businesses, they charge fees to match. Fees are paid on a monthly basis, for each subject studied, over a period of approximately 10 months. The cost to a student retaking seven subjects will be approximately $\mathrm { H K S 4 5 0 }$ $( \mathrm { U } \mathrm { S } \$ 60 )$ per subject, i.e. $\mathrm { U S S 4 2 0 }$ per month. Over the academic year, this amounts to a total of approximately $\mathrm { U S } \$ 4,000$ 3.

The objection may be raised that a study of full-time students does not meet the criterion for a case study of tutorial schools, which tend to offer part-time, evening and weekend courses. However, it is felt that such an objection is not valid because the students have finished full-time public school, are paying tutorial school fees and are being educated wholly in a tutorial school..

The focus of the current study concerns students preparing to retake the Year 11 HKCEE English language in day-school mode; the discussion in the paper will now confine itself to this focus.

The tutorial school in the current case study is one of a number of schools in the parent famous teacher' school group. The operation of the school broadly mirrors that of the government system. First, the academic year operates in the standard Hong Kong manner, commencing early September. Second, maximum class size in the school -- in keeping with the regulations for regular schools - is 45 students. The actual class maximum in the current study was 42. Classes receive four hours of English tuition a week, giving a total input of approximately $8 0 \ \mathrm { h }$ over the year -- slightly less than the recommended figure for senior secondary of approximately $1 3 5 \mathrm { ~ h ~ }$ per year (see http://www.edb.gov.hk/attachment/en/curriculum-development/ kla/eng-edu/eng_lang_final.pdf), but a substantial amount of class time nonetheless. The study involved the HKCEE English language classes of a single teacher, who taught a total of seven classes comprising 206 students. Limiting the study to a single teacher means that the quality and type of teaching (see Rowe 2003) from the perspective that the teacher variable is controlled for. The teacher in the current case study stated that his major focus with all classes was on the teaching of reading and writing in English. All instruction was conducted through the medium of the mother tongue - Cantonese.? Very little, if any class time at all, was spent in developing students' listening skills. Clearly the results of this case study cannot be generalised to all tutorial schools. However, given the paucity of research in this area, any investigation -- even a case study such as this - can provide useful insights into the operation of such institutions.

3 Some tutorial schools' quoted fees (as of March 2014) are as follows:   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Tutorial school</td><td>Yearly school fees. for English and five. other subjects (US$)</td><td>Duration of study</td><td>Website</td></tr><tr><td>King&#x27;s Glory</td><td>S5: $3,525</td><td>S5: 10 months</td><td>http:/www.kingsglory.edu.hk</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S6: $3,290</td><td>S6: 9 months</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Beacon College</td><td>S5: $4,200</td><td>S5: 11 months</td><td>http://www.beacon.com.hk</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>S6: $3,900</td><td>S6: 9 months</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

In Hong Kong, the crucial HKCEE grade levels are Level 2, which equates to a pass locally. Level 3 equates to a Grade C in the International General Certificate of Secondary Education (IGCSE), with the equivalence with the British IGCSE giving the local Hong Kong qualification international currency. The current study will therefore pay particular attention to students who, in their resit of the 2010 examination, will be hoping to either obtain a pass at Level 2, not having done so previously, or will be hoping to increase their Level 2 pass grade to the international currency of a Level 3 grade.

There were three phases in the data collection process, as elaborated below.

Phase 1 took place in mid-March 2010 in the tutorial school, before students completed their Year 11 programme of study.4 Towards the end of a lesson, students completed a questionnaire, comprising questions in three sections which took approximately 15 min. Section I involved background demographics. Section II asked students to report on the grades they obtained in their last attempt on the different papers of the 2009 HKCEE English language examination. It also asked them to predict the grades they hoped to get in the different sections of the 2010 HKCEE English language examination. Section III tapped attitudinal issues, comprising seven questions probing students' perceptions of English language lessons both at their previous schools and at the current one. Questions were posed on a 6-point Likert scale, with $\cdot _ { 6 } ,$ indicating a positive response and 1' a negative response. Students were asked to provide their names if they wished to, although they were free to not provide information they did not care to divulge. Virtually all provided their names and other details.

Phase 2 was in August 2010 when the students, via their teacher, provided results for the 2010 HKCEE English language examination.

Phase 3, which is not reported in the current study, and which constitutes a separate study, is a qualitative follow-up exercise (see Coniam 2013). This involves students who had indicated their willingness to participate in semi-structured interviews, providing data about their attitudes towards and opinions of the tutorial school, discussing their study experience in the school and contrasting them with their experiences in their recently attended government-controlled schools and the subsequent grade they received in their retake of the HKCEE English language examination in 2010.

# 7 Results

This section describes the data which made up the study and the methods used to analyse it. The total sample comprised 206 students. While the figure of 206 is taken as the baseline, not all students responded to every item in the questionnaire, and not all students reported all results. At times, figures reported are therefore lower than the total of 206.

# 7.1 Phase 1: Background and Expectations

# 7.1.1 Students' Background

The sample comprised 206 students in seven classes, two Arts and five Science classes. In all cases, the students joined the tutorial school in order to improve their 2009 results. They were placed in the class of this teacher by the tutorial school itself - students had no choice in terms of which teacher or class they could join. Entry to classes was not determined by ability, although there were separate streams for Arts and Science students. Students were not involved in any kind of choice over teaching approach, as the major methodology advocated by the school, as stated above, was of the transmission type. Given that students were assigned to classes by the school, the data will be presented from the perspective of the stream - Arts or Science - rather than by class. This is for two reasons: firstly, assignation to any given class was random. More importantly, however, by combining the class data into streams, greater statistical power may be achieved - specifically by conducting analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), with the 2009 grades as a covariate to control for the likely effects of prior achievement. Table 7.1 presents the sample.

The ratio of Science to Arts students was approximately 2:1, with a gender split of 126 males and 80 females. The age range was 16-22 years, with 99 17-year-olds and 71 18-year-olds. As might be expected, given that the sample consists of retakers, the average age is slightly older than the usual 16-17 year age range for firsttime sitters. The larger proportion of males in the study can be attributed to the preponderance of Science classes, reflecting the fact that boys are steered towards science and technology more than girls (see Volk and Yip 1999).

# 7.1.2 Examination Grades and Expectations

Table 7.2 presents students' overall scores in the 2009 HKCEE examination and their anticipated grades in their retake in the 2010 examination.

The data in Table 7.2 show the mean grade achieved in 2009 was Level 1.60, that is, a failure grade (Level 2 being the lowest pass grade). Although not reported here, the reported grades for the different skill papers (Reading, Writing, etc.) were quite close to the figure for the overall result, suggesting that students appear to be consistent in their reporting - and hence, most likely truthful. The Arts stream was the less able stream, with an average score of 1.33, just over Level 1. The Science stream achieved an average score of level 1.71. In the Science stream, there were six students who had obtained a Level 4 on their previous attempt, as well as one student who obtained a Level 5 (and who was aiming for a $5 ^ { * }$ ) -- underscoring the fact that many Hong Kong students retake examinations not only when they fail but also with the hope of improving their grade. While students were generally retaking six or seven subjects, the current study limits itself to reporting English subject grades.

Table 7.1 The sample $( N { = } 2 0 6 )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Male</td><td>Female</td><td>Age</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Arts</td><td>35</td><td>33</td><td>17.6</td><td>68</td></tr><tr><td>Science</td><td>91</td><td>47</td><td>17.7</td><td>138</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>126</td><td>80</td><td>17.7</td><td>206</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7.2 Students' 2009 HKCEE grades and grades anticipated for the 2010 HKCEE examination   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Stream</td><td></td><td>2009 - grade obtained</td><td>2010 - grade aspired to</td><td>Hoped-for increase</td></tr><tr><td>Arts</td><td>Mean</td><td>1.33</td><td>2.58</td><td>1.25</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>57</td><td>59</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SD</td><td>.78</td><td>.77</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Science</td><td>Mean</td><td>1.71</td><td>3.01</td><td>1.30</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>136</td><td>131</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SD</td><td>.98</td><td>.97</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Mean</td><td>1.60</td><td>2.87</td><td>1.27</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>193</td><td>190</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SD</td><td>.94</td><td>.93</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7.3 Level gain aspired to   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Level</td><td>Number</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>4 (2.1 %)</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>127 (67.9 %)</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>55 (29.4 %)</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>1 (0.5 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>187</td></tr></table></body></html>

The hoped-for increase was 1.27 levels, with the Science students hoping for a slightly larger gain than the Arts students. Table 7.3 elaborates this picture, with the gain aspired to by the amount of levels. Due to incomplete data by some students, the analysis in Table 7.3 has been conducted on the basis of the data available for 187 students.

As can be seen, $67 . 9 ~ \%$ of students aspired to a one-level improvement in their gain. $2 9 . 4 \%$ aspired to a two-level gain. Four students were apparently not concerned about a gain in their English grade - presumably because they were focusing on subjects other than English. Table 7.3 suggests that students are not wildly overestimating their potential gain -- generally aiming for a one- or possibly two-level gain. This issue is revisited below when the live examination results are incorporated into the data.

Table 7.4 Students' attitudes towards their previous and current learning experiences   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Item (1&#x27;=not at all/negative/much worse; 6&#x27;=a great deal/very positive/much better)</td><td>N</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>16. How much did you like your English lessons at your last school?</td><td>207</td><td>3.00</td><td>1.45</td></tr><tr><td>17. How much did you like your English teachers at your last school?</td><td>206</td><td>3.17</td><td>1.50</td></tr><tr><td>18. How much did you enjoy studying English at your last school?</td><td>206</td><td>2.83</td><td>1.39</td></tr><tr><td>19. Since I left school, my attitude towards English has become.</td><td>205</td><td>3.77</td><td>1.11</td></tr><tr><td>more positive. 20. I now enjoy studying English more than I did at my last school..</td><td>205</td><td>4.36</td><td>1.11</td></tr><tr><td>21. How would you compare your current teacher with your last.</td><td>206</td><td>4.58</td><td>1.17</td></tr><tr><td>English teacher at your last school? 22. How would you compare the current teaching methods with the. methods at your last school?</td><td>204</td><td>4.66</td><td>1.20</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7.5 Questionnaire - significant differences   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Item (1&#x27;=not at all/negative; 6&#x27;=a great deal/very positive)</td><td>Variable</td><td>Significance</td></tr><tr><td>16. How much did you like your English lessons at your last school?</td><td></td><td>2009 gradex(25)=38.44, p=.042</td></tr><tr><td>18. How much did you enjoy studying English at your last school?</td><td></td><td>2009 gradex(25)=40.42,p=.026</td></tr><tr><td>19. Since I left school, my attitude towards English has become more (positive).</td><td></td><td>2009 gradex(25)=43.05, p=.014</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 7.1.3Students'Attitudes

To provide some perspective on students' background and attitudes, this section reports briefly on students' attitudes towards their previous and current school as well as their attitudes towards teaching methods.

There were seven attitudinal questions on the questionnaire, with questions presented on a six-point Likert scale, where '6' indicated a positive response and '1' a negative response. The reliability (using Cronbach's alpha) for these questions was first examined, with the figure of 0.74 emerging. While a level of 0.8 is generally desirable in a questionnaire (e.g., Dornyei 2003), given the small number of items, the reliability figure suggests that the items were generally well constructed.

In the brief discussion below, item means are first described (Table 7.4), and the chi square statistic then used to investigate significant differences (Table 7.5). In Table 7.4, the first three questions refer to students' previous learning experiences and the last four to their current experiences.

With a midpoint on the scale of 3.5, Table 7.4 shows that students were slightly negative towards their previous learning experiences, although not majorly so.

Towards their current school, they are markedly more positive, greatly preferring the current teaching methods. These issues will be further explored in the semistructured interviews phase of the research.

Table 7.5 presents -- via the chi square statistic - significance which emerged on particular background demographic variables.

The only demographic variable to reveal significant differences was grade in the 2009 examination. Quite understandably perhaps, the higher the grade on their previous sitting of the HKCEE English language examination, the more positive students were towards their previous English language learning experience.

# 7.2 Phase 2: Examination Results in the Live 2010 Examination

This section reports students' results in the 2010 HKCEE English language examination, contrasting these with the results the students achieved in their 2009 sitting of the examination, as well as with their anticipated grade. To present a complete picture, results are presented from a number of perspectives. First, gains are presented as broad-level gains, as well as by mean level gain. The picture is then extended to gains by stream. Success in achieving Levels 2 and 3 is reported, as is the performance of the small number of able students at the higher end of the ability spectrum. While 206 students re-sat the 2010 examination, results were only obtained from 194 students. It is therefore upon this figure of 194 subjects that the analyses below are based.

As part of the broader picture, Table 7.6 first presents the level gains hoped for by the corresponding number of students - referenced against what they actually achieved. For this analysis, comparative data was available for 192 subjects.

As Table 7.6 shows, 61 students $( 3 1 . 8 \% )$ improved their result by one level and two students by two levels. While this was undoubtedly good news for these 63 students $( 3 2 . 8 ~ \% )$ , the rosy picture is rather offset by the fact that 122 $( 6 3 . 5 \% )$ students achieved zero gain in their retake while a further seven students $( 3 . 6 ~ \% )$ obtained a result one level lower in 2010 than in 2009. The gain obtained does not, however, mirror that aspired to. One-third achieved a one-level gain, against the two-thirds that had hoped for such a gain. Only $1 \%$ achieved a two-level gain, significantly lower than the $29 \%$ that had been hoping for a two-level gain.

Table 7.7 now extends the picture of gain in terms of the 2009 results referenced again the 2010 resit results.

As revealed in Table 7.6, on average, one-third of students obtained a one-level gain. The majority recorded zero gain, although seven students actually recorded a lower grade in 2010 than in 2009. Extending this picture, Table 7.7 shows that seven students improved by one level from Level O to Level 1. Only one student moved from Level 0 (unclassified) to the important Level 2 pass. At Level 1, 49 students $( 6 1 . 3 ~ \% )$ made zero gain, while 30 $( 3 7 . 5 ~ \% )$ made a one-level gain to earn themselves a Level 2 pass. One student made a two-level gain to move from Level 1 to a

Table 7.6 Amount of gain hoped for vs. obtained (in HKCEE levels)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Level gain aspired to</td><td>Number</td><td>Level gain obtained</td><td>Number</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>-1</td><td>7 (3.6 %)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>0</td><td>122 (63.5 %)</td></tr><tr><td>+1</td><td>127 (67.9 %)</td><td>+1</td><td>61 (31.8 %)</td></tr><tr><td>+2</td><td>55 (29.4 %)</td><td>+2</td><td>2 (1.0 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>187</td><td>Total</td><td>192</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7.7 Amount of gain by HKCEE level, 2009-2010   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2" colspan="3"></td><td colspan="4">Gain (in levels), 2009-2010</td></tr><tr><td>-1</td><td>Zero</td><td>+1</td><td>+2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">HKCEE result 2009</td><td>Level 0</td><td>16</td><td>0</td><td>8 (50.0 %)</td><td>7 (43.8 %)</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Level 1</td><td>80</td><td>0</td><td>49 (61.3 %)</td><td>30 (37.5 %)</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Level 2</td><td>68</td><td>5</td><td>48 (70.6 %)</td><td>15 (22.1 %)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Level 3</td><td>21</td><td>2</td><td>12 (9.5 %)</td><td>7 (33.3 %)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Level 4</td><td>6</td><td>0</td><td>4 (66.7 %)</td><td>2 (33.3 %)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Level 5</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>1 (100 %)</td><td>0 (0 %)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>192</td><td>7 (3.6 %)</td><td>122 (63.5 %)</td><td>61 (31.8 %)</td><td>2 (1.0 %)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Level 3, IGCSE-equivalent pass. At Level 2, only 15 of the 68 students moved up to Level 3.

Moving to the other end of the ability spectrum, there was a small number of students at the upper ability end of the sample. Six students had obtained Level 4 in the 2009 examination (Students A-F in Table 7.8) and one a Level 5 (Student G in Table 7.8). To complement the picture of ability, Table 7.8 presents the picture of gain by these seven most able students.

As Table 7.8 indicates, the Level 5 Student G did not attain the $5 ^ { * }$ she had aspired to. In the context of the general picture of minimal gain, the exceptions are Students A and B who both improved from Level 4 in 2009 to Level 5 in 2010. Table 7.9 elaborates the picture of gain for these two students and includes the results for the different language skill areas.

As Table 7.9 shows, Student A made gains across three of the four skill areas while student B made gains in two of the skill areas, in particular in Writing where a two-level gain was achieved, although there was a drop of one level in the Reading score.

The perspectives on gain will now be explored in greater depth, with an examination of gain by stream. An analysis of the data is presented using two statistics. First, $t$ -tests were conducted across the two streams to investigate whether the gains recorded were significant. Second, ANCOVA was conducted to determine the extent to which the grades students obtained in 2009 affected their grades obtained in 2010. Table 7.10 presents the results of $t$ tests.

Table 7.8 Gain at Levels 4 and 5   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Student</td><td>Year</td><td>Overall</td><td>Speaking</td><td>Reading</td><td>Writing</td><td> Listening</td></tr><tr><td>A</td><td>2009</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2010</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>B</td><td>2009</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>3</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2010</td><td>5</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>4</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7.10  Gain by stream   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Student</td><td>2009</td><td>2010</td></tr><tr><td>A</td><td>4</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>B</td><td>4</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>c</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>D</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>F</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>G</td><td>5</td><td>5</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7.9 The profile of gain for students A and B   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Stream</td><td></td><td>2009 - overall grade</td><td>2010 - expected overall grade</td><td>2010 - overall grade</td><td>Hoped-for increase</td><td>Actual increase</td><td>t-test results</td></tr><tr><td>Arts</td><td>Mean</td><td>1.33</td><td>2.58</td><td>1.42</td><td>1.38</td><td>0.09</td><td>t=-1.399, df= 54,</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>57</td><td>59</td><td>57</td><td></td><td></td><td>p=.168</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SD</td><td>.78</td><td>.770</td><td>.82</td><td></td><td></td><td>t=-7.983,</td></tr><tr><td>Science</td><td>Mean</td><td>1.71</td><td>3.01</td><td>2.09</td><td>1.31</td><td>0.38</td><td>df=135, p=.000</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>136</td><td>131</td><td>137</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SD</td><td>.98</td><td>.973</td><td>1.01</td><td></td><td></td><td>t=-7.466,</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td> Mean</td><td>1.60</td><td>2.87</td><td>1.89</td><td>1.31</td><td>0.29</td><td>df=190,</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>193</td><td>190</td><td>194</td><td></td><td></td><td>p=.000</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>SD</td><td>.94</td><td>.934</td><td>1.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

From Table 7.10, it can be seen that the gain of 0.38 levels recorded by the Science stream was significant, whereas the Arts stream gain of 0.09 was not significant.

The results of ANCOVA indicated, however, a strong relationship between the two sets of grades. The covariate (2009 overall grade) was significantly related to the overall grade obtained in 2010: $F ( 1 , 1 8 8 ) { = } 4 4 5 . 3 6$ $p { < } . 0 0 1$ . Science students' starting point after the 2009 HKCEE was at a higher level than the Arts students -- suggesting that their higher ability on entry was related to and reflected in their bigger -- and significant -- gain.

# 8 Conclusion

This study has reported on full-time students in one Hong Kong tutorial school retaking the HKCEE English language examination. There were two related hypotheses being addressed, namely,

1. Students' 2009 HKCEE English language results would, on average, show no significant improvement in the 2010 retake of the examination. 2. Students' 2009 HKCEE English language results would not improve by, on average, one level in the 2010 public examination.

With regard to Hypothesis 1, it can be seen that significant gain was achieved through the extra year of tuition, with the mean gain equating to approximately a third to half an HKCEE level. The first hypothesis is consequently rejected: students do make significant, although small, gains. It is not, of course, claimed that the participation in the tutorial school caused the gain -- which could be due to a number of factors, e.g. maturation, motivation, exposure to English, etc.

Concerning Hypothesis 2, while a third of students $( 3 2 . 8 \% )$ achieved a one-level or more gain, twice this number $( 6 7 . 2 ~ \% )$ achieved no gain at all. The second hypothesis is therefore accepted. Students had been anticipating a mean gain of 1.31 HKCEE levels. This was not realised.

In the current study, it can be suggested that gain appears to be linked to ability. As Table 7.10 reveals, students in the Science stream showed a bigger gain. This is an interesting discovery and would appear to be worthy of further investigation to see whether the more able consistently obtain greater gain in their resits. A further hypothesis worthy of exploration would appear to be that given that the most able students tend to achieve most gains, the gains might be linked to greater motivation in the more able students than in their less able counterparts. This trend was confirmed in the responses to empirical questions in the questionnaire, where more able students were more positive towards their study experience generally, and is currently being investigated further through qualitative interviews.

In the context of students' aspirations, however, the half-level gain falls substantially short. Of the students who obtained a Level 1 in the 2009 HKCEE and had been aspiring to a Level 2 in their 2010 result, just over a third $( 3 7 . 5 ~ \% )$ achieved what they aspired to. One student moved from the lowest grade Level O to a Level 2, but this was a rare success story. Those who were aspiring to move from a Level 2 to a Level 3 were equally frustrated, with only $( 2 2 . 1 \% )$ achieving the gain aspired to. These limited gains can be viewed from the perspective that $67 . 9 \%$ of students hoped for the minimum, a one-level gain, but such a gain was obtained by only $3 1 . 8 \%$ of students.

Interestingly, it should be noted that the extent to which the results achieved by the 2010 set of retakers comprising the current study met the teacher's expectation is not known, because, before the current case study was undertaken, the teacher was unaware (and he had been for his previous 7 years in the school) of his students' aspirations in their resit, and how well or badly the result of their resit compared with their previous examination result.

The current study has limited itself to examining the classes of a single teacher. This limitation regarding the quality of the teaching has both advantages and drawbacks since the teacher factor can be an important issue (Rowe 2003). Ideally, a follow-up study should be conducted on a larger sample of students, comprising different ability levels and school types, although such research is complicated by the somewhat closed nature of the shadow school system. The current study has only focused on gain in English. If it were possible to obtain the data for subjects other than English - given that all students in the sample took seven subjects -- the opportunity to gauge the amount of gain obtained in other subjects would present a more comprehensive picture.

A major issue arising from the current case study is whether enrolment in additional classes at supplementary tutoring schools pays dividends in terms of the gains that students aspire to, given - as has been shown above - that such aspirations should not be over-optimistic. The results of the current study suggest that these aspirations have not been achieved. While students make gains as a result of their own efforts or their teachers' efforts in terms of examination readiness, preparations and tips', the current study suggests that, overall, the picture of likely gain - in contrast to that proclaimed in the advertisements - is perhaps overstated. Students may attend tutorial classes due to peer pressure reasons, because they may feel they are missing out if they do not attend while their friends do or because of the images of trendy tutors telling them an A' is an easily obtainable target. The end result, however, appears to be that, for the majority of students, their moderate expectations are unfulfilled. If these disappointments are consistent over the entire spectrum of shadow education in Hong Kong, and if the overall results were to be made public, the influence and incidence of tutorial schools of this type might diminish. However, results concerning failure are not published so students and their parents are unable to become fully cognizant of the lack of success of the majority of students.

While it is difficult to obtain concrete evidence of what the shadow school system provides to the many students paying their fees, which are not insubstantial, the current case study, although not generalisable to all tutorial schools in Hong Kong, or to tutorial schools outside Hong Kong, suggests that the returns advertised to potential students may not be commensurate with either their efforts or their financial outlay. More research is required in this area in order to uncover results which are applicable to a wider range of tutorial schools.

# References

Amano, I. (1986). Educational crisis in Japan. In W. K. Cummings, E. R. Beauchamp, S. Ichikawa, V. N. Kobayashi, & M. Ushiogi (Eds.), Educational policies in crisis. New York: Praeger Publishers.   
Biggs, J. B. (1985). The role of metalearning in study processes. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 55(3), 185-212. 88 Research and Development, 8, 7-25.   
Bray, M. (1999). The shadow education system: Private tutoring and its implications for planners (Fundamentals of Educational Planning 61). Paris: UNEsco International Institute for Educational Planning. Bray, M. (2007). The shadow education system: Private tutoring and its implications for planners (Fundamentals of educational planning 61, 2nd ed.). Paris: UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning.   
Bray, M. (2009). Confronting the shadow education system: What government policies for what private tutoring? Paris: UNEsCO International Institute for Educational Planning.   
Bray, M. (2010). Researching shadow education: Methodological challenges and directions. Asia Pacific Education Review, 11, 3-13. Bray, M., & Kwok, P. (2003). Demand for private supplementary tutoring: Conceptual considerations, and socio-economic patterns in Hong Kong. Economics of Education Review, 22, 611-620. Coniam, D. (2013). Private tutorial schools in Hong Kong: An examination of the perceptions of public examination re-takers. The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 1-10.   
Dornyei, Z. (2003). Questionnaires in second language research: Construction, administration, and processing. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum. Hamid, O., Sussex, R., & Khan, A. (2009). Private tutoring in English for secondary school students in Bangladesh. TEsOL Quarterly, 432, 281-308.   
Hong Kong Education Bureau. (2o01). Learning to learn - The way forward in curriculum. Available at: http://www.edb.gov.hk/en/curriculum-development/cs-curriculum-doc-report/wfin-cur/index.html   
Ireson, J., & Rushforth, K. (2005). Mapping and evaluating shadow education. ESRC Research Project RES-000-23-0117. Institute of Education: University of London. Available at: http:// www.dorsetmathsdoctor.co.uk/ireson%20report.pdf   
James, E. (1993). Why is there proportionately more enrollment in private schools in some countries? Working Paper Series 1069. Washington, DC: Country Economics Department, The World Bank. Available at: http://www-wds.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/WDSP/ IB/1999/04/28/000009265_3961004003631/Rendered/PDF/multi_page.pdf   
Kwok, P. L. Y. (2004). Emergence of demand for private supplementary tutoring in Hong Kong: Argument, indicators and implications. Hong Kong Teachers' Centre Journal, 3, 1-14.   
Lee, C. (1996). Children and private tuition (Youth Poll Series No. 34). Hong Kong: Hong Kong Federation of Youth Groups.   
Lee, B. M. (2010). The pre-university English-educational background of college freshmen in a foreign language program: A tale of diverse private education and English proficiency. Asia Pacific Education Review, 11, 69-82.   
Rowe, K. (2003, October 19-21). The importance of teacher quality as a key determinant of students' experiences and outcomes of schooling. Paper presented at the Australian Council for Educational Research ACER Research Conference 2003 Building Teacher Quality: What does the research tell us?, Melbourne. Available at: http://research.acer.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi? article=1001&context=research_conference_2003 Smyth, E. (2008). The more, the better? Intensity of involvement in private tuition and examination performance. Educational Research and Evaluation, 14(5), 465-476.   
Ukai, N. (1994). The Kumon approach to teaching and learning. Journal of Japanese Studies, 20(1), 87-113. Volk, K. S., & Yip, W. M. (1999). Gender and technology in Hong Kong: A study of pupils' attitudes toward technology. International Journal of Technology and Design Education, 9, 57-71.

# Chapter 8 Innovating in Tertiary Education: A Course in Language Play

Roger Berry

Abstract In this chapter I discusses the development, implementation, teaching and evaluation of a course entitled 'Language as Play', an elective on the BA in Contemporary English Studies at Lingnan University, Hong Kong. I outline some of the challenges involved in delivering such an innovative course in the absence of anything that might be termed a theory of language play (including uncertainty about a definition) or of any coherent teaching or reading materials. Some ad hoc theoretical concepts are presented, and the problematic relationship between language play and the much-vaunted but poorly understood concept of language creativity, and how to teach and assess it, is investigated. The chapter finishes with an evaluation of the success (or not) of the course.

Keywords Language play $\bullet$ Tertiary $\bullet$ Language creativity

# 1 Introduction

In the academic year 2007/2008, a new course, Language as Play, was added to the list of discipline electives for the major in Contemporary English Studies at Lingnan University, Hong Kong. It has proved to be a popular course, having been taught every year since then; sometimes it has been necessary to lay on a second section because of high enrolment. While the inclusion of 'play' in the title may have raised the eyebrows of those who consider that university education should only involve serious academic study, the course has become accepted and is increasingly seen as being aligned with attempts to encourage more creativity in students. To what extent this is a valid view is discussed below.