# Languages and social cohesion: a transdisciplinary literature review

by Gabriela Meier and Simone Smala, London, Routledge, 2022, 1–144 pp., $\mathsf { U S S 4 7 . 9 6 }$ (Hardback), ISBN 978-0-367-63720-0

Danielle H. Heinrichs

To cite this article: Danielle H. Heinrichs (2024) Languages and social cohesion: a transdisciplinary literature review, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:10, 1442-1445, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2024.2394869

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2024.2394869 carried out in the study by Torregrossa, Caloi and Listanti, who investigate the acquisition of different types of clauses in children between the ages of 6 and 12 whose dominant language is German, also employing a longitudinal examination of their linguistic experience. The results of these analyses show that early exposure to Italian is found to be a predictor of the mastery of complement clauses. Interestingly, the findings indicate that more complex structures are more vulnerable under limited input, and the authors argue for the need of in-depth analyses of language exposure at specific developmental stages that could be crucial for the acquisition of these structures. In the last chapter of Part I, Schmitz and Diaubalick present findings from a study of Italian-German bilingual adults, which show that cross-linguistic influence does not impact the production of modality expressions.

The second part of the book includes three chapters presenting data gathered through nonexperimental methodologies. Ferrini’s chapter 8 is different from all other chapters in its analysis of the spoken-typed written language of third-generation speakers of Italian on Facebook groups in the US. The following chapter by De Cristofaro and Badan analyses the spontaneous speech of Italian speakers in Flanders, focusing on both quantitative and qualitative aspects of the use of discourse markers in Italian. In the final chapter of the book, Di Salvo and Goria focus on auxiliary selection in two different Italo-Romance varieties used as heritage languages in two migratory settings, the Piedmontese dialect in Argentina and the Campanian dialect of Montefalcione in England. As the authors suggest, a comparative approach in the study of heritage speakers needs to take into account the different socio-linguistic contexts and migration histories, and these studies contribute to our understanding of this important aspect of linguistic variation.

Overall, the volume offers a reflection on the complexity of interpreting data from heritage Italian speakers, when so many internal and external variables can play a role. The authors have contributed to shaping our understanding of variables such as age of acquisition, exposure to input, the influence of dialects or regional variation and also the variability that we can find across generations of speakers and in different sociolinguistic contexts. While this is an initial step into a deeper understanding of Italian as a heritage language, this volume also offers an insight that can be generalised or applied to other languages, therefore contributing to our understanding of bilingualism, intergenerational language transmission and language change.

# Notes on contributor

’ is a research fellow at the University of Bologna. Her research interests focus on bilingual language acquisition in educational contexts and within the process of family language transmission.

Languages and social cohesion: a transdisciplinary literature review, by Gabriela Meier and Simone Smala, London, Routledge, 2022, 1–144 pp., US\$47.96 (Hardback), ISBN 978-0- 367-63720-0

Language is an important component in social cohesion and plays a key role in managing conflict in situations where various languages come into contact. In light of this, Languages and social cohesion:

A transdisciplinary literature review, by Gabriela Meier and Simone Smala, embarks on a transdisciplinary literature review to explore the ways in which language and social cohesion intersect in academic articles.

The book is divided into five chapters that trace the impetus for the project, important definitions, the process for the systematic literature review, key findings, and additional, practical tools for future use. The book is methodologically relevant for researchers and students interested in large-scale literature reviews in the social sciences and theoretically relevant for those with an interest in language education research and concepts. While the first three chapters provide a detailed walk-through of the process for setting up a large-scale systematic literature review, the final two chapters unpack themes related to language and social cohesion before describing how such a process could be applied in additional contexts using the tools the researchers developed in their project. Overall, the book provides a practical yet theoretically and methodologically robust example of largescale systematic literature review combined with comprehensive illustrations of the connections between language and social cohesion from the extensive body of existing literature.

To contextualise the project, in Chapter 1, the authors detail the motivation for the project based on a concern that ‘divided societies may be vulnerable ill-equipped to deal with the enormous global challenges we face in coming decades’ (2) whereas socially cohesive societies are ‘more resilient and more able to cope with challenges’ (UNDP as cited in Meier and Smala, 2). It is the role of language in fostering such social cohesion, according to the authors, that requires additional consideration. Of further note in Chapter 1 is the attention to the authors’ own biases in which they acknowledge their locations in English-speaking contexts as well as the unequal inclusion of studies from English-speaking countries in the literature review. Chapter 2 centres on definitions of language that have informed the author’s study and include those which recognise language as tool for communication, identification, mediation before noting that ‘languages are a social construct’ (14) with a political nature depending on their uses, management, and associated policies. Chapter 2 also links language to the concept of social cohesion which the authors broadly define as including ‘social norms, belonging, trusts, and behaviour … social organisation and stability’ (21). The overlaps between languages and social cohesion then form the basis for Chapter 3 in which the authors outline the specifics of their systematic literature review such as the date-range, search terms, additional screening criteria and inclusion criteria. This led to 285 articles being identified, and in Chapter 3, a brief analysis of trends related to date of publication and location is offered showing gaps in 1992 and 1998 and almost half of all publications coming from USA, the UK, Canada, and Australia.

A theoretically driven, thematic analysis of the 285 articles is presented in Chapter 4 and is divided into five subthemes: (i) social networks and access to resources through languages, (ii) norms, attitudes and beliefs related to languages and groups, (iii) languages and a sense of belonging, (iv) manifestations of linguistic behaviour and social cohesion and (v) language policy and planning and social cohesion. Moreover, the authors refer only to select articles from the systematic literature review as they are related to each subtheme as illustrations, avoid repetition and manage the large number of examples. Chapter 4 then maps the complexities associated with social networks and access to resources through dominant, minority and foreign languages finding that the socio-political and historical contexts have a significant influence on the degree to and ways in which languages foster social cohesion, and that no particular category of linguistic social network or access offers a panacea for social cohesion. Next, in discussing the 111 articles relevant to the subtheme of norms, attitudes and beliefs related to languages and groups, the authors draw on various examples to highlight critical issues related to power, linguistic hierarchies, race, and marginalisation and argue that these are ‘important subjective factors that determine the extent to which language repertoires can be translated into social networks, sources and belonging’ (63).

Chapter 4 continues by looking at the intersection of languages and a sense of belonging in 104 articles from the literature review; the authors note that a sense of belonging is connected to and through languages which may be multiple or imagined and can be establish or negotiated via narratives of the self and/or language communities and can result in affinity, detachment, or identity crises. The authors point out that a sense of belonging is ‘a complex affective factor’ with implications for the subsequent subtheme in Chapter 4 that explores manifestations of linguistic behaviour. As acknowledged by the authors, ‘there are some overlaps with other themes’ in this subtheme; however, some insights into the role of mediation and the ways in which a sense of belonging works to exclude or include speakers is explored in more detail. A significant contribution of this subtheme is the discussion of multilingual practices identified in the articles, and how these link to the growing body of critical language education pedagogies such as translanguaging. Chapter 4 concludes with a discussion of articles relevant to the subtheme of language policy and planning and social cohesion. Language policy and planning are discussed from a top-down perspective to note the differences for monolingual, bilingual, and plurilingual approaches. As with each subtheme, the final section end withs the authors’ insights; here, they confirm ‘the field of education as one of the main spheres within which authorities can influence language status and hierarchies, as well as dimensions of social cohesion’ (100).

Chapter 5 draws together five distinct perspectives that the authors have identified throughout their thematic analysis and presents these in an easy-to-read figure (104). The five interconnected language and social cohesion perspectives identified by the authors are: behavioural, organisational, emotional, ideational, distributive, and contextual. The remained of the chapter unpacks these perspectives in detail before translating the perspectives into a framework for use in practice. Of particular utility is a table including questions related to language and social cohesion that the authors have included to ‘prompt interested parties to consider ideas, possibilities, and warning signs that emerged from our literature review, when exploring real-life practical contexts and research projects’ (112). Appendices with the subthemes and descriptive codes are also provided.

Overall, Languages and social cohesion: A transdisciplinary literature review by Gabriela Meier and Simone Smala offers a painstakingly detailed example of a systematic literature review on the topic of languages and social cohesion. By clearly outlining each step of their process, including appendices with subthemes and descriptive codes and being afforded the space and word count to expand on their decision-making processes in the format of a book helps immensely in understanding how this method can be undertaken to explore topics in sociolinguistics, language education and qualitative studies more broadly. Moreover, the thoughtful questions included in Chapter 5 provide well-founded inspiration for novice researchers grappling with the multitude of potential research topics in this space. In addition, by utilising the format of a book to present a systematic literature review, Meier and Smala have covered a dearth of theoretical concepts related to language and social cohesion which allows the reader to engage with the field of language education and sociolinguistic research more broadly through their examples and explanations. It is also appreciated that the authors have carefully selected the examples to include in Chapter 4, and rather than attempting to include all relevant studies or present these quantitatively, the authors have meticulously described each article as it relates to their subthemes. As such, this book is of particular use to doctoral and Masters students interested in conducting systematic literature reviews as well as those seeking guidance in how to refine their research topics.

The book also recognises its own limitations in terms of the bias towards research published in English, predominantly from four countries. This raises questions about how alternative theories generated from beyond the Global North might offer more diverse insights into how social cohesion and languages are conceptualised to inform the theoretical basis of a systematic literature review such as this. Another area worthy of further unpacking relates to the discussions of emotion; this would benefit from insights drawn from multicultural theories on affect that also grapple with the embodied nature of language as it connects to race, class, and status in order to move beyond only psychologised notions of emotion as explanations for how a sense of belonging manifests. Nevertheless, the book offers a detailed overview of languages and social cohesion with examples from a wide range of articles and serves as an aspirational model for large-scale systematic literature reviews in the social sciences.