# Collaborative writing: Bridging the gap between the textbook and the workplace

Stephen Bremner \*

Department of English, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong

# Abstract

A key challenge facing professional communication teachers is the need to bridge the gap between the culture of the classroom and the reality of the workplace. One area of difference between the two contexts is the way in which collaborative activities surrounding the construction of written text are enacted. Differences in collaborative practices result from factors such as the way in which hierarchies and power relationships are arranged, differing levels of knowledge and expertise, and the motives for collaboration. An understanding of this aspect of workplace writing could benefit the student writer. However, an analysis of eight currently used business communication textbooks, an important resource for ESP teachers, suggests that collaboration is discussed only in the most general terms, and specific differences between the two contexts are rarely addressed. Additionally, few tasks provide students with activity-types that would help them understand and experience the kinds of collaborative interaction that they will encounter at work. This paper argues the need for business communication textbooks to narrow the gap between the classroom and the workplace, and discusses ways in which more authentic collaborative activities can be set up in the classroom.

$^ { © }$ 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

The importance of collaborative writing is well attested. Its prevalence in the workplace was demonstrated in early research by Faigley and Miller (1982) and Paradis, Dobrin, and Miller (1985), among others, and since then studies in this area have ranged from attempts to describe and categorise collaborative activity (Couture & Rymer, 1989; Debs, 1991; Ede & Lunsford, 1990; Killingsworth & Jones, 1989) to investigations of largescale collaboration (Cross, 1994, 2001). The notion of collaborative writing is extended by most researchers beyond the simple idea of groups coming together to produce texts. Couture and Rymer, for example, see collaboration as the “oral and written communication pertaining to a document during the process of planning, drafting and revising it”, and say that “it may be fair to conclude that significant writing is enveloped in talk” (1989, p. 79), a point echoed by Debs (1991) and Louhiala-Salminen (2002). The profusion of terminology that has emerged from the various studies is an indication of the complexity of the collaborative writing process, as has been noted by Thompson (2001) and Lowry, Curtis, and Lowry (2004).

The majority of research into collaborative writing has been conducted in North America, although Gollin’s (1999) study of collaboration in an Australian workplace is a notable example of work conducted elsewhere. It should be noted that English for Specific Purposes as a field has not addressed the area in great detail. Bhatia suggests that “language teaching, including ESP, has always treated writing as an individual activity, and it is only recently that we have discovered that out in the world of work, professional writing is invariably collaborative” (2004, pp. 205–206). It may be that ESP’s primary interest in genre and text rather than the processes surrounding their construction has led to this situation, yet in the light of its prevalence, collaborative writing is an area that merits consideration by ESP teachers.

Gollin highlights the difference between the workplace and the classroom in respect of collaborative writing, saying that workplace collaborative writing processes “are embedded, [and] differ significantly from the writing processes of individuals modelled in traditional pedagogy” (1999, p. 268). Indeed, this difference in the nature of the context is critical. A social constructionist view of writing sees genres as situated in the contexts that are constructed through social interaction (Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995; Blyler & Thralls, 1993), and the fundamental differences between the workplace and the classroom in terms of context and community – two mutually linked and central factors in the collaborative construction of texts – mean that a number of key aspects of the process will differ as well (Freedman, Adam, & Smart, 1994).

Given that collaborative writing is a common feature of workplace practice, it is important that students are made aware of the ways in which collaboration differs in classroom and professional contexts. As Gollin says, “collaborative writing is a complex activity and needs to be actively taught” (1999, p. 289), a point also made by Colen and Petelin (2004), and Dovey (2006). The latter, in the context of the “new vocationalism”, cites approaches adopted at the University of Technology in Sydney (UTS): their Statement of Graduate Attributes has a Communicative/Collaborative Domain in which the literacies described “include the language and social practices involved in establishing and maintaining collaborative relationships” (2000, p. 3, cited in Dovey, 2006, p. 392).

For teachers of business communication, whether they are working with L1 or L2 learners, the question is how to provide students with experiences that will help them understand the nature of workplace practices. Chan (2009) notes that despite the considerable number of studies of language use in business settings, “the interface between research and pedagogy remains weak” (p. 125), and this claim is borne out by her study of the ways in which textbooks deal with business meetings. In the case of collaborative writing, the teaching resources that address this aspect of the workplace come largely in the form of business communication textbooks from North America, where, as noted above, the bulk of research has been conducted. Such books are also used extensively with non-native speakers outside the US, in regions such as East Asia and the Middle East, where there are often few locally produced teaching resources available. This article examines how business communication textbooks deal with collaborative writing. It discusses the differences between collaborative writing in the workplace and the classroom, examines how textbooks tackle this area and the extent to which they are able to bridge the gap between the two contexts, and finally it looks at possible ways of approaching collaborative writing in the classroom.

# 2. Collaborative writing – the classroom and the workplace

The issue of how context affects collaborative writing processes in the classroom and the workplace is central to this paper. This section examines the way in which the two contexts differ, and discusses how this can affect the resulting collaborative activity. Some of the differences identified pertain to writing in general, while others relate specifically to the nature of collaborative activity. Both need to be explained as they both impact on the way in which writing plays out in the two sites.

For the purposes of this article, it is assumed that undergraduate classrooms are the likely target for the books under examination, in that most of the texts tackled are the basic entry-level genres of business communication (letters, e-mails, reports, etc.). It is also assumed that there will be a greater degree of homogeneity in undergraduate student groups than might be found in older postgraduate groups, where members might vary more in age and professional experience. It is acknowledged, though, that there will also be differences among students in groups that might seem superficially homogenous: Yang (2008), for example, found differences in approach and disagreements among Chinese-background ESL students in Canada. Differences among students can be attributed to factors such as language proficiency, personality, culture and disciplinary background. Such differences among participants are also found in professional contexts, but the nature of the workplace makes possible a wider range of differences than might be seen in the classroom, as will be discussed below.

An important difference, and one which informs many other aspects of the process, is the reason why writing takes place In the workplace, writing is instituted for pragmatic or instrumental reasons, which relate to the overall goals of the organization; in the classroom, however, it is seen essentially as a process that students engage in with the aim of developing their writing skills, or for the display of knowledge (Freedman & Adam, 1996).

By extension, the audience for the written product and their reasons for reading it will be different (Wallace, 1994): texts produced in the workplace might be read by a variety of audiences (Palmeri, 2004), and for instrumental reasons. In most classroom situations, on the other hand, the audience is likely to be an instructor, who will be reading the texts for evaluative and developmental purposes. Freedman et al. discuss this point, suggesting that in workplace writing “the prime concern is for what the reader can get from the text, not for what the writer got out of the process of writing” (1994, p. 206). Writers also have to consider what the reader is likely to know, and in this there is a clear difference between the two contexts: the need to display understanding and knowledge can lead to students’ including information that would be unnecessary in a workplace context (Dovey, 2006).

In addition to these differences relating to writing in general, there is the question of why writers collaborate. With regard to the workplace, Reither (1993) talks of motives which relate to management monitoring, efficiency and effectiveness, and of situations where a group effort is likely to be better than that of a lone writer. Another reason might be to help maintain relationships (Gollin, 1999; Paradis et al., 1985). Reither also contends that collaborating can serve “the need to develop and maintain an identity and culture for the institution itself” (1993, p. 200). In the classroom, on the other hand, very often students collaborate simply because they are asked to do so by their instructors.

A crucial difference lies in the constitution of the community producing the texts. In the workplace there will often be considerable diversity among the participants in terms of knowledge, disciplinary background, work styles, experience and motives, and each will bring these to bear on the process. This notion is captured by Dautermann in her study of a hospital community: “within the writing group, each writer represented a unit, a specialty, a hospital role, or a level of commitment to the hierarchy” (1993, p. 103). Cross (2001) also talks about how members of functional units may take different approaches to writing. A student group, by contrast, is likely to be more homogenous in its make-up, with most members having similar levels of knowledge and experience; most probably they will all be focused on the same goal.

In addition there will be differences in status and power Any institution will have what Bhatia (2004) calls “participatory mechanisms”, whereby it is understood who can contribute what and when to the collaborative writing process, a point made by Yates and Orlikowski, who investigate “who is not empowered to initiate or receive certain genres” (2002, p. 17). This question of power distribution is implied by some of the collaborative configurations described by Paradis et al. (1985) and Ede and Lunsford (1990). There is less likely to be much difference in power and status among students.

Another aspect of the two contexts that differs markedly is the presence of intertextuality, which can be seen as a form of collaboration. Often writers in the workplace can draw on previous examples of letters, progress reports and action plans, a practice reported by Flowerdew and Wan (2006), and by Freedman et al., who say that “workplace writing is resonant with the discourse of colleagues and the ongoing conversation of the institution” (1994, p. 210), something also noted by Louhiala-Salminen (2002). Intertextual influences in the workplace can also be less overt, but nevertheless present: workplace documents might also incorporate ideas and text that have been constructed elsewhere, for example organizational guidelines or templates; such influences can help writers, but can also act as a constraint. Witte (1992) also talks about the phenomenon of “covert collaboration”, whereby writers are in effect collaborating with other writers in the organization, consciously or otherwise. By contrast, students doing collaborative writing tasks tend to have few if any other texts to refer to; often they are given a scenario in the form of a scripted context, and little in the way of intertextuality is present (Bremner, 2008).

The differences outlined above will have a considerable impact on the types of collaboration in the two contexts, in particular the interactions among participants and the composing processes. In the workplace, the fact of a hierarchy and the diversity of in knowledge, experience, background and so on among participants allow for a broader range of possible collaborative configurations. Ede and Lunsford (1990), for example, talk of hierarchic and dialogic collaboration, while Killingsworth and Jones (1989) propose division-of-labor and integrated-teams models. Paradis et al. (1985) discuss “document cycling”, a process whereby more experienced writers help others, Smart (1993) also describes cycles of workplace collaboration between writer and supervisor, and Freedman and Adam (1996) similarly emphasise the iterative nature of drafting in professional contexts.

Collaborative configurations in the classroom, on the other hand, will often differ from those in the workplace: the relatively homogenous make-up of student groups gives them fewer reasons to assume particular roles, and often they simply divide up the work, with each taking responsibility for a different section. In support of this, Freedman and Adam (1996) speculate that a subject in their study brought with him from university into the workplace the notion of collaboration as simply dividing up a task. Freedman et al. also report that the student collaboration they observed “does not at all approximate the nature or intensity of the collaboration more commonly found in the workplace” (1994, p. 212).

A related issue is that of medium of communication. Often workplace collaborators will have a wider selection of channels available to them, such as videoconferencing and collaborative software packages. It may be that not all of these are fully used, however, and many students are now able to call upon an increasingly sophisticated range of tools to communicate.

A final point of comparison between the workplace and the classroom relates to the role of conflict. Participants in collaboration may belong to professional or disciplinary communities that have different expectations and approaches to writing and to the target texts, in addition to their varying levels of experience, knowledge, power and motives. A consequence of these differences is the possibility of conflict, discussed in some detail by Cross (1994, 2001). As Palmeri points out, though, “conflict in interprofessional collaboration is not inherently positive or negative” (2004, p. 60). On the positive side the benefits of substantive conflict are discussed by Burnett (1993) and Wallace (1994), and Dautermann reports a study in which a writing group built up “a sense of community among themselves” (1993, p. 103) as they worked through differences. Palmeri (2004) also mentions a set of documents that “speak persuasively to their diverse professional audiences” (2004, p. 37) as the positive outcome of conflict within a law firm.

When students collaborate, the possibility of conflict also exists: this may come about through disagreement over workload, roles or strategies, or may be the result of personality differences. It is unlikely, however, that the causes of conflict in the classroom will have the same complex and diverse origins as might be seen in the workplace.

It is clear then, that there are substantial differences in the ways that collaborative writing is enacted in the workplace and the classroom. In general terms these relate to the reasons for writing and the nature of the audience. The reasons for collaborating will also differ, and the presence of intertextuality is an additional factor. Finally the constitution of the writing community, with its diversity of knowledge, status, motive, expectations and so on will affect both the types of interaction and the composing processes.

# 3. Research aims

In the light of the above differences, this article considers how the gap between the workplace and the classroom is dealt with in business communication textbooks, examining the extent to which they provide students with opportunities to experience the kinds of collaborative interactions and composing processes that can be seen at work. The study will serve as an evaluation of what is considered an important resource for teachers of workplace English, and will also provide insights into the teaching of collaborative writing. Two main research questions are addressed:

1. To what extent do business communication textbooks acknowledge the nature of collaborative writing in the workplace? 2. To what extent do they provide meaningful practice of collaborative writing?

# 4. The study

Eight textbooks were selected for analysis. All were published within five years of this study, and can be considered typical in that they address – to varying degrees – genres commonly found in workplaces, such as letters, e-mails, reports and presentations. They are listed below.

1. Fundamentals of contemporary business communication (Ober, 2004).   
2. Business communication for managers: An advanced approach (Penrose, Rasberry, & Myers, 2004).   
3. Business communication essentials (Bovee & Thill, 2006).   
4. Improving business communication skills (Roebuck, 2006).   
5. Business communication: Making connections in a digital world. (International Student Edition) (Lesikar,   
Flatley, & Rentz, 2008).   
6. Business communication: Building critical skills (Locker & Kaczmarek, 2004).   
7. Essentials of business communication (Asian Edition) (Guffey & Du-Babcock, 2008).   
8. Managing business and professional communication (Dodd, 2004).

Only Penrose et al. (2004) specify a target audience – admittedly a broad one – saying that their book is suitable for graduate students, junior and senior undergraduates, and business practitioners. As for the other books, the basic genres they deal with (letters, e-mails, reports) and in many cases the grammar and “mechanics” sections, imply that they are targeting entry-level learners who have little experience of real workplaces. Dodd’s comment that his students “regularly express their desire to know how things work in the real world” (2004, p. xx) supports this notion. Lesikar et al. (2008), and Guffey and Du-Babcock (2008), are “international” editions; in the case of the former there is no mention of overseas learners; the latter is aimed at “Asian students and professionals”, but is almost identical in aims and content to both the US and Canadian editions of the same book. The fact that these two books are not noticeably different from other North American textbooks suggests an assumption on the part of the writers that the aims of L1 and L2 learners are similar. This seems a reasonable assumption, although the question of whether these populations warrant different approaches and materials is outside the scope of this paper.

# 4.1. Data collection and analysis

The eight books were examined to find out how they deal with the following aspects of collaborative writing:

1. Collaborative writing as a feature of the workplace: Do they acknowledge this? Do they talk about its prevalence and importance?   
2. The nature of collaborative writing in the workplace: To what extent is this addressed? Which of these specific aspects are looked at? - why writers collaborate, - the constitution of the community, - differences in status and power, - the presence of intertextuality, - interactions and composing processes, - the possibility of conflict.   
3. The workplace and the classroom: Do they explicitly address how the workplace differs from the classroom in respect of collaboration?   
4. Collaborating effectively: What advice is given for working in teams and for dealing with conflict?   
5. Collaborative writing tasks: Do these provide useful practice?

(As the books deal with the topic in a variety of ways, references to collaborative writing or any similar activity e.g. “co-authored documents” or “team writing” were considered.)

# 5. Findings

# 5.1. Collaborative writing as a feature of the workplace

All eight books make reference to this in some way. The idea of collaboration and its attendant features is implicit in Dodd’s description of the workplace as a “complicated mix of values and needs, relationships and conflicts, and technology and people” (2004, p. xvii). Locker and Kaczmarek take a broad view, saying that “all writing is in some sense collaborative” (2004, p. ix). Ober maintains that team writing is “quite prevalent in organizations” (2004, p. 306), a claim echoed by Bovee and Thill (2006), and Lesikar et al. (2008). Penrose et al. look to the future, saying that “writing experts and business practitioners see collaborative writing as a technique that will increase in value” (2004, p. 125), while Roebuck is similarly forward-looking: “the network, not the pyramid, will become the conceptual model for how people work together to achieve goals” (2006, p. xiv).

# 5.2. The nature of collaborative writing in the workplace

# 5.2.1. Why writers collaborate

The reasons cited for collaborating relate to the practical, the need to accommodate diverse views, and the possible benefits. On the practical side, saving time is a motive (Lesikar et al., 2008), Locker and Kaczmarek (2004) also mention this, adding that it is unlikely that one person would have all the knowledge required to do a task. Lesikar et al. (2008) say that the specialised knowledge of the different participants and their combined talents will lead to better documents. Bovee and Thill (2006) agree, and suggest that the use of teams will boost the likelihood that the solution will be accepted. Penrose et al. point to the potential benefits of collaborating, talking of “a beautifully crafted message that is the result of team synergy, balanced abilities, a common goal” (2004, p. 124).

# 5.2.2. The constitution of the community; differences in status and power

The notion of diversity in collaborative groups is recognized by several of the books, including Bovee and Thill (2006) and Locker and Kaczmarek (2004). Penrose et al. (2004) enumerate the kinds of diversity that might be seen in a writing team, such as differences in approaches to writing, and in ability and knowledge, hierarchical influences, and the possibility of political factors. Dodd also talks about these last two when giving advice for group discussions, saying that “individuals can be intimidated by leaders and others with power” (2004, p. 195), and Bovee and Thill (2006) mention hidden agendas as a potential pitfall when collaborating. While some books comment directly on this issue of diversity, the others all do so implicitly in their discussion of conflict and its causes, which are looked at later in this section.

# 5.2.3. The presence of intertextuality

There is no specific reference to the notion of intertextuality in any of the books, but in some, the idea that other texts may play a part in the writing process is referred to either explicitly or implicitly. Penrose et al., for example, consider the idea of corporate guidelines as having an influence on layout (2004, p. 103), while Locker and Kaczmarek discuss the influence of “boilerplate”, and point out that in business “old text may be included without attribution” (2004, p. 79), this ties in with Freedman et al.’s (1994) observation, noted above, that “intertextual borrowing” is common in the workplace. Referencing, which can be seen as a form of collaboration in that it involves recourse to other people’s texts, is mentioned by several books, for example Guffey and Du-Babcock (2008), who address the issue of plagiarism. Thus while there is implicit discussion of intertextual relations, this discussion is not located within the concept of collaboration.

# 5.2.4. Interactions and composing processes

Lesikar et al. intimate that writers will play different roles: “even if one person has primary responsibility for a report, he or she will often need contributions from many people” (2008, p. 293). Locker and Kaczmarek (2004) extend this idea, talking about group size, where decision-making power lies, and how responsibility can be apportioned. Roebuck details a range of possibilities as to what collaborative writing can be, including co-authoring a document, critiquing a peer’s work, individual or team planning and drafting, and researching and drafting by an individual for editing by a supervisor (2006, p. 283). Such configurations suggest delineated roles and responsibilities, and while other books do not specify interactive patterns, many of them consider the role of critiquing and feedback.

Dodd talks about the characteristics of small groups, describes different types of network, and explains the “life cycle model” (forming, storming, norming, performing, superperforming) that accounts for how collaborative teams operate (2004, pp. 212–213). A similar model is mentioned by Roebuck (2006) in relation to virtual team development. The use of collaborative software is discussed in several books. Ober (2004) looks at virtual teams, Lesikar et al. (2008) consider the possibilities of asynchronous and synchronous contributions afforded by technology, and Guffey and Du-Babcock (2008) discuss collaborative programs that can enable multiple contributions and exchange.

In addition to what is outlined above, beliefs about the nature of collaborative interactions and composing processes are also implied in the advice given for effective collaboration, which is discussed later.

# 5.2.5. The possibility of conflict

The issue of conflict is covered implicitly or explicitly by all the books. Penrose et al., for example, consider collaborative scenarios where, “often . . . the result pits writers against each other” (2004, p. 124). “Conflict is what group meetings are all about”, says Ober (2004, p. 29), but he offers the caveat that there should be debate about issues rather than personalities. Similarly, Dodd (2004) talks about substantive and non-substantive conflict, a question considered by Burnett (1993) and Wallace (1994), as mentioned earlier. Dodd also lists possible causes of conflict, which include different goals, relationship differences, unequal power distribution, different values, and the need to save face (2004, pp. 108–109).

# 5.3. The workplace and the classroom

Differences between the workplace and the classroom tend to be implied rather than explicit. There is some discussion of context and culture: Lesikar et al. (2008) talk about the influence of the different contexts of writing – organizational, professional or personal – and Dodd stresses the importance of organizational culture. Locker and Kaczmarek (2004) also discuss culture, as well as the notion of discourse community, but from the point of view of audience analysis rather than writing.

There are also some specific references to the difference in contexts. Locker and Kaczmarek identify areas in which business communication differs from other school writing, including purpose, audience, information, organization, style, document design and visuals (2004, pp. 5–6), although they do not mention collaboration. Lesikar et al. hint at the disjunct between the reality of the workplace and the patterns that they prescribe: “all too often, groups experience results that vary from these patterns” (2008, p. 316), while Roebuck makes the point that team membership is often “somewhat fluid” (2006, p. 286).

# 5.4. Collaborating effectively

All the books give advice for effective collaboration. Some of this is fairly general: “a team must prepare thoroughly and make assumptions, roles, procedures, standards, norms, and processes explicit”, says Roebuck (2006, p. 274), while Bovee and Thill suggest that “effective teams . . . understand their purpose, communicate openly and honestly, build consensus, think creatively, stay focused, resolve conflict” (2006, p. 29).

Roebuck also has more specific guidelines for working in a team setting, including allowing time to get to know one another, developing a plan, and working towards group consensus (2006, pp. 283–285). Guffey and Du-Babcock suggest approaches to what they call “team writing projects”, accounting for the different stages of the process; for the initial phase “Preparing to work together”, they offer advice relating to the size of the team, deciding how the team will be governed, and how to deal with underproductive team members (2008, p. 253). Lesikar et al. also identify typical activities that would contribute to the production of a collaborative report: these include collectively determining the purpose in order to develop “a coherent, shared sense” (2008, p. 317) of target audience and needs, assigning parts to be written, and revising collaboratively.

Locker and Kaczmarek’s (2004) advice is based on research by Burnett (1993), Locker (1991) and Ede and Lunsford (1990). They contend that collaborative writing is “most successful when the group articulates its understanding of the document’s purposes and audiences and explicitly discusses the best way to achieve these rhetorical goals” (p. 367), echoing a number of the other books. They suggest that writers take into account the styles and commitments of other participants, and, like Roebuck (2006), they emphasise the need to allow time for participants to get acquainted.

Locker’s (1991) research is cited in Locker and Kaczmarek (2004) to describe the characteristics of successful student groups. Among her conclusions was the observation that the successful group “planned revisions as a group, saw supervisors’ comments as legitimate, and had a positive attitude toward revision” (2004, p. 367), this group also “distributed power equally, worked to soothe hard feelings, and was careful to include all group members” (2004, p. 367). A number of the other books discuss the question of role allocation in collaborative activity. Lesikar et al. talk of “the need to include all major areas of specialization involved in the work to be done” (2008, p. 316), and suggest that “the usual practice is to assign each person a part of the report” (p. 319). Ober, meanwhile, advises writers to “divide the tasks equitably, based on each member’s needs, interests, expertise, and commitment to the project” (2004, p. 31).

As mentioned earlier, the idea of conflict is addressed in all the books, and there is general consensus that if handled appropriately, it can have a positive impact. “Confrontation can actually create better final documents”, say Guffey and Du-Babcock (2008, p. 253), Locker and Kaczmarek (2004) venture a similar opinion, while Roebuck (2006) suggests allowing and encouraging disagreements, rather than settling on a quick an easy answer. Dodd and others look at the communication skills needed for handling criticism; Locker and Kaczmarek (2004) outline steps in conflict resolution, as do Guffey and Du-Babcock (2008).

# 5.5. Collaborative writing tasks

The books all give practice in a range of areas related to business communication, and this section provides a representative selection of tasks which deal with collaborative writing.

Some tasks are aimed at sensitizing students to issues involved in collaborating. Here is a “Teamwork” task from Bovee and Thill: “With a classmate, attend a local community or campus meeting where you can observe group discussion” (2006, p. 43). Dodd offers a variation on this: “With a team of classmates, interview the leader of a company about the use of teams” (2004, p. 225). Lesikar et al. take another approach: “Collaborative reports are better than reports written by an individual because they use many minds rather than one. Discuss” (2008, p. 322). Locker and Kaczmarek ask students to reflect on the process: “As you work in a collaborative writing group, keep a journal after each group meeting” (2004, p. 371).

When it comes to writing practice, again different approaches can be seen. Some books provide instructions simply to work together, as in this example from Ober: “Working in teams of three or four, assume the role of grievance committee of your union” (2004, p. 201). Here is a task from Roebuck in a similar vein: “After you have completed your research, develop your collaboratively written report” (2006, p. 217). In Guffey and Du-Babcock, working together is presented as an option: “Formal report: Intercultural Communication . . . Write your report individually or in teams” (2008, p. 291). Penrose et al. propose a writing task that focuses on a particular aspect of working together: “Divide up a writing project . . . among group members so that each person writes a section using the same word-processing program . . . Work together on the same computer, edit and smooth out the flow so the document has consistent tone and coherency” (2004, p. 127).

Finally there are task types which provide more information for the writers, usually in the form of scripted context. Here is an extract from an example from Bovee and Thill: “ . . . you quickly convince other members of the food services staff to help you out. Working together, you’ll have all the skills necessary to organize the event . . . With your team. . .” (2006, p. 273). A similar kind of task can be found in Locker and Kaczmarek; it involves the creation of a committee to address the poor writing habits of employees: “Known throughout management ranks for your excellent communication skills, you and your classmates have been named to this group” (2004, p. 104).

# 6. Discussion

In summary, this survey of eight business communication textbooks shows that all acknowledge the role of collaboration in the workplace writing process. The exact nature of collaborative writing is dealt with in different ways, and while there is some implicit discussion of how the workplace differs from the classroom, there is nevertheless room for a more explicit account of how the two contexts differ. All recognize the possibility of conflict, and offer advice relating to team-building and conflict management.

However, what emerges most strongly from this investigation is that the task types across the eight books appear to provide few if any opportunities that would expose students to the realities of collaboration. In other words, the activities engendered by these tasks would not resemble very closely the kinds of activity seen in the workplace. Three points relate to this. Firstly, in the books, “teamwork”, for the most part, simply means working together, and the tasks are likely to foster group activity in which roles are not differentiated. Indeed, although some books in their task sections distinguish between “individual” and “group” activities, there is often little obvious basis for this distinction. Suggesting that students simply divide up a task equally – and this practice was noted in several books, as indicated above – only serves to emphasise the lack of delineation in roles.

The second point is that much of the advice given regarding working in team settings seems to be predicated on idealized visions of teamwork, where the writing proceeds in a controllable order. It also implies an equality among participants that may not necessarily be found in the workplace. This is understandable, given that in the classroom students tend to be of similar status, as mentioned earlier. However, what this means is that students will not be able to experience the kinds of group configurations and interactions that are seen in the workplace. To provide such opportunities is of course a challenge, and this will be discussed in the final section of this article.

The third point relating to task provision is that quite a number of tasks are overscripted, in the sense that students are given a context and often told what they think and exactly what they have to do. Such tasks allow little leeway for different points of view, and thereby reduce the possibility of conflict, which, as most of the books note, is an important element in collaborative activity.

It has been shown, then, that there is a disjunct between what the books say about the nature of collaborative writing and the actual “collaborative” tasks that are provided. Why this is the case is open to question. It may be that the books do not see it as their role to deal with this aspect of workplace writing. Penrose et al. (2004), for example, in their discussion of writing proposals and reports, are focused on the writing and the texts rather than the involvement of other people in these processes. Meanwhile Lesikar et al. are clear about where their focus lies: “although a discussion of group development and processes is beyond the scope of this book, you might want to consult one of the many references on the subject” (2008, pp. 316–317).

The other possible explanation is that the books see the provision of workplace-like tasks in the classroom as unfeasible, that the differences between the two contexts are pedagogically insurmountable. Indeed, there has been much debate about whether the workplace can be recreated in the classroom. Mabrito is doubtful: “we will never be able to exactly duplicate in our classrooms many of the constraints and pressures that writers experience in the workplace” (1999, p. 105), he says, citing the different types of relationships found in the two contexts, a point echoed by Debs (1991).

However, accepting the idea that there is a divide between the workplace and the classroom should not discourage teachers from attempting to give their students a sense of how collaborative writing operates at work. With this aim in mind researchers talk about the need to provide a social context and community in the classroom (Doheny-Farina, 1986; Gollin, 1999), opportunities for students to interact (Couture & Rymer, 1989) and play multiple roles (Dias, Freedman, Medway, & Pare´, 1999). Beaufort goes further in suggesting that we should “capitalize on social motives for writing” (2000, p. 218), and that we should adopt collaborative models for writing rather than competitive ones. Schneider and Andre (2005) also talk of the need to provide collaborative opportunities, as do Pare´ and Smart, who contend that students need to engage with “a set of texts, the composing processes involved in creating these texts . . . and the social roles played by writers and readers” (1994, p. 147). Wallace (1994) suggests that an increased understanding of audience and social context can result from collaborative activity, while Palmeri calls for pedagogical models “for merging discourses in interprofessional communication” (2004, p. 61).

Essentially what we see in the business communication textbooks is an explanation (partial in some instances) of how collaboration functions in the workplace, yet the accompanying tasks do not provide the opportunity to understand or experience this. Such an approach is akin to explaining a grammatical structure without giving any opportunities for communicative practice. Thus, following on from the calls enumerated in the previous paragraph, it would seem that the task of the teacher attempting to prepare students for the reality of the workplace is to help students in a number of ways: firstly, to help them see that collaborative writing is not the somewhat idealised activity that is hinted at in textbooks; secondly, to help them understand the factors that affect collaborative writing and the potential problems these can cause; and thirdly, to provide them with opportunities to experience the kinds of interaction and potential for conflict that they might encounter in the workplace.

It is fair to say that the exact conditions of the workplace cannot be recreated. However, some efforts can be made to provide students with opportunities beyond merely working together. Perhaps the most problematic aspect of such attempts is the fact that student groups, especially at undergraduate level, are often homogenous in their make-up, their members more likely to be similar in age, status, knowledge, and motive. A key factor noted earlier is that collaborative groups in the workplace tend to be more diverse in their make-up, and it is this diversity that can lead to the kind of dynamic that is usually absent from student collaboration. Sutton, having acknowledged these various differences, says that in his writing class he tries “carefully to design the collaborative groups, working to combine students with complementary skills . . . and corresponding work styles” (2007, p. 103). However, in so doing the teacher runs the risk of creating a dynamic that does not resemble the workplace. An alternative approach, suggested below, would be to capitalize on the possibility of difference rather than attempt to remove it from the mix.

The task for the teacher, then, would be to consider ways in which the element of difference can be incorporated into student activity. Take a report writing task for example. Rather than simply asking students to work in teams and write a report, the students could be grouped according to a putative function they play in the workplace, each group representing a different department and interest in an organization e.g. Finance, Marketing, Production, Distribution. Each group would then be given certain information that their department would expect to hold, such as knowledge about the market situation, production costs and so on. In this way an information gap would be created. Groups would then prepare their respective positions, each having to discuss what their motives and aims are, areas where they believe they are qualified or not qualified to contribute, which part(s) of the document they will write, what they do or do not want to see in the document, the concessions they are prepared to make, how they would like the final document to look, and what their strategies will be for achieving their aims. Once this is done, the groups are reorganized so that each new group has one representative from each of the original departmental groups. The group now works together “in character” to produce the target text. In this way a need to negotiate, and to deal with potential conflict has been created, and the results of these interactions will be seen in the shape and content of the final document. This is in some ways similar to the “role-based approach to revising and editing” advocated by Colen and Petelin (2004, p. 141). Finally there should be an opportunity after the report has been written for students to reflect on the process and the strategies they used to deal with conflict and other problems. An additional element could be to provide a set of texts to draw on as they work out their roles and create their target document: as explained above, the presence of other texts can act as both a resource and a constraint but is representative of the “covert collaboration” that Witte (1992) talks about.

# 7. Conclusion

The business communication textbooks in this study explain to some degree how collaborative writing functions in the workplace, yet the activities they provide fail to give students a sense of the realities they describe. Collaboration is not necessarily cooperative in the way that is anticipated in the classroom and in the way that these tasks seem to suggest – often it involves contestation and the negotiation of diversity. While it is not possible to replicate the exact conditions of the workplace, there are nevertheless aspects of this context that students can be made aware of. Indeed, if teachers can – with the help of business communication textbook materials – set up contexts for writing that are rich with the types of interactions, motives and concerns, and even the unpredictability and frustration, that feature in the workplace, they may be able to provide students with experiences and skills that will help them when they take up their place in the real world of work. Tasks which exploit the idea of difference as described above require more thought and preparation, but they are surely a better alternative to activities which barely attempt to bridge the gap between the classroom and the reality of the workplace.

# Acknowledgements

I would like to express my thanks to Professor Diane Belcher for her helpful comments and observations, and the two anonymous reviewers for their feedback and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper.

# References

Beaufort, A. (2000). Learning the trade: A social apprenticeship model for gaining writing expertise. Written Communication, 17(2), 185–223.   
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. (1995). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication: Cognition/culture/power. New Jersey, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Blyler, N., & Thralls, C. (Eds.). (1993). Professional communication: The social perspective. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.   
Bhatia, V. (2004). Worlds of written discourse: A genre-based view. London: Continuum.   
Bovee, C., & Thill, J. (2006). Business communication essentials (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.   
Bremner, S. (2008). Intertextuality and business communication textbooks: Why students need more textual support. English for Specific Purposes, 27(3), 306–321.   
Burnett, R. (1993). Conflict in collaborative decision-making. In N. Blyler & C. Thralls (Eds.), Professional communication: The social perspective (pp. 145–163). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.   
Chan, C. (2009). Forging a link between research and pedagogy: A holistic framework for evaluating business English materials. English for Specific Purposes, 28(2), 125–136.   
Colen, K., & Petelin, R. (2004). Challenges in collaborative writing in the contemporary corporation. Corporate Communications, 9(2), 136–145.   
Couture, B., & Rymer, J. (1989). Interactive writing on the job: Definitions and implications of “collaboration”. In M. Kogan (Ed.), Writing in the business professions (pp. 73–93). Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English and Association for Business Communication.   
Cross, G. (1994). Collaboration and conflict: A contextual exploration of group writing and positive emphasis. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, Inc.   
Cross, G. (2001). Forming the collective mind: A contextual exploration of large-scale collaborative writing in industry. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press Inc.   
Dautermann, J. (1993). Negotiating meaning in a hospital discourse community. In R. Spilka (Ed.), Writing in the workplace. New research perspectives (pp. 98–111). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.   
Debs, M. (1991). Recent research on collaborative writing in industry. Technical Communication (Fourth Quarter), 476–484.   
Dias, P., Freedman, A., Medway, P., & Pare´, A. (1999). Worlds apart: Acting and writing in academic and workplace contexts. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Dodd, C. (2004). Managing business and professional communication. Boston, MA: Pearson.   
Doheny-Farina, S. (1986). Writing in an emerging organization: An ethnographic study. Written Communication, 3(2), 158–185.   
Dovey, T. (2006). What purposes, specifically? Re-thinking purposes and specificity in the context of the ‘new vocationalism’. English for Specific Purposes, 25, 387–402.   
Ede, L., & Lunsford, A. (1990). Singular texts/plural authors: Perspectives on collaborative writing. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.   
Faigley, L., & Miller, T. (1982). What we learn from writing on the job. College English, 44(6), 557–569.   
Flowerdew, J., & Wan, A. (2006). Genre analysis of tax computation letters: How and why tax accountants write the way they do. English for Specific Purposes, 25(2), 133–153.   
Freedman, A., & Adam, C. (1996). Learning to write professionally: “Situated learning” and the transition from university to professional discourse. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 10(4), 395–427.   
Freedman, A., Adam, C., & Smart, G. (1994). Wearing suits to class: Simulating genres and simulations as genres. Written Communication, 11(2), 193–226.   
Gollin, S. (1999). ‘Why? I thought we’d talked about it before’: Collaborative writing in a professional workplace setting. In C. Candlin & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: Texts, processes and practices (pp. 267–290). London, England: Longman.   
Guffey, M., & Du-Babcock, B. (2008). Essentials of business communication (Asian ed.). Singapore: Thomson.   
Killingsworth, M., & Jones, B. (1989). Division of labor or integrated teams: A crux in the management of technical communication?. Technical Communication 36(3), 210–221.   
Lesikar, R., Flatley, M., & Rentz, K. (2008). Business communication: Making connections in a digital world (11th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Irwin.   
Locker, K. (1991). What makes a collaborative writing team successful? A case study of lawyers and social service workers in a state agency. In J. Forman (Ed.), New visions of collaborative writing (pp. 37–52). Portsmouth, NJ: Boynton.   
Locker, K., & Kaczmarek, S. K. (2004). Business communication: Building critical skills (2nd ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.   
Louhiala-Salminen, L. (2002). The fly’s perspective: Discourse in the daily routine of a business manager. English for Specific Purposes, 21, 211–231.   
Lowry, P., Curtis, A., & Lowry, M. (2004). Building a taxonomy and nomenclature of collaborative writing to improve interdisciplinary research and practice. Journal of Business Communication, 41(1), 66–99.   
Mabrito, M. (1999). From workplace to classroom: Teaching professional writing. Business Communication Quarterly, 62(3), 101–104.   
Ober, S. (2004). Fundamentals of contemporary business communication. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company.   
Palmeri, J. (2004). When discourses collide: A case study of interprofessional collaborative writing in a medically oriented law firm. Journal of Business Communication, 41(1), 37–65.   
Paradis, J., Dobrin, D., & Miller, R. (1985). Writing at Exxon: Notes on the writing environment of an R&D organization. In L. Odell & D. Goswami (Eds.), Writing in non-academic settings (pp. 281–308). New York, NY: Guilford.   
Pare´, A., & Smart, G. (1994). Observing genres in action: Towards a research methodology. In A. Freedman & P. Medway (Eds.), Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 146–154). London, England: Taylor & Francis.   
Penrose, J., Rasberry, R., & Myers, J. (2004). Business communication for managers: An advanced approach. Mason, OH: Thomson/SouthWestern.   
Reither, J. (1993). Scenic motives for collaborative writing in workplace and school. In R. Spilka (Ed.), Writing in the workplace. New research perspectives (pp. 195–206). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.   
Roebuck, D. (2006). Improving business communication skills (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, Prentice Hall.   
Schneider, B., & Andre, J. (2005). University preparation for workplace writing: An exploratory study of the perceptions of students in three disciplines. Journal of Business Communication, 42(2), 195–218.   
Smart, G. (1993). Genre as a community invention: A central bank’s response to its executives’ expectations as readers. In R. Spilka (Ed.), Writing in the workplace. New research perspectives (pp. 124–140). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.   
Sutton, M. (2007). English 4090: Collaborative writing at work. Composition Studies, 35(2), 101–109.   
Thompson, I. (2001). Collaboration in technical communication: A qualitative content analysis of journal articles, 1990–1999. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 44(3), 161–173.   
Wallace, D. L. (1994). Collaborative planning and transforming knowledge. Journal of Business Communication, 3(1), 41–60.   
Witte, S. (1992). Context, text, intertext: Toward a constructivist semiotic of writing. Written Communication, 9(2), 237–308.   
Yang, L. (2008). From group talk to group writing. In D. Belcher & A. Hirvela (Eds.), The oral-literate connection: Perspectives on L2 speaking, writing and other media interactions (pp. 139–167). Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press.   
Yates, J., & Orlikowski, W. (2002). Genre systems: Structuring interaction through communicative norms. Journal of Business Communication, 39(1), 13–35.