Short communication

# Writing teacher feedback literacy: Surveying second language teachers' knowledge, values, and abilities

Icy Lee a, Zhicheng Mao b,\*

a National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore b Faculty of Education, University of Macau, Macao SAR, China

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Assessment literacy   
Classroom writing assessment   
Feedback literacy   
Second language writing   
Writing teacher education

Despite a significant rise in awareness of the critical role of assessment literacy, teacher feedback literacy as an important component of assessment literacy has received scant attention in the domain of second language (L2) writing. By drawing on questionnaire data gathered from 353 English as a foreign language teachers and follow-up interviews with 34 focal teachers, this study attempts to ascertain L2 writing teachers' self-reported feedback literacy in relation to their knowledge, values, and abilities regarding feedback. Findings of the study reveal both deficiencies and gaps in the participants' writing feedback literacy. While the respondents reported a fundamental understanding of writing teacher feedback literacy, they appeared less certain of their abilities to implement feedback practices in the writing classroom. Despite this uncertainly, they held values about feedback that largely align with the principles supported by existing literature. The current study serves to make a novel contribution to existing research by shedding light on the underexplored concept of L2 writing teacher feedback literacy, with clear implications for the delivery of feedback training in teacher education programs.

# 1. Introduction

Feedback is acritical component of clssoom writing assessment, which serves as a formative assessment tool to promote student learning in the second language (L2) writing classroom (Hyland & Hyland, 2019; Lee, 2017). While feedback is sen as crucial for encouraging and consolidating learning, it has been acknowledged as a challenging enterpris, as evidenced by students' limited engagement with feedack and teachers' dissaisfaction with feedback procese Ferris & Kurzer, 2019). Such practica failure may preclude feedback from promoting assesment for learning - namely, using asessment to improve students performance. In order for student writers to benefit from feedback, there has been a growing emphasis on teachers' capacities to optimize the potential of feedback (Boud & Dawson, 2021), termed teacher feedback literacy.

Sutton (2012) inroduced the notion of feedback literacy, originating from literature on assesment/academic literacies,to describe students abilit  read, inerret and effectively utiize feack Drawing on this dfntion, the oncet f stdent feack litracy has been taken up by researchers who have elaborated on it both conceptually and empiricall, accentuating its importance for productive feedack processes (eg., Carles & Boud, 2018; Yu et al., 2022). Rather than focusing on the student persective, Lee (2017) considered writing teacher feedack literacy (wTFL) as an indispensable part of teacher assessment literacy, with a direct impact on student feedback literacy. Conceptualized as writing teachers repertoire of feedback competencies that involve knowledge, values, and abilities regarding feedback (Lee 2021), wTFL serves as a holistic construct for investigating teachers competencies in constructing productive feedback processes, representing an important contribution to L2 writing scholarship.

An in-depth understanding of WTFL iscrucial for L2 writing teachers, not only for enriching their pedagogical knowledge but also for helping them adress the belief-practice gaps as reported in the literature. For instance, Min's (2013) sef-study examined her beliefs and practices about providing writte fdback over a semester, pointing to the importance of procedural nowledge (i.e, how to apply acquired technical knowledge from feedack reearch), as part of techer feedback literacy, in facilittig congruty between eliefs and practice. imilarly, the mismatches between teachers pereptions of how they provide fedack and their actual practices, as revealed in Mao and Crosthwait (2019) and Junqueira and Payant (2015), suggest that writing teachers ned to enhance their feedback literacy to bring their beliefs into better alignment with their practices.

Owing to the theoretical and pedagogical importance of the topic, surveying WTFL wil provide a valuable understanding of this important yet under-researched construct, and inform L2 writing practice and research, as well as teacher education. To our knowledge, however, no L2 reearch has explored the level f WTFL - that is theextentto which writing teachers are fedack literate. As a preliminary attempt to ascertain L2 teachers writing fedack iteracy, this study utilizes a combination of questionnare survey and follow-up interviews to addres the fllowing research question: To what extent are L2 writing teachers feedback literate? The current study contributes to aclearer picture of WTFL, and generates methodological implications related to elicitig, measuring, and analyzing WTFL in L2 writing.

# 2. The study

# 2.1. Research methods

As part ofa larger research project investigating the development of teachers wTFL in L2 contexts, this study consists of two stages: a questionnaire survey administered to a relatively large group of respondents and follow-up individual interviews conducted with focal teachers. In the current study wTFL is operationalized with reference to the pedagogical framework of WTFL proposed by Lee (2021), which onsists of three components: (a) teachers nowledge about feedback (understanding, awarenes, and familiarit about feedback), (b) teachers' values about feedback (beliefs, attitudes, goals, dispositions, and perceptions about feedback), and (c) teachers' abilities to use feedback to inform learning and teaching (abilities in handling the process of feedback).)

In the first phase of the study, a "Feedback Literacy Scale for L2 Writing Teachers" was developed and validated (see Lee et al. 2023), which aimed to elicit L2 writing teachers' backgrounds and perspectives on WTFL. The scale consists of 34 five-point Liker. t-scale items covering three dimensions of WTFL - namely, knowledge (10 items), values (12 items), and abilities (12 items) regarding feedback. The survey was administred to prospective respondents on an online platform through various channels, icluding email, QR codes and messaging applications such as WeChat and WhatsApp..

Following the administration of the scale, semi-structured individual interviews were conducted with voluntary focal respondents whose responses served to explain and llustrt salient points and patterns obtained from the survey findings. The interview questions aimed to probe participants' perspectives and views about various ssues concerning feedback such as their understanding and views about feedback in L2 writing classrooms (e.g., in your opinion, what are the goals of feedback? Are these goals achieved in your own writing clasroom?). The us of semi-structured interviews to accompany questionnaire resuls could both illutrate and illuminate questionnaire results and bring the research study to life (Dornyei & Dewaele, 2023), thereby helping researchers gain a better understanding of what the numerical responses actually mean..

# 2.2. Participants

The participants are 353 English teachers from Hong Kong SAR and mainland China, who speak Cantonese or Mandarin Chinese as their L1 and teach English as a foreign language at various educational levels. About one third of the participants $( \Nu = 1 1 4 )$ ) have a bachelor's degree only, and the others also hold a master's degree or equivalent $( \Nu = 2 1 2$ ) and a doctoral degree $\left( \mathrm { N } = 2 7 \right)$ . In terms of teaching experience, nearly half of the participants $\left( \mathrm { N } = 1 6 8 \right)$ ) had more than 10 years of experience in English language teaching, among whom 72 had been teaching English for over 20 years. Over half of the participants were teaching in secondary schools $( \mathbf { N } =$ 211; $5 8 \%$ , followed by universities $( \Nu = 1 0 9$ $3 0 . 9 \%$ , and primary schools $( \mathrm { N } = 3 0$ $8 . 5 \%$ $8 3 \%$ of the respondents are female $( \mathbf { N } =$ 293), and $1 7 \%$ are male $\left( \mathrm { N } = 6 0 \right)$ . Of the 353 respondents, 34 focal teachers (named T1-T34) agreed to take part in follow-up individual interviews conducted in English. They included ten universty teachers, twenty-three secondary teachers, and one primary teacher, who were EFL teachers working at various schools and universities in Hong Kong SAR and mainland China.

# 2.3. Data analysis

Survey data were entered into spss 29.0, with frequency analyses, descriptive analyses, and reliability analyses utilized for analyzing respondents' self-reported WTFL. Participants' responses were categorized into a five-point Likert scale - $\mathbf { \partial } \cdot 1 = \mathbf { n o t }$ knowledgeable/true/capable at all; $2 \_ =$ slightly knowledgeable/true/capable, $3 \ =$ somewhat knowledgeable/true/capable; $4 \ =$

knowledgeable/true/capable; $5 =$ very knowledgeable/true/capable - for evaluating knowledge, values, and abilities respectively.   
Cronbach's alpha for the scale was 0.93.

All the interviews were audio-recorded and conducted in English, which lasted 25 - 40 minutes. After the interviews were transcribed, an inductive approach was employed to analyze the interview data. Based on the operational framework of WTFL, related themes were identified and then categorized to fit in the thee dimensions of the triartite framework - i., knowledge, values and abilite. Instances of \*knowledge" concerned teachers understanding of the type, purposes, and strategies fedback, as wel as the teachers' knowledge of writing and assessment; data categorized as values" pertained to teachers' belies about the goals of feeback and teacher feedback literacy; and example of \*abilitie' included teachers skills and abilities in designing effectiefedback processes and engaging students with feedback.

# 3. Results

In the following, we report the results of the analysis on each dimension of WTFL as per the survey and interview data.

# 3.1. Knowledge

As shown in Table 1, the average mean value of the knowledge-related items ranged from 2.99 to 3.61, showing that the re. spondents considered themselves somewhat knowledgeable or knowledgeable about the different sources of feedback $( 7 4 . 7 \% )$ , features of good writing $( 7 9 . 3 \% )$ , the role of feedback in formative assessment $( 7 1 . 1 \% )$ , feedback strategies $( 7 5 . 9 \% )$ , contextualized feedback $( 7 5 . 7 \% )$ , feedback modes $( 7 3 . 6 \% )$ , individualized feedback $( 7 7 . 3 \% )$ , peer feedback $( 7 3 . 4 \% )$ , and assessment criteria for effective feedback $( 7 0 . 2 \% )$ . Of all the items, the participants appeared to be least knowledgeable about the role of students' affective dimension in feedback practices (Item 9, $M = 2 . 9 9$ $S D = 1 . 0 0 8 \mathrm { \Omega }$ , with $2 2 . 9 \%$ and $3 6 . 8 \%$ of the respondents reporting that they were only slightly or somewhat knowledgeable about it.

From the interviews, teachers appeared to pay a great deal of attention to feedback as a means to help students get rid of their weaknesses and problems in writig, scially grmmar errors. Yet, they shwed litle awareness that students aility to do so hinges largely on their affective tates - that is if students are not motivated they are unlikely to engage with the feedback received. Most informants remarked that effective feedback should \*identify the problems in student writing" $\left( \mathrm { N } = 2 8 \right)$ , "improve student performance" $( \Nu = 2 0 )$ , and/or "suit individual needs" $\left( \mathrm { N } = 6 \right)$

Effective feedback should help students identif their writing problems and weaknesses, and student performance on the subsequent writing could be the evidence about its efectiveness. What is efective wil be that feedback could arouse students awareness of the problems in their writing, and help them avoid making the same mistakes again (T12, follow-up interview).

Among the 34 focal teachers, however, only three mentioned that feedback should not discourage students or demotivate students to act upon t. Without due onsidration of stdents affective reponses to the fdback received, it would be callengig for teachers to fully understand the role of student affective states in the feedback processes.

# 3.2. Values

Concerning teachers' values about fedback, the average mean of the items ranged from 3.83 to 4.59 (see Table 2). Out of the eleven items, the mean of nine items was above 4. Generally, teachers believed that fedback should be understandable $( \mathbf { M } = 4 . 5 9$ , SD $= 0 . 6 1 1 \dot { }$ , is both a process and product $\mathbf { M } = 4 . 3 9$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 6 8 7 \mathrm { \Omega }$ , is contingent on teacher feedback literacy promoted through professional development $( \mathbf { M } = 4 . 3 6$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 7 2 2 \mathrm { \Omega }$ , is a shared responsibility between teachers and students $( \mathbf { M } = 4 . 2 9$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 6 8 5 \mathrm { \Sigma }$ should enable students to set further learning goals $\mathbf { M } = 4 . 2 8$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 7 3 8 \mathrm { \Omega }$ and revise their writing $( \mathrm { M } = 4 . 2 4$ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 7 9 7 )$ , should help teachers to improve their teaching $( \mathrm { M } = 4 . 2 4 $ $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 7 3 4 \mathrm { , }$ , should be supplemented with post-feedback reinforcement $( \mathrm { M } = 4 . 0 9 $ $\mathbf { S D } = 0 . 7 6 7 .$ , and should be tailored to individual feedback requests $( \mathbf { M } = 4 . 0 7$ $\mathbf { S D } = 0 . 8 0 3 $ . For example, during the follow-up interviews, the focal teachers demonstrated espoused beliefs that effective feedback should be understandable and actionable to students, and it should help students to improve writing in certain areas such as language and organization (32 out of the 34 teachers). Over half of the focal teachers (22 out of 34) also noted the nd to take into consideration student diversity (e.g., students language proficiency and variations in their writing weakneses so as to better suit individual students' needs, as shown in the following excerpt:

Table 1 L2 Writing Teachers' Knowledge about Feedback.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>What is the extent of your knowledge about...</td><td>NK</td><td>SIK</td><td>SoK</td><td></td><td>VK</td><td>Mean</td></tr><tr><td>1 how feedback from different sources can be given i.e., teachers, peers, and self?</td><td>1.4%</td><td>14.7%</td><td>36.5%</td><td>38.2%</td><td>9.1%</td><td>3.39</td></tr><tr><td>2 the features of good writing that enable you to provide accurate judgement of student writing?</td><td>0.6%</td><td>9.6%</td><td>28.6%</td><td>50.7%</td><td>10.5%</td><td>3.61</td></tr><tr><td>3 the role of feedback in formative assessment?</td><td>3.1%</td><td>11.9%</td><td>29.2%</td><td>41.9%</td><td>13.9%</td><td>3.52</td></tr><tr><td>4 relevant strategies for giving effective feedback?.</td><td>2.5%</td><td>15.9%</td><td>37.4%</td><td>38.5%</td><td>5.7%</td><td>3.29</td></tr><tr><td>5 how to give feedback according to the needs of your teaching context (e.g., age, educational level and expectations of students)?</td><td>2.5%</td><td>17%</td><td>39.7%</td><td>36%</td><td>4.8%</td><td>3.24</td></tr><tr><td>6 different delivery modes for feedback - i.e., written, oral, and technology supported?</td><td>2%</td><td>15.9%</td><td>33.1%</td><td>40.5%</td><td>8.5%</td><td>3.38</td></tr><tr><td>7 how to give feedback according to individual student needs?</td><td>2.8%</td><td>14.7%</td><td>38.5%</td><td>38.8%</td><td>5.1%</td><td>3.29</td></tr><tr><td>8 the benefits of peer feedback?e</td><td>3.1%</td><td>12.7%</td><td>30.3%</td><td>43.1%</td><td>10.8%</td><td>3.46</td></tr><tr><td>9 the role of students affective dimension (e.g., emotions, attitudes, and motivation) in the feedback process?</td><td>7.6%</td><td>22.9%</td><td>36.8%</td><td>27.5%</td><td>5.1%</td><td>2.99</td></tr><tr><td>10 the impact of clear assessment criteria for effective feedback?</td><td>3.7%</td><td>15.9%</td><td>29.7%</td><td>40.5%</td><td>10.2%</td><td>3.38</td></tr></table></body></html>

$\mathbf { N K } = \mathbf { N o t }$ Knowledgeable at All; SlK $=$ Slightly Knowledgeable; SoK $=$ Somewhat Knowledgeable; $\mathbf K =$ Knowledgeable; VK $=$ Very Knowledgeable

Table 2 L2 Writing Teachers' Values about Feedback.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>To what extent do the following statements reflect your values about feedback?</td><td>NT</td><td>SIT</td><td>SoT</td><td></td><td>VT</td><td>Mean</td></tr><tr><td>11 Feedback should aim to make students become autonomous writers.</td><td>1.1%</td><td>9.1%</td><td>22.9%</td><td>39.4%</td><td>27.5%</td><td>3.83</td></tr><tr><td>12 Feedback should encourage students to revise their writing..</td><td>0.8%</td><td>2.5%</td><td>9.9%</td><td>45.6%</td><td>41.1%</td><td>4.24</td></tr><tr><td>13 Feedback should be given to multiple drafts rather than one draft.</td><td>2.3%</td><td>6.5%</td><td>22.7%</td><td>41.6%</td><td>26.9%</td><td>3.84</td></tr><tr><td>14 Teachers should provide students with reinforcement after feedback is provided.</td><td>0.3%</td><td>3.7%</td><td>12.5%</td><td>53.8%</td><td>29.7%</td><td>4.09</td></tr><tr><td>15 Feedback should be given timely without delay..</td><td>1.4%</td><td>5.7%</td><td>16.4%</td><td>47.9%</td><td>28.6%</td><td>3.97</td></tr><tr><td>16 Feedback should be understandable to students..</td><td>0%</td><td>1.1%</td><td>3.1%</td><td>31.7%</td><td>64%</td><td>4.59</td></tr><tr><td>17 Feedback is a shared responsibility between teachers and students.</td><td>0%</td><td>1.4%</td><td>8.8%</td><td>48.7%</td><td>41.1%</td><td>4.29</td></tr><tr><td>18 Continuing professional development is important for teachers&#x27; feedback literacy.</td><td>0.3%</td><td>1.1%</td><td>9.3%</td><td>40.8%</td><td>48.4%</td><td>4.36</td></tr><tr><td>19 Feedback is both a process and a product.e</td><td>0.6%</td><td>0.8%</td><td>5.7%</td><td>44.5%</td><td>48.4%</td><td>4.39</td></tr><tr><td>20 Teachers should encourage students to make individual feedback requests.</td><td>0.8%</td><td>2.5%</td><td>16.1%</td><td>49.6%</td><td>30.9%</td><td>4.07</td></tr><tr><td>21 Feedback information should enable teachers to improve their teaching.</td><td>0%</td><td>2%</td><td>11.9%</td><td>46.7%</td><td>39.4%</td><td>4.24</td></tr><tr><td>22 Feedback information should enable students to set further learning goals for their writing development.</td><td>0%</td><td>2%</td><td>11%</td><td>43.6%</td><td>43.3%</td><td>4.28</td></tr></table></body></html>

$\mathbf { N T } = \mathbf { N o t }$ True at All; SlT $=$ Slightly True; SoT $=$ Somewhat True; $\mathrm { \Delta T = }$ True; VT $=$ Very True

For higher proficiency students who are able to figure out their problems, I could just highlight the language errors and provide more feedback on organization in writing. But some low proficiency students are not ale to identify the problems and I need to give feedback in more detail (T8, follow-up interview).

As for the other three items with lower mean scores, the resuls suggest that teachers were less certain about the truthfulness of whether feedback should be timely $( 7 6 . 5 \%$ - true or very true), whether it should be given to multiple drafts rather than one draft $( 6 8 . 5 \%$ - true or very true), and whether it should make students become autonomous writers ( $6 6 . 9 \%$ - true or very true). In the followup interviews, many teachers related their uncertainty about timely fedback and multipl-drafing practices to the shortage of time. As they neded to pend a huge amount of time commenting on students writing (e.g., responding to writing errors) and fulilling other teaching dutie, they were unsure about the neessty to return timely fedack to students for review. As remarked y T16, Hong ong teachers usually teach at least two or three large casses (up to 35 students in each class and \*t is quite stessul for teachers to mark and return student' compositions within a short period" and meanwhile \*keep a balance between work eficiency and feedback quality". Similarl, seven teachers also mentioned the "practicaldifficulty in implementing multiple drafts in the writing classroom While completing the required number of writing tasks sipulated by thir curriculum outline. As regards teachers' values about the purpose of fedback, the majorit of survey respondents taught secondary students preparing for universty-entrance examinations. In the follow-up interviews, they tended to associate the goal of feedback to motivating students to revise their writing $( M = 4 . 2 4$ $s D =$ 0.797) and establishing additional learning goals, particularly for the examinations $M = 4 . 2 8$ $S D = 0 . 7 3 8 $ ). However, there was less emphasis on fostering students' autonomy $( M = 3 . 8 3$ $S D = 0 . 9 7 1 \mathrm { \Omega }$

Table 3 L2 Writing Teachers' Abilities about Feedback.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>How would you rate your ability to....</td><td>NC</td><td>SIC</td><td>SoC</td><td>c</td><td>vc</td><td>Mean</td></tr><tr><td>23 reflect on your own feedback practice to further improve it?</td><td>1.1%</td><td>10.2%</td><td>44.5%</td><td>40.2%</td><td>4%</td><td>3.36</td></tr><tr><td>24 help students determine their own learning goals to guide self- and/or peer feedback?</td><td>1.4%</td><td>14.4%</td><td>42.4%</td><td>38.5%</td><td>3.4%</td><td>3.28</td></tr><tr><td>25 help students use feedback to monitor their own learning and writing?.</td><td>0.8%</td><td>17.6%</td><td>36.8%</td><td>39.9%</td><td>4.8%</td><td>3.30</td></tr><tr><td>26 involve other colleagues in professional learning about feedback?</td><td>11.6%</td><td>31.4%</td><td>34.8%</td><td>19.3%</td><td>2.8%</td><td>2.70</td></tr><tr><td>27 avoid overwhelming students by addressing every problem in giving feedback?</td><td>4.2%</td><td>17.3%</td><td>36%</td><td>35.3%</td><td>7.1%</td><td>3.24</td></tr><tr><td>28 use information from feedback to improve your own teaching?</td><td>1.1%</td><td>9.9%</td><td>28.3%</td><td>50.7%</td><td>9.9%</td><td>3.58</td></tr><tr><td>29 engage students actively throughout the feedback process?</td><td>2.5%</td><td>20.4%</td><td>36.3%</td><td>34.3%</td><td>6.5%</td><td>3.22</td></tr><tr><td>30 provide effective training to prepare students for peer feedback?</td><td>6.2%</td><td>24.9%</td><td>33.7%</td><td>30.6%</td><td>4.5%</td><td>3.02</td></tr><tr><td>31 plan and organize peer feedback activities effectively?</td><td>4%</td><td>26.1%</td><td>34.8%</td><td>30.3%</td><td>4.8%</td><td>3.06</td></tr><tr><td>32 provide feedback that addresses individual student needs?</td><td>2%</td><td>15.3%</td><td>33.1%</td><td>42.8%</td><td>6.8%</td><td>3.37</td></tr><tr><td>33 empower students to use self-feedback effectively?</td><td>5.7%</td><td>24.6%</td><td>38.2%</td><td>26.3%</td><td>5.1%</td><td>3.01</td></tr><tr><td>34 make use of technology to enhance feedback in the writing classroom?</td><td>5.4%</td><td>26.9%</td><td>31.7%</td><td>30%</td><td>5.9%</td><td>3.04</td></tr></table></body></html>

NC $=$ Not Capable at All; SlK $=$ Slightly Capable; SoK $=$ Somewhat Capable; $\mathrm { { C = } }$ Capable; VC $=$ Very Capable

# 3.3. Abilities

Regarding the abilities dimension, the mean values of all the 11 items were below 3.60 (see Table 3). In particular, the teachers reported a lack of competence in involving other colleagues in professional learning $( M = 2 . 7$ $S D = 1 . 0 0 0 ) $ , as only $1 9 . 3 \%$ and $2 . 8 \%$ of them rated themselves as capable and very caable in response tothis item. Other isues that posed challenge tothe teachers included how to empower students to use self-feedback $( M = 3 . 0 1$ $S D = 0 . 9 7 1$ ), set goals ( $M = 3 . 2 8$ $S D = 0 . 8 0 3 \mathrm { \Omega }$ , monitor their own learning and writing $\mathbf { \mathcal { M } } = 3 . 3 0$ $S D = 0 . 8 4 4 )$ , provide effective peer feedback training $\mathbf { \mathit { M } } = 3 . 0 2$ $S D = 0 . 9 9 4 ) $ I, and make use of technologymediated feedback $( M = 3 . 0 4$ $S D = 1 . 0 1 2 \mathrm { \Omega }$ and peer feedback activities $( M = 3 . 0 6$ $S D = 0 . 9 5 6$ . Based on descriptive statistics, teachers felt most capable of using feedback information to inform their own teaching (with the highest mean $= 3 . 5 8$ $S D = 0 . 8 4 2 \mathrm { \Omega }$ but least capable of involving colleagues in professional learning about feedback (with the lowest mean $= 2 . 7$ $S D = 1 . 0 0 0 \mathrm { \Omega }$

The lack of abilies in providing effective fedback, as reported by the respondents, was partially due to their scant exposure to professional learning opportunities. When asked about the importance of and their experience with professional development programs, the focalteachers noted insufficient opportunities to receive guidance about providing feedback on student writing, although they consider such training essential for constructive teacher feedack. Specificall, al the primary and secondary teachers reported that they had never engaged in professonal learning programs, except for three who received relevant instruction about marking English writing for the university-entrance examination. As for the ten university teachers, only three of them underwent related training: two participated in academic lectures and one participated in online professonal learning communities. The following remark by T13 illustrated this:

I think it's important to learn how to give proper feedback because the teacher spent so much time reading student writing. Not much time is spent on telling teachers how to give feedback on writing, so attending these professional development programs would be pretty important for teachers to refresh their memory and maybe learn new methods and methodologies for this. However, it [how to give feedback] is not something that everybody knows, even with teacher training, and many teachers at our school are too busy to participate in these programs (T13, follow-up interview).

# 4. Discussion and implications

The current study employed the "Feedback Literacy Scale for L2 Writing Teachers" and follow-up individual interviews to investigate teachers self-rported FL in relation to their knowledge, values, and abilite about feedack in writing. The findings point to some deficiencies and gaps in L2 writing teachers' WTFL, especially in terms of their knowledge and abilities, despite their espoused values about the importance of various aspects of feedback.

In the knowledge dimension, the survey results suggest that the teacher participants considered themselves to be more knowl. edgeable about some technical aspects of feedback such as strategies and modes than the role of student affective reactions (e., emotions, attitude, and motivation) in the feedback process Such results are not surprising, given that previous research (e.g, ${ \mathrm { Y u } } ,$ 2021) has found that L2 teachers tend to provide error-focused feedback even though such feedback is overwhelming, frustrating, confusing and demotivational for students. In addition, owing to the lack of attention to the motivating role of feedback and student subsequent responses, it is unlikely for teachers to engender student active engagement and positive affective states in feedback practices (Lee, 2021).

The results of the values dimension reveal the participants' general support of diffrent feedback principles espoused in the literature, exct that thy semed les sure about fedack in multiple-draft clasrooms timely feedack, and feedback for fostering learner autonomy. It is possble that some teachers found it hard to put the abovementioned into practice, as demonstrated in the predominance of single drafting in many EFL classrooms, large classizes, and heavy workloads and hence dificulty in providing timely feedback, as well s students' tendency to rely on teachers (Ferris & Kurzer, 2019; Lam, 2019). Teachers' values about the role and purpose of feedback might also be influenced by their EFL work contexts dominated by an examination culture (Lee, 2017), where a primary emphasis is placed more on written production than learner autonomy.

Pointedly, the results from the abilities dimension demonstrate that the participants considered themselves to be only somewhat capable of most aspects WTFL included in the section. Specificall, the participants did not report strong confidence in their bility to use feedack for fostering students ability to engage in per and selfeedback, and to exploit tehnolog o enhance fedack, which suggests that these fdback straegies were unlikely tobe part of their reular practice, as in many FL classooms ., Junqueira & Payant, 2015; Ma0 & Crosthwaite, 2019). The findings indicate the necesst of putting stronger emphasis on teachers professional training in different educational contexts, the lack of which is likely to exert a negative inluence on the teaching and assessment of writing (Lam, 2019. Considering that primary and secondary teachers have limited aces to resources and facilities that can enhance their feedback practices, more opportunities should be provided to create a need and motivation for them to collaborate with col. leagues and experts in pursuit of professional development.

The results of the survey have clear implications for teacher education, pointing to the need to enhance 2 teachers knowledge and skills with regard to feedback in writig. I light of teachers sense of inadequacy in heeding student affectie reactions and balancing the roles of the teacher and the student i feedback processes, t is crucial for them to develop visions about feedback and to sharpen awarenes of student individual needs as wellas the ultimate goal of fostring learner autonomy through effectie feedack practices. Notably, this requires teachersto be wellinformed and resonsive to the diverse nees and contexts of their students, and in particular to heighten awareness of students' emotions and feeings in response to feedback, and to equip teachers with skills to share responsibility with students through providing opportunitie for goal-seting, self-evaluation, self-eflection, and peer evaluation Given that many writing teachers lack professional development opportunities to enhance their feedback literacy, teacher education programs should encourage teachers to engage in critical reflection and continuing professional development so as to build their expertise and refine their feedback practice. Teachers can form school-base collaborative professional leaning communities, through which they cllctively enhance their professonal learning about asssment principles and practie to utilize fdack appropriately and effectively, reflect on and improve their fedback techniques, and enact WTFL in their own writing classroom to benefit student learning. Ideed, WTFL should be accorded an important placein L2 writing teacher education - the development of WTFL for teachers is not a fad; it is a must.

# 5. Conclusion

As an important element of classroom writing assessment literacy, wTFL has receive insufficient attention in the L2 writing literature. The current study is one of the first endeavors to understand and explore this important construct by investigating a cohort of L2 writing teachers' WTFL. Results of the study revealed gaps in the participants' WTFL as well as an imbalance of the three dimensions of knowledge, values, and abilites within their WTFL. It should be acknowledged that the participants are all from EFL contexts and their elfreported data cannot be representative of the entire L2 teacher population. Nonetheless, tis study serves to make a novel contribution to existing research on writing asessment literacy by shedding light on EFL teachers' wTFL, informing teacher education programs for exploiting feedback opportunities in L2 writing classrooms.

# Research funding

This work is funded by the Language Fund under Research and Development Projects 2021-22 of the Standing Commitee on Language Education and Research (SCOLAR), Hong Kong SAR. The project reference number is (EDB(LE)/P&R/EL/203/3). The study was undertaken when the firs author was a profesor and the second author worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Faculty of Education of The Chinese University of Hong Kong.

# Summary of the brief report

Despite a significant rise in awareness of the critical role of assessment literacy, teacher feedback literacy as an important component of assessment literacy has received scant attention in the domain of second language (L2) writing. By drawing on ques. tionnaire data gathered from 353 Englishas a foreign language teachers and follow-up interviews with 34 focal teachers, this study attempts to acertain  writing teachers sef-reorted fdback literacy i relation to ther knowledge, value, and abilitie regarding feedback. Findings of the study reveal both deficiencies and gaps in the participants writing feedack literacy. While the respondents reported a fundamental understanding of writing tacher feedback literacy, they appeared les certain of their abilities to implement feedback practices in the writing classroom. Despite this uncertainly, they held values about fedback that largely align with the principles supported by existing literature. The current study serves to make a novel contribution to existing research by shedding ligt on the underexplored concept of L2 writing teacher feedback literacy, with clear implications for the delivery ofedback training in teacher education programs.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Lee Icy: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Proect administration, Validation, Writing-original draft Writing -review & editing. Mao Zhicheng: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writingoriginal draft, Writing - review & editing, Resources.

# Declaration of Competing Interest

We have no known conflict of interest to disclose.

# Data Availability

Data will be made available on request.

# Appendix A

Follow-up Interview Questions.

1. Tell me about your experiences of teaching English writing.   
2. In your opinion, what are the goals of feedback? Are these goals achieved in your own writing classroom?   
3. How would you characterize feedback: Is it primarily a product or a process? In your own writing clasroom, is fedback implemented more as a product or a process?   
4. How do you see the connections between feedback, teaching and learning? Explain with reference to your own writing classroom.   
5. What counts as 'effective' feedback? In your own writing classroom, to what extent is feedback effective?   
6. What should be the sources of feedback? In your own writing classroom, what are the sources of feedback?   
7. How often do you usedifferent modes of feedack - e.g., written, oral, technology enhance feedback? How would you evaluate the effectiveness of each mode of feedback?   
8. What role should students play in the fedback proces? How do you see the role of students in the feedback process of your own writing classroom?   
9. Should feedback be given to single-draft or multiple-draft writing classrooms? What is the situation like in your own writing classroom?   
10. To what extent do you think students have understood your written feedback?   
11. To what extent do you think your feedback has improved students' writing?   
12. How do you see the importance of teacher professonal development with regard to feedback in writing? How would you describe the situation in your school -e., do teachers engage in professional development to enhance their fedback practices?   
13. Do you have any suggestions as to how teachers can make better use of feedback to help students improve English writing?

# References

Bod    i -4 https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2021.1910928   
Cares   d 018).T f  ac   af fack  n  gion 438, 1315-1325. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2018.1463354   
Donyei, ., waele, J. M (2023). Qestionaire in econd nage rarch onstrction dation, d poesing (3d .). Rtee. Feedback in second language writing: Contexts and issues (2nd ed., pp. 109-124). Cambridge University Press.   
Hyland, K, & Hyland, F. (2019). Feedback in second language writing: Contexts and issues (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Pres,   
quer   . 5 t   gt  i' d  w k Writing, 27, 19-36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2014.11.001   
Lam R 019 hr a iacri , tions an ti f cr-wngn i on  stm 81, 78-89. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2019.01.006   
Lee, I. (2017). Classroom writing assessment and feedback in L2 school contexts. Springer,.   
Le, I. (2021) The dment of fdack literacy fr writing techers. 0L Quarterl, 553), 1048-1059. htps:/o.org/10.1002/esq.3012 doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2023.100743   
ao, .. .09i w ti    cr  i  f   g 45, 46-60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2019.05.004   
in H T. (2013). c sty f an  witing tchers ble d prtice aout wit feack st 41(, 625638. ps:/oi./10.1016/. system.2013.07.018   
Suon, . ,   11. 10.1080/14703297.2012.647781   
Yu, . (2021).i ci f  wi tcr: i  f  of   ig 2 il 00798. /g/.106/. jslw.2021.100798   
Yu,    03 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2022.100643