# Language-related perceptions: How do they predict student satisfaction with a partial English Medium Instruction in Higher Education?

Elvira Barriosa,\*, Aurora Lopez-Gutierreza, Luis-Alejandro Lopez-Agudob

a Facultad de Ciencias de la Educacion, Universidad de Malaga, Malaga, Spain b Facultad de Ciencias Economicas y Empresariales, Universidad de Malaga, Malaga, Spain

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
English medium instruction (EMI)   
Higher education   
Bilingual programme   
Language-related factors   
Satisfaction   
Student perceptions

This study investigated language-related predictors of satisfaction with a partial English Medium Instruction (EMI) programme in teacher education at a Spanish university. More specifically, it explored the impact on programme satisfaction of students' perceptions of language improvement, of opportunities to use English, of lecturers' English proficiency, and language improvement as a motivation for enrolling in the programme. Additionally, it examined how self-rated proficiency affects the association between these language-related variables and satisfaction. Results show that students were more satisfied than they were dissatisfied, that they acknowledged having made an improvement in their English skills, and that the lecturers' English proficiency was below their expectations. Most importantly, the language-related variables under study were found to be significant predictors of student satisfaction with EMI, and each of them explained a high percentage of the variance in programme satisfaction. It was also found that these variables impacted student satisfaction differently across different self-rated proficiency groups. The article discusses that, at a time when competition among universities is taking a global dimension and students' general English proficiency is getting progressively higher, most attention needs to be paid to the language when designing and resourcing EMI initiatives in order to make them competitive and sustainable.

# 1. Introduction

One of the most remarkable developments in higher education in the last decades has been the exponential increase in English Medium Instruction (EMI) in non-native English-speaking contexts. Against the backdrop of icreasing globalisation, staf and student exchanges and labour mobility, global comparisons and university rankings, English-taught courses have proliferated across Higher Education (HE) worldwide and have become astandard strategy to meet internationalisation policies (Dearden, 2014; Fenton-Smith et al., 2017; Macaro et al., 2018).

The most commonly claimed advantage of EMI is the simultaneous acquisition of disciplinary knowledge and language competence (Coleman, 2006; Doiz & Lasagabaster, 2020; Rose et al., 2020). However, doubts have been raised about the validity of this claim by those who hold that conclusive evidence regarding the nature of the purported improved English competence of students in EMI initiatives is sill lcking (, Macro et al., 2018). Among students, the prospect f improving ther Eglish skill sems to be one f the most common reasons why they choose to opt for an EMI track (Chapple, 2015; Salaberri-Ramiro & Sanchez-Perez, 2018; Yeh, 2014). Additionall, the positive impacts of English-medium instruction on the development of thir English language skils is one of the student reported benefits from an EMI experience (Aguilar & Rodriguez, 2012; Barrios & Lopez-Gutierrez, 2021; Byun et al, 2011; Galloway & Rueg, 2020; Hernandez-Nanclares & Jimenez-Munoz, 2017; Rogier, 2012; Rose et al., 2020; Tazl, 2011; Wu, 2006), even if they enrolled for reasons other than improving their English (Yeh, 2014). There is evidence, albeit to a leser extent, that some students do not appreciate the expected improvement in their language proficiency (Aguilar & Rodriguez, 2012; Chapple, 2015; Kim et al., 2016; Lei & Hu, 2014; Sert, 2008).

In the early stages of EMI in European higher education (HE) language learning was not recognized as one of the reasons alleged by governments and institutions to adopt EMI. In fact, in his state-of-the-art article on this topic, Coleman (2006) even highlighted that "foreign language leaning in itself i NOT the reason why institutions adopt English medium teaching (p. 4; emphasis in the original). With the expansion of EMI in countries where their citizens English proficiency has traditionally lagged behind that of those European pioneering countries in the implementation of EMI policies (The Netherlands and northern European countries),the reasons behind EMI may have acordingly changed and, as Pecorari (2020) contends, \*Thereis [..] reason to think that decisions to implement EMI are guided not only by the present value of English in permtting universities to internationalize, but also by the future value to students in having acquired this door-opening proficiency (p. 2). This holds true in the case of Spanish universities, that place the promotion of language leaning at universies at the heart of their intenationalistion polies. The oficial nationwide strategy for the internationalisation of Spanish universities for the period 2015-2020 (Ministerio de Educacion, Cultura y Deporte, 2014) recommends the reinforcement of language larning opportunities as the means to scale up the number of "bilingual" (i., partial EMI) bachelor's and master's courses, which are considered to "facilitate students' mobility and exchanges, together with providing them with opportunities to work and study at international and multicultural environments' (p. 41).

Given the understandable expectations of linguistic gains generated by EMI in students atested to by research findings, it can be speculated that perceptions of language-related dimensions connected with the programme may be crucial factors in determining student satisfaction with EMI. However, the association of language-related student perceptions and satisfaction with EMI remains surprisingly underexplored (cf. Barios & Lopez-Gutierrez, 2021; Lei & Hu, 2014). In a previous study (Barrios & Lopez-Gutierrez, 2021), findings indicated that the higher the students'self-rated proficiency in English, the lower the satisfaction with his partial EMI programme in teacher education. These findings prompted us to investigate further into language-related student perceptions. Additionall, the study investigated the relationship between being motivated to enrol by language learning and programme satisfaction, and how self-rated proficiency affects the association between language-related perceptions and satisfaction.

# 2. Literature review

Research findings to date indicate that, although they hold complex and ambivalent atitudes toward EMI, students acros contexts seem to be more satisfied than unsatisied with EMI (Aguila & Rodriguez, 2012; Botha, 2013; Eko, 2020; Karakas, 2017). One of the major sources of issatisfaction with EMI among students is thir non-native lecturers English proficiency (Aguilar & Rodriguez, 2012; Bolton & Kuteeva, 2012; Byun et al., 2011; Chapple, 2015; Ekoc, 2020; Jensen et al., 2013; Klassen, 2003) - with accent being a frequent issue of complaint (Karakas, 2017). vidence also exists that students establish a connection between the quality of their EMI experience and the lecturers' English proficiency (Ekoc, 2020; Jensen et al., 2013; Madrid & Julius, 2017).

When it comes to perceptions of language learning, the majority of the studies find that students experience an improvement in their language competence (Hernandez-Nanclares & Jimenez-Munoz, 2017; Rogier, 2012), particularly in terms of technical, specialized vocabulary (e.g., Aguilar & Rodriguez, 2012). However, there is also evidence that questions the effctivenes of EMI for language learning from the students' standpoint (Aguilar & Rodriguez, 2012; Lei & Hu, 2014; Sert; 2008). With regard to the affordances that EMI programmes or courses offer the students, studies repeatedly report that students perceive a remarkable reduction in lecturer/student interaction in EMI as opposed to L1-medium intruction (Aguilar & Rodriguez, 2012; Airey & Linder, 2006; Eko, 2020; Wu, 2006).

As noted above, the asociation between satisfaction with EMI and English learning is far from being thoroughly researched. Two studies have explored this relationship so far. In a study conducted in China, Lei and Hu (2014) investigated the impact of EMI on undergraduates English roficiency and affct in Engish lerning and use. Infirst analyi, dref sfactionwith I was ound to be significantly related to proficiency. The students who perceived EMI to be satisfactory made significantly greater gains in their English proficiency than their Chinese medium (CM) counterparts who, like the EMI students, received instruction in English in ther programme in BusinessAdministration. However, when prior English proficiency scores were entered in the analyses to partial out the differences in English proficiency between the two groups, the EMI students did not outperform their CM peers on an English proficiency test after receiving EMI for one year. This indicates that previous English proficiency had the same magnitude of effct on students' subsequent English proficiency regardes of satisfaction with EMI. More recently, in astudy carried out in the same pro gramme as the present study (Barros & Lopez-Gutierrez, 2021), it was found that the higher the students proficiency in English, the less satisfied they were wth it. A statisticall sigficant iffernce in saisfaction with the programme was found betwen the lowest self-rated proficiency group (B1) and the highest (C1) groups, with an intermediate efect size. The fact that the advanced (C1) group was also the one that perceived the least improvement in their English skill led the researchers to suggest that there might be an association between their lowest satisfaction with the programme and their perception of modest language gains.

In conclusion, despite the fact that language improvement is one of the main reasons why the students claim to have enrolled in EMI and one of the most frequently reported benefits, the literature concerning research on the relationship between satisfaction with EMI and perceptions of language-related factors in HE EMI settings is strikingly scarce. However, the existing evidence suggests that the perceptions that the students hold concerning the language dimension in EMI may be essential in how they appraise their EMI experience.

# 3. Materials and method

# 3.1. Objective and research questions

The present study had a two-fold aim. The first was to investigate the impact a) of perceptions of language improvement; b) of opportunities to use English; c) of lecturers' English proficiency; and d) of motivation to improve English as reasons to enrol in the programme on satisfaction with it. The second aim was to examine how self-rated proficiency affcts the association between these language-related variables and satisfaction. More specifically, the study was guided by the following research questions:

RQ1. Which language-related factors are asociated with satisfaction with a partial EMI programme in teacher education?

This research question can be divided into four sub questions:

RQ1.a. Is perception of English improvement associated with satisfaction with a partial EMI programme in teacher education? RQ1.b. Is perception of opportunities for English use associated with satisfaction with a partial EMI programme in teacher education?   
RQ1.c. Is perception of lecturers English proficiency associated with satisfaction with a partial EMI programme in teacher education?   
RQ1.d. Is English improvement as a reason to enrol in the programme associated with satisfaction with a partial EMI programme in teacher education?   
RQ2. Are there statisticall significant differences in how language-related factors are associated with satisfaction with a partial EMI programme in teacher education across different self-rated proficiency groups?

# 3.2. Context

The study took place at the Faculty of Education at the University of Malaga (Spain), where a partill English-taught programme leading to a Bachelor Degree in Primary Education was offered. Before entering university, student lean a foreign language - in most cases English - for 12 school years and they typically reach an A2-B1 level. The programme did not include explicitly stated language learning goals or formal language provision. A minimum entry English level was not required for students or lecturers. Around $3 5 \%$ of the 240 Ecrs credit points were delivered in English by non-native lecturers over the course of the four-year degree programme. Among the English-taught modules were the following: Music Education, Arts Education, Social Sciences Education, Physical Edu. cation and Science Education. Only students specialising in English as a Foreign Language Teaching received specific training in Content and Integrated Language Learning (CLIL). Instruction was mainly in English, although teachers' code-switching was some. times used to support student understanding of unfamiliar concepts. The tuition fe for this programme was the same as for the equivalent Spanish language programme.

# 3.3. Participants

Two hundred and seven students enrolled in the partial EMI programme in teacher education took part in the study. All participants were L1 speakers of Spanish. Although some intenational students were enrld in program modules at the time of data collction, they were excluded from the study. One hundred and sixty-seven participants $( 8 0 . 6 8 \% )$ were identified as female, 36 as male $( 1 7 . 3 9 \% )$ , 1 $\left( 0 . 4 8 \% \right)$ as non-binary and 3 $( 1 . 4 5 \% )$ preferred not to say. Their ages ranged between 18 and 40 $( M = 2 0 . 6 4$ $S D = 3 . 0 1 4 $ $M o = 2 0$

A total of 267 students were registered in this partly English-taught degree programme in the academic year in which data were collected (2019-2020). It represents $7 7 . 5 3 \%$ of the total number of students enrolled. The study included students from all four course years (see Table 1).

Thirty-eight $( 1 8 . 3 6 \% )$ students self-rated their English proficiency as B1 according to the Common European Framework of Reference (Council of Europe, 2001), 107 $( 5 1 . 6 9 \% )$ as B2, and 62 $( 2 9 . 9 5 \% )$ as C1. As many as 35 $3 6 . 9 0 \%$ students declared not to have an officially recognized English proficiency certification. Of the remaining 172 students, 2 $\left( 0 . 9 7 \% \right)$ held an A2, 57 $2 7 . 5 4 \%$ a B1, 82 $( 3 9 . 6 1 \% )$ a B2, and 31 $( 1 4 . 9 8 \% )$ a C1 level.

Table 1 Distribution of the sample by course year.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Course year</td><td>Frequency</td><td>Percentage</td></tr><tr><td>1st</td><td>57</td><td>27.54</td></tr><tr><td>2nd</td><td>50</td><td>24.15</td></tr><tr><td>3rd</td><td>49</td><td>23.67</td></tr><tr><td>4th</td><td>51</td><td>24.64</td></tr></table></body></html>

English improvement was the second most frequently selected motivation for joining EMI, just behind the expectation of improved employment opportunities in local bilingual schools $( n = 1 6 6$ $\left[ 6 2 . 1 7 \% \right] .$ ); a hundred and thirty-two $( 6 3 . 7 7 \% )$ participants indicated that improving their English competence was the only reason ( $\mathbf { \tilde { \it n } } = 1 3$ $\left[ 6 . 2 8 \% \right]$ ) why they enrolled in EMI, or one of the reasons why they opted for it.

# 3.4. Instrument

An anonymous online questionnaire was used to gather data on participants perceptions of language-related issues and satisfaction with the partial EMI programme in teacher education (Appendix). The questionnaire consisted of a demographics section and four different scales. The 6-item 'Perception of language improvement scale' (Cronbach's $\alpha = 0 . 8 9 5$ was designed to gather students' perceptions on their English language development in the programme. This scale contained statements concerning overall English improvement, listening, speaking, oral interaction, reading and writing. The second scale (5 items), Perceptions of opportunities for English use scale' (Cronbach's $\alpha = 0 . 8 1 7 \mathrm { \Omega }$ , aimed to obtain information on the students' views on affordances provided by the pro. gramme to use English in conversation, monologue, listening, reading and writing. The third scale, Perception of lecturers' English proficiency' (4 items) (Cronbach's $\alpha = 0 . 8 8 1$ ), included statements on the lecturers' ability to use English competently. The fourth scale, 'Satisfaction with the bilingual programme scale' (Cronbach's alpha $. = . 8 9 7 $ was designed to be a measure of programme satisfaction. The ollowing dimensions were represented: overal satisfaction, methodology and qualit of lessons. The same procedure was used to construct all the cales. The rerch tem, consisting of three language tching scialist, gnerated a poo of items for each potentia scale. A panel f five experts was involved in the determination of the content validity of th items in the scales. There were specialis in language aching edagogy from threediffeent HE institutions i pain, with between 11 and21 yrs experience as university professors. Each expert individuall assessed each item for it relevance to the scale content domain. Each item was scored according to the following scoring system: ${ \bf 1 } =$ not relevant; $2 =$ somewhat relevant; $3 =$ quite relevant; $4 =$ highly relevant. Scores 3 and 4 were considered acceptable (Lynn, 1986). In order to calculate the Item-level Content Validity Index (I-Cv1) (Ayre & Scally, 2014; Lawshe, 1975; Wilson et al., 2012) the cale was collapsed into a dichotomy f relevant (points 3& 4) and non-relevant (points 1 & 2). Only items with an I-CVI core of 1 were finll selected following recommendations by Polit and Beck (2006) and Polit et al. (2007). Both the Perception of language improvement scale and the Satisfaction with the bilingual course cale were used in a previous study (Barrios & Lopez-Gutierrez, 2021). However, they were also subject to the content validation process explained above for the present investgation.A draft questionnaire was piloted on 11 olunteer from the programme, who then participated in a group interview. The described procedure allowed us to identify wording problems, refine the measure accordingly, and estimate the questionnaire completion time.

# 4. Results

# 4.1. Language-related factors of satisfaction with the partial EMI programme in teacher education

Descriptive statistics for the continuous variables in the study are shown in Tables 2 and 3, and the results for the Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimator are reported in Table 4.

Table 2 shows that students were only moderately satistied with the programme. Female students were les satisied with it than their male counterparts. Additionally, those students who joined the partial EMI programme in teacher education seeking English improvement seemed to be considerably more satisfied with it than those who did not endorse that motivation. These descriptive results were checked by an OLS regression model. As Table 3 shows, students held the view that they had made above average progress in their English competence and that the programme had provided relatively high opportunitie for language exposure and practice. As a group, they perceived that their lecturers' English level was not good enough.

As Table 4 shows, al factors under study are associated with satisfaction with the partial EMI programme in teacher education. Results indicate that female students were les satisfied than their male counterparts, as cofficients show their satisfaction was between 0.976 and 1.575 points lower than that of male students. Aditionally students who joined the programme because they wanted to improve their English valued thir satisfaction with it more than two points higher than those who did not report ths reason to register in t. l th gge-latd prtion sc in the study e igicny aotdwth satisfaction a-quare values show, the overall models accounted for a considerable variation in programme satisfaction. Particularly striking is the result of the specification II, in which gender and perception of lecturers' English proficiency explained $5 4 \%$ of the variance in satisfaction with the partial EMI programme in teacher education, followed by the result of specification I, in which gender and perceptions of English improvement explained $3 2 \%$ of the variance in programme satisfaction.

Table 2 Descriptive statistics for the dependent variable 'Satisfaction with the bilingual programme'.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Mean</td><td>Standard Deviation</td><td colspan="2">Range</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Potential</td><td>Actual</td></tr><tr><td>Whole sample</td><td>15.62</td><td>4.06</td><td>6-24</td><td>6-23</td></tr><tr><td>Female</td><td>15.30</td><td>4.24</td><td></td><td>6-23</td></tr><tr><td>Male</td><td>17.08</td><td>2.67</td><td></td><td>10-23</td></tr><tr><td>English improvement as a reason to enrol (yes)</td><td>16.44</td><td>3.81</td><td></td><td>10-23</td></tr><tr><td>English improvement as a reason to enrol (no)</td><td>14.11</td><td>4.09</td><td></td><td>6-21</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Descriptive statistics for the independent variables measured by scales.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Mean</td><td>Standard Deviation</td><td colspan="2">Range</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Potential</td><td>Actual</td></tr><tr><td>Perception of English improvement</td><td>17.39</td><td>3.33</td><td>6-24</td><td>7-24</td></tr><tr><td>Perception of opportunities for English use</td><td>15.57</td><td>2.27</td><td>5-20</td><td>10-20</td></tr><tr><td>Perception of lecturers&#x27; English proficiency</td><td>7.02</td><td>2.14</td><td>3-12</td><td>3-12</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Relationship between overall satisfaction with the programme and perception variables.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variables</td><td>Spec. 1</td><td>Spec. II</td><td>Spec. III</td><td>Spec. IV</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Gender: female (ref.: male)</td><td>0.976</td><td>1.183*</td><td>0.987*</td><td>1.575**</td></tr><tr><td>(0.621)</td><td>(0.658)</td><td>(0.510)</td><td>(0.714)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Perception of English improvement</td><td>0.671***</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>(0.071)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Perception of opportunities for English use</td><td></td><td>0.831***</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>-</td><td>(0.111)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"> Perception of lecturers&#x27; English proficiency</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>1.365***</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>(0.091)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">English improvement as a reason to enrol in the programme: yes (ref.: no)</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>2.238***</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>(0.570)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Constant</td><td>4.737***</td><td>3.656*</td><td>6.847***</td><td>15.467***</td></tr><tr><td>(1.427)</td><td>(1.889)</td><td>(0.824)</td><td>(0.766)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>203</td><td>203</td><td>203</td><td>203</td></tr><tr><td>Observations R-squared</td><td>0.326</td><td>0.241</td><td>0.542</td><td>0.098</td></tr></table></body></html>

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. "Spec." stands for "Specification". Estimation method: Ordinary least squares. Dependent variable: Overall satisfaction with the programme. Coefficient: \*\*\*Significant at $^ { 1 \% }$ \*\* significant at $5 \%$ \* significant at $1 0 \%$

4.2. Language-related factors of satisfaction with the partial EMI programme in teacher education across sl-rated proficiency groups

Descriptive statistics for the continuous variables in the study by self-reported proficiency group are shown in Table 5 and th results for the OLS estimator by self-reported proficiency group are reported in Table 6.

According to results in Table5, it sems that the lower the students' self-ratd English level, the higher the overal satisfaction with the programme, with quite asubstantialdifference in the average value for satisfaction between the highest and the lowest self-rated proficiency groups. Excet for the perceptions on the opportunities fforded by the programme to use English, which seem to be rather similar across the three self-rated proficiency levels, groups iffer in terms of how they viewed their nglish improvement - lower level students perceive they had made greater language gains - and their lctures English competence, with higher slf-rated proficiency students assessing this competence lower than those students in lower self-rated level groups.

Table 5 Descriptive statistics for the continuous variables in the study by self-reported English proficiency group.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variables</td><td>Mean</td><td>Standard Deviation</td><td colspan="2">Actual range</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Min.</td><td>Max.</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Satisfaction with the programme scale</td></tr><tr><td>B1</td><td>18.45</td><td>3.091</td><td>11</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>B2</td><td>15.73</td><td>4.107</td><td>6</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>C1</td><td>13.59</td><td>3.364</td><td>10</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Perception of language improvement scale</td></tr><tr><td>B1</td><td>18.22</td><td>2.016</td><td>13</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>B2</td><td>17.59</td><td>3.705</td><td>7</td><td>24</td></tr><tr><td>C1</td><td>16.52</td><td>3.148</td><td>7</td><td>24</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Perception of opportunities for English use scale</td></tr><tr><td>B1</td><td>16.05</td><td>2.525</td><td>12</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>B2</td><td>15.51</td><td>2.248</td><td>10</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>C1</td><td>15.37</td><td>2.132</td><td>11</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Perception of lecturers&#x27; English proficiency</td></tr><tr><td>B1</td><td>8.58</td><td>1.605</td><td>6</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>B2</td><td>7.18</td><td>2.092</td><td>3</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>C1</td><td>5.73</td><td>1.760</td><td>3</td><td>10</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 adds interactions to the regression model presented in Table 3; specificall, the interactions between the perception variables and that regarding English improvement as motivation to join the programme, with the self-rated English level, using the C1 level as refrence. Thes interactions show that, with the exception of the perception of ecturers proficiency (which seems t affect satisfaction acrosself-rated proficiency groups more uniformly), both the perceptions of language improvement and language use n the programme, and the enrolment in i fo language improvement reasons, impact significantly differently on programme satisfaction according to self-rated proficiency groups.

These interactions show that for the perceptions of language improvement and of opportunities for English use, the lower the students self-perceived English level, the higher the impact of these language related perceptions on their programme satisfaction. The difference in the association between perceptions of language improvement and programme satisfaction is 0.217 and 0.094 points more for the self-rated B1 and the B2 group, respectively, as compared to the C1 group. In the case of the association between perceptions on opportunities for language use and satisfaction, this ifference amounts to 0.281 and 0.135 points more for the self-rated B1 and the B2 group, respectively.

This also happens with the variable related to English improvement as a reason to choose partial EMI programme for teacher education, as B1 students with this motivation present a programme satisfaction which is almost 5 points higher than C1 students with the same motivation, whereas B2 students present 2.4 points higher programme satisfaction than C1 students.

Finally, the OLS regression analysis confirms that students with lower English level give higher value tothe programme, as can be seen from the previous descriptive table.

Table 6 Relationship between overallsatisfaction with the programme and perception variables, by self-reported English proficiency group.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variables</td><td>Spec. I</td><td>Spec. II</td><td>Spec. III</td><td>Spec. IV</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Sex: female (ref.: male)</td><td>0.951</td><td>1.089*</td><td>1.119**</td><td>1.373**</td></tr><tr><td>(0.584)</td><td>(0.608)</td><td>(0.516)</td><td>(0.683)</td></tr><tr><td>Perception of language improvement</td><td>0.527***</td><td></td><td></td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Perception of opportunities for English use</td><td>(0.073)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>-</td><td>0.634***</td><td></td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Perception of lecturers&#x27; English proficiency</td><td></td><td>(0.105)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>-</td><td>1.267***</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Attending the programme to improve English: yes (ref.: no).</td><td rowspan="2"></td><td></td><td>(0.130)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td></td><td>0.100</td></tr><tr><td>Interactions (ref.: C1)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>(0.760)</td></tr><tr><td> Perception of language improvement*B2</td><td>0.094***</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td>(0.030)</td><td></td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>0.217***</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Perception of language improvement*B1 Perception of opportunities for English use*B2</td><td>(0.037)</td><td></td><td></td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>0.135***</td><td>-</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Perception of opportunities for English use*B1</td><td></td><td>(0.034)</td><td></td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>0.281***</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td></td><td>(0.042)</td><td></td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>-</td><td></td><td>0.007</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Perception of lecturers&#x27; English proficiency*B2</td><td></td><td></td><td>(0.074)</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Perception of lecturers&#x27; English proficiency*B1</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>0.141</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Attending the programme to improve English*B2: yes (ref.: no).</td><td>/</td><td>-</td><td>(0.085)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>-</td><td>2.415***</td></tr><tr><td>Attending the programme to improve English*B1: yes (ref.: no)</td><td></td><td>-</td><td></td><td>(0.783) 4.715***</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Constant</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>(0.900)</td></tr><tr><td>5.625***</td><td>4.698***</td><td>7.394***</td><td>15.293***</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(1.331)</td><td>(1.734)</td><td>(0.868)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>(0.728)</td></tr><tr><td>Observations</td><td>203</td><td>203</td><td>203</td><td>203</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.553</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>R-squared</td><td>0.427</td><td>0.380</td><td></td><td>0.208</td></tr></table></body></html>

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Estimation method: Ordinary least squares. Dependent variable: Overall satisfaction with the programme. Coefficient: $* * *$ Significant at $^ { 1 \% }$ \*\* significant at $5 \%$ \* significant at $1 0 \%$

# 5. Discussion

Our study confirms previous research in other contexts that found that students in EMI were more satisied than they were dissatisied (Aguilar & Rodriguez, 2012; Botha, 2013; Ek0c, 2020; Karakas, 2017), that they acknowledge language progress as a benefit of the programme (Aguilar & Rodriguez, 2012; Hernandez-Nanclares & Jimenez-Munoz, 2017; Rogier, 2012), and that the lecturers' English proficiency was below their expectations (Aguilar & Rodriguez, 2012; Bolton & Kuteea, 2012; Byun et a., 2011; Chapple, 2015; Ekoc, 2020; Jensen et al., 2013; Karakas, 2017; Klaassen, 2003). Most significantly, our study provided substantial evidence that language-related factors impact student satisfaction with EMI and that these factors impact student satisfaction differently across ifferent sef-rated proficiency groups (Aguilar & Munoz, 2014; Barrios & Lopez-Gutierez, 2021). Firstly, students Who were driven to enter the programme by their expectations of language improvement (as the sole motivation or, more commonly, as one of the reasons alongide others rate their satisfaction with the partial EMI programme for teacher education significantly higher than those who did not share this motive. Secondly, whether the students joined the programme hoping to improve their English also significantl affects programme satisfaction depending on elf-rated proficiency group, as the lower the proficiency of the students who shared this motive, the higher their programme satisfaction is. Thirdly, all language-related factors under study significantly predict programme satisfaction, and each one of them explains a high percentage of the variance in programme satisfaction. Fourthly, students from different elf-rated proficiency groups asss programme satsfaction significantl differentl, with satisfaction decreasing with increasing self-rat proficiency. And, finll, the effc f the pereptions of language improvement and f portunities for language use on satisfaction significantly differ by self-rated proficiency group, the trend being that the effct of perceptions of language improvement and of opportunities for English use on programme satisfaction increases as students'slf-rated proficiency decreases.

Our results have interesting implications for EMI programme design and evaluation. With increasing numbers of universities offering partial or full EMI courses, competition among universties inevitably grows. This, in turn, compels universtie to fight for new national and international recruits and try to ensure student satisfaction. With an ever increasingly proficient student population, the prospect of English language progress could become les of an incentive to enrol in EMI than is at present. This reinforces the need for EMI initiatives to incorporate well-defined explicit language learning goals (Rogier, 2012), including academic and discipline-specific ones (Airey et al, 2017; Galloway & Rueg, 2020; Kuteeva & Airey, 2014). This would ental the provision of not only general but also discipline-specific language support (Kling, 2017; Kuteeva & Airey, 2014; Rose et al., 2020), thus addressing Cummins (e.g., 2008) seminal distinction between basic interpersonal communication skill (BIcs) and cognitive academic language proficiency (CALP) Even students who are highly proficient in general English would profit from the development of academic and discipline-specific discourse competence and would, consequently, experience the language gains that, according to our findings, significantly impinge on programme satisfaction. Being stakeholder participation mandatory in quality asurance, student satisfaction related to perceptions of language improvement could also have an impact on the evaluation and sustainability of EMI programmes. In fact, the quality assurance frameworks developed by national and international agencies and through projects (see Curle at al., 2020, for a review) to evaluate EMI acknowledge the relevance of language teaching policies and practices as one of the focus areas. Although it is beyond the scope of this aticle to discus language provision in EMI in detail, student support with English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and English for Special Purposes (ESP), and collaboration between language specialists and content teachers, with the former providing language-related knowledge and pedagogical skils, have been proposed as strategies to enable students to improve English language skills while learning through EMI (Dearden, 2018; Lasagabaster, 2018).

Additionall, EMI programmes should offer plenty of opportunities for students to use English both receptively and productively, which reinforces the need to set up formal language provision to equip the students with the necessary skill to operate in general, academic and disciplin-specificontexts in English. Finll, it is imperative that EMI universty teachers have a high command of English to participate in EMI (Drljaca Margic & Vodopija-Krstanovic, 2018; Kling, 2017). The relatively low use of English in the field of education (Kuteeva & Airey, 2014) may probably be - at least partly - responsible for this language deficit. Teachers' weak proficiency may contribute to their adherence to ateacher-fronted, monologic teaching stle, which liits student-tacher interaction and discussion (Cost & Coleman, 2013). Besides, the potential effct of some lecturers' poor English proficiency on the image of the academic institution and on the individual lecturer's reputation and credibilit, and on the perception of their lecturing competence should not be underestimated (Bolton & Kuteeva, 2012; Jensen et al., 2013; Klassen, 2003). To ilustrate, the study conducted by Jensen et al. (2013) in Denmark found an impact of perceived English skill on perceived general lecturing competence and vice versa. Drawing on previous studies on the efect of accent variation on percetions of competence and socialattractivenes, the reearchers concluded that students' evaluations were most probably highly influenced by stereotyping concerning perceptions of English ability. As student evaluations are currntly used to asss individual lcturers teaching competence, negative assessments ifluenced by weak English ability may have serious consequence for tenure-seeking faculty. Additionally, as previously mentioned,student evaluations are used as a measure of the success or filure) of university programmes and courses, which is further powerful reason to focus on the accreditation and upgrade of lecturers' English proficiency if EMI programmes are to be sustainable and competitive in the future.

However, a high competence does not guarantee that lecturers have the sils to produce academic and discipline-specific texts (Dafouz & Nunez, 2009), which makes the case for the need to train and support EMI teachers disciplinary language development (Dafouz & Smit, 2020). Additionall, it must also be noted that advanced general English proficiency and familiarity with discipline-specific discourse conventions, in itelf, does not assure effectie comunication or efective lectring (Hellekjer, 2010; Pecorari, 2020) and that pragmatic and interactive strategies, together with scaffolding strategies - such as providing supportive material such visuals and slides - have ben found to offet the lecturer's potentially problematic linguistic features and facilitate students content understanding and intelligility (Bjorkman, 2008; Griffith, 2021; Hellekjer, 2010). To illustrate, preliminary findings from error and discourse analysis in EMI Computer Science lesons leads Griffth (2021) to conclude that the communicative context of the clssoom makes normatie accuracy an imperfct measure of the communicative value of the classroom. Aspects such as clarification strategies, summarisation and negotiation of meaning proved to impact intelligibility much more than the errors detracted from it (p. 315). EMI lecturers need, therefore, to be sensitive to the methodological and linguistic implications in EMI (Dafouz et al., 2018; Hellekjer, 2010; Macaro, 2020; Schmidt-Unterberger, 2018) and to be trained in the explicit use f efective language-sensitive pedagogical and methodological approaches (Kling, 2017; Pecorari, 2020) to facilitate content understanding and develop their students' disciplinary literacy (Airey, 2016). This conception of professonal development for EMI contrasts, however, with current practices in the training and accreditation of universty teachers in EMI reflecting a belief in university education that language proficiency in itself is sufficient to teach subjects through another language" (Dafouz, 2018, p. 542).

# 6. Conclusions

The study behind this article amed at investigating what language-related factors predicted satisfaction with a partial EMI programme in teacher education and how self-rated proficiency affcted the association between these language-related variables and satisfaction. It has corroborated previous research findings concerning students' reasonable satisfaction with the partial EMI programme in teacher education, reports of language gains and relatively poor asessment of their lecturers' English proficiency. Addtionall, it has ben proven that satisfaction wth MI was trongly influenced by language-related factors and that these factors impact student satisfaction as function of self-rated proficiency. The results are a clear indication of the high value atached by EMI students to English gains and ther language-associaed isues when asssing it in tems of satsfaction, and of th efect of Eglish proficiency on perceptions concerning EMI, with higher proficiency students reporting esatisfaction with EMI, weaker language gains, and the perception of fewer opportunitie to use English in the partial EMI programme in teacher education, and of a lower English proficiency in their lecturers.

Our results have implications for EMI curriculum design, resourcing and lecturer selection if EMI intiatives are to be sustainable and competitive. In order to ensure teaching quality and student satisfaction, the language dimension must be purposely integrated into the programme, with explicit general, academic and disciplinary language learning goals. Also, lecturers who have advanced English proficiency need to be selected, and language support should be provided to both students and lecturers in general, academic and discipline-oriented English. Finall, EMI teacher professional development should include language-sensitive methodological education to facilitate both content learning and disciplinary literacy.

While the present research provides new insights into the scarcely researched area of associations between language-related factors and EMI programme satisfaction, some limitations need to be acknowledged. Firstly, the study was conducted at a particular HE educational context and our results cannot be directly extrapolated to other contexts. Secondly, as participation in the study was voluntary, a self-selection bias may be present. Thirdy, a questionnaire was the only data-gathering instrument and only quantitative data was colected. Qualitative and mixed methods studies are necessary to provide further insights into the association between language-factors and student satisfaction with EMI. Fourthly, students English proficiency was self-reported, so it could be subject to report bias. Notwithstanding these limitations, our study contributes to the existing EMI litrature by exploring the so far underresearched association between language-related factors and satisfaction with an EMI programme.

# CRediT author statement

Elvira Barrios: onceptualisation, Methodology, Supervision. Aurora Lopez-Gutierrez: Conceptualisation, Writing - Original Draft Writing - Review & Editing. Luis-Alejandro Lopez-Agudo: Methodology, Data curation.

# Declaration of competing interest

None.

# Appendix. Questionnaire of Perceptions on EMI

1. Gender:  Female  Male  Non-binary  I prefer not to say   
2. Age:

3. Course year:  First  Second  Third  Fourth

4. What are the main reasons why you enrolled in the bilingual programme?

To have better professional opportunities.   
To improve your level of English.   
To have more opportunities regarding international mobility (study or work abroad) Other (Please, specify):

5. Have you got a certified English level? If "yes", please indicate what level: No  Yes  A1  A2  B1  B2  C1  C2

6. How would you rate your current level of English? A1  A2  B1  B2  C1  C2

Please indicate your personal agreement with the following statements according to the following scale: 1 (Strongly Disagree), 2 (Disagree), 3 (Agree) and 4 (Strongly Agree.

# Perceptions of Language Improvement

- Taking part in this programme has improved my level of English.   
- Taking part in this programme has improved my listening skills in English.   
- Taking part in the bilingual programme has improved my speaking skill in English (oral presentations and similar activities).   
- Taking part in the bilingual programme has improved my oral interaction skill in English (in dialogues, debates and similar activities).   
- Taking part in the bilingual programme has improved my reading skill in English (academic documents, online information and similar activities).   
- Taking part in the ilingual programme has improved my writing skill in English (essays, exam questions, written portfolios and similar activities).

Perceptions of opportunities for language use

In the English-taught modules I had enough opportunities to ...

- speak (in oral presentations and similar activities) in English.   
- interact with the teachers and my classmates (in dialogues, debates ...) in English.   
- listen to academic English (lectures, videos, etc.).   
- read academic texts and documents in English.   
write in English (presentations, essays, portfolios ...).

Perceptions of lecturers' English proficiency

In the English-taught modules ...

- I am overall satisfied with the lecturers' level of English.   
- lecturers use English correctly and appropriately.   
- lecturers use English with good pronunciation and understandable accents.   
- lecturers have adequate linguistic competence to teach in English.

Satisfaction with the EMI programme in teacher education

- Being part of the bilingual group has been a satisfactory experience.   
- I am generally satisfied with the delivery of the contents of the subjects taught in English.   
- I am generally satisfied with the methodology used in the English-taught subjects.   
- Learning through the medium of English has been a positive experience.   
- I would recommend other students to join the bilingual programme.   
In general, the quality of lessons is, at least, as good as the quality of the ones taught in Spanish.

# References

Agir    n   i1 118 https://doi.org/10.1111/ijal.12006   
Aguilar,   012).   t r   tin. io   ion nd Bilingualism, 15(2), 183-197. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2011.615906   
Aire, J. (2016) P, MI or CLIL? In K Hyland, & P. Shaw (Eds.), The Routge handook of Eishfor acadmic puposes (p. 95-107). Rutedge.   
Ary     7- thrt anguage policies encorage bottom-up discipliary litrac gls? Highe dcain, 734), 561-576. htps://doi.org/10.1007/10734-015-99502   
Aire, . . 206 t r   t   .   f Ph, 273, 5-56. /.g 10.1088/0143-0807/27/3/009   
Ayre . l .014iil  or   alt rtii th o f co  ion n Counseling and Development, 47(1), 79-86. https://doi.org/10.1177/0748175613513808   
Barrio,  -1).   n l  t      ti. International Journal of Multilingualism. https://doi.org/10.1080/14790718.2021.1888956   
Bjorkman,. 2008. wh e ake ia sh  h rt n n.gish oay, 242) 541.h//./10.1017 S0266078408000187

Multicultural Development, 33(5), 429-447. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2012.670241 tha, .13.na t    . d , 3(, 61475./.1/.12053 y, h   Pr    01 sh n   atg in, 62 (4), 431-449. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-010-9397-4 Chappl, 5   i   th n sh o , 1-1//.9/p] Coleman, J. (2006. ngsh-d tchng in ro higher ctin. L hg 391) 114 htps/i./10.1017/02614480600320X Cta,  3      im, 1 (1), 3-19. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2012.676621 Council of Europe. (2001). Cmmon European framework of Referne fr languages: aning, teching, asssment. ambridge Universit Pres. a h  it  .), (2nd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 71-83). Springer Science $^ +$ Business Media LLC. Literacy. Crle , J  e    00  ),  e  e. British Council. Dafouz, E (018). English-medm inttion and techer cation progammes in higher edcation: Idlogical fos ad mained identities at work. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 21(5), 540-552. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2018.1487926 Dafouz,  r,   , 018 n,  l  : dtn y g otio  sh-mem instruction. Tesol Quarterly, 52(3), 540-563. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.459 Dafouz,   009).  g io ig a   f  .,  e Experiences from primary, secondary and tertiary contexts (pp. 101-112). Santillana. Dafouz, E., & Smit, U. (2020). ROAD-MAPPING English medium education in the internationalized university. Palgrave MacMillan. Dearden, J. (2014). English as a medium of instruction - a growing global phenomenon. British Council. in higher education (pp. 323-338). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70214-8_18. Doiz, , aaaster,. 2020. ig t a ie in Eish-md ntion a rity mpreive proch. niol Jo Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 23(3), 257-262. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2020.1727409 Dr i8 t English for Academic Purposes, 35, 31-41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.06.005 koA20   ti   n  f 42) 231-243. https://doi.org/10.1080/0309877X.2018.1527025 Feton-Sth,  Hmphries  inshw, . 017). Eis  nctio  hgr ion in Asia Pciic Fro pc  g. riner. Galoway,   20 is  p  sh tio   J h   Esh or dc Purposes, 45, 100846. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100846 Grift,  . t i  .  c (pp. 297-319). John Benjamins Publishing Company. https://doi.org/10.1075/dapsac.92.13gri. Heleje  010 e ci  ish- he io   f   i e, 45,11-34. h/i. org/10.7146/hjlcb.v23i45.97343 Hande-ae  & -z,  017). ish a f inction: ice fr lag ad ont ts  iinltion in economics. nternational Jounal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 20(7),883-896. htps://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2015.1125847 Journal of English Studies, 13(1), 87-112. arakas, 017)h  hetio i h ishntion. h  of sh nin Language, 12(1), 1-14. Kim, EG., wn, ., Kim, J. 2016. Kon gnerin tdents ption f Eish medu instrction (EM an 1 use in M clss. Jo of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 38(2), 130-145. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2016.1177061 Klassen, . (2003. nis-md rres in higher tion: From mpltion qalit aunce.  a Lwe, & R Wkinon (Ed.), Muing approchs in univrsiy ectio Callenges and practice (p. 119-143). Valkof e & Talnentr Universiteit Maastricht. Kling, J. 017). ish md tion d th itiono    Bro .) Te n  te on integrating language (2nd ed., pp. 216-227). University of Michigan Press. 533-549. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-013-9660-6 Lasagabaster . (2018. steig tm chg Mapg t ah ad for is-md nctionat rsty el.  hg 51(3, 400-416. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444818000113 Lawshe  1975 qtiveph  alit.    63-575.//44-65707.1393. Linguistics in Language Teaching, 52(2), 99-126. https://doi.org/10.1515/iral-2014-0005 Lynn, M. R. (1986). Determination and quantification of content validity. Nursing Research, 35, 382-385. aro,  0    sh       -. doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2019.1620678 acro,     (018 t  ish m ni  hig   11), 3676. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444817000350 adrid,   17   nntt e. 849./.07.402 Pecoai,  00).is nii  d . .), universities (pp. 15-36). Springer. Polt, .  eck  2006.The on aldt inex: Ar y sure y w wht's ben oeiiqe ad rommndtion. h in sing Health, 29(5), 489- 497. https://doi.org/10.1002/nur.20147 Polt    00t     a   , 30 (4), 459-467. https://doi.org/10.1002/nur.20199 Exeter. https://re.exeter.ac.uk/repository/bitstream/handle/10036/4482/RogierD.pdf?sequence=2. e   i      , skill, and motivation. Studies in Higher Education, 45(11), 2149-2161. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2019.1590690 laerr-. -  01is of e t i  . .p 61-74). hid  18sh sh-  ei Education and Bilingualism, 21(5), 527-539. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2018.1491949 Sert N (2) The lanonae nf inctrctin dilemma in the Turkic cntet etom 36) 156.171 hte//ni o/1 1016/ stem 20711 6

Tazl .011ish ses  a ariaist f  ci, ei ad. of is r Academic Purposes, 10(4), 252-270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2011.08.003   
Wison,   tr r   t  i Development, 45(3), 197-210. https://doi.org/10.1177/0748175612440286   
Wu, W.-. 00.d  td:   rta n ml   io  d i 4 67-4   
Ye, C-C. (2014)  sts  d t     iy io  , 453) 05-319. /o. org/10.1177/0033688214555358

and plurilingual programs at schools and at higher education.

Ara - a      t spi coodo for eel y  in     rkinn r hthi t s-io int   Primay Education at the University of Malaga.

Luis  t Empresariales. Universidad de Malaga. Plaza de El Ejido $s / n ,$ 29013, Malaga (Espana); e-mail: lopezagudo@uma.es. He holds a degree in Business Administration and ang  ,   th     s. Hs  a ciency, with specific emphasis on the gender and equality areas.