# Multilingual doctoral students' lived experiences of genre knowledge development through social interactions: Learning writing 'styles' and 'thought processes'

Naoko Mochizuki

Department of English, Kanda University of International Studies, 1-4-1 Wakaba, Mihama-ku Chiba-shi, Chiba, 261-0014, Japan

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Genre knowledge   
Perceptions   
Interactions   
Multilingual writers   
Predicaments   
Perezhivanie

Genre knowledge development can be facilitated as writers engage in social interactions and make sense of a new rhetorical situation in a new discourse community. However, the details of this genre learning process are underexplored. The study explores this issue by investigating the relationship between writers' perception of genre learning through social interactions and their genre knowledge development. Drawing on a sociocultural perspective of lived experience, perezhivanie, the study investigates two multilingual doctoral students' perceptions of academic genres and their learning to write through social interactions. Data were collected in group writing conferences at an Australian university through observation and audio recordings of the conferences, student interviews, and students' written drafts. The study found that the students perceived the academic genres in different ways, a "Western style" and "native-speaker thought processes, which led to their contrasting stances in learning to write. The students' different ways of negotiating cultural and linguistic identity in the past were related to their different ways of understanding genre-specific knowledge and approaching genre learning through social interactions. Highlighting the role of writers' past experiences in genre awareness, the study offers pedagogical implications for building genre knowledge utilizing social interactions.

# 1. Introduction

When engaging in new situated writing, the writer needs to draw on genre knowledge rather than exclusively focusing on linguistic knowledge. The writer's gained genre knowledge leads to their expertise in integrating their own linguistic, proces, rhetorical, and subject matter knowledge for their purposes of writing in their contexts (Tardy, 2009). Building genre knowledge can be especially challenging for multilingual international students. With diverse linguistic, sociocultural and educational backgrounds, in a new discourse community, they face substantial change from previous ways of learning to write in order to gain expertise in the target genre. Genre knowledge development can be facilitated as the writer engages in social interactions in various activities and tasks in a discourse community (e.g., Falconer, 2019; Tardy, 2009). As they engage in these social interactions and activities, writers are aware of and think about the relationships between a self, writing, and situations, and make sense of a new rhetorical situation in a new discourse community (e.g., Dressen-Hammouda, 2014). However, limitations have been also identified with mere-immersin oriented and apprenticeship-centred reearch writing (Cheng, 2018), and more explict, guided immersion" is clld for (Cheng, 2018, p.15) Some studies have investigated graduate students larning to write, participating in activities of their discourse communities such as co-authoring (Florence & Yore, 2004) and supervising (Dysthe, 2002) and suggest how those activities can provide more explicit and guided immersion for research writing. Writing conferences or writing groups, where writer can get fedback on their writing, also attract attention as a promising approach in educational settings to support research writing (Aitchison & Guerin, 2014), but few studies have investigated them in relation to the students' genre knowledge development. This study, therefore, investigates the relationship between writing conferences and multilingual students genre knowledge, focusing on how multilingual students perceive a genre they encounter and lear it through social interactions in writing conferences. The study examines the lived experience of two multilingual doctoral students, who participated in group writing conferences at an Australian universty. The study aims to inform specific ways to contextualize and integrate social ineractions in writing conferences or clases for developing genre knowledge. The sections that fllow review the context of multilingual doctoral students' learning to writ, and genre knowledge development and social interactions, fllowed by the exposition of the analytical lens the study adopts, perezhivanie lived experience) (Vygotsky, 1994)

# 1.1. Multilingual doctoral students' writing and social interactions

To doctoral students, genre knowledge development is esential, because their life is marked by such high-stakes situated writin as a thesis or dissertation for the degre attainment and publications for their future academic jobs. However, doctoral education is generally lacking in the teaching of cholarly writing (Gren, 2009). Traditional doctoral supervision has become more challenging due to the increased workload of supervisors and contextual changes in higher education including more interdisciplinary and multi-method research, increased number of students per supervisor, and greater cultural and inguistic diversty across students and supervisors (Aitchison & Guerin, 2014). Under these circumstances, various kinds of opportunities for larning to write for doctoral students have been created, and writing groups including group writing conferences, where I collected data for ths study, are one of such innovations.

Because of their cross-linguisic, cross-cultural, and croseducational-context experiences, multilingual doctoral students go through diverse and complex processes of learning to write in a new discourse community, facing substantial changes in writing demands, genre knowledge or identity negotiation (Starfield & Paltridge, 2019). Many studies to date, investigate this complex process of thesis writers learning to write and emphasize their idntity, agency, and voice negotiations as key aspects of their genre learning (e.g, de Magalhaes et a., 2019; Mochizuki & Starfield, 2021; Sanchez-Martin & eloni, 2019). Writers' social interactions could take place in various forms and networks such as the interaction in supervisor-supervisee mentoring (Sanchez-Martin & Seloni, 2019), face-to-face writing conferences (Mochizuki & Starfield, 2021) or a writing group whose members are globally dispersed and virtually interacting with each other (de Magalhaes et al., 2019).

In the previous studies on writing groups for postgraduate students, social interactions among members are also emphasized as one of the resources for learning to write. Often reported as gains by participating in these groups were not only improved writing skill but also learners' perspective changes on their writing and themselves as a writer such as developing scholarly identity as an author (Larcombe et al., 2007) and gaining a better understanding of the audience (Li & Vandermensbrugghe, 2011). Sharing knowledge about one's disciplinary writing with others helps construct writers voice in writing (Mochizuki & Starfield, 2021). Per review is acknowledged as a key pedagogical tool during interactions in these groups, but few studies have examined its influence on writers genre knowledge in these social activities.

# 1.2. Genre knowledge development and social interactions

Genres are social practices and rhetorical categories (Tardy et al., 2020), the multifaceted construct characterized by various features including social relations, practices, power, and texts. Geres reide in the relations between the purposes of the text, social contexts, and social practices. Linguisic and rhetorical patterns are formed aording to these relations and shared among community members to achieve common goals.

This study draws on the genre knowledge model proposed by Tardy et al. (2020) to explore multilingual writers perceptions of a genre they encounter. Genre knowledge is an integration of genre-specific knowledge and genre awareness. Genre-specific knowledge is not the sum of discrete domains but a layered and dynamic knowledge of several overlapping domains such as formal, rhetorical, process and subject matter knowledge. The model emphasizes the important role that genre awareness plays in genre knowledge development. Genre awarenessconcerns a broad understanding of what genres are and how they work, in other words, the perception of rhetorical situations (Gentil, 2011). It facilitates understanding pecific genre knowledge (Devit, 2004; Tard, 2020), helping the writer with identifying similarities and differences of a new genre they encounter across genres, languages, and cultures, (Gentil, 2011). Metacognitive knowledge, consisting of declarative, procedural and conditional knowledge, also plays a significant role in genre knowledge development. Negretti and McGrath's (2018) study on metacognitive scaffolds in a genre-based writing course shows the interrelationship between genre knowledge development and the development of metacognition. Notably, writers metacognitive knowledge is inseparable from their rcontextualization, a process through which writers adapt their genre knowledge to a new writing situation (Negretti & McGrath, 2018). Multilingual writers recontextualize their genre knowledge across languages and contexts (e.g., Kim & Belcher, 2018), but these cros-lingual acts of recontextualization processes may be more demanding than recontextualization processes within the same language, involving these writers negotiation of their expanded linguistic repertoires and different cultural conventions (Tardy et al., 2020).

As mentioned above, since genres are rhetorical categories, genre knowledge can also be described as a knowledge of the rela tionship between atool (a gere) and the world in which it i used (Tardy et l., 2020). Theefore, genre rning should not be reduced to the development of awarenes of the features of genre-specific knowledge but should emphasize the development of awarenessof the relationships between those features and the social context, that is, \*increasingly sophisticated awarenes of the rhetorical considerations motivating the genre features" (Cheng, 2007, p. 303). Cheng (2018) argues that the goal of genre instruction is rhetorical consciousness-raising.

In the investigation of writers' genre knowledge, attention is often paid to their writing performance. However, how writers perceive given genre instruction and how they approach a genre may not be the same as what the instructor expects.In fact in Cheng's study (2011), the students were able to notice certain textual features which many genre instructors would not expect they would. More importantl, their approach to the relationship between text and context is distinct from genre theorists' characterization of the relationship. Similarly, many studies on feedback in second language writing have examined the effect of the feedback provided through interactions by looking at learners' writing performance, namely, the amount or the quality of their revision based on the feedback they received. To varying degrees, the positive changes in writers inguistic behaviours afer the conference have been reported (Hyland & Hyland, 2006), but the relationship between these changes and writers' genre knowledge development remain unclear. Scarce is the research into writrs' perceptions, specificall, their awarenes of and thinking about various fatures of the target genre (Cheng, 2007, 2011) and how that awareness and thinking are related to building genre knowledge through social in. teractions. In my study, therfore, to explore the potential of social interactions to provide gere leaning opportunitie, I focs on how writers perceive their problems with genre knowledge and how they perceive social interactions at writing conferences as a means of solving those problems.

Another understudied issue concerning social interactions for genre knowledge development includes learners' various ways of understanding and participating in social interactions. Learners' ways of participating in interactions vary substantially, and their patterns of interaction affect their language learning (Storch, 2002). In fact some leaners even do not choose to participate in social interactions as a way of genre learning, regardles of their availbility. Of the four L2 graduate students in Tardy's (2009) study, for example, one student was reluctant to engage in oral interactions such as disciplinary participation or feedack, although he willigly referred to other types f resources for learning. Some studies have investigated variation in the ways of participating, in relation to learners' motives and goals (e.g., Zhu & Mitchell, 2012), but learners' perspectives on the factors that motivate their ways of participating remain unclear. To explore learners' perspectives on learning to write through social interaction, this study focuses on how writers' views about learning to write through social interactions are shaped.

1.3. A sociocultural approach to the lived experience of genre learning: perezhivanie

To investigate writers' perceptions of the genres they encounter and their perceptions of learning to write through social inter. action, I adopt a sociocultural approach to the lived experience, perezhivanie (Vygotsky, 1994), as my analytical lens. Perezhivanie refers to a unit of human consciousness involved in mental development through experience of the environment and emphasizes the relationships betwen individuals' experience and their perception of the environment as an integral part of human mind development. Perzhivanie as an analytical lens, therefore, pemits the investigation of laners perctions of the leaning proces in a social situation, shaped by their experiences. This matches the study focus: the perception of a genre that writers encounter and their experiences of a social situation, that is social interactions through which they get feedback on their writing and learn to write.

A key concept in perezhivanie is a predicament in an individual's perception. It can become a driving force in human mind development because cognitive, mental, and emotional engagement is involved in the proces of making sense of one's predicament and seeking a way to get over it in one's social context. Whether or not an individual perceives something as a predicament depends on whether they perceive needs or impulses. Whether or not an individual perceives needs or impulse depends on their internal position, that is, how they perceive the external environment (Grimmet, 2014). Even if the external environment consists of some demands whether or not, or how, a person recognizes those demands depends on how the person perceives that environment. In the process of learning to write a thesis or research article, for example, diffrent writers recognize diffrent predicaments with their genre knowledge based on the needs they perceive in their perceived environments. These perceived predicaments, needs, and environment, therefore, would indicate their perception of the thesis and research genre.

Perezhivanie as an analytical lens also allows investigating the connection between writers' experiences and their ways of and attitudes toward a genre as well a learning to write through social interaction. An individual's view of the world is shaped by their own experiences, and based on those shaped views, the person perceives and makes sense of the environment (Vygotsky, 1994). Thus, a learner's perezhivanie connects their own experiences with both past and ongoing development (Mok, 2015). The writer's view of a genre and their view of learning it through social interactions are shaped by how they have hitherto experienced learning academic writing and social interactions in their institutions..

In sum, perezhivanie enables the conceptualization of the learning process from the learner's perspective (Mok, 2015). Focusing on the learner's perspective of earning to writ through social interactions, this study aims to offr some pedagogical implications for building multilingual writers genre knowledge utilizing social interactions. Attention is paid to writrs perceptions of a genre, their perceptions of learning through social interactions, and their experiences (both previously and at the writing conference) in which those perceptions are shaped. The research questions are formulated as follows:

(1) How do multilingual writers' experiences shape their perceptions of a genre and their perceptions of learning it through social interactions? (2) How are those shaped perceptions related to their genre knowledge development through social interactions?

# 2. Methods

The study adopts an ethnographic case study approach. As an ethnographic aproach to literacy studies helps close the gap between text and contex (Paltidge et al., 2016), in this study, itcan contribute to gaining thick decriptions (Gert, 1973) of the relationships between students' engagement in situated writing and their experiences in sociocultural contexts.

# 2.1. Research site and participants

The research was conducted in the thesis writing support program at the learning centre in an Australian university. The program provided group writing conferences for graduate thesis writers. This was not a mandatory course, and any graduate tudents who were writing their thesis could apply for the program. Those students in the program were divided into small groups of five at most. A learning centre staff member joined each group. The main activity of goup writing conferences was to read the member's writing and give feedback to each other. The facilitator's role was to ensure each student got feedback on his/her writing from others. The facilitator also read students' drafts and gave feedback. The groups met for two hours fortnightly, five times a semester.

Participants were recruited through an announcement made in the last five minutes of group writing conferences at the learning centre, ccompanied by printed flyrs and my explanations. liot and Yujin (pseudonyms), who agred to participate, were in different groups facilitated by different facilitators (for the students' profile, see Table 1).

Eliot was from China and in a group of three students. He was at the stage of mid-candidature, which means he had finished his research proposal and had collected his data, and was about to start writing the complete thesis. The other two students in his group were at a late stage of their candidature. One student was a native speaker of English from Australia and the other student was from Brazil. They were from the same faculty, but the areas of their research differed. During the conferences, Eliot often stayed silent compared to other members of the group. He rarely gave feedback on others writing. When he received feedback on his writing from other members, he usually gave brief responses, such as "yes' or "OK'.

Yujin was from Korea and in a group of five students. Yujin was at the very endpoint of her candidature. She had just submitted her thesis to her extenal reviewers and was waiting for the results. While waiting for the results, he was writing an artice for publication based on her theis. In her group, al the other students were also international students; they came from China, Vietnam, Indonesia, and Hong Kong. Two students were in their mid-candidature. The other two students were at the late stage of their candidature but had not finished writing their theses. One of them was writing her master's thesis. Apart from Yujin, none of the students had experience of writing article for publicatio. The ther four stdents we from the same faculty, which was dferent from jin's. The ar ther research differed.

# 2.2. Data collection and analysis

Data were collected through observation and audio recordings of the group conferences, student interviews, and students' written draft. I observed and audio-recorded three meetings (approximately six hours) for Elio's group and five meetings approximately ten hours) for Yujin's group. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with the students twice, midway through the program and after the end of the program (about a month apart). Each interview lasted approximately 60 minutes. The audio recordings of the conferences and the interviews were transcribed..

A general inductive approach (Thomas, 2006) was taken for the content analysis of the transcriptions. For the analysis of the interview data, both a priori categories from the interview topics and the themes that emerged through my coding process were used. The categories from the interview included the students' experiences of academic writing, learning to write through social interactions, challenges and difficultie, and their thoughts aout fedback exchange during the writing conferences. The themes from coding concerned students' cross boundary experiences and their perceptions of social interactions for feedback, such as emotion, writing strategies, native and non-native speakers' English, participation patterns in discussions, gains from the conference, and relations with supervisors. Iused the computersoftware package, NVivo 11 to assist my coding. Writte samples were analysed for the changes students made based on the fedback given to them. The transcripts of conference interactions were segmented according to the topic they discussed. I analysed each segment for predicaments and genre knowledge and summarized them. I added to ths summary the findings from other data sources: participants' revising actions based on feedback and their thoughts about them.

I developed narratives of the perezhivanie of the participants by reading each student's codes from the interview data and his/her coded excs reatdy, reerring to the umay f coferece ntractions and the oriinl dat. wote narratives, fsed on the concepts in perezhivanie, such as predicaments, experiences that shape the perception of a predicament, and perceived environments.

Table 1 Students' bio.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Student (Pseudonym)</td><td>Home country</td><td>Age</td><td>Candidature stage</td><td>Years in Australia</td><td>Research area</td></tr><tr><td>Eliot</td><td>China</td><td>20s</td><td>Mid</td><td>3</td><td>Construction Management</td></tr><tr><td>Yujin</td><td>Korea</td><td>20s</td><td>Late</td><td>3</td><td>Management</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3. Findings

Eliot and Yujin considered their inability to make their argument clear in their writing as their predicaments. They both perceived and verbalized the textual features of what they were writing then (for Eliot a thesis; for Yujin a journal article) in a similar way. However, their perezhivanie showed each student's diffrent percetion of a genre, closely related to their experience in the past, present, and future.

# 3.1. Eliot's perezhivanie

Eliot gained a master's degree in the masters-by-course-work program (a program requiring coursework for degree atainment; usually no thesis required from the same university where he was pursuing a PhD, so it was for the first time for him to write athesis in English. He came to the writig conferences to lean a style of writing for his thes (Interview, September 19, 2014). For every meeting of the conferences, Eliot brought pages from his literature review.

3.1.1. Perceived predicament: "someone like to highlight the topic sentence at first"

Eliot perceived his inabilit to shape his arguments in his thesis writing as his predicament. Eliot referred to what he was writing, a thesis, as a Western style, a "strange" writing pattern compared to what he had been familiar with in his home country Interview, September 19, 2014). He had formed the view that his predicament was derived from cultural differences in writing style between his own culture and "western" culture. In the interview, comparing Mandarin and English, he described the characteristics of each writing style:

"You know that Mandarin is quite different from English because t's like aconclusive language. (.) someone like to highlight the topic sentence at first and then expand the topic sentence that is the way that English want to do (..) Yeah but for Mandarin, it's always good way to give you all information and conclude at the end of .. (Interview, September 19, 2014).

As the above excerpt shows, he has some genre-specific knowledge of the thesis genre, but he semed to perceive this pattern is not his way, saying that \*someone" who speaks English may do so, but not him, a Mandarin speaker. His cultural and linguistic identity seemed to be the anchor in his perception of this predicament.

To Eliot, a \*Western'" writing style seemed to rfer to nothing but textual patterns. To get over his predicament, liot focused on building his knowledge of prototypical formal features of the genre, that i formal knowledge, a domain of genre-specific knowledge (Tardy et al., 2020). During the conferences, he seemed concerned with gaining pies of formal knowledge for revising and writing his text by istening to feedback and reading others papers. He rarely spoke during the conferences, but a few times when he spoke to respond to others comments on his writig, he clarified the details of the specific feedack he received on his writing regarding how to revise the text. He seemed to be most concerned about what appears in the text.

3.1.2. Experiences and the perception of a predicament: lowering down my atitude is very helpful"

Eliot's perception of his predicament was shaped by his experiences of a variety of changes derived from cross-cultural, cross linguistic, and cross-educational-context experiences. Through these cros oundary experiences, he came to feel \*strange" about the ways of expressing oneself in English, both in speech and writing, in the new discourse community. What he had experienced in the educational settings in China was a teacher-centred, lecture style of teaching, wherestudents were not expected to ask questions or cut in on the teacher's talk, whereas in his master's courseclsses at his institution in Australia, a discussion-style of teaching was often adopted, and students were given more freedom to speak. When he became a PhD student, thesis writing, which required him to express his opinions more overtl, was added as a new and \*strange experience" since he had only been required to write a short essay or answers to exam questions in his master's-by-course-work program.

Cross boundary experience also led Eliot to feel a lack of confidence in his English, and this interacted with the strange feelings that he had. Consequentl, he came to adopt a strategicall silent and istening-centred participatory style in his discourse community, keeping his distance from the "strange" "Western-style" ways of participating. Due to his perceived "poort" ability in English, he said he always regarded himself as \*the worst one" when he joined a group discussion (Interview, September 19, 2014). While he lived in China, his grade for English at school were not high, and he never used English in his daily lif or at his workplace. He said that when he came to Australia, his English was \*poor' (Interview, September 19, 2014). Graduallysilence in discussion to Eliot from his perspective, came to be a planned, strategic silence in order to listen to others better. He said, lowering down my attitude is very helpful of listening to other people's suggestions' (Interview, September 19, 2014).

These experiences of strategic silence in discussions with his colleagues seemed to shape his perceptions of learning to write through social interactions. Intily, when he started his study in Australia, he was not inclined to show his writing to anybody because he had a strong fear of humiliation derived from his lack of confidence in English. Later, when he showed his manuscript to his colleague for the first time, he received kind, encouraging and useful omments, which was quite dfferent from what he had expected initially. He said, \*before I think people are awful and they just laugh at me and I will be .. humiliate ... ut they were just encouraging that told me where I should do bettr and what's the problem and what's the good things I have done" (Interview, September 14, 2014) Since then, he said he started to se todiscss his writing with someone. With hs trategi-silence approach, however, he semed to perceive laning to write through interactions as the opportuty to collec forml knowledge revise his text

Cross boundary experiences also shaped Eliot's view of his own culture, which was also closely related to his perception of his predicament. When I asked him about his experience of ways of expressing oneself in schoos i China, asking if students ask questions

to the teacher during the class, he said:

It's quite .. quit .. it's quite dep. It [the culture] influence on personality, never ask questions, never try to challenge them. but if...look at the students from Australia or from Europe, America they want to challenge. They want .. they have ego to demonstrate themselves. They want everyone to know what they are thinking and what their attitude is about, but for the people from Japan and China, they always, I don't give you my opinion, I will ell it to you later or something like that. (Interview, September 19, 2014)

He seemed to feel more comfortable with his own \*Asian' ways of expression, seting up an "East-West" binary through which to expressnegative feeings about \*Westen ways of expressing an opinion. To him, it appeared egoistc to overtl expres one's opinion and "share thinking and atitudes. His perception of a thesis writig style seemed to be also based on this cultural reductionism, in terms of when and how to put forth one's opinion in both writing and speaking. Thus, Eliot may wel have felt reluctant to acquire this dominant \*Western' way of self-expression in academic writing, which is further discussed in the following section.

Eliot's cross boundary experiences shaped his view of this genre as a text pattern of Western culture which made him feel un. comfortable. He also perceived that this knowledge can be learned by his knowledge-collecting and strategic-silence approach.

3.1.3. Shaped view and ongoing learning to write: "I thought it was this part to discuss it"

His shaped view of his predicament associated with cultural differences created gaps in his genre awareness. His view of the cultural difference gave him a good reason to preserve his way of writing. His identit negotiation also seemed to support this reasoning. Getting over his predicament involves transforming his sense of himself. Being asked by the facilitator i his group why he had not changed his writin style ollowing his supervisors' advice, he mentioned, . just fel uncomfortable when he tried to write as suggested (Writing conference, October 16, 2014). His shaped view of the genre fixed his atention to how he fees about the Western style, rather than how the audience would understand his way of writing.

His perception of learning through social interaction as knowledge-colection-by listening led to the lack of mutual understanding between Eliot and the readers of his drafts during the conference. Since he rarely expressed his thoughts about writing nor did he respond to th comments he received, liot and the readers of his draft in the group failed to recognize the gap between the way Eliot understood this genre and that of the readers. In the interview, Eliot expressed the idea that this western writing style meant writing one's argument at the beginning of a paragraph or a section (Interview, November 20, 2014). However, Eliot did not writ in this way himself. Moreover, he did not mention this understanding in the conferences. At every conference, therefore, the comments repeatedy given to Eliot fited the western writing style as hetheorised it in the intervie. In his readers eyes, liot did not know the prescriptive rule, whereas in Eliot's view he knew the rule and was practising it in his own cultural way.

Another example of this gap was related to the concept of discussing in academic writing, specificall, to "discuss' previous literature. At every conference, Eliot's iterature review was criticized for its lack of commentaries, being a list of summaries of different studies without any information for the reader to explain why he was summarizing them. In the last conference, Eliot counter argued, for the first time, that he had indeed "discussed" some points, as someone in the group had told him to do at the previous conference:

Eliot: (...) So I thought it was this part to discuss it as the different characters of communication and the different dimensions ...

Facilitator: But you're not discussing it. That's the problem. (...)

(Writing conference, October 16, 2014)

Eliot seemed to have conceptualized "discuss" as refer to" or "mention', which was different from the facilitator's conceptuali. zation of "discuss".

Due to his perception of a genre as textual patterns, he seemed to perceive only the need to develop formal knowledge associated with his actual writing. His exteral environment, however, seemed to consist f some ther needs, as can beseen from the fact that the same comments had been given to him repeatedly by the other students, the facilitator of the conference group, and his supervisors. He seemed to draw solely on his declarative knowledge about how to argue or dscuss without considering who the audience was and how the audience would respond to his writing. Therefore, in the above excerpt, he expressed his surprise at the unexpected comments from the others, saying \*I thought this part was to discuss ...".

# 3.2. Yujin's perezhivanie

Yujin gained her master's degree at a university in Korea, which adopted English as a medium of instruction (EMI). She wanted to be an academic in an Englis-speaking country such as the USA, the UK, or Australia and she believed that getting her article published was essential to get such a job. he came to the writing conference to check f her writing could be undersood by those outside her field because she felt she needed to reach a wider readership to ensure publication.

# 3.2.1. Perceived predicament: "native-speaker thought processes"

Yujin's immediate predicament was the lack of a publication, specificall, her lack of knowledge of what journal article reviewers would expect from her manuscript. For her writing in general, however, she also had a prolonged predicament through which her fundamentalattitudes to thesis writing were shaped. This predicament was her lack of abilit to produce argumentative writing. She had conceptualized ths style of writing as writing based on \*native-speaker thought proceses," which she perceived was lacking in her writing (Inerview, October 18, 2014). \*Native-speaker thought processes" were her ideal form (Vygotsky, 1994), which she had been aiming at throughout her thesis writing because she believed that i was the only styleof writing which would make sense to those who would read her writing and make judgements on it.

To her, "native-speaker thought processes" can be reflected in the text as overt writing of one's argument at the beginning of a paragraph or a section. Therefore, her feedback on others' writing during the conferences mainly focused on how to strengthen arguments, specificall "fronting" one's argument either by a topic sentence or an introductory foreshadowing paragraph for section or by the use of structural patterns which she thought would reflect "native-speaker thought processes" In the interview, when asked what she was most concerned about when giving comments on others' writing, she said:

I focus on the major error of this writing, because if this rror should not be corrected, then your writing cannot be published. (. the major point is whether the tructure itef is loical, the structure tself is pretty much the same as the thought process of native speakers because native speakers will read your paper, or willread your thesis. (Interview, October 18, 2014).

The above excerpt also ilustrates the relationship between her percetion of a genre and her genre knowledge. Yujin seemed to :onsider this genre as a social practice, thinking about her text in relation to the audience (the reader), the purpose, and the setting. However, to her, the primary audience was "native speakers" of English or those who follow \*native-speaker thought processes".

3.2.2. Experiences and the view of a predicament: "it was really hurt ...'

Yujin's perception of her predicament was related to her cultural and linguistic identity negotiation through her experiences of scholarly writing in English in two different institutions (in Korea and Australia) and her relationships with her two native-Englishspeaking supervisors in a PhD program at an Austalian university. When she was studying in Korea, although her university adopted EMI and she wrote her master's thesis in English, she reflected on her way of writing then as "Konglish, English writing based on thought processes in Korean (Interview, October 18, 2014). In her writing the, she recalled that her arguments did not appear in the first sentence. In her view, she said that it was because addressing one's argument at the beginning was considered \*impolite in Korean culture. She said, suall, the firs or the second sentence f a paragraph, or the whole paper, is about some kind of examples, backgrounds, and some kind of using friendly knowledge, to express your ideas in a polite way. Then the last sentence of your paragraph is the topic sentence' (Interview, October 18, 2014).

When she entered her PhD program in Australia she became aware that her writing based on Korean thought processes" was problematic in that it was not meeing her supervisors' expectations. She learned the thesis genre through her interactions with these two native English-speaking supervisors throughout her candidature. She thought that her writing did not make sense to her supervisors because she was writing in a Korean way. She recounted this experience in her interview:

Both of my supervisors actually told me \*you know I'm lost I'm los ... where is your topic sentence, I'm lost (..) they were really confused and they always criticised my writing, because even though your grammar is perfect, .logiclly peaking, that doesn't make sense at all. Because your argument is nowhere, the first sentence, the second sentence, the third sentence, all examples .. backgrounds of this research, right? So in this sense that was reall relly a big chllenge, I mean even though you are fluent in English, in a second language, your thought process is not reall in English mode. Interview, October 18, 2014).

She felt pained and shocked when she found that her supervisors criticized her work in such a straightforward manner, which was considered impolite in her culture. What she had achieved at her EMI university in Korea, gaining a master's degree and writing a thesis in English, seemed to be suddenly denied at another English-speaking institution in an English-speaking country' It might be then when Yujin's focus shifted from formal knowledge of writing, such as "grammar is perfect' or being fluent in English', to a rhetorical aspect of writing, namely, the audience's thought proces, what she framed as "native-speakers' thought processes".

She tried to overcome her predicament by deliberately changing her ways of thinking in writing to follow \*native-speaker thought processes. She engaged in metacognitive thinking to practise this principl. In her drafting, she constantly referred, mentally, to her ideal form of "native-speaker thought processes". She wrote and then revised at least four times ater an interval of one night or one day. She looked over her text with fresh eyes focusing on its logic and clarity and most importantly the organization of her writing, telling herself, Argue my main idea upfront. While practising this way, she said she reflected on her own thought processes, saying always start talking about examples or existing phenomena first then narrow down my argument I's kind of upside-down, in the opposite way (Interview, October 18, 2014). After two months of experiencing overt criticisms by her supervisors on her writing and struggling to make herself transform her writing into what her native speaker" supervisor wished, then she realized, Yeah, maybe that's [the criticisms] the truth".

As she accepted the rejection of her way of writing and perceived native speakers" criticisms of her writing as \*thetruth, her view on her own culture was reshaped. The juxtaposition of two diffrent rhetorical moves regarding making arguments, which she called "native speaker's thought processes" and \*Konglish, led her to a negative perception of her own culture. She was especiall critical of the English education she had received in her home country. In the interview, she criticized English teaching in her country and the English education policy of the government for just teaching "onglish and not being able to make students "achieve native speaker's standards' (Interview, November 22, 2014).

Through her linguistic and cultural identity negotiation, her genre awareness developed with an intense focus on the reader's perspective, especially those who make a judgement on her writing such as supervisors, thesis reviewers, and article reviewers who were al subsumed as native speakers" in her percetion. The interactions with her native-speaker supervisors semed to shape Yujin's perception of learning to write through social interactions as an oportunity tonegotiate her understanding of \*native-speaker thought processes".

3.2.3. Shaped view and ongoing learning to write: "I should have a little trick ..., right?"

Yujin's shaped perception of a genre focused her attention on her target audienceall through the processof writing, including during the writing conferences. The feedback given to her writing during the writing conferences represented, to her, the variety of views the potential readers of her article would hold, and so could asst her strategic decisions in revising her text. Yujin scrtinized al the feedback she rceived in relation to the urpose of her writig and her target reader, namely article reviewers of a target journal. Who, in her pereption, fllowed ative-speaker thought processes'. Indee, the power of the article reviwer reided in her perceived rhetorical situation. For a strategic reason, she sometimes chose not to adopt the suggestions she received from the group members, even though she agreed with those suggestions, because she thought that article reviewers would preer her original way of writing (Interview, November 22, 2014).

Her group members' research areas varied and were different from hers. She appreciated various feedback from diffrent per. spectives (Interview, November 22, 2014). Her view of the audience of her text was broadened, but her view of the relationship between her text and her primary audience, the gatekeer, firmly remained unchanged. She said, \*so if I relly want t sell my work. Whether it is a thesis or journal artices, I should have a littl trick to convince our potential readers, potential employers, right?" (Interview, November 22, 2014). She concentrated on integrating different feature of her genre-specific knowledge solely to meet the gatekeeper's demands and advance her academic career.

Through the interactions with other multilingual writers in the writing conference group, who were sill in the middle of writing their theses, her view of academic genres and a writing style based on "native-speaker thought proceses" was further strengthened. While reviewing other multilingual students papers, she noticed their writing reflected "non-native-speaker thought processes", and felt relieved, feeling she was not the only one:

If I am the only one, that's gonna be a very big problem, right? Everyone else is thinking in native speakers' way, but I am the only one, just stands out, right? I have no chance to get a job. From my experience of this writing group, I realized that I am not the only one .. I am glad that I realized that I am not the only one. (Interview, November 22, 2014).

The social interactions of writing conferences assured her that her understanding of "native-speaker thought proceses" could continue to shape her perception of new genres she would encounter in her future career.

# 4. Discussion and conclusion

The study explored the perezhivanie of the multilingual doctoral students to investigate the relationships between writers per. ceptions of a genre, their experience of learning to write and their genre knowledge development through social interactions. The research questions the study posed are: How do multilingual writers' experiences shape their perceptions of a genre and their perceptions of learning it through social interactions? How are those shaped perceptions related to their genre knowledge development through social interactions?

With regard to the first research question, the indings highlight the role that multilingual writers inguistic and cultural identity negotiation plays in the interrlationship between their experiences, percetions of a genre and perceptions of learning it through social interactions. Identity is shaped in many ways in relation to the available roles in social interactions and contexts (Holland & Lachicotte, 2007). liot and Yuji's linguistc and cultural identities were negotiated as they engaged in new social relationships in the new institution, which in turn inluenced their perception of a genre and learning to write through social interactions. Their identity negotiation played an integral part in their investment (Darvin & Norton, 2015) in learning to write a thesis, interacting with the perceived benefit of their cultural capital. The influence of a learner's view of hi or her sef in social relationships on their lerning to writ is also suggested in Falconer's (2019) study, which argues for the inluence of social positioning on rhetorical skill development. The findings on the rol of culture support Roose's (2022) study on Chinese intenational students online discussion, which has shown the students' use of their lived cultural experiences for engaging with the text they read and constructing their responses to it.

Eliot and Yujin perceived the academic genres discussed in the writing conferences n a similar way: self-expression that belongs to a foreign culture, "a Western style' or \*native-speaker thought processes." However, their diferent ways of negotiating cultural and linguistic identity led them to diffrent understandins of genre-specific knowledge. Eliot perceived his own cultural" way of writing as a more comfortable way. To Eliot, who lacked confidence in his English ability, this \*Western style" was another knowledge piece of the English language he needed to learn. Yujin, in contrast, negatively asessed her cultural way of writing, a "Konglish" way of writing, and perceived the necessity of a complete departure from it. Yujin, having experienced writing an MA thesis at her EMI institution in Korea, perceived that something more than linguistic knowledge was necessary, which was to her, "native speakers thought processes".

The writers views of their language and culture were also related to their views of genre learning through social interactions. Eliot perceived social interactions as an opportunit to collect formal knowledge. His strategic listening-centred participation during interactions seemed to come from his lack of confidence in English. ujin perceived social interactions as a space to know readers ways of thinking and to experiment with her view of "native-speaker thought proceses." Underlying their diffrent ways of participation was their different sense-making of social interactions for the perceived benefit of their learning, which involved different ways of understanding their language and culture.

Notably, these identity negotiations were inseparable from an ideology in English language teaching, native-speakerism (Holliday,

2006). The findings of this study show problematic native peaker effcts (Doerr, 2009) on multilingual writers' genre learning. The power of "native speakers" and \*native-speakers' culture" that had permeated Eliot and Yujin's life may have led them to see their culture and language within such hierarchical and dichotomized relations as "native" and "non-native" or "East" and \*West" relations. This simplistic way of thinking about academic genres, such as Yujin's \*native speaker thought process" and Eliot's western style" may stop multilingual writers from being aware of more dynamic aspects of genre as social practices which alow fluidity, variation, choice, critique and even innovation (Tardy, 2016).

The implications of the writers' experiences and shaped perceptions lead to the answers to the second research question. The findings suggest the critical role the writer's ideas of rhetorical situations play in the relationships between their shaped perceptions and genre knowledge development through social interactions. Notably, the study highlights the role that writers perceptions of the needs in their perceived environment play in their understandings of rhetorical situations. Eliot was stil at the mid-stage of his candidature, whereas Yujin was at the end of her PhD lif. liot did not perceive the need to depart from his comfortable cultural way of writing. For Eliot, writing a thesis was an activity within the educational context of the university. He focused on formal knowledge to write and fix the text to submit it to his supervisors and panels as if he were writing a course assgnment to submit to the course instructor. For Yujin, in contrast writing a journal article resided in a broader context acrostime and space; her future career plans encouraged her to recognize that she needed to know the proces of understanding undertaken by readers of her article, many of hom would be outside her university in the world of "English-speaking" academia.

The findings of the study offer pedagogical implications regarding social interactions during writing classe or conferences. The interactions during the conferences in this study did not change the writers' perceptions of the academic genres discussed in the writing conferences, nor did they achieve the goal of genre instruction: developing writers sophisticated awareness of rhetorical considerations (Cheng, 2011). However, based on the analysis of the students' perceptions of learning to write through social interactions, the study highlights a key role that writing conferences could play in developing writers thinking about and awareness of a genre, that is providing a space for writers to exchange their views of writing. For Bakhtin (1981), the juxtaposition of different standpoints during dialogic interaction transforms the views of the interactants and enables them to gain new perspectives. In Roose's (2022) study, the writers' negotiation of viewpoints throughout the online discussion with peers enhanced thir writing as a social practice. In the writing confernces of this study, the views were xchangd mainly on the writer'stxt, ut different views on the text from those who had different experiences of diffrent genres did make the writers reflect on their own view of writing. The group members gaveuji fback on her writing fromthe standoin f adence from different fields. In reising her text, she considered these various views and reflected on her use of her genre-specific knowledge such as her knowledge of the publication process and the relationship between her text and article reviewers' expectations. This role of social interactions indicates the benefit of more sophisticated genre awarenessin the exchange of views at writing conferences. If more developed views on the text-social context re. lationships had been presented to Yujin and Eliot, their awareness of the rhetorical contexts of the genre may have evolved and expanded. Eliot may have started exploring genre-specific knowledge with a broadened view of his text purpose; Yujin could have gained a refined view of herself as an author with critical awareness of social context.

Another pedagogical implication is related to the facilitative role that the exploration of individuals' perezhivanie could play in building genre knowledge. Specificall, by exploring students' prezhivanie, the teacher or the facilitator can expect beter outcomes from writing tasks or conferences in class. Beter understanding of students' prior experiences and shaped perceptions of the target genre would promote dialogic interactions that could guide the learner's ways of thinking about what they are learning (Poehner & Infante, 2017). By knowing writers' emerging genre knowledge and how they came to their present understanding through their arious experiences, such as the experience f identity netiation, lingstic idlogies, and power relations, the teacher or facilitator can plan questions to ask or topics to disus to shift students atention todifferent perspectives of the academic geres they discus.

Students can also benefit from exploring the perezhivanie of other writers, specificall through sharing experiences and views of writing with peers or expert writers. During writing conference interactions, for example, eedback needs to be exchanged not only on writers' texts but also on their perceptions of the relationships between text and social context. Writers' perceptions of these re. lationships would be shaped by discussing rhetorical situations, contexts, writing processes and learning-to-write experiences. The teacher or facilitator could invite writrs with various backgrounds and experiences, including more experienced genre users, to join the classor conference to share their views. Experienced genre users sophisticated rhetorical considerations would especially motivate writers to explore and create their text-social context relationships. Multilingual writers would especially benefit from multilingual experienced gere users' learning processes and experiences of various genres, discussing their perceptions of cultural and linguistic identity negotiation, linguistc deologies, and power in scholarly writing. Discussion with peers who are from diffrent disciplines could also be beneficial, providing each learner with the chance to reflect on their relationship with writing in a broader context, juxtaposing their rhetorical situation of writing with others (Mochizuki & Starfield, 2021). An important role that the teacher or the facilitator should play would be tosupport writersin connecting thir reflections to more sophisticated gre awarenes, based on the juxtaposition of different views.

It should be noted that the study has several limitations. The duration of the datacollction was relatively short since the writing groups were run for only one term. Longitudinal studies would allow the investigation of more detail of the relationships between writers' perceptions of a genre, their genre knowledge development and their recontextualization of their knowledge in different rhetorical situations. The findings of this study were drawn from the investigation of a small number of students in a limited context two multilingual doctoral students' learning to write in an Australian university, and the findings may not be generalizable in other contexts.

Despite these imitations, the study offers a new perspective on enhancing genre pedagogies and developing new ones. Specifiall, the study call for more atention to writers past experieces with academic writing in order to rise their present genre awareness and rhetorical consciousness. In developing genre pedagogies, the focus isusually on students' ongoing thinking and awareness as they engage in a current writing activity, such as the use of metacognitive scaffolds (Negretti & McGrath, 2018) in clss or including language play and genre play in academic writing instructions (Tardy, 2021). This study sheds light on students' thinking and awareness when engaging in previous writing activitie before joining a current writig course or program, and shows the benefit of exploring writers perezhivanie in order to expand the potential of genre pedagogies. The study, therefore, proposes a new line of inquiry for writing reearchers and teachers: how a writer has come to percive a genre in a particular way. Further investigation of the perezhivanie of diffrent writers with various inguistic and cultural backgrounds, pursuing degrees at different levels in various contexts, would pave the way to connecting this inquiry to new genre pedagogy.

# Author statement

Naoko Mochizuki: Conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, investigation, resources, data curation, writing (drafting, reviewing, editing)

# Acknowledgements

I sincerely appreciate the JEAP editors and anonymous reviewers for their generous and insightul feedback on earlier versions of this paper.

# References

Atho. 4    . (pp. 3-17). Routledge.   
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays. University of Texas Press.   
Cheng,  207). Transferrin geri fes ad ronxlizg g ares dertandng witing ponce n th e-ad literacy framework. English for Specific Purposes, 26(3), 287-307. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2006.12.002.   
Cheg, 01).   s t s t  t in  n-l  ad t icio. J f  nge Writing, 20(1), 69-82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2010.12.002.   
Cheng, A. (2018). Genre and graduate-level research writing. The University of Michigan Press.   
ari,    015. ty a  mdf i in p tic.  f p stcs 5, 6-56. /10.1017 S0267190514000191.   
da1    309) 4-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2018.05.001.   
Devitt, A. J. (2004). Writing genres. Southern Illinois University Press.   
Dor,  009.tiie a t  mni ker .  . ie concept: Ethnographic investigations of native speaker effects (pp. 15-46). Mouton de Gruyter.   
Dresen-014   it c ig f e  n. Specific Purposes, 34(1), 14-25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2013.10.001.   
ysthe, 0. 002). Poas mr f ac tex : n  std wh r  msters d stens th ies i a Norwegian university. Written Communication, 19(4), 493-544. https:/doi.org/10.1177/074108802238010.   
Faloner, .019.thik  k n nd ik ht  f sin hori skll nt in cice in Communication, 36(1), 9-37. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741088318804819.   
Fce,   .204) it ia k f  , 37-66. https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.20015.   
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures: Selected essays. Basic Books.   
Gentil, G. 2011.  bility gda for  rh. J f Sd n wg 20(1), 623.ht://i./0.1016/jw.2010.1.00.   
Gren, . (2009. tive,  i. d  .), tie of  i ( 239-248. .   
Grimmett, H. (2014). The practice of teachers professional development: A cultural-historrical approach. Sense Publishers.   
Hollnd,  e,  00, , e  l  ofit.el, l .h .), Thri companion to Vygotsky (pp. 101-135). Cambridge University Press.   
Holliday, A. (2006). Native-speakerism. ELT Journal, 60(4), 385-387. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccl030.   
Hyland,   Hld,  006. c n  aa d wig g hig 392) 3101. h/ 10.117/026144806039.   
Kim, M & Ber, . (2018). Buidg gre knde in sond ng witers ring std arod n higher cation. Jol of gis for Aadmic Purposes, 35, 56-69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.06.006.   
Larome,  ker,   ghlin, (200). pingion PhD and  ds to e ofit a wri: n altio  hs writers' circes. Jounal of Universty Teaching and Learning Practice 4(1), 54-63. Retrieved from http/ssrn.com/abstract=2126912.   
Li  h  1th t   t t  . nn Education & Teaching International, 48(2), 195-205. https://doi:10.1080/14703297.2011.564014.   
hki  1).  a  t g  t  o k. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 50, Article 100956. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100956.   
Mok . (2015). wad  drd f pie fr crl  ch  d  r, 2 13-153. / 1.558/t. v2i2.26248.   
eeti,  t    i   in Writing, 40, 12-31. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2017.12.002.   
Paltridge, B., Starfield, S., & Tardy, C. M. (2016). Ethnographic perspectives on academic writing. Oxford University Press.   
Poer, fnte, . 017)dt k apch   g  bii.  Ql, 512, 332-357. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.308.   
Roose, ).  i    f Academic Purposes, 56, Article 101092. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101092.   
ach-Mai  019    iit ie    m  of Writing, 43, 24-35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2018.06.006. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2018.10.002.   
Storch, N. (2002). Patterns of interaction in ESL pair work. Language Learming, 52(1) 119-158. hps://doi.og/10.1111/1467-9922.00179   
Tardy, C. M. (2009). Building genre knowledge. Parlor Press.   
Tardy, C. M. (2016). Beyond convention: Genre innovation in academic writing. University of Michigan Press.   
Tdy .2021).   f pla    in    g 3 il 0. /g/0 1016/j.jslw.2021.100833.   
Tardy, C. M Sommer-Faria, B., & Gers, J (2020). eching and rerchig genre wdge: oward an eanced hretei framework. writen Communication, 37(3), 287-321. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741088320916554.   
Thmas 2006 tie r a qive on i  f o 2, 237-246.//0 1177/1098214005283748.   
Vygotsky, L.S. (1994). The probelm of the environment In R. Van der Veer, & J. Valsiner (Eds.), The Vygotky reader (pp.338-354). Blackwell.   
hu . , 2. i i   ait f    r  iit tr ti OL Quarterly, 46(2), 362-386. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.22.