# BALEAP news - Introduction to SIGs: Meet academic literacies (AL) SIG

Background: Statistical evidence from the National Benchmark Test Data indicates that only one third of the students entering higher education might be able to cope with the academic demands of first year studies (Scholtz, 2016). While academic readiness for higher education can be potentially attributed to various factors, it is the transitional challenges that students have to experience when entering higher education, including culture shock and literacy demands that are often cited as a major reason for poor academic performance (Wong, 2018). An Academic Literacies approach (Lea & Street, 2006) views the process of becoming academically literate as ‘complex, dynamic, nuanced, situated’ (p.369) and takes into consideration the unequal power dynamics at play. Often these dy namics and literacies are ‘hidden’ from students and staff making them difficult to uncover and address (Hubbard et al., 2020). It is therefore essential to work to make visible and develop the academic literacies required by contemporary study in UK Higher Edu cation in order to ease this transition and support teaching and learning at university for all (Bailey et al., 2015).

Rationale: Belonging to an academic community requires an understanding of the culture of that community. However, university culture continues to be experienced along a spectrum of ‘belonging’ or ‘otherness’, with one's position on this spectrum largely dictated by social, economic and cultural factors (Read et al., 2003). An enhanced sense of belonging has been strongly linked with achievement (Pedler et al., 2022) therefore academic literacies development is seen as having a tangible impact on retention, academic outcomes and student satisfaction. Historically, various practices have been adopted to support international students (Jefferies et al., 2018), however, UK/Home students who need academic literacy support due to their diverse cultural, linguistic or education backgrounds are not always identified and therefore may not receive the assistance and support they require (Hillege et al., 2014).

Development: To explore the extent to which academic literacy support can be tailored to address and successfully meet the diverse needs of the whole student body and how such support could be planned/designed/developed and implemented in HE, the Academic Literacies SIG was launched in 2021, with a focus on addressing widening participation, reducing attrition/dropout rates, and working with staff and students to uncover the often hidden literacies and practices required for successful study and making these visible and more accessible to all. This is an education forum for sharing knowledge, ideas, practice, and research on Academic Literacies in which members benefit from actively participating in workshops, clubs, webinars and other activities and events on how to best support students with learning development in HE. Guest speakers are invited to each event presenting their work (either research or reflections on practice) to the membership and space is allowed for members to ask questions and explore aspects of these pre sentations in more detail. Presentations are recorded with the permission of the presenter and shared with the membership via our online communication platform on MS TEAMS.

Events: In 2021–2022, eight events were organised including four theme-based workshops (aligned to the core components of the BALEAP Competency Framework) on student needs, learning development, implementation, and academic practice, and four reading clubs offering opportunities for peer discussion, knowledge transfer and knowledge exchange through sharing thoughts, practices, and experiences. In 2022–2023, four events were organised including two workshops, both on professional identify in EAP and two reading clubs exploring pertinent issues relating to approaches to embedding academic literacies across the disciplines including viability, resilience, and sustainability.

Impact: The SIG has been widely embraced by practitioners working in HE of diverse backgrounds and roles including academic skills advisors, learning developers, academic consultants, university lecturers and professors, language centre/unit directors, and Heads of Teaching and Learning. The SIG currently enrols 140 members from 48 university across the UK and abroad, and is growing, attracting increasing attention from the wider higher education community.

Dissemination/Community Engagement: AL SIG has its own official website, acting as an education forum for sharing knowl edge, ideas, practice, and research on Academic Literacies. The SIG runs its own communication platform on MS TEAMS, which - besides the general channel for news and updates - includes channels on forward planning, research, and collaboration and is active on social media (Twitter and Facebook) through which activities and events are promoted. The Executive Committee meet regularly and work alongside the membership to identify and address needs, adopt, and share effective practice, encourage research and scholarly activity, create opportunities for networking and collaboration, and support on-going learning and continuous professional

development.

Moving forward: AL SIG constantly invites membership to put forward ideas on what they would expect from this forum, ideas for different events, topics of discussion, areas of research, training needs which are then discussed and actioned by the Executive Committee. Listening to and accommodating the needs of our membership is important as it is their suggestions that can help improve and further develop the activities of the SIG. Our experience so far indicates that we need to invest more in promoting this SIG and our work through the social media and the next step would be to create an operational and dissemination plan that would offer an outline of the various events to be held annually and work with members who have already presented their work at our events to produce reports or blogs that the wider higher education community could access and could be used as a guide for practice.

# AL SIG executive committee

Angelos Bakogiannis (Teesside University, UK) - Convenor Stefani Goga (Oxford Brookes University, UK) - Secretary Anthony Flint (Teesside University, UK) - Treasurer Daniela Standen (University of Reading, UK) - Events Coordinator Emily Downes (Teesside University, UK) - Social Media Coordinator

# References

Bailey, A., Zanchetta, M., Velasco, D., et al. (2015). Building a scholar in writing: A model for developing students' critical writing skills. Nurse Education in Practice, 15 (6), 524–529.   
Hillege, S. P., Catterall, J., Beale, B. L., et al. (2014). Discipline matters: Embedding academic literacies into an undergraduate nursing program. Nurse Education in Practice, 14(6), 686–691.   
Hubbard K. Gawthorpe P. Fallin L. & Henri D. Addressing the Hidden Curriculum during transition: the importance of empathy, in T. Hinchcliffe (ed.) The Hidden Curriculum of Higher Education 2020. AdvanceHE. Available at: www.advance-he.ac.uk/knowledge-hub/hidden-curriculum-higher-education (Accessed 14 June, 2023).   
Jefferies, D., McNally, S., Roberts, K., et al. (2018). The importance of academic literacy for undergraduate nursing students and its relationship to future professional clinical practice: A systematic review. Nurse Education Today, 60, 84–91.   
Lea, M. R., & Street, B. V. (2006). The “academic literacies” model: Theory and applications. Theory Into Practice, 45(4), 369–377. https://doi.org/10.1207/ s15430421tip4504_11   
Pedler, M. L., Willis, R., & Nieuwoudt, J. E. (2022). A sense of belonging at university: Student retention, motivation, and enjoyment. Journal of Further and Higher Education, 46(3), 397–408. https://doi.org/10.1080/0309877X.2021.1955844   
Read, B., Archer, L., & Leathwood, C. (2003). Challenging cultures? Student conceptions of ‘belonging’ and ‘isolation’ at a post-1992 university. Studies in Higher Education, 28(3). https://doi.org/10.1080/03075070310000113397   
Scholtz, D. (2016). Improving writing practices of students' academic literacy development. Journal for Language Teaching, 50(2), 37–55.   
Wong, B. (2018). By chance or by plan? The academic success of non-traditional students in higher education. AERA Open, 4(2), 1–14.