# Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages, Inc. (TEsOL)

# Out of tbe Woods: Emerging Traditions in the Teacbing of Writing

ANN RAIMES Hunter College, City University of New York

Twenty-five years ago, writing instruction was characterized by an approach that focused on linguistic and rhetorical form. Since then, we have gone into the woods in search of new approaches, focusing in turn on the writer and the writer's processes, on academic content, and on the reader's expectations. In our search for a new approach, we have come up against some thorny issues, five of which are described in detail: the topics for writing, the issue of "real' writing, the nature of the academic discourse community, contrastive rhetoric, and responding to writing. The difficulty of negotiating our way also makes us susceptible to false trails. The paper ends with a discussion of emerging traditions that reflect shared recognitions rather than provide new methodologies.

Most good fairy tales, at least the ones that delight us and make us or our children beg for more, begin with looking back to "once upon a time." Since the TEsOL organization has now reached its 25th anniversary, this seems a good way to begin looking at the story of how the teaching of writing to adult (secondary and higher education) nonnative speakers of English has developed since 1966; we can follow it up with an account of the thickets and thorny problems we face as we journey into the woods. Despite false trails, we might still, true to the best endings of fairy tales, be able to find a way out of the woods and live happily ever after. But that last is only speculation. Let's begin by looking back at the trails we've followed up to now, keeping in mind that we might not all have met the same witches, wizards, wolves, or good fairies along the way. Readers should be aware that the author of this article has been teaching ESL for more than 25 years, and so her telling of the story is inevitably influenced by the paths she chose to follow.

# ONCE UPON A TIME: WRITING INSTRUCTIONAND RESEARCH 1966--1991

This brief historical survey delineates four approaches to L2 writing instruction that have been evident in the last 25 years. Each approach, at least as it emerges in the literature, has a distinctive focus, highlighting in one case the rhetorical and linguistic form of the text itself; in another, the writer and the cognitive processes used in the act of writing; in another, the content for writing; and in the last, the demands made by the reader. The dates given mark the approximate time when each focus first appeared consistently in our literature; no final dates are given, since all the approaches are still, in varying degrees, subscribed to in theory and certainly in practice.

# Focus on Form, 1966--

Once upon a time, when the TEsOL organization first was founded in 1966, the audiolingual method was the dominant mode of instruction. The view that speech was primary meant that writing served a subservient role: to reinforce oral patterns of the language. So in language instruction, writing took the form of sentence drills-- fill-ins, substitutions, transformations, and completions. The content was supplied. The writing reinforced or tested the accurate application of grammatical rules. In the 1970s, the use of sentence combining (O'Hare, 1973; Pack & Henrichsen, 1980), while still focusing on the manipulation of given sentences and thus, according to Zamel (1980), ignoring "the enormous complexity of writing (p. 89), provided students with the opportunity to explore available syntactic options.

In the early 1970s, too, passages of connected discourse began to be used more often as classroom materials in the teaching of writing. Controlled composition tasks, still widely used today, provide the text and ask the student to manipulate linguistic forms within that text (see, for example, Byrd & Gallingane, 1990; Kunz, 1972; Paulston & Dykstra, 1973). However, the fact that students are using passages of connected discourse does not necessarily guarantee that the students view them as authentic. If the students are concentrating on a grammatical transformation, such as changing verbs from present to past, they "need pay no attention whatever to what the sentences mean or the manner in which they relate to each other"' (Widdowson, 1978, p. 116).

It was not only grammatical form that was emphasized in the 1960s and early 1970s. Concern for rhetorical form was the impetus for Kaplan's influential 1966 article that introduced the concept of contrastive rhetoric. His "doodles article," as he calls it (Kaplan, 1987, p. 9), represents the "thought pattern" of English as "dominantly linear in its development' (Kaplan, 1966, p. 4) in contrast to the paragraph patterns of other languages and cultures. It has led to compensatory exercises that offer training in recognizing and using topic sentences, examples, and illustrations. These exercises often stress imitation of paragraph or essay form, using writing from an outline, paragraph completion, identification of topic and support, and scrambled paragraphs to reorder (see, for example, Kaplan & Shaw, 1983; Reid & Lindstrom, 1985).

Formal considerations are also the basis for a great deal of current L2 writing research. Textual features, such as the number of passives or the number of pronouns, are counted and compared for users of different cultures (Reid, 1990). Researchers examine the structure of such features as introductory paragraphs (Scarcella, 1984), the form of essays in various languages (Eggington, 1987; Hinds, 1987; Tsao, 1983), cohesion and coherence (Connor, 1984; Johns, 1984), and topical structure (Lautamatti, 1987). A large-scale study of written composition across 14 countries established to codify tasks and describe the state of writing instruction has provided a rich data base for cross-cultural discourse analyses (Purves, 1988). (For a summary of text-based research, see Connor, 1990.) A form-dominated approach has the largest body of research to inform and support it; it has been with us for a long time, and lends itself to empirical research design.

# Focus on the Writer 1976--

The 1970s saw the development of more than sentence combining and controlled composition. Influenced by L1 writing research on composing processes (Emig, 1971; Zamel, 1976), teachers and researchers reacted against a form-dominated approach by developing an interest in what L2 writers actually do as they write. New concerns replaced the old. In place of "accuracy"' and "patterns" came"process," "making meaning," invention," and "multiple drafts." The attention to the writer as language learner and creator of text has led to a "process approach," with a new range of classroom tasks characterized by the use of journals (Peyton, 1990; Spack & Sadow, 1983), invention (Spack, 1984), peer collaboration (Bruffee, 1984; Long & Porter, 1985), revision (Hall, 1990), and attention to content before form (Raimes, 1983a; Zamel, 1976, 1982, 1983). Zamel (1983) has recommended that teachers not present instruction in the use of thesis sentences and outlines before the students have begun to explore ideas. In response to theory and research on writers' processes, teachers have begun to allow their students time and opportunity for selecting topics, generating ideas, writing drafts and revisions, and providing feedback. Where linguistic accuracy was formerly emphasized from the start, it is now often downplayed, at least at the beginning of the process, delayed until writers have grappled with ideas and organization. Some practitioners even entirely omit attention to grammar, as in ESL writing textbooks that contain no grammar reference or instructional component (e.g., Benesch & Rorschach, 1989; Cramer, 1985).

Research publications on L2 writing processes grew rapidly in the 1980s to inform and support the new trends in instruction (e.g., Cumming, 1989; Friedlander, 1990; Hall, 1990; Jones, 1982, 1985; Jones & Tetroe, 1987; Raimes, 1985, 1987; Zamel, 1982, 1983; for a summary, see Krapels, 1990). However, although we are beginning to discover much about the writing process, the small number of subjects in case study research limits generalizations, and we are rightly warned that the "lack of comparability across studies impedes the growth of knowledge in the field" (Krapels, 1990, p. 51).

Despite the rapid growth in research and classroom applications in this area, and despite the enthusiastic acceptance of a shift in our discipline to a view of language as communication and to an understanding of the process of learning, teachers did not all strike out along this new path. The radical changes that were called for in instructional approach seemed to provoke a swift reaction, a return to the safety of the well-worn trail where texts and teachers have priority.

# Focus on Content 1986--

Some teachers and theorists, alienated by the enthusiasm with which a process approach was often adopted and promulgated (Horowitz, 1986a), interpreted the focus on the writer's making of personal meaning as an "almost total obsession" (Horowitz, 1986c, p. 788) with "the cognitive relationship between the writer and the writer's internal world" (Swales, 1987, p. 63). Those who perceived the new approach as an obsession inappropriate for academic demands and for the expectations of academic readers shifted their focus from the processes of the writer to content and to the demands of the academy. By 1986, a process approach was being included among "traditional' (Shih, 1986, p. 624) approaches and in its place was proposed what Mohan had already proposed in 1979-- a content-based approach. In content-based instruction, an ESL course might be attached to a content course in the adjunct model (Brinton, Snow, & Wesche, 1989; Snow & Brinton, 1988) or language courses might be grouped with courses in other disciplines (Benesch, 1988). With a content focus, learners are said to get help with "the language of the thinking processes and the structure or shape of content" (Mohan, 1986, p. 18). It is interesting to note here that the content specific to English courses--language, culture, and literature--is largely rejected (see Horowitz, 1990) in favor of the subject matter of the other fields the ESL students are studying.

The research studies that inform this approach include analysis of the rhetorical organization of technical writing (Selinker, ToddTrimble, & Trimble, 1978; Weissberg, 1984), studies of student writing in content areas (Jenkins & Hinds, 1987; Selzer, 1983), and surveys of the content and tasks L2 students can expect to encounter in their academic careers (Bridgeman & Carlson, 1983; Canseco & Byrd, 1989; Horowitz, 1986b). While classroom methodology might take on some of the features of a writer-focused approach, such as prewriting tasks and the opportunity for revision, the main emphasis is on the instructor's determination of what academic content is most appropriate, in order to build whole courses or modules of reading and writing tasks around that content.

This content-based approach has more repercussions on the shape of the curriculum than the two approaches previously described, for here the autonomous ESL class is often replaced by team teaching, linked courses, "topic-centered modules or minicourses," sheltered (i.e.,_"field specific") instruction, and "composition or multiskill English for academic purposes (EAP) courses/tutorials as adjuncts to designated university content courses" (Shih, 1986, p. 632-633). With an autonomous ESL class, a teacher can--and indeed often does--move back and forth among approaches. With ESL attached in the curriculum to a content course, such flexibility is less likely. There is always the danger that institutional changes in course structure will lock us into an approach that we want to modify or abandon.

# Focus on the Reader 1986--

Simultaneously with content-based approaches came another academically oriented approach, English for academic purposes, which focuses on the expectations of academic readers (Horowitz, 1986a, 1986b, 1986c; Reid, 1987, 1989). This approach, in which the ESL teacher runs a theme-based class, not necessarily linked to a content course, is also characterized by its strong opposition to a position within a writer-dominated process approach that favors personal writing. A reader-dominated approach perceives language teaching "as socialization into the academic community-not as humanistic therapy" (Horowitz, 1986c, p. 789).

The audience-dominated approach, focusing on the expectations of readers outside the language classroom, is characterized by the use of terms like academic demands and academic discourse community. Attention to audience was, in fact, first brought to the fore as a feature of the process approach, but the focus was on known readers inside the language classroom, as peers and teachers responded to the ideas in a text. An English for academic purposes approach focuses on the reader, too-not as a specific individual but as the representative of a discourse community, for example, a specific discipline or academia in general. The reader is an initiated expert who represents a faculty audience. This reader, "particularly omniscient" and "all-powerful" (Johns, 1990a, p. 31), is likely to be an abstract representation, a generalized construct, one reified from an examination of academic assignments and texts.

Once the concept of a powerful outside reader is established, it is a short step to generalizing about the forms of writing that a reader will expect, and then an even shorter step to teaching those forms as prescriptive patterns. Recommendations such as the following: "Teachers must gather assignments from across the curriculum, assess the purposes and audience expectations in the assignments, and present them to the class" (Reid, 1987, p. 34) indicate a return to a form-dominated approach, the difference being that now rhetorical forms, rather than grammatical forms, are presented as paradigms.

A reader-dominated approach, like the other approaches, has generated its own body of research: mostly surveys of the expectations and reactions of faculty members (Johns, 1981; Santos, 1988), studies of the expectations of academic readers with regard to genres (Swales, 1990), and identifications of the basic skills of writing transferable across various disciplines (Johns, 1988).

These four approaches are all widely used and by no means discrete and sequential. Certainly the last three appear to operate more on a principle of critical reaction to a previous approach than on cumulative development. In all, our path through the woods of writing instruction is less clearly defined now in 1991 than it was in 1966. Then there was one approach, form-dominated, clearly defined, and relatively easy to follow in the classroom. Now teachers have to consider a variety of approaches, their underlying assumptions, and the practices that each philosophy generates.

Thus, leaving the security of what Clarke and Silberstein call the explicitly mandated reality" (1988, p. 692) of one clear approach, we have gone in search of a new theoretical approach or approaches to L2 writing instruction.

# INTO THE WOODS: THICKETS AND THORNY ISSUES

Once we have left the relative safety of a traditional formdominated approach and set off into the woods in search of new theories, our progress is hampered by many thickets and thorny issues. These we have to confront and negotiate before we can continue our journey. Particularly thorny are five classroomoriented issues that arise in our literature and in teachers' discussions frequently enough to trouble L2 writing instructors, issues that in my more than 25 years of teaching have provided cause for reflection and uncertainty: the topics for writing; the issue of "real" writing; the nature of the academic discourse community; the role of contrastive rhetoric in the writing classroom; and ways of responding to writing. These areas, difficult to negotiate, will be described as discrete items, each posing its own set of problems. A word of caution is in order, though: Readers should not expect to find here miracle solutions or magic charms to lead the way past these thickets and out of the woods.

# The Topics for Writing

One of the major problems teachers face is what students should write about. Topics for writing are an integral part of any writing course, and the four approaches outlined above lead to what can be a bewildering array of topics for teachers. In a form-dominated approach, topics are assigned by the teacher; since the interest is in how sentences and paragraphs are written rather than in what ideas are expressed, each piece of writing serves as a vehicle for practicing and displaying grammatical, syntactic, and rhetorical forms. For this purpose, almost any topic will serve. In a writerdominated approach (usually called a process approach), the students themselves frequently choose the topics, using personal experience to write about what concerns them, or responding to a shared classroom experience, often a piece of expository writing or a work of literature (Spack, 1985). In a content-dominated approach, topics will be drawn from the subject matter of either a particular discipline or a particular course, supplied either by the content teacher when content and writing course are linked in the adjunct model (Snow & Brinton, 1988) or by the language teacher in theme-based EAP courses. And in a reader-dominated approach, the model is one of the writing-across-the-curriculum movement, with language teachers examining what other disciplines assign and training students how to respond to those assignments by "deconstructing" (Johns, 1986a, p. 253) the essay prompt and by following a model of the appropriate form of academic writing.

The problem of whether to teach personal or academic writing has surfaced frequently in recent years (Mlynarczyk, in press) and has no easy solution. Approaches that focus on rhetorical form and on the reader's expectations look to the larger community for guidance. ESL instruction is seen as a service "to prepare students to handle writing assignments in academic courses" (Shih, 1986, p. 617). For EFL students and for international students in the U.S., who will probably only write in English as part of their educational requirement and not at all thereafter, this might be suitable. However, the purposes are different for the many ESL immigrant and refugee nonnative speakers in secondary and college classrooms. This last group, a rapidly growing one, Leki (1990) equates with native speakers of English, who, she says, are "more likely to write for many different contexts in the course of their professional lives" (p. 14). For native speakers--and, by extension, certain large groups of ESL students-Hairston (1991) rejects the idea that writing courses should be "service courses" taught for the benefit of academic disciplines, since "writing courses taught by properly trained teachers do have important content: learning how to use language to express ideas effectively" (p. B1).

# "Real' Writing

A great deal of the recent controversy about the teaching of writing has centered not only around the topics students write about but also around the dichotomy of process and product. Horowitz initiated lengthy debate (see Braine, 1988; Hamp-Lyons, 1986; Horowitz, 1986a, 1986b, 1986c; Liebman-Kleine, 1986; Lyons, 1986; Reid, 1984; Spack, 1988; Zamel, 1983) by questioning the effectiveness of the process approach with its focus on the writer. In particular, Horowitz (1986) criticized what he termed the "cavalier view" (p. 141) of a process proponent (this author) who said at the 1985 TEsOL Convention that examination writing was not "real'" (p. 141) writing. Horowitz is not alone in his complaint. Cited as a major flaw in a process approach is the fact that "the Process Approach fails to give students an accurate picture of university writing"' (Johns, 1990b). The issue of what university writing is and what kind of writing ESL students should be doing is a thorny one, and the use of the term real relates to this issue in practice as well as in theory.

In practice, I and many of my colleagues teach two types of writing in our classes: writing for learning (with prewriting, drafts, revisions, and editing) and writing for display (i.e., examination writing). Our students are aware of the different purposes and different strategies. They recognize that these are distinct. The use of the term real in this context was initiated by Searle (1969), who makes a clear distinction between real questions and exam questions. In real questions, the speaker wants to know the answer; in exam questions, the speaker wants to know if the hearer knows. Similar distinctions can be made with writing. In a writing class, students need to be taught both how to use the process to their advantage as language learners and writers, and also how to produce an acceptable product upon demand. A shortcoming of the debate around these issues is that process and product have been seen as either/or rather than both/and entities. However, while students certainly need to learn how to pass exams, they also need to perceive writing as a tool for learning, a tool that can be useful to them throughout their professional and personal lives.

As evidence of the difficulty of defining authentic writing, it is interesting to note that even Horowitz (1986b) has used the designation real to describe writing. He suggests ways to simulate "the essential characteristics of real university writing assignments" (p. 449) and discusses the context of "a real academic task' [italics added] (p. 459). Here, too, the use of the term real could be questioned. However, we should not assume that the implication is necessarily that the topics and tasks that come from ESL teachers own repertoire are somehow unreal; it is, rather, that Horowitz and others find them less appropriate in certain settings. In any case, the L2 debate provides a great deal of evidence for what Harris (1989) has observed in L1 writing: "One seems asked to defend either the power of the discourse community or the imagination of the individual writer" (p. 2). Obviously, the whole area of the types of writing students are expected to do and the types of writing we should teach is one surrounded by controversy.

# The Nature of the Academic Discourse Community

Frequently cited as important in determining the nature of "real" writing and the topics we should assign are the demands of the 'academic discourse community." These demands provide a set of standards that readers of academic prose, teachers in academic settings, expect. So some L2 writing teachers look to other disciplines to determine their course content, their readings, their models, and their instruction of rhetorical form. One thorny issue here is whether we should put our trust in this community, or whether we shouldn't rather be attempting to influence and change the academic community for the benefit of our students, while teaching our students how to interpret the community values and transform them (for discussion of similar issues, see Auerbach, 1986, 1990; Peirce, 1989).

According to Johns (1990a), teachers who emphasize the conventions of the discourse community will begin with "the rules [italics added] of discourse in the community" (p. 32), since academic faculty "insist that students learn to talk like engineers', for example, surrendering their own language and mode of thought [italics added] to the requirements of the target community (p. 33). The language used here--"rules" and "surrender"--reveals perceptions regarding who exercises power in the community and the value of that power. In contrast, Patricia Bizzell (cited in Enos, 1987) sees the academic community as synonymous with "dominant social classes" and has recommended that we not direct our students towards assimilation but rather find ways to give them "critical distance" on academic cultural literacy, so that eventually "elements from students' native discourse communities can be granted legitimacy in the academic community" (p. vi).

Another thorny problem is whether we view the academic discourse community as benign, open, and beneficial to our students or whether we see discourse communities as powerful and controlling, and, as Giroux (cited in Faigley, 1986) puts it, "often more concerned with ways of excluding new members than with ways of admitting them' (p. 537). These opposing views point to the validity of Berlin's (1988) statement that every pedagogy implies "a set of tacit assumptions about what is real, what is good, what is possible, and how power ought to be distributed" (p. 492). Teaching writing is inherently political, and how we perceive the purposes of writing vis-a-vis the academic community will reflect our political stance.

Reflecting our stance, too, is how we interpret the information that comes to us from members of the academic community. In a survey of 200 faculty members' opinions in response to the question, "Which is more important for success in your classes, a general knowledge of English or a knowledge of English specific to the discipline?", (Johns, 1981, p. 57) most faculty members ranked general English above specific purposes English. This result was interpreted in the following way:

There could be a number of reasons for the general English preferences, the most compelling of which is that most faculty do not understand the nature and breadth of ESP. They tend to think of it as an aspect of the discipline that has to do with vocabulary alone. (p. 54)

The mix of signals perhaps reflects a more generalized ambivalence of TEsOL practitioners: Subject-area faculty are viewed as a valuable resource; however, when they do not support what ESL teachers and researchers expect, it is tempting to discount their perceptions.

A focus on the academic discourse community also raises issues as to whether academic writing is good writing, whether academic discourse "often masks a lack of genuine understanding" (Elbow, 1991, p. 137) of how a principle works, and indeed whether there is a fixed and stable construct of academic writing even in one discipline. Elbow goes so far as to say that we can't teach academic discourse "because there's no such thing to teach" (p. 138). This issue of the nature, requirements, even the existence of, an academic discourse community is a thicket in which we could be entangled for a long time.

# Contrastive Rhetoric

Although it has been 25 years since contrastive rhetoric research was introduced (Kaplan, 1966, Leki, 1991) and the concept is frequently mentioned in discussions of theory and research, its applications to classroom instruction have not developed correspondingly. Published research informs teachers about the different ways in which the written products of other languages are structured (e.g., Eggington, 1987; Hinds, 1987; Tsao, 1983), but the nature of transfer in L2 writing remains under debate (see Mohan & Lo, 1985) and transfer has been found not to be significant in certain types of task, such as paraphrase (Connor & McCagg, 1983). The declared intention of contrastive rhetoric research is, however, "not to provide pedagogic nethod" but rather to provide teachers and students with knowledge about how the links between culture and writing are reflected in written products (Grabe & Kaplan, 1989, p. 271).

Rather than abstracting a principle of the \*linear" development of English prose (Kaplan, 1966) as a pedagogic principle, contrastive rhetoric is more useful as a consciousness-raising device for students; teachers can discuss what they have observed about texts in different cultures and have students discover whether research findings hold true in their experience of their Ll texts.

The thicket that contrastive rhetoric presents for teachers as they wander into the woods of theory is the question of the value of prescribing one form of text-English form-not just as an alternative, but as the one privileged form of text, presented as the most logical and desirable, with which other learned systems interfere. Land and Whitley (1989), in discussing how readers read and judge ESL students' essays, found that nonnative speaker readers could "accommodate to more kinds of rhetorical patterns" (p. 287) than could native-speaker readers. If we are to move away from courses that are "as retributive as they are instructive"' and away from "composition as colonization," we need, they say, to "recognize, value, and foster the alternative rhetorics that the ESL student brings to our language" (p. 286), not treat them only as features that interfere with language learning. Land and Whitley fear that "in teaching Standard Written English rhetorical conventions, we are teaching students to reproduce in a mechanical fashion our preferred vehicle of understanding" (p. 285).

In the same way that multiple "literacies" (Street, 1984) are posed against the idea of one dominant cultural literacy (Hirsch, 1987), so a broad use of contrastive rhetoric as a classroom consciousnessraising tool can point to linguistic variety and rhetorical choices; a narrow use would emphasize only prescriptions aimed at counteracting L1 interference. An extensive research study (Cumming, 1989) of the factors of writing expertise and second-language proficiency of L2 writers revealed in the qualities of their texts and their writing behaviors warns against such a narrow use of contrastive rhetoric: "Pedagogical prescriptions about the interference of learners' mother tongue in second-language performance--espoused in audiolingual methodologies and theories of linguistic transfer or contrastive rhetoric--appear misdirected" (pp. 127-128) since students' L1 is shown to be an important resource rather than a hindrance in decision making in writing.

# Responding to Writing

With a number of approaches to teaching writing to choose from, teachers are faced with a similar variety of ways to respond to students' writing. Since a response on a student's paper is potentially one of the most influential texts in a writing class (Raimes, 1988), teachers are always concerned about the best approach. Some of the options follow, illustrating the variety at our disposal. We can correct errors; code errors; locate errors; indicate the number of errors (see Robb, Ross, & Shortreed, 1986, for a discussion of these); comment on form; make generalized comments about content, e.g., good description"' or "add details' (Fathman & Whalley, 1990, p. 182); make text-specific comments, e.g., "Im wondering here what Carver tells the readers about the children"; ask questions, make suggestions; emote with comments like "Nice!" or "I'm bored' (Lees, 1979, p. 264); praise; ask students to comment on the source of the error (Raimes, 1990); or ask L1 peers to reformulate the students' texts (Cohen, 1983). Given the range of choices, it's hardly surprising that responding is a thorny issue. It is, in fact, so problematic that much of our written response to students' texts is inconsistent, arbitrary, and often contradictory (Zamel, 1985).

In an effort to understand more about teachers' responses, researchers are looking at students' responses to feedback (Cohen, 1987; Cohen & Cavalcanti, 1990; Radecki & Swales, 1988), finding mainly that students simply "make a mental note" of a teacher's response. The fact that little of the research examines activities that occur after the act of responding seems to get at the heart of the problem. If teachers see their response as the end of the interaction, then students will stop there. If, however, the response includes specific directions on what to do next, an "assignment' (Lees, 1979, p. 265), there is a chance for application of principles.

# FALSE TRAILS

The five thorny issues just discussed are ones that trouble teachers and concern theorists and researchers. There are many others, too, rendering our journey into the woods exciting, even hazardous. As teachers read the theories and research and try to figure out what approach to adopt in a writing classroom, they will sometimes confront a false trail that seems to promise a quick way out of the woods, an easy solution. We have seen evidence of false trails in the rise and demise of various methods (Clarke, 1982, 1984; Richards, 1984). Similarly, prescriptions of one approach for our whole profession and all our students can be seen as false trails, too, since they actually lead back to another "explicitly mandated reality" (Clarke & Silberstein, 1988) to replace the mandate of form-focused instruction. Such a prescription in the teaching of writing appears in proposals for the widespread adoption of content-based language teaching as "the dominant approach to teaching ESL at all levels" (Celce-Murcia, 1989, p. 14).

I regard proposals like this as false trails because they perpetuate one of the errors that has been at the heart of many of our thorny problems about writing. That problem, alluded to earlier, is that we tend to discuss ESL/EFL students as if they are one or at the most two groups. Much of the dissension and controversy that has surfaced at conferences and in our literature would, I submit, simply cease to exist if we defined our terms. Our field is too diverse for us to recommend ways of teaching ESL in general. There is no such thing as a generalized ESL student. Before making pedagogical recommendations, we need to determine the following: the type of institution (high school, two-year college, four-year college, research university?) and the ESL student (undergraduate or graduate? freshman or junior? international student [returning to country of origin] or immigrant/refugee? with writing expertise in L1 or not? with what level of language proficiency?) If we are to prescribe content, we need to ask, Whose content? For the nonnative-speaking first-year students in my university, to offer modules of marketing, accounting, and nursing is to depart from the very tradition of a liberal arts education. On the other hand, for very specialized international graduate students, a content approach might be the most appropriate. When Johns and Connor (1989, reported in Leki, 1990) maintain that no such thing as general English exists, they are referring to international students, but immigrant students need general English; that is, they need more than ways to adapt to course requirements for a few years. They need to be able to write in English for the rest of their working and earning lives. They need to learn not only what academia expects but how to forge their place in it, and how to change it. Indeed, on many campuses now, a diverse student body is urging the replacement of the male Eurocentric curriculum model with one emphasizing gender representation and cultural diversity. Adopting a contentbased approach for all ESL students would be succumbing to what I have called "the butler's stance"' (Raimes, in press), one that overvalues service to other disciplines and prescribes content at the expense of writer, reader, and form.

Being lost in the woods might be uncomfortable, but we have to beware of taking an easy path that might, in fact, lead us back to where we started, to a reliance on form and prescription.

# OUT OF THE WOODS: EMERGING TRADITIONS IN THE TEACHING OF WRITING

What is the story now after a 25-year journey, beset by thickets, thorns, and false trails? Are new traditions emerging?

I am reminded of an article I wrote for this journal 8 years ago (Raimes, 1983b), in which I argued that in spite of the thrust towards communicative competence, there had been no real revolution in our field. While there were then signs of some shifts in the assumptions about what we do, we were still enmeshed in tradition but were beginning to raise important questions. At that time Kuhn's (1970) description of a paradigm shift seemed apt for the field of ESL/EFL in general: "the proliferation of competing articulations, the willingness to try anything, the expression of explicit discontent, the recourse to philosophy and to debate over fundamentals" (p. 91). That description seems still to be apt for the teaching of writing, where there is certainly evidence of competition, discontent, and debate, and where now, given the plurality of approaches, designs, and procedures, it seems more appropriate to talk of traditions rather than of one tradition.

If any clear traditions are emerging, they have more to do with recognition of where we are now rather than delineation of exactly where we are going. I see five such emerging traditions of recognition: recognition of the complexity of composing, of student diversity, of learners' processes, of the politics of pedagogy, and of the value of practice as well as theory. I end with a brief discussion of each.

# Recognition of the Complexity of Composing

Despite all the false trails and some theorists' desire to offer one approach as the answer to our problems, what seems to be emerging is a recognition that the complexity of the writing process and the writing context means that when we teach writing we have to balance the four elements of form, the writer, content, and the reader. These are not discrete entities. Rather,

writers are readers as they read their own texts. Readers are writers as they make responses on a written text. Content and subject matter do not exist without language. The form of a text is determined by the interaction of writer, reader, and content. Language inevitably reflects subject matter, the writer, and the writer's view of the reader's background knowledge and expectations. (Raimes, in press)

This complexity may mean that no one single theory of writing can be developed (Johns, 1990a) or it may mean that a variety of theories need to be developed to support and inform diverse approaches (Silva, 1990). In either case, recognition of complexity is a necessary basis for principled model building.

# Recognition of Student Diversity

While there is still a tendency to discuss our field as if it were the easily definable entity it was 25 years ago, there are signs that we are beginning to recognize the diversity of our students and our mission, and to realize that not all approaches and procedures might apply to all ESL/EFL students. Reid (1984) notes this when she reminds Zamel of the differences between advanced students and novice writers, particularly with regard to cognitive development; Horowitz (1990) notes this when he lists the questions that we need to ask about our students before we decide to use literature or any other content. For heterogeneous classes, a "balanced" stance is recommended (Booth, 1963; Raimes, in press), one that presents a governing philosophy but pays attention within that philosophy to all four elements involved in writing: form, writer, content, and reader. The combination of complexity and diversity makes it imperative for us not to seek universal prescriptions, but instead to "strive to validate other, local forms of knowledge about language and teaching" (Pennycook, 1989, p. 613).

# Recognition of Learners' Processes

Amidst all the winding and intersecting paths and false trails, one trail seems to be consistently well marked and well traveled. While there is controversy about what a process approach to teaching writing actually comprises and to what extent it can take academic demands into account, there is widespread acceptance of the notion that language teachers need to know about and to take into account the process of how learners learn a language and how writers produce a written product. Such a notion of process underlies a great deal of current communicative, task-based, and collaborative instruction and curriculum development (Nunan, 1989a, 1989b). Even writing theorists who are identified with content-based and reader-based approaches frequently acknowledge the important role that the writer's processes play in the writing class (Johns, 1986b; Shih, 1986; Swales, 1987). The process approach more than any other seems to be providing unifying theoretical and methodological principles.

# Recognition of the Politics of Pedagogy

Along with the recognition of the complexity of composing and the diversity of our students and their processes has come a more explicitly political understanding: The approach we take to the academic discourse community and the culturally diverse students in our classrooms will inevitably reflect "interested knowledge," which is likely to be "a positivist, progressivist, and patriarchal' view presented as "a method" (Pennycook, 1989, p. 589). All approaches should, therefore, be examined with a set of questions in mind: Who learns to do what? Why? Who benefits? (See

Auerbach, 1986, 1990). Recognizing the power of literacy, we need to ask "what kind of literacy we want to support: literacy to serve which purposes and on behalf of whose interests' (Lunsford, Moglen, & Slevin, 1990, p. 2) and to keep in mind that "to propose a pedagogy is to propose a political vision" (Simon, 1987, p. 371).

# Recognition of the Value of Practice

Both in L1 and in L2 instruction, the power that theory, or method, has held over instruction is being challenged by what Shulman (1987) calls "the wisdom of practice" (p. 11). North (1987) argues that in L1 writing instruction we need to give credit to "practitioners' lore" as well as to research; teachers need to use their knowledge "to argue for the value of what they know and how they come to know it"' (p. 55). Before we heed our theorists and adopt their views, it will help us if we first discover how often they teach writing to ESL students, where they teach it, how they teach it, and who their students are. We need to establish a context. We need to know the environment in which they have developed what Prabhu (1990, p. 172) calls "a teacher's sense of plausibility about teaching, which is the development of a "concept (or theory, or in a more dormant state, pedagogic intuition), of how learning takes place and how teaching causes and supports it." But better than putting the research into a teaching context is for teachers to become researchers themselves. Classroom-based research and action research is increasingly recommended to decrease teachers' reliance on theorists and researchers (Richards & Nunan, 1990). Teachers can keep sight of the forest as well as the trees.

These recognitions characterize our position at the end of our 25- year journey from "once upon a time," journeying into the woods, facing the tangle of thickets and thorny problems to trying to recognize-and avoid-false trails. Our own telling of the story might also include having taken some false trails or having met and vanquished a few big bad wolves in our travels. The fact that we are beginning to emerge from the woods with new recognitions but not a single new approach is perhaps the happiest 1991 ending that we can expect, given the diversity and complexity of our students and of learning and teaching writing. But by the turn of the century, we could well be reading (and writing) a different story.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Many thanks to Kate Parry, Ruth Spack, and Vivian Zamel, who read earlier drafts of this paper and offered perceptive and helpful advice. Thanks also go to the graduate students in my course, Rhetoric and Composition, who steered me away from the idea of using \*Little Red Writing Hood" as a subtitle for this paper.

# THE AUTHOR

Ann Raimes is the author of many articles on writing research, theory, and teaching, and on ESL methodology. Her books include Techniques in Teaching Writing (Oxford University Press, 1983), Exploring Through Writing (St. Martin's Press, 1987), and How English Works: A Grammar Handbook with Readings (St. Martin's Press, 1990). She has taught ESL for more than 25 years.

# REFERENCES

Auerbach, E. R. (1986). Competency-based ESL: One step forward or two steps back? TESOL Quarterly, 20(3), 411-429.   
Auerbach, E. R. (1990). Review of Alien winds: The reeducation of America's Indochinese refugees. TESOL Quarterly, 24(1), 85-91.   
Benesch, S. (Ed.). (1988). Ending remediation: ESL and content in higher education. Washington, DC: TESOL.   
Benesch, S., & Rorschach, B. (1989). Academic writing workshop II. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.   
Berlin, J. A. (1988). Rhetoric and ideology in the writing class. College English, 50(5), 477-494.   
Booth, W. C. (1963). The rhetorical stance. College Composition and Communication, 14(2), 139-145.   
Braine, G. (1988). Comments on Ruth Spack's "Initiating ESL students into the academic discourse community: How far should we go?" TEsOL Quarterly, 22(4), 700-702.   
Bridgeman, B., & Carlson, S. B. (1983). Survey of academic writing tasks required of graduate and undergraduate foreign students (TOEFL Research Rep. No. 15). Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.   
Brinton, D., Snow, M. A., & Wesche, M. (1989). Content-based second language instruction. New York: Newbury House.   
Bruffee, K. (1984). Collaborative learning and the "conversation of mankind." College English, 46(7), 635-652.   
Byrd, D.R. H., & Gallingane, G. (1990). Write away 2. New York: Newbury House.   
Canseco, G., & Byrd, P. (1989). Writing required in graduate courses in business administration. TESOL Quarterly, 23(2), 305-316.   
Celce-Murcia, M. (1989). Models for content-based curricula for ESL. CATESOL Journal, 2(1), 5-16.   
Clarke, M. A. (1982). On bandwagons, tyranny, and common sense. TESOL Quarterly, 16(4), 437-448.   
Clarke, M. A. (1984). On the nature of technique: What do we owe the gurus? TESOL Quarterly, 18(4), 577-594.   
Clarke, M. A., & Silberstein, S. (1988). Problems, prescriptions and paradoxes in second language teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 22(4), 685-700.   
Cohen, A. D. (1983, December). Reformulating compositions. TESOL Newsletter, p. 1, 4-5.   
Cohen, A. D. (1987). Student processing of feedback on their compositions. In A. Wenden & J. Rubin (Eds.), Learner strategies in language learning (pp. 57-68). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.   
Cohen, A. D., & Cavalcanti, M. C. (1990). Feedback on compositions: Teacher and student verbal reports. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 155-177). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Connor, U. (1984). A study of cohesion and coherence in English as a second language students' writing. Papers in Linguistics: International Journal of Human Communication, 17, 301-316.   
Connor, U. M. (1990). Discourse analysis and writing/reading instruction. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 11, 164-180.   
Connor, U., & McCagg, P. (1983). Cross-cultural differences and perceived quality in written paraphrases of English expository prose. Applied Linguistics, 4, 259-268.   
Cramer, N. A. (1985). The writing process: 20 projects for group work. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.   
Cumming, A. (1989). Writing expertise and second language proficiency. Language Learning, 39(1), 81-141.   
Eggington, W. G. (1987). Written academic discourse in Korean: Implications for effective communication. In U. Connor & R. B. Kaplan (Eds.), Writing across languages: Analysis of L2 text (pp. 153-168). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.   
Elbow, P. (1991). Reflections on academic discourse: How it relates to freshmen and colleagues. College English, 53(2), 135-155.   
Emig, J. (1971). The composing processes of twelfth graders. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.   
Enos, T. (1987). A sourcebook for basic writing teachers. New York: Random House.   
Faigley, L. (1986). Competing theories of process: A critique and a proposal. College English, 48(6), 527-542.   
Fathman, A. K., & Whalley, E. (1990). Teacher response to student writing: Focus on form versus content. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 178-190). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Friedlander, A. (1990). Composing in English: Effects of a first language on writing in English as a second language. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 109-125). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Grabe, W., & Kaplan, R. B. (1989). Writing in a second language: Contrastive rhetoric. In D. M. Johnson & D. H. Roen (Eds.), Richness in writing: Empowering ESL students (pp. 263-283). New York: Longman.   
Hairston, M. (1991, January 23). Required writing courses should not focus on politically charged social issues. Chronicle of Higher Education, pp. B1-B3.   
Hall, C. (1990). Managing the complexity of revising across languages. TESOL Quarterly, 24(1), 43-60.   
Hamp-Lyons, L. (1986). No new lamps for old yet, please. TEsOL Quarterly, 20(4), 790-796.   
Harris, J. (1989). The idea of community in the study of writing. College Composition and Communication, 40(1), 11-22.   
Hinds, J. (1987). Reader versus writer responsibility: A new typology. In U. Connor & R. B. Kaplan (Eds.), Writing across languages: Analysis of L2 text (pp. 141-152). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.   
Hirsch, E. D., Jr. (1987). Cultural literacy: What every American needs to know. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.   
Horowitz, D. M. (1986a). Process, not product: Less than meets the eye. TESOL Quarterly, 20(1), 141-144.   
Horowitz, D. M. (1986b). What professors actually require: Academic tasks for the ESL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 20(3), 445-462.   
Horowitz, D. M. (1986c). The author responds to Liebman-Kleine. TESOL Quarterly, 20(4), 788-790.   
Horowitz, D.M. (1990). Fiction and nonfiction in the ESL/EFL classroom: Does the difference make a difference? English for Specific Purposes, 9, 161-168.   
Jenkins, S., & Hinds, J. (1987). Business letter writing: English, French, and Japanese. TESOL Quarterly, 21(2), 327-349.   
Johns, A. M. (1981). Necessary English: A faculty survey. TESOL Quarterly, 15(1), 51-57.   
Johns, A. M. (1984). Textual cohesion and the Chinese speaker of English. Language Learning and Communication, 3, 69-74.   
Johns, A. M. (1986a). Coherence and academic writing: Some definitions and suggestions for teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 20(2), 247-265.   
Johns, A. M. (1986b). The ESL student and the revision process: Some insights from schema theory. Journal of Basic Writing, 5(2), 70-80.   
Johns, A. M. (1988). The discourse communities dilemma: Identifying transferable skills for the academic milieu. English for Specific Purposes, 7, 55-60.   
Johns, A. M. (1990a). L1 composition theories: Implications for developing theories of L2 composition. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 24-36). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Johns, A. M. (1990b, March). Process, literature, and academic realities: Dan Horowitz and beyond. Handout for paper presented at the 24th Annual TEsOL Convention, San Francisco, CA.   
Jones, C. S. (1982). Attention to rhetorical form while composing in a second language. In C. Campbell, V. Flashner, T. Hudson, & J. Lubin (Eds.), Proceedings of the Los Angeles Second Language Research Forum (Vol. 2, pp. 130-143). Los Angeles: University of California, Los Angeles.   
Jones, C.S. (1985). Problems. with monitor use in second language composing. In M. Rose (Ed.), Studies in writer's block and other composing process problems (pp. 96-118). New York: Guilford Press.   
Jones, C. S., & Tetroe, J. (1987). Composing in a second language. In A. Matsuhashi (Ed.), Writing in real time: Modeling production processes (pp. 34-57). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
Kaplan, R. B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education. Language Learning, 16(1), 1-20.   
Kaplan, R. B. (1987). Cultural thought patterns revisited. In U. Connor & R. B. Kaplan (Eds.), Writing across languages: Analysis of L2 text (pp. 9-20). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.   
Kaplan, R. B., & Shaw, P. A. (1983). Exploring academic discourse. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.   
Krapels, A. (1990). An_overview of second language writing process research. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 37-56). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Kuhn, T.S. (1970)."The structure of scientific revolutions (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
Kunz, L. (1972). 26 steps: A course in controlled composition for intermediate and advanced ESL students. New York: Language Innovations.   
Land, R. E., & Whitley, C. (1989). Evaluating second language essays in regular composition classes: Toward a pluralistic U.S. rhetoric. In D. M. Johnson & D. H. Roen (Eds.), Richness in writing: Empowering ESL students (pp. 284-293). New York: Longman.   
Lautamatti, L. (1987). Observations in the development of the topic in simplified discourse. In U. Connor & R. B. Kaplan (Eds.), Writing across languages: Analysis of L2 text (pp. 87-114). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.   
Lees, E. O. (1979). Evaluating student writing. College Composition and Communication, 30(4), 370-374.   
Leki, I. (1990). Potential problems with peer responding in ESL writing classes. CATESOL Journal, 3(1), 5-19.   
Leki, I. (1991). Twenty-five years of contrastive rhetoric: Text analysis and writing pedagogies. TESOL Quarterly, 25(1), 123-143.   
Liebman-Kleine, J. (1986). In defense of _teaching process in ESL composition. TEsOL Quarterly, 20(4), 783-788.   
Long, M. H., & Porter, P. A. (1985). Group work, interlanguage talk, and second language acquisition. TESOL Quarterly, 19(2), 207-228.   
Lunsford, A., Moglen, H., & Slevin, J. (Eds.). (1990). The right to literacy. New York: Modern Language Association.   
Mlynarczyk, R. _(in press). Personal and academic writing: A false dichotomy? TESOL Journal.   
Mohan, B. A. (1979). Relating language teaching and content teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 13(2), 171-182.   
Mohan, B.A. (1986). Language and content. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.   
Mohan, B. A., & Lo, W. A. (1985). Academic writing and Chinese students: Transfer and developmental factors. TEsOL Quarterly, 19(3), 515-534.   
North, S. M. (1987). The making of knowledge in composition: Portrait of an emerging field. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, Heinemann.   
Nunan, D. (1989a). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Nunan, D.(1989b). Toward_a collaborative approach to curriculum development: A case study. TEsOL Quarterly, 23(1), 9-25.   
O'Hare, F. (1973). Sentence combining: Improving student writing without formal grammar instruction. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.   
Pack, A. C., & Henrichsen, L. E. (1980). Sentence combination. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.   
Paulston, C. B., & Dykstra, G. (1973). Controlled composition in English as a second language. New York: Regents.   
Peirce, B. N. (1989). Toward a pedagogy of possibility in the teaching of English internationally: People's English' in South Africa. TESOL Quarterly, 23(3), 401-420.   
Pennycook, A. (1989). The concept of method, interested knowledge, and the politics of language teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 23(4), 589-618.   
Peyton, J. K. (Ed.). (1990). Students and teachers writing together: Perspectives on journal writing. Alexandria, VA: TESOL.   
Prabhu, N. S. (1990). There is no best method--Why? TEsOL Quarterly, 24(2), 161-176.   
Purves, A. C. (Ed.). (1988). Writing across languages and cultures. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.   
Radecki, P. M., & Swales, J. M. (1988). ESL student reaction to written comments on their written work. System, 16, 355-365.   
Raimes, A. (1983a). Anguish as a second language? Remedies for composition teachers. In A. Freedman, I. Pringle, & J. Yalden (Eds.), Learning to, write: First language/second language (pp. 258-272). Harlow, England: Longman.   
Raimes, A. (1983b). Tradition and revolution in ESL teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 17(4), 535-552.   
Raimes, A. (1985). What unskilled ESL students do as they write: A classroom study of composing. TESOL Quarterly, 19(2), 229-258.   
Raimes, A. (1987). Language proficiency, writing ability, and composing strategies: A study of ESL college student writers. Language Learning, 37(3), 439-468.   
Raimes, A. (1988). The texts for teaching writing. In B. K. Das (Ed.), Materials for language learning and teaching (pp. 41-58). Singapore: SEAMEO Regional Language Centre.   
Raimes, A. (1990). How English works: A grammar handbook with readings. (Instructor's Manual). New York: St. Martin's Press.   
Raimes, A. (in press). Instructional balance: From theories to practices in teaching writing. Georgetown University Round Table on Languages and Linguistics 1991.   
Reid, J. (1984). Comments on Vivian Zamel's \*The composing processes of advanced ESL students: Six case studies." TEsOL Quarterly, 18(1), 149-159.   
Reid, J. (1987, April). ESL composition: The expectations of the academic audience. TESOL Newsletter, p. 34.   
Reid, J. (1989). English as a second language composition in higher education: The expectations of the academic audience. In D.M. Johnson & D. H. Roen (Eds.), Richness in writing: Empowering ESL students (pp. 220-234). New York: Longman.   
Reid, J. (1990). Responding to different topic types: A quantitative analysis from a contrastive rhetoric perspective. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 191-210). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Reid, J., & Lindstrom, M. (1985). The process of paragraph writing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.   
Richards, J. C. (1984). The secret life of methods. TEsOL Quarterly, 18(1), 7-23.   
Richards, J. C., & Nunan, D. (Eds.). 1990. Second language teacher education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Robb, T., Ross, S., & Shortreed, 1. (1986). Salience of feedback on error and its effect on EFL writing quality. TEsOL Quarterly, 20(1), 83-93.   
Santos, T. (1988). Professors' reactions to the academic writing of nonnative-speaking students. TESOL Quarterly, 22(1), 69-90.   
Scarcella, R. C. (1984). How writers orient their readers in expository essays: A comparative study of native and nonnative English writers. TESOL Quarterly, 18(4), 671-688.   
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Selinker, L., Todd-Trimble, M., & Trimble, L. (1978). Rhetorical function shifts in EST discourse. TESOL Quarterly, 12(3), 311-320.   
Selzer, J. (1983). The composing processes of an engineer. College Composition and Communication, 34(2), 178-187.   
Shih, M. (1986). Content-based approaches to teaching academic writing. TESOL Quarterly, 20(4), 617-648.   
Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard Educational Review, 57(1), 1-22.   
Silva, T. (1990). Second language composition instruction: Developments, issues, and directions in ESL. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classrom (pp. 11-23). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Simon, R, (1987). Empowerment as a pedagogy of possibility. Language Arts, 64(4), 370-382.   
Snow, M. A., & Brinton, D. M. (1988). The adjunct model of language instruction: An_ideal EAP framework. In S. Benesch (Ed.), Ending remediation: ESL and content in higher education (pp. 33-52). Washington, DC: TESOL.   
Spack, R. (1984). Invention strategies and the ESL college composition student. TESOL Quarterly, 18(4), 649-670.   
Spack, R. (1985). Literature, reading, writing, and ESL: Bridging the gaps. TESOL Quarterly, 19(4), 703-725.   
Spack, R. (1988). Initiating ESL students into the academic discourse community: How far should we go? TESOL Quarterly, 22(1), 29-51.   
Spack, R., & Sadow, C. (1983). Student-teacher working journals in ESL freshman composition. TESOL Quarterly, 17(4), 575-593.   
Street, B. V. (1984). Literacy in theory and practice. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. (1987). Utilizing the literatures in teaching the research paper. TESOL Quarterly, 21(1), 41-68.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.