# The social and cultural life of non-native English speaking international graduate students at a Canadian university

Johanne Myles\*, Liying Cheng Faculty of Education, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada K7L 3N6

# Abstract

It is generally believed that international graduate students have difficulties adapting to a wide range of social and academic situations within the university community. This paper reports on an interview study that addresses the social and cultural life of 12 non-native English speaking (NNES) international graduate students in the following four aspects: (1) relationships with supervisors and instructors; (2) experiences as teaching assistants; (3) communication with colleagues and friends; and (4) social life. Results are illustrated with the students’ own words. The findings indicate that student experiences are varied and the adaptation process depends on both internal and external factors. Many of the students we interviewed seemed very well adapted to the university life despite the fact that they had not made an intentional effort to contact native English speaking (NES) students. These students seemed to have learned about the host culture mostly through a network of students with similar cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Implications of the findings for effective communication in intercultural interactions among NNES and NES students, faculty and staff, and future research on intercultural adaptation are discussed.

$©$ 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Cultural adjustment; International graduate students; Higher education; Intercultural communication and adaptation; Interviews

# 1. Introduction

Research has shown that international non-native English speaking (NNES) students face many difficulties in their adjustment to higher education in English speaking, Western-style universities (Ballard, 1996; Barker, Child, Gallois, Jones, & Callan, 1991; Blue et al., 2000; Boyer & Sedlacek, 1986; Burke & Wyatt-Smith, 1996; Choi, 1997; Huntley, 1993; Lacina, 2002; Ramsey, Barker, & Jones, 1999; Samuelowicz, 1987; Wan, 1992). In general, their main challenge is to become acculturated into a new academic and cultural community. Graduate students, in particular, feel intense pressure to succeed because many of them have scholarships and/or jobs in their native country to which they will return. In addition to language barriers, which can impede effective communication, many of these students have personal challenges, such as finances and family support; psycho-social challenges, such as making new friends, isolation, loss of social status, and understanding the rules that apply in specific social situations; and academic challenges, such as managing their workload and having sufficient academic background in their areas of specialization.

No doubt, academic knowledge, language, and managing the workload (Abel, 2002; Flowerdew & Peacock, 2001; Johns, 1997) are important factors affecting progress; however, the interplay between academic and non-academic demands can broaden our understanding of the cultural, social, intellectual and personal adjustments these students have to make. For instance, studies have shown that there may be a relationship between social contact with the host culture and the social adjustment of international students (Furnham & Bochner, 1982; Zimmermann, 1995), which, in turn, can affect academic achievement (Boyer & Sedlacek, 1986; Westwood & Barker, 1990). Other research has pointed to the fact that establishing strong relationships with other people from a common cultural background can raise self-esteem and consequently affect the personal adjustment of international students in a positive way (Al-Sharideh & Goe, 1998). It is important to examine NNES international students’ perceptions of how they have adapted socially and culturally to university life in and outside the classroom in order to deepen our understanding of some of the concerns of these students as they reflect on their experiences in the academic community.

The purpose of the present study was to address some major features regarding the social and cultural life of 12 NNES international graduate students at a Canadian university through interviews. The interviews were a follow-up to information that had been gathered from a survey administered to a larger sample of graduate students. The questions on the survey had focused on the language skills highly required in their academic studies, and the skills they perceived most difficult to cope with and the strategies they employed to deal with these difficulties. Although during the interviews students elaborated on the topics of language skills and academic progress, different elements pertaining to social and cultural adaptation emerged from the interview data, as follows:

Relationships with supervisors and instructors Experiences as teaching assistants Communication with colleagues and friends, and Social life.

In the interview study, our main intent was to find out what perceptions NNES graduate students have of their social and cultural experiences at the university. Acknowledgment of student needs should lead to better intercultural understanding and communication among the faculty, staff and students within the community, as well as greater social and academic fulfillment. In this way, we can also provide a valid rationale for the implementation or improvement of linguistic, cultural and social support programs for international graduate students separate from or part of English for academic purposes (EAP) or English for specific purposes (ESP) courses (e.g. Blue et al., 2000; Leki & Carson, 1994; Swales, Barks, Osterman, & Simpson, 2001; Tait, 1999). According to Dirven and Putz (1993), and many others (Byrnes, 1991; Hinkel, 1999; Kramsch, 1998; Valdes, 1995), language teachers should concern themselves with the teaching of cultural competence in addition to language, for it is now commonly believed that ‘‘misunderstandings that can occur between people of different cultures may not be reducible exclusively to language difficulties, but may be also attributable to different sets of experiences, different expectations and even profoundly different ways of thinking’’ (Stephens, 1997:123).

# 2. Background and rationale

NNES international students must adapt to a sociocultural system that is different from their own when they pursue their academic studies in an English medium university like the one where we conducted our study. For example, sociocultural constructs or norms characteristic to many English speaking communities include the value of intellectual property, self-reliance, and the right of individuals to refuse a request with which they are not comfortable (Hinkel, 2001). Adaptability can be defined as the capacity for an individual to suspend or change behavior common to his or her native culture, to learn and accommodate some of the new cultural ways, and ultimately ‘‘find ways to manage the dynamics of cultural difference/unfamiliarity, intergroup posture, and the accompanying stress’’ (Kim, 1991: 268). Communication is central to the intercultural adaptation process. Kim (1994) points out ‘‘. . .communication—the process of encoding and decoding verbal and nonverbal information—lies at the heart of cross-cultural adaptation. . .It is only through communication that strangers can come to learn the significant symbols of the host culture, and thereby to organize their own and others’ activities successfully’’ (p. 394). NNES international students’ adaptation is influenced by both environmental conditions, for example, how active the university is in welcoming newcomers, and internal conditions, which include how prepared students are with regard to prior knowledge of the host culture and language, ethnicity and personality (Kim, 1994). In order for communication to take place, these students must have interactional competence in English and they must have the desire to participate appropriately in various social situations with NES students and faculty, and with other international students and faculty. In short, besides developing good writing skills and research strategies (academic literacy), NNES graduate students also need to build solid relationships with their professors, thesis supervisors, peers and others within the social setting of their host environment, and the culture of their academic institutions (Braine, 2002).

A number of studies documenting the perceived academic, cultural and linguistic needs of international graduate students have been carried out in English speaking universities (Blue, 1990; Burke & Wyatt-Smith, 1996; Perrucci & Hu, 1995; Schneider & Fujishima, 1995; Solaiman, 1995; Wan, 1992; Zelmer & Johnson, 1988). Needs assessments and surveys conducted for EAP programs have tended to focus on language skills in relation to the academic demands of various programs only, with relatively little attention to the factors that affect cultural and social adjustments of students to university life (Berman & Cheng, 2001; Ferris & Tagg, 1996; Sun, 1987; Xu, 1991). However, studies initiated by those counseling international students or researchers in the field of cross-cultural communication have revealed the importance of the need for NNES international students to have increased social contact with host NES individuals (Heinkinheimo & Shute, 1986; Quintrell & Westwood, 1994; Sakurako, 2000; Westwood & Barker, 1990). Indeed, the findings from these studies should also impact curriculum developments in EAP programs as well. The fact that misunderstandings can occur due to lack of interactional competence in the social use of language raises a significant concern with regard to how language is learned. Although it is widely believed that language learning results in target culture understanding, language learned in a formal class setting does not necessarily lead to cross-cultural understanding and communicative competence (McMeniman and Evans, 1997). For example, in their interviews with students from Mainland China studying in the United States, Sun and Chen (1997) found that despite their high TOEFL scores, students encountered major problems communicating with Americans academically and socially, dealing with cultural differences and relationships, and adapting to a new academic environment in the process of intercultural adjustment. Furthermore, studies have also shown that NNES students do not always follow the norms of politeness and appropriateness in various speech acts common to their host culture community (Gass & Neu, 1996; Hinkel, 1996; Scollon & Scollon, 2001).

Forming and maintaining friendships, taking the initiative in conversations and a willingness to converse with native speaking students are all important to social adjustment. In their studies of culture shock, Furnham, Bochner, and Lonner (1986) found that social contact with local people and prior foreign experience were the two most important factors involved in the coping process of students in a foreign university. Other studies of communicative competence and intercultural attraction also suggest that talking to native speakers is a prime factor in international students’ perceptions of communication competency (Zimmermann, 1995), and that attitudinal similarity is important in predicting attraction between intercultural partners (Kim, 1991). Again, it is important to be aware of the fact that effective communication involves more than competency in the language. The concept of culturalemotional connectedness, that is, comfort level, sharing a similar communication style, mutual interests and sense of humor, is crucial to successful interactions (Volet & Ang, 1998). Understanding cultural norms, relationships among people, and nonverbal behavior, come into play as well.

Although academic studies seem to dominate the lives of many NNES international students, research has also shown that these students have a desire for more social contact with native speakers (Blue, 1990). Certainly, providing opportunities for interaction and social contact is invaluable to the adaptation process. Peer-pairing programs and buddy systems with NES students have been very successful in that they not only lower drop out rates for international students, but they also accrue social and educational benefits to the host NES students, faculty and staff as well as financial benefits for the universities (Westwood & Barker, 1990). This process also contributes to the internationalization of higher education and increased diversity (Bond & Bowry, 2002).

# 3. Methodology

Exploring students’ beliefs, perceptions and feelings about their social and cultural experiences is critical for understanding how NNES international graduate students go about learning to adapt to the new culture and the impact of contextual factors on their behaviors. Our study was conducted at a small Canadian university—one of Canada’s most prestigious and competitive universities (Exclusive Rankings: The University Crunch, 2002). In 2001/2002, about 14,000 full-time students were enrolled in the undergraduate program, and more than 2,000 were enrolled in the graduate program in 43 departments. International graduate students accounted for about $1 5 \%$ of the graduate population—almost all are NNES with a few exceptions from other English speaking countries. Graduate students were chosen for this study so that we could pinpoint the issues of this particular group who had already had some years experience working in their own countries and were mature in their linguistic, social and cultural development.

After we had obtained data from a larger survey study, we chose an interview format as our method of exploration to tap into the experiences and perceptions of some of these students in detail. We adopted Patton’s categories as the general interview guide, as opposed to the informal conversational interview or the standardized open-ended interview (Patton, 1990). The interview guide was developed before the interview took place, and the issues were discussed at various times in the conversation. Like a checklist, the guide ensures that all relevant topics are covered for each respondent (LeCompte & Preissle, 1993: 169) rather than on a case-to-case basis. The questions, then, served as guidelines for what became open-ended conversations, which also allowed us to explore ideas and angles not anticipated in the original planning of the guide.

Twelve interviews were conducted in an informal setting and were audiotaped with the students’ consent. There were six males and six females including five Chinese (Mandarin speakers), one East Indian (Hindi), and six Europeans (two Bulgarians, two Romanians, one Polish, and one Greek). Among them, nine were working on master’s degrees and three were working on their doctoral degrees. Four of them were in engineering, three from social sciences, one from urban and regional planning, and the other four from sciences. Most of them had been in Canada for $1 -$ 3 years at the time of the research. The interviews ranged from one hour to one and a half hours in length. The students were invited to reflect on their academic and social experiences within the local community. The interviews were transcribed verbatim and then categorized according to four emerging and recurring patterns and themes from the data analysis. They are (1) relationships with supervisors and professors; (2) experiences as teaching assistants; (3) communication with colleagues and friends, and (4) social life.

# 4. Results and discussion

# 4.1. Relationships with supervisors and professors

Research has shown that close advisor/student collaboration using an apprenticeship approach to learning can lead to positive outcomes for NNES graduate students when it comes to communication, academic literacy, and thesis writing (Belcher, 1994). Overall, the graduate students we interviewed stated that they communicated well with their supervisors and instructors. They had no difficulty going to their supervisors for help or requesting explanations. They also welcomed any editing of written work that their supervisors would do for them. When they met with their supervisors, they started to work immediately. A female student from China comments:

If I talk with my supervisor, we just concentrate on what I am doing. And my supervisor and me, we understand very quickly.

On the other hand, there was some feeling that professors needed to be more culturally sensitive and more aware of what they were saying considering the number of international students in the courses. A female student from Taiwan felt strongly about the lack of an international focus in her courses:

Like if you want to teach, you need to know your students, right. And nowadays your students come from all over the world so should all the content they teach. Does it have different point of views? Do they point out their cultural bias or do they point out their conceptual baggage? Like okay, I’m talking about this, but I didn’t cover other things and the jokes they make or just the way they talk. Like one Prof., it’s a joke among international students here and he says,‘‘ I went to the conference. We have planners from all over the world, Los Angeles, Vancouver, Toronto, Chicago, New York.’’ Actually all the cities he mentioned are U.S. and Canada. That’s all over the world to them already.

It has become essential for faculty to make a conscious effort to learn about students’ cultures and cultural differences in order to become more aware of their own ethnocentric behavior. According to Bennett (1993), if we do not recognize cultural differences, we assume that students from other cultures are just like us. As a result, we begin to judge individuals from other cultures by our own cultural norms, behaviors, and values. These sorts of judgments can lead to misunderstandings and potentially insulting remarks and behavior. In order for faculty to develop more intercultural sensitivity, it has been suggested that there be programs or workshops on developing intercultural understanding. For a campus to truly internationalize, faculty, staff and students must all be committed to promoting cultural understanding, fostering tolerance of diversity, and infusing an intercultural perspective into the curriculum through discovering alternative ways of thinking (Mestenhauser & Ellingboe, 1998).

Knowing how to address a professor can be difficult in Western cultures. There is a great deal of informality, but rules and professional protocol are not written in stone or practiced consistently. Some professors may want to be called by their first name, while others would prefer to be addressed more formally. The lack of specific etiquette for approaching a supervisor can be puzzling to students who are used to more formality in their home culture. In addition, students from collectivist societies like those particular to Asia are very aware of status differences. Students from cultures with high levels of power distance tend to accept the power of superiors as a basic feature of their relationship (Hofstede, 1996). A student from India assumes that calling professors by their first name is a sign of friendship in Canada. However, this may or may not be the case. He commented:

Culture is different. We respect teachers a lot in my culture so I always. . .at first I felt so confused. I just don’t feel good to call them David or. . .I don’t feel good to call them by their first names.. . .You need to think every time which term I need to use to call them. The relationship between teacher and student is different here. It’s more like friendship here.

The informal, friendly behavior of a supervisor or professor toward his or her student can be disorienting to a student who is more comfortable keeping a professional distance. Generally adjustments are made on both sides but a student might not be aware of the limits or boundaries to what can or cannot be expressed.

Communication with faculty and the fostering of trusting, collaborative relationships with professors and supervisors are central to the adaptation process for NNES graduate students, as they are for all students, NNES or NES. However, studies have reported that these needs are often felt more strongly by international students, particularly when it comes to writing papers and working on their dissertation (Dong, 1998; Perrucci & Hu, 1995). For example, the same student from Taiwan felt that it was unfair of her professor to say that she had a language problem, which in her mind had more to do with the use of colloquial vocabulary than writing academic papers. Her difficulties became apparent when she had to create a questionnaire for a research project:

Designing a questionnaire you need to use common language which is actually more difficult for me compared to writing an academic article because I think writing you can just copy other similar kinds of writing.. . .But when you use common language it’s just very difficult. It’s also a cultural thing, you don’t know what thought flow. . .it is more difficult than academic things. I would be upset if they [professors] always say I have language problems. I don’t like people saying I have language problems because I don’t think I have any language problem. It’s like excuse for them to have more extension on your papers, not be too hard on your papers. But I don’t think it’s really a language problem. Mostly it’s communication problem. Like they don’t know okay that you are non-native speaker so you will have more difficulty in designing questionnaires instead of writing a paper. Like, my professor asks me whether I write the paper by myself because he thinks my questionnaire kind of not flow. . .but totally I can write a paper better than designing a questionnaire he wants so it’s kind of a communication problem.

The student appeared to resent the fact that her professor was querying her language ability after he noticed the mistakes she had with the word choices on her questionnaire. She also wanted to be evaluated according to the same standards as native speakers and not be singled out as being ‘special’. Contrary to much research in which Asian students cite inadequate English as the reason for their difficulties in academic performance (Ballard, 1996; Barker et al., 1991; Sun & Chen, 1997), in this circumstance, this student was defending her language ability, which she felt was adequate academically. Instead of language being the problem, she attributed her difficulties to lack of understanding in the use of common language and miscommunication between her and her professor. Granted, there are many issues at play here—how NES professors perceive the English language abilities of their international students; how these students perceive their own language skills and how reliable those perceptions are; and how we define ‘‘language problems’’ and ‘‘communication problems’’, and discussion of all these issues is beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, this incident supports the notion that professors need to examine their own assumptions and expectations of language and difference and how their attitudes may serve to ‘‘exoticize’’ NNES students in the academy (Zamel, 1998).

# 4.2. Experiences as teaching assistants

Many NNES international graduate students become teaching assistants (TAs), also referred to as International Teaching Assistants in the literature (ITAs) and research assistants (RAs), to gain some teaching and research experience in their field and supplement their study expenses. Issues related to the language needs, cross-cultural communication, and pedagogy of ITAs in particular are well documented (Madden & Myers, 1994). The perceptions of native English speaking undergraduate students taught by international teaching assistants have revealed that students generally prefer ITAs who use interactive and interpersonal teaching behaviors, and who talk openly about their native cultures (Gayle, 1990). If students have difficulties and are feeling pressured by the work in required courses, they are reluctant to go to their ITAs for help if those TAs have different cultural and pedagogical expectations (Plakans, 1997). Although many universities offer training sessions and workshops for ITAs, intercultural sensitization for or from undergraduates should also complement this training. It has also been found that undergraduates who have had previous contact with people from other cultures are more positive about the NNES instructor’s messages (Ma, 1993).

In our interviews, we found that one of the main concerns for ITAs was their oral proficiency, especially pronunciation. A male graduate student from Romania told us that when students do not understand something it is more likely to be due to his English than to the content of his presentation:

It’s my English all the time. This summer I TA in a big lab together with one of my colleagues and we decided that one day she would present in front of all the students some hints about the lab, some thing they have to be careful. And one day I will present my first presentation in front of the students. . .and I supposed to say swirl, swirling, and I was saying, I said squirrel. They all start laughing and okay since then I remember it’s swirl, not squirrel.

However, if they are conscious about their pronunciation and are not getting the message across due to pronunciation problems, most ITAs will find teaching strategies to help them in their instruction. These include more use of overheads, boardwork, and getting those students who do not understand the ITA’s presentation to repeat the instructions or concepts to the class. Being open to suggestions, having flexible instructional approaches, and a sense of humor are also real assets. Many ITAs also expressed the desire that if given the time, they would value the opportunity to attend pronunciation classes.

It is important for ITAs to learn from mistakes and not feel embarrassed about mispronouncing words. If they exhibit a relaxed, friendly, yet professional attitude, native speaking undergraduate students will perhaps be more compassionate and helpful.

It is interesting to note that not all undergraduate students are native speakers of English and ITAs may find themselves presenting material to a class consisting of NNES students from a variety of cultural backgrounds. A female student from Bulgaria had already had considerable teaching experience in her native country and so had no difficulty with presenting information; however, she noticed that Chinese students, in particular, were having difficulties comprehending the English in the manual:

I did TA this year and the good thing was I have no basic problem with the material, how to TA and so so. I survive very well. I just had a problem with the Chinese students. I just don’t understand their problem at all. They have been reading. I have been explaining and we have been speaking a completely different language. Their questions were not the material, the physics material. Most questions have been language questions. . .What was written in the manual, in the book, what does it mean. Just to explain them because they read but they do not understand.

She felt that the Chinese students could understand her English very well and she had been making an effort to work with these students. She commented that they continued to see her for more consultations and more information, even after her tutorship was over. Perhaps the students felt more comfortable going to her for help rather than to native English speakers because she was a fellow international student and could, according to their perceptions, identify with their difficulties.

In addition to oral communication and presentation skills, differences in teaching styles, expectations, and communication skills affect the way the students, faculty, and the ITAs perceive classroom practice (Jenkins, 2000). A male student from India was very concerned about the cultural barriers that existed between him and his students because the learning environment was so much more informal than he was used to. Although he felt confident in his instruction, he was not comfortable socializing with students. He was conscious of the rigidity of his style that seemed incongruent with the relaxed atmosphere and apparently lackadaisical manner in which the students were working:

I cannot feel as comfortable among white students as you know I would feel among non-white students because you know there are some communication barriers, some cultural barriers. . .Like a white TA would joke around and kind of you know make environment more informal but that was kind of beyond me. I would strictly stick to the delivery of the information and the concepts of the subject, right, just like a lecturer. . .but I won’t interact with the students that much informally. The education environment in India is so formal and here it is so informal. Like you know in India you cannot bring any food, any drinks in the class and in here I see people dozing and sleeping in the front room while the instructor is teaching. They keep their legs on the table and all that kind of stuff is not allowed in Indian universities or schools. It is strictly formal. . .so I think it is very difficult for me to adjust to this environment but it does not affect my duties and my responsibilities. I still teach them except I don’t mingle or socialize with my students.

It is not clear whether this ITA felt he was under some kind of obligation to engage in small talk and mingle with the students. Perhaps he had observed native English speaking teaching assistants socializing with their students. Certainly, styles and approaches to teaching will indeed vary among host nationals, and understanding these socio-cultural rules can be challenging to newcomers. The ITA from India seemed to feel most comfortable teaching in the manner to which he was accustomed. He would do his job responsibly, but keep a social distance from the students.

# 4.3. Communication with colleagues and friends

The students we interviewed felt they had no difficulties communicating with NES colleagues and friends (the term ‘‘friends’’ here may well suggest more like ‘‘acquaintances’’). However, they did feel frustrated communicating in English with other international students. A male student from China said that he could not understand their accents:

They [international students from other countries] don’t speak English well either, so I don’t bother. We just work. Often they ask me questions I don’t understand.

Some students expressed that they felt frustrated interacting with other NNES students who were constantly speaking their native language. A female student from Poland commented that:

It’s harder for me to understand foreign speakers. Sometimes I have to focus. Some international students, their English is weak. So they end up working and talking in their language and explain their techniques to each other and no one else knows what they are doing and cannot really communicate well with them.

If a NNES student is of an ethnic minority that has a large representation on campus and a strong subculture, he or she is very likely to feel drawn to membership in that group. As a result, active participation in the host culture’s social communication activities may be discouraged and limited (Kim, 1994), and the student may be perceived by host nationals and other students as anti-social for speaking his or her native language and socializing with members of his or her own group most of the time.

Some students are somewhat more understanding of cultural and linguistic differences among classmates, and if there is some miscommunication due to language ability, they will find ways to make communication easier. A female student from Bulgaria said she had no problem communicating with native speakers, but had trouble understanding a colleague from Japan. To alleviate this problem, the student from Japan was asked to express herself in writing so that everyone could understand:

Colleagues from here [Canada], and I don’t have language problems with them at all, but we do have a colleague from Japan. She is doing her Ph.D. research and our communication with her is all the time a problem because her listening is very poor. She is, she could write everything correctly. Sometimes one of my colleagues just asks her to write, and he just read. Because he is from China and he could read Japanese. She writes in Japanese and English and then no problems with the comprehension.

# 4.4. Social life

In our study, the social lives of students varied depending whether they had family responsibilities or were single people living alone or in shared accommodation. Married students with children mentioned that they had very little time for socializing as most of their free time was spent at home with their family. They were more likely to meet other families through schools, community and religious organizations. Some students intentionally make friends with Canadians in order to improve their English and become better acquainted with the culture. They are more eager to participate in social events and meet new people. Their personality may be such that they exhibit an openness and receptiveness to new situations and the strength and resiliency to absorb the ‘‘shocks’’ from the environment (Kim, 1994). Some students live in a shared house with other students from the same linguistic and cultural background. As a result, they do very little socializing with host nationals and much of their emotional support comes from their group. Many NNES students feel more comfortable spending their leisure time with students from similar ethnic backgrounds or with other ‘‘outsiders.’’ A female student from Taiwan felt that Canadians were very nice, but:

You always feel you are still an outsider. Because my circle, my friends, I found mainly because of similar experiences as a newcomer, people get together more easily rather than native speakers.

The ‘‘outsider’’ status was also mentioned by a male student from India because he felt uncomfortable doing the things that Canadians liked to do:

I don’t feel very comfortable when I go to parties or barbeques. I can speak English, but I cannot speak their way, so I cannot just mingle with them very comfortably. I am vegetarian. I am from a different country, a different culture, so they do understand [why I don’t go to their parties].

A male student from Bulgaria concurred with this feeling and seemed to accept the fact that people are different and so he preferred to socialize with his own ethnic group:

I don’t really have Canadian friends. I am having trouble like getting close to Canadians. Maybe it’s the culture. I have a couple of international student friends. They have an eastern European background. It’s just that people are different.

Students feel like outsiders so they do not participate in social activities with host nationals. Indeed, people are different and asking them to transcend traditional ethnocentrism and to explore new relationships across cultural boundaries may be asking for behavior that is not ‘‘natural’’ (Bennett, 1993). People join others in social situations when they have things in common. Their mutual interests, preferences and attitudes will drive the conversation. However, there is much in the literature which suggests that international students who spend most of their leisure time with host nationals have fewer problems with cultural, academic and social adjustments at the university (Heinkinheimo & Shute, 1986; Schram & Lauver, 1988; Surdam & Collins, 1984). If they want to feel more like ‘‘insiders’’, they need to participate in a host cultural milieu in order to acquire new cultural knowledge, cultivate greater emotional and aesthetic sensitivity and expand the range of their behavioral repertoire (Kim, 1994).

# 5. Conclusion

Interviews with NNES graduate students help us to get an in-depth understanding of how they adapt to the social and cultural life of the university, which cannot be entirely revealed in survey studies. Although the sample was relatively small, there was good mix of male and female graduate students from Asia and Europe. The semi-structured format of the interviews allowed students to talk freely and openly about their experiences and perceptions of life on campus.

The results of this study suggest that NNES graduate student experiences are varied and the adaptation process depends on a mixture of external and internal factors. Contrary to the belief that social adjustment is facilitated through increased contact with the host culture, many of the students we interviewed seemed relatively well adjusted to university life, despite the fact that they had not made an intentional effort to contact native speaking students. These students seemed to learn about the local culture through their own network of international students with similar cultural and linguistic backgrounds (Al-Sharideh & Goe, 1998). In a way, although it appears easier for students to learn about the host culture from their own native language peers, this support can sometimes result in cultural stereotyping in both directions. Based on their interviews with local and international students, Volet and Ang (1998) conclude that cultural distance is a factor influencing the mixing of students in multicultural settings. From the students’ perspective, the reasons for the lack of interaction are ‘‘a group of peers from the same background provides psychological emotional support; helps develop and maintain a sense of identity; makes communication easier; and enables group members to use well-rehearsed, common-study strategies’’ (Volet & Ang, 1998:39). However, if cultural mixing does not take place, students will miss out on critical learning opportunities that can ease the process of adaptation. We would like to emphasize that intercultural contact, and the social cohesion that can result from such contact, should be formally structured into student life. In fact, in order to provide a social context that will help facilitate the personal adjustment of NNES graduate students to university life, programs can be designed to foster the establishment of relationships among a combination of both international students of similar cultural background and host nationals (Al-Sharideh & Goe, 1998). Cultural orientation sessions and workshops that specifically focus on strategies for achieving intercultural competence among international and host students as well as among faculty and staff should also complement the opportunities for intercultural mixing. Intercultural contact and effective communication among different cultures can only be achieved if everyone in the academic community is prepared to make it work.

One way of preparing students for life in a new culture is to include intercultural elements in EAP or bridging programs through courses designated such as ‘‘Adapting to the Cultural and Social Life of the University’’ or ‘‘Intercultural Communication Skills.’’ Dunnet, Dubin, and Lezberg (1995) describe a program which includes participation by American students who act as student-facilitators. Both the international students and the American students work together in groups to discuss broad intercultural themes such as ‘‘Gestures and Non-Verbal Communication.’’ For students intending to pursue graduate studies, more specific topics could include ‘‘Interacting with your Supervisor and Fellow Classmates.’’ Problem solving using case studies and critical incidents referred to as ‘‘culture assimilator’’ (Seelye, 1988), and role plays whereby students take on the parts of typical members of host cultures are also effective instructional methods. Since graduate programs often attract candidates from a variety of cultures, students can also be made aware of the fact that they are most likely entering a multicultural environment, where communicating with NNES and NES students and professors from a variety of cultures and language backgrounds is the norm and not the exception. Addressing issues of stereotyping and discrimination is essential in discussions and activities centering upon culture-related themes. Unfortunately, students may feel that time spent addressing cultural issues is wasted compared to practice in language skills, particularly writing; however, the intercultural component of the EAP program could be presented in a way that is stimulating and inviting. Another drawback is that most of the EAP programs in Canada tend to offer courses to only non-native English speaking students. No doubt, if students have the opportunity to practice their speaking skills with native English speaking students, they might change their mind with regard to the value of such a course. These suggestions are in no way intended to be ‘assimilationist’ in their ideology; on the contrary, we would strongly advocate that it is time for the university to address issues of diversity in its policy making and think more deeply about how the institution can change its existing practices to more effectively accommodate difference.

Future research is needed to find out more about how groups of NNES international graduate students interact with each other. In our study, understanding the English spoken by different ethnic groups was perceived to be more of a problem than communicating with native speakers. Examining the impact of oral interactional competence on social relationships not only with local students, but also with other international students would be valuable. In addition, research in this area has most often looked at NNES students across the curriculum and generalizations have been made about their linguistic and/or cultural needs and academic success. It would be useful to investigate the adaptation process of groups of students within particular faculties, as the academic demands of the programs will be different. For example, the responsibilities of a TA in engineering might be totally different from a TA in sociology. It would also be interesting to study how student perceptions of cultural distance change over a period of time and what produces such a change, not only for NNES students, but local NES students, faculty and staff as well.

# Acknowledgements

We acknowledge the contribution of funding from SSHRC through Queen’s University’s internal PDF/ARC funding program. We would like to thank Jun Qian for her significant contribution in the data collection and analysis of this study. We also would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback, and Andy Curtis, School of English, Queen’s University for his contribution to the final version of the paper.

# References

Abel, C. (2002). Academic success and the international student: research and recommendations. New Directions for Higher Education, 117, 13–20.

Al-Sharideh, K., & Goe, R. (1998). Ethnic communities within the university: an examination of factors influencing the personal adjustment of international students. Research in Higher Education, 39, 699– 725.   
Ballard, B. (1996). Through language to learning: preparing overseas students for study in Western universities. In H. Coleman (Ed.), Society and the language classroom (pp. 148–169). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Barker, M., Child, C., Gallois, C., Jones, E., & Callan, V. (1991). Difficulties of overseas students in social and academic situations. Australian Journal of Psychology, 43, 79–84.   
Belcher, D. (1994). The apprenticeship approach to advanced academic literacy: graduate students and their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 23–24.   
Bennett, M. (1993). Towards ethnorelativism: a developmental model of intercultural sensitivity. In R. Paige (Ed.), Education for the intercultural experience (pp. 21–71). Yarmouth ME: Intercultural Press.   
Berman, R., & Cheng, L. (2001). English academic language skills: perceived difficulties by undergraduate and graduate students, and their academic achievement. Canadian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 4, 25– 40.   
Blue, G. (1990). Language learning within academic constraints. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 390298).   
Blue, G., Milton, J., & Saville, J. (Eds.). (2000). Assessing English for academic purposes. Bern, Germany: Peter Lang.   
Bond, S., & Bowry, C. (Eds.). (2002). Connections & complexities: the internationalization of higher education in Canada (Occasional Papers in Higher Education 11). Winnipeg, Canada: The University of Manitoba, Centre for Research and Development in Higher Education.   
Boyer, S., & Sedlacek, W. (1986). Attitudes and perceptions of incoming international students. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED278935).   
Braine, G. (2002). Academic literacy and the nonnative speaker graduate student. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1, 59–68.   
Burke, E., & Wyatt-Smith, C. (1996). Academic and non-academic difficulties: perceptions of graduate non-English speaking background students [electronic database] TESL–EJ, 2. Available at: http:// www-writing.berkeley.edu/TESL-EJ/ej05/al.html..   
Byrnes, H. (1991). Reflections on the development of cross-cultural communicative competence in the foreign language classroom. In B. Freed (Ed.), Foreign language acquisition research and the classroom (pp. 205–218). Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath and Company.   
Choi, M. (1997). Korean students in Australian universities: intercultural issues. Higher Education Research and Development, 16, 263–281.   
Dirven, R., & Putz, M. (1993). Intercultural communication. Language Teaching, 26, 144–156.   
Dong, Y. (1998). Non-native graduate students’ thesis/dissertation writing in science: self-reports by students and their advisors from two US institutions. English for Specific Purposes, 17, 369–390.   
Dunnett, S., Dubin, F., & Lezberg, A. (1995). English language teaching from an intercultural perspective. In J. Valdes (Ed.), Culture bound (pp. 148–161). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Exclusive Rankings: The University Crunch. (2002, November 18). Maclean’s Magazine. (Special Edition).   
Ferris, D., & Tagg, T. (1996). Academic oral communication needs of EAP learners: what subject-matter instructors actually require. TESOL Quarterly, 28, 673–703.   
Flowerdew, J., & Peacock, M. (2001). Research perspectives on English for academic purposes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Furnham, A., & Bochner, S. (1982). Social difficulty in a foreign culture: an empirical analysis of culture shock. In S. Bochner (Ed.), Cultures in contact: studies in cross-cultural interaction (pp. 161–198). New York: Pergamon Press.   
Furnham, A., Bochner, S., & Lonner, W. (1986). Culture shock: psychological reactions to unfamiliar environments. London: Methuen.   
Gass, S., & Neu, J. (1996). Speech acts across cultures: challenges to communication in a second language. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Gayle, L. (1990). International teaching assistants: a review of research. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED321535).   
Heikinheimo, P., & Shute, J. (1986). The adaptation of foreign students: student views and institutional implications. Journal of College Student Personnel, 27, 399–406.   
Hinkel, E. (1996). When in Rome: evaluations of L2 pragmalinguistic behaviors. Journal of Pragmatics, 26, 51–70.   
Hinkel, E. (1999). Culture in second language teaching and learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Hinkel, E. (2001). Building awareness and practical skills to facilitate cross-cultural communication. In M. Celce-Murcia (Ed.), Teaching English as a second or foreign language (3rd ed.) (pp. 443–458). Scarborough, Ontario: Heinle & Heinle, Nelson/Thomson Learning.   
Hofstede, G. (1996). Cultures and organizations: software of the mind (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.   
Huntley, H. (1993). Adult international students: problems of adjustment. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED355886).   
Jenkins, S. (2000). Cultural and linguistic miscues: a case study of international teaching assistant and academic faculty miscommunication. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 24, 477–501.   
Johns, A. (1997). Text, role, and context: developing academic literacies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Kim, Y. (1991). Influence of language and similarity on initial intercultural attraction. In S. Ting-Toomey, & F. Korzenny (Eds.), Cross-cultural interpersonal communication (pp. 213–229). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.   
Kim, Y. (1994). Adapting to a new culture. In L. Samover, & R. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: a reader (7th ed.) (pp. 392–404). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.   
Kramsch, C. (1998). Language and culture. Toronto: Oxford University Press.   
Lacina, J. (2002). Preparing international students for a successful social experience in higher education. New Directions for Higher Education, 117, 21 -327.   
LeCompte, M., & Preissle, J. (1993). Ethnography and qualitative design in educational research (2nd ed.). New York: Academic Press.   
Leki, I., & Carson, J. (1994). Students’ perceptions of EAP writing instruction and writing needs across the disciplines. TESOL Quarterly, 28, 81–101.   
Ma, R. (1993). Communication differences between native and non-native instructors as perceived by U.S. students. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED367011).   
Madden, C., & Myers, C. (1994). Discourse and performance of international teaching assistants. Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages.   
McMeniman, M., & Evans, R. (1997). The contribution of language learning to the development of cultural understandings. Australian Review of Applied Linguistics, 20, 1–18.   
Mestenhauser, J., & Ellingboe, B. (1998). Reforming the higher education curriculum: internationalizing the campus. Phoenix, AZ: American Council on Education/Oryx Press.   
Patton, M. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.   
Perrucci, R., & Hu, H. (1995). Satisfaction with social and educational experiences among international graduate students. Research in Higher Education, 36, 491–508.   
Plakans, B. (1997). Undergraduates’ experiences with and attitudes toward international teaching assistants. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 95–119.   
Quintrell, N., & Westwood, M. (1994). The influence of a peer-pairing program on international students’ first year experience and use of student services. Higher Education Research and Development, 13, 49–57.   
Ramsey, S., Barker, M., & Jones, E. (1999). Academic adjustment and learning processes: a comparison of international and local students in first-year university. Higher Education Research & Development, 18, 129–144.   
Sakurako, M. (2000). Addressing the mental health concerns of international students. Journal of Counseling and Development, 78, 137–144.   
Samuelowicz, K. (1987). Learning problems of overseas students: two sides of a story. Higher Education Research & Development, 6, 121–134.   
Schneider, M., & Fujishima, N. (1995). When practice doesn’t make perfect: the case of a graduate ESL student. In D. Belcher, & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 3–22). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
Schram, J., & Lauver, P. (1988). Alienation in international students. Journal of College Student Development, 29, 146–150.   
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. (2001). Intercultural communication: discourses approach (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell.   
Seelye, H. (1988). Teaching culture: strategies for intercultural communication. Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook Company.   
Solaiman, A. (1995). The major quantitative findings of a study of the English language based study skills problems of two groups of foreign students at an American university. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED358 497).   
Stephens, K. (1997). Cultural stereotyping and intercultural communication: working with students from the People’s Republic of China in the UK. Language and Education, 11, 113–124.   
Sun, W. & Chen, G. (1997). Dimensions of difficulties mainland Chinese students encounter in the United States. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED408635).   
Sun, Y. (1987). An EFL needs assessment: chinese students at a Canadian university. TESL Canada Journal, 5, 27–44.   
Surdam, J., & Collins, J. (1984). Adaptation of international students: a cause for concern. Journal of College Student Personnel, 25, 240–244.   
Swales, J., Barks, D., Ostermann, A., & Simpson, R. (2001). Between critique and accommodation: reflections on an EAP course for masters of architecture students. English for Specific Purposes, 20(1), 439–458.   
Tait, R. (1999, March). Multiple perspectives on academic writing needs. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages, New York, NY.   
Valdes, J. M. (1995). Culture bound (2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Volet, S., & Ang, G. (1998). Culturally mixed groups on international campuses: an opportunity for intercultural learning. Higher Education Research and Development, 17, 5–23.   
Wan, T. (1992). Academic stress of international students attending U.S. universities. Research in Higher Education, 33, 607–623.   
Westwood, M., & Barker, M. (1990). Academic achievement and social adaptation among international students: a comparison groups study of the peer-pairing program. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 14, 251–263.   
Xu, M. (1991). The impact of English-language proficiency on international graduate students’ perceived academic difficulty. Research in Higher Education, 32, 557–570.   
Zamel, V. (1998). Strangers in academia: the experiences of faculty and ESL students across the curriculum. In V. Zamel, & R. Spack (Eds.), Negotiating academic literacies: teaching and learning across languages and cultures (pp. 249–264). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.   
Zelmer, A., & Johnson, N. (1988). International students in higher education: a follow-up study of university graduates. The Canadian Journal of Higher Education, 18, 31–50.   
Zimmermann, S. (1995). Communication competence and international student adaptation to an American campus. Communication Education, 44, 321–335.

Johanne Myles is a PhD candidate at the Faculty of Education, Queen’s University. She has been teaching courses in English for Academic Purposes both in Canada and abroad for over 20 years. Her main research interests are in intercultural communication issues, second language writing and curriculum design. She has published in System and Open Learning.

Liying Cheng (PhD) is an Assistant Professor in Teaching English as a Second/Foreign Language at the Faculty of Education, Queen’s University. She has been conducting research in English for Academic Purposes in a number of universities. Some of her reports are published in Issue in Applied Linguistics and Canadian Journal of Applied Linguistics.