# Rhetorical features of high-graded and low-graded engineering case study responses

Jean Parkinsona\*, Craig Wattersona, Alexandre Sawczuk da Silvab, Erandi Kithulgoda a

a Victoria University of Wellington, Kelburn Parade, Wellington, New Zealand b OSTHUS GmbH, Eisenbahnweg 9-11, 52068, Aachen, Germany

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Genre   
Rhetorical strategies   
Case studies   
Engineering   
Argumentation

Case study responses are a frequent assignment type in engineering degrees, where they aim to prepare students for professional practice. With the goal of supporting the teaching of engineering case responses, this study compares the use of rhetorical strategies in low-graded and high-graded case study responses. Using a corpus of 20 high-graded and 20 low-graded case responses, the article investigates quantitative and qualitative differences in use of rhetorical strategies. Faculty feedback on assignments was analysed to identify rhetorical features valued by instructors, and good alignment was found between features valued by instructors and the rhetorical strategies identified as important by our analysis. Findings were that low-graded assignments neglected to use key rhetorical strategies and used them less expertly. In contrast, high-graded assignments were skilful in using rhetorical strategies such as establishing the purpose and importance of the case, using course concepts and the findings of their analysis to support recommendations, discussing options, and providing reasons for recommendations to build strong arguments.

# 1. Introduction

Degrees preparing students for work in professions such as engineering, business and medicine typically prioritise writing that prepares students for their future workplace(Gardner & Nesi, 2013); case study assignments are often used for this purpose. Case study assignments require students to analyse a workplace problem or situation. The present study builds on a prior study of engineering student case writing (Parkinson et al., 2022), which provided an analysis of rhetorical moves and strategies in a corpus of high-graded student case responses. Using the rhetorical moves identified in our previous study, the present study compares the linguistic and rhetorical features of highgraded and low-graded enginering assgnments; it seks to identify the rhetorical featres contributing to the success of high-graded assignments as wel as weakneses in low-graded asignments that could be a focus for writing instruction. We anticipate that such instruction willbe benefical for students during their studies and also once they are employed in industry. The study draws on writing by students in their final year of four-year engineering degree at a New Zealand universty. Students were enrolled in a course in professional practice, intended to foster critical thinking and encourage reflection on professional ethics and conduct.

# 2. Literature review and theoretical framework

# 2.1. The case study genre

Student case study assgnments are common in disciplines like busines and engineering. Gardner (2016) found that written case responses were frequently assigned across al years of engineering. Case asignments allow students the opportunity to analyse cases drawn from their industry/profession, thus developing an understanding of professonal practice (Nesi & Gardner, 2012). Case assignments have also been given good del fattention in theengineering ducation iterature. In eginering fields, caseassnments are used as a way to teach analytical kills and to allow students to investigate real problems that have arisen in the industry and for which there is no obvious solution (Davis & Yadav, 2014). In a meta-analysis on the teaching of engineering ethics, Haws (2001) found that case studies were used in more than half of the 42 studies on which he reports.

Nathan (2013, p. 59) notes different types f business case: case critiques (which use theory to analyse organisations actions); case reports ("action-focused reports for a businessaudience which simulate writer adoption of a business rle); and case analysis (writers analyse case and identif factors that inluenced events). The third of these, case analysis, is les likely than the case critique or case report to make recommendations (Nathan, 2016). Gardner (2016, p.15) likewise distinguishes case responses, \*which have the main intention of making recommendations for future practice", from those that evaluate a business The case responses analysed in this article fall most closely into the case analysis category mentioned by Nathan (2013, 2016), in that although 'concrete recommen dations' were expected of excellent assignments inthe assignment marking rubric (see Appendix 2) and were in fact present in $7 5 \%$ of student assignments, they were not explictly required by the assignments prompts (ee Appendix 1). Instead, the prompt required students to "discuss the situation and the ethical issues involved' (Appendix 1).

Further variation in case assgnments reported in previous studies is between open cases, which require students to find infor. mation about a case themselves "either through group discusson and direct observation, or from newspapers and other library sources (Esteban & Canado, 2004, p. 139), and closed cases, where instructors supply case descriptions and data about the case. The case assgnments in the present study were of the open type in which students sourced information themselves from library and internet sources.

Variation in case assgnments isalso reflected in reader and writer role, with some casting the writer as a consultant addressing an industry reader, and others casting the writer as a student addressng the instructor (Forman & Rymer, 1999). Gardner (2012) and Pessoa et al. (2020) note a continum in busines case writing from more pedagogically-oriented to more professonally-riented. As Gardner (2012) describes, in pedagogicall-oriented case assignments the student writer is cast in a professinal role and orients to both the actual academic audience and the imagined professional audiences. The case assgnments in our corpus fll into the pedagogical category, with writers addressing an academic audience. In his study of busines case studies, Nathan (2013) concluded that students' communicative purpose in case responses was demonstrating to the instructor their knowledge of concepts taught, their ability to apply these to a case, and to argue logicall to recommend solutions. Nathan (2013) notes that student case responses use an academic rather than industry style, with academic formatting and styl. Conrad's (2018) comparison of the reports written by engineering students and practicing engineers likewise noted the more academic style of the student reports. In the preent study the case prompts clld for an academic style in that they explicitly mention the ned to cite and reference sources (Appendix 1). In addition, the prompt indexes an academic context by explicitlystating that students must rfer to at least one Framework discussed in class".

As indicated above, case responses require students to demonstrate knowledge of the case as well as disciplinary knowledge. Additionall, good case responses identify problems in the case, evaluate the case using disciplinary concepts, and argue convincingly to present a solution (Pessoa et al., 2021). Pessoa et al. (2021) make suggestions for teaching a case assgnment. This included scaffolding learning of the genre through workhops on each part of the case aignment; this assistd students in planning the structure of their texts and the arguments to be advanced. Students received feedback on drafts from instructors. Instructors also scaffolded the language resources for arguing convincingly. For example, students were guided in paragraph structure, the use of logical connectors (such as in conclusion, thus and therefore) to construct arguments. In Pesoa et al.(2021), students were encouraged to distinguish between what they know from course concepts, what they observe, se or find out from reading about the case, and what they conclude based on reasoning. Using this know-see-conclude heuristic, they were guided to make claims drawing on their own observations, course concepts and inferences that can be drawn from these. Appendix 1 shows that in the present study theassignment prompt likewise prompts students to draw on framework[s] discussed in class (or what they know in the heuristic of Pessoa et al. (2021), to reference information (see) and also in the marking rubric in Appendix 2, to "Draw valid conclusions" (conclude).

# 2.2. Genre analysis

In this article, we treat case ssignments as a particular genre of student writing. A genre is a collection of texts with a particular purpose, that shares similar organisation, similar discourse features and similar communicative purpose (Martin, 1984; Swales, 1990, 2004). Askehave (199) discusses he dfficultie of pinning down a single communicative purpose of any genre. Taking the example of the company report, she points out that its purpose may be to mould public opinion, to present the company as areliable business partner, and to atract financial support. Similarly, one purpose of engineering case asignments is to analyse and make recommendations about an engineering problem or event; for both students and instructors another purpose is preparing students for future work by familiarising them with past engineering problems. In addition, for students, a further purpose is earning grades.

Genre researchers have also discussed the influence of audience on a genre. As discussed above, students are sensitive to the ex. pectations of their instructors, and although some case assgnments ask students to play the role of consultant, most studies (e.g, Freedman et al., 1994; Nathan, 2013) have found that writers orient to the instructor as reader.

# 2.3. Theoretical framework: Genre and move analysis

Rhetorical move analysis has been used to analyse such diverse texts as research articles (e.g. Basturkmen, 2012; Swales, 1990, 2004), job application lettes (Henry & Roseberry, 2001), graduate program appications (Samraj & Monk, 208) and company audit reports (Flowerdew & Wan, 2010). Moves are segments of text expressing particular rhetorical meanings and serving particular semantic functions. Each move can be realised in one or more ways. The alternative realisations are known as steps (Swales, 1990) or strategies (Bhatia, 2004). Typically, move analysis identifies the persuasive meanings characteristic of agenre as wllas the typical lexis and grammar used in expressing these meanings.

Nathan's (2013) move analysis of business case studies found the moves: Orientation (such as introduction and objectives), Analysis (.g., problem definition or using a swoT analysis), Options and alternatives, and Advisory/Recommendations. We rely on our previous analysis f engineering case study asignments (Parkinson et a., 2022), where we developed our move structure by analysing 29 high-graded assgnments. In that study we provided a detailed analysis of rhetorical moves and strategies. Building on the work of Nathan (2013) and others, we found moves relating not only to introduction/orientation, options, and recommendations, but also moves related to frameworks, question-raising, results, and text-organisation.

The resulting move structure is reproduced in Table 1. Table 1 shows the seven moves? that were identified in Parkinson et al. (2022). It also shows the steps/strategies that are used to realise each move, and provides a brief description of each strategy. These seven moves have similarities with Nathan's analysis of busines cases. For example, our Moves 1 and 2 have some overlap with Nathan's Orientation move; our Move 3 is included in Nathan's Analysis; Our Move 6 corresponds with Nathan's Options and al. ternatives; and our Move 7 corresponds with Nathan's Advisory/Recommendations move. Additional moves in our analysis which are not found in Nathan (2013) are Move 4: Raising questions and problems and Move 5: Reporting results.

# 2.4. Previous studies of high-versus low-graded writing

What are the features that contribute to high grades in student writing?Previous studies comparing high- and low-graded writing have considered the use of evaluative language in presenting persuasive arguments. This i relevant to our study, which, being based on a rhetorical move analysis, concerns persuasive discourse strategies. In one recent study, Lancaster (2014) compared patterns of stance (attitudes, evaluations and how the writer interacts with the reader) in high- and low-graded undergraduate economics writing. Using interviews with instructors, he found that these patterns of stance influenced instructors' judgements of writers critial reasoning. Lancaster (2016) investigated stance features of high- and low-graded writing and found that higher-graded student writing used more expressions of contrastivenes, including contrastive logical connectors. He also found more tendency for high-graded writing to problematise. Reidsema and Mort (2009) report similar findings in their comparison of high- and low-graded reflective writing by undergraduate engineering students. They found that high-graded assignments used considerably more causal and evaluative lexis than low-graded writing.

Lee (2008) investigated use of evaluative language in undergraduate persuasive essays, finding that high-graded essays used more evaluative language. In contrast with Le (2008), Myskow and Ono (2018) found littl difference between high- and low-graded writing in the evaluative language used in historical biographical essays. Interestingly though, they found that high-graded writers were more skilful in their use of evidence to support evaluation.

Miller et al. (2014) studied argument development in high- and low-graded undergraduate history essays. They focused on use of disclaim: counter argument structures (in which the writer advances a perspective contrary to expectations) and concede $^ +$ counter argument structures (where writer concede the reasonableness of an opposing perspective but then explain why is not true). They found that writers of low-graded texts were less adept at using these argument structures than writers of high-graded texts. High-graded wriers were also more silld at incorporating and referring to source exts. Writers of low-gaded texts were e likely to include a reference to a source to support their arguments, resulting in the impression of greater subjectivity.

Mitchell et al. (2021) similarl identified more skilful argument structures in high-graded compared with low-graded assignments in the discipline of information systems. They found that high-graded assgnments were more sucesul at drawing on disciplinary concepts and using them in their analysisto identify problems. In making recommendations high-graded assignments drew on their analysis rather than on the disciplinary concepts. In conrast, the low-graded assignments referred to the disciplinary concepts but did not use them to analyse the case. Their recommendations then drew on the disciplinary frameworks rather than on the student writr's analysis.

These studies document the greater sil of writers of high-graded assinments in producing evaluative writing that reflects critica reasoning. Rhtrical features of this writing include expressions of stance, skilld use of evidence supportig evaluation,skilled use of argument structure, ability to problematise, for example using resources expressing contrast and skilled incorporation of references. The above studies mostly examined undergraduate essay-writing in disciplines other than engineering. The study by Mitchel et al. (2021) relate to case studies, although not in engineering, while Reidsema and Mort (2009) concerns engineering writing of a genre other than case responses. In this article we seek to contribute to an understanding of student writing in engineerig, specifically writing preparing students for professional practice. To do this, we consider firstly what features engineering faculty value in student writing as reflected in their fdback. Secondly, we investgate student use of rhetorical resources in engineering case responses, which, like argumentative essays, require critical reasoning and argumentation. In particular, we are interested in the following questions:

Table 1 Moves in engineering case responses.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Moves</td><td>Strategies</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>Move 1:</td><td>Delimiting topic</td><td>States what is included and excluded from the field of interest of the case study</td></tr><tr><td>Organising text</td><td>Stating purpose Map to reader</td><td>States the writer&#x27;s purpose in the case study/section Outlines how the text/section is organised; includes section headings and titles of</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>tables/figures Claims/explains that the case, or key issues in the case, are an important area of</td></tr><tr><td>Move 2: Introducing case study</td><td>Establishing importance or relevance</td><td>focus</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Providing background Providing source</td><td>Reports the context or history of the case study Refers reader to source of information</td></tr><tr><td>Move 3: Setting out frameworks and</td><td>Defining terms</td><td>Terms are defined</td></tr><tr><td>methods</td><td>Outlining framework</td><td>Explains the framework for analysis</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Showing relevance of framework</td><td>Links theoretical frameworks or course theory to the case study</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Detailing procedure</td><td>Methods of data collection are outlined</td></tr><tr><td>Move 4:</td><td> Asking a question</td><td>Poses/presents a question about the general area/detail of the case study</td></tr><tr><td>Raising questions and problems</td><td> Identifying a problem</td><td>Writer identifies a problem in the field, organisation or situation</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Countering problem</td><td>Notes ameliorating factors that mitigating the problem or would mitigate the</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>problem if x was done</td></tr><tr><td>Move 5: Reporting results</td><td>Reporting results</td><td>Providing outcomes of writer&#x27;s empirical study/measurements/observations/</td></tr><tr><td>Move 6: Proposing and discussing</td><td> Proposing options</td><td>analysis Providing possible options or alternative solutions</td></tr><tr><td>options</td><td>Discussing option</td><td>Discusses benefits and weaknesses in option.</td></tr><tr><td>Move 7:</td><td></td><td>Recommending action/recommending solution to the case study issue or problem</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Making recommendation</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>discussed</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Making recommendations</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Reason for recommendation</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td> Justifying the recommendation</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

a. What features of student writing do engineering faculty value, as reflected in their feedback on case responses? b. How do low- and high-graded case responses differ quantitatively and qualitatively in use of rhetorical moves?

# 3. Methods

# 3.1. The assignments

Student responses to two case study assignments, from the final year of a four-year engineering degre at a Universty in New Zealand, were colected in 2019 and 2020. The students were enrolled in the disciplines of software engineering and electrical en. gineering. The frs assinment concerned an ethical dilemma in an engineering case (such as an engineer becoming aware of unethical behaviour by the company they work for); this assgnment required the students to analyse the case using ethical frameworks. See Appendix 1 for prompt for ssignment 1. The second assinment involved a case on topics such as technological inovation e.g., esla, Airbnb) and compliance (e.g., End user licencing agreement). As Table 2 shows, 20 high-graded and 20 low-graded assgnments were selected for analysis, with selection limited to students who had given consent for thir assgnments to be included in the study. In total, 153 students did the course over the two years that data was collcted. The 20 assignments with the highest grades and the 20 with the lowest grades were selected for analysis. High-graded assignments earned between $8 0 \%$ and $1 0 0 \%$ with an average of $9 1 \%$ Low-graded assignments earned between $3 6 \%$ and $6 9 \%$ , with an average of $5 6 \%$

Table 2 Assignments and analysis types.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Analysis types</td><td>High-graded assignments</td><td>Low-graded assignments</td></tr><tr><td>Move analysis: 40 assignments</td><td>20 (54,824 words; mean length 2741 words; average mark 91%)</td><td>20 (43,309 words; mean length 2165 words; average mark 56%)</td></tr><tr><td>Analysis of evaluation criteria used by engineers: 23 assignments</td><td>10 (27,033 words; average mark 91%)</td><td>13 (28,640 words; average mark 57%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

The 2019 asignments were graded by the third author, a software engineer, while in 2020 five engineering faculty members collaborated on grading theassignments. The comments of these graders also formed part of our analys (see Section 5.1) because we were interested in what features the engineering faculty valued, and why asignments were awarded high or low grades. Markers provided their fedack on asignments using in-text comments, terminal comments, as wl as the marking rubric (see Appendix 2 for marking rubric).

# 3.2. Analysis of moves

Following Swales (1990, 2004), a rhetorical move analysis of 20 high-graded and 20 low-graded assignments was undertaken. The move structure of the 20 high-graded assgnments had been analysed in a previous study (Parkinson et al., 2022) (see Table 1). The resulting move structure was then used in analysing the 20 low-graded assgnments; the firt and fourth authors independently used the move structure in Table 1 to analyse the 20 low-graded assgnments. Differences were discussed until consensus was reached, resulting in an interrater reliability score of $9 6 \%$

The number of words used in each move and each strategy by the high- and low-graded groups was calculated (Table 3), as was the number of strategies used by writers in each group (Table 4). To investigate what features of assgnments contributed to high or low grades, we quantitatively examined the points of difference between the two groups in the us ofrhetorical moves (Section 4). Because high-graded assignments were longer on average than low-graded assignments, these comparisons were normed per 1000 word. The groups were compared using a t-test, or, in cases where normality assumptions were not met, by a Mann-Whitney $U$ test.

Assignments were then qualitatively considered, investigating how the strategies were used in context in the assignments (Section 5).

# 3.3. Identification of criteria used by engineering faculty to judge the assignments

We also considered the criteria used to judge the assgnments by the five instructors who graded them. We relied on comments made on the assignments, both marginal ie-by-line comments, as well as terminal/overall comments. Faculty comments on ten high. graded and 13 low-graded assignments were included in this analysis. The intructors gave informed consent for their comments and evaluations to be included in our analysis. Analysis f these comments involved careful reading of the in-text and terminal comments in conjunction with the student texts. We unfortunately did not have the marking rubrics that instructors had returned to students, and therefore focused on the in-text and terminal comments in our analysis. Comments were found to all into several categories, most of which were found to correspond to the criteria in the marking rubric (See Appendix 2). They included: description of problem; analysis, including use of frameworks from course lectures for analysis; validit of conclusions and recommendations; language and mechanics; organisation; use of sources and referencing.

Table 3 Number of words used on each strategy per 1o00 words in high- and low-graded assignments.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move</td><td>Strategy</td><td>Low- graded</td><td>High- graded</td><td>Comparison of group means (t-test/Mann-Whitney U test)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Move 1: Organising text</td><td>M1S1: Delimiting topic</td><td>9.5</td><td>4.7</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M1S2: Stating purpose</td><td>11.1</td><td>21.5</td><td>Greater for high-graded, U = 127, p = 0.04922, effect size medium (0.3)</td></tr><tr><td>M1S3: Map to reader</td><td>28.2</td><td>10.8</td><td>Greater for low-graded, U = 304, p = 0.005099, effect size medium (0.44)</td></tr><tr><td>M2S1: Establishing importance or</td><td>9.4</td><td>26.3</td><td>Greater for high-graded, U = 106, p = 0.01007,</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4"></td><td>relevance M2S2: Providing background</td><td></td><td></td><td>effect size medium (0.41) n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M2S3: Providing source</td><td>442.8 20.0</td><td>423.2 18.8</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M3S1: Defining terms</td><td>10.6</td><td>39.1</td><td>Greater for high-graded, U = 78, p = 0.0006816,</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>effect size large (0.54)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4"></td><td>M3S2: Outlining framework M3S3: Showing relevance of</td><td>93.9 199.0</td><td>118.9 124.9</td><td>n.s. n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>framework M3S4: Detailing procedure</td><td></td><td></td><td>Greater for high-graded, U = 130, p = 004532, effect</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>0.0</td><td>4.5</td><td>size medium (0.45)</td></tr><tr><td>M4S1: Asking a question</td><td>12.3</td><td>14.5</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">problems</td><td>M4S2: Identifying a problem</td><td>61.3</td><td>73.4</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M4S3: Countering problem</td><td>0.0</td><td>1.0</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M5: Reporting results</td><td>46.2</td><td>56.9</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>Move 5: Reporting results Move 6: Proposing and discussing</td><td>M6S1: Proposing options</td><td>10.1</td><td>6.4</td><td> n.s.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">options Move 7: Making recommendations</td><td>M6S2: Discussing option</td><td>4.5</td><td>14.8</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M7S1: Making recommendation</td><td>38.1</td><td>20.9</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M7S2: Reason for recommendation</td><td>2.9</td><td>19.5</td><td>Greater for high-graded; U = 134.5; p = 0.0301; effect size medium (0.34)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Frequency of moves in high-graded and low-graded assignments per 10,o00 words.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Move</td><td>Moves/10,000 words low-graded</td><td>Moves/10,000 words high-graded</td><td>Comparison of group means (t-test/Mann-Whitney U test)</td></tr><tr><td>M1S1</td><td>Delimiting topic</td><td>3.0</td><td>2.0</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M1S2</td><td> Stating purpose</td><td>5.1</td><td>6.4</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M1S3</td><td> Map to reader</td><td>48.0</td><td>29.2</td><td>Greater for low graded: U = 383, p = 0.0007594, effect size large (0.51).</td></tr><tr><td>M2S1</td><td>Establishing importance or relevance</td><td>2.5</td><td>7.5</td><td>Greater for high graded: U = 117, p = 0.02146, effect size medium (0.36)</td></tr><tr><td>M2S2</td><td>Providing background</td><td>45.7</td><td>40.5</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M2S3</td><td> Providing source</td><td>55.0</td><td>70.8</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M3S1</td><td>Defining terms</td><td>2.8</td><td>10.8</td><td>Greater for high graded: U = 74, p = 0.0004327, effect size large (0.56)</td></tr><tr><td>M3S2</td><td>Outlining framework</td><td>15.5</td><td>30.1</td><td>Greater for high graded: t(38) = 2.8813, p = 0.0065, effect size large Cohen&#x27;s d = 0.911151</td></tr><tr><td>M3S3</td><td>Showing relevance of. framework</td><td>28.2</td><td>24.1</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M3S4</td><td>Detailing procedure</td><td>0.0</td><td>1.8</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M4S1</td><td>Asking a question</td><td>5.5</td><td>6.2</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M4S2</td><td>Identifying a problem</td><td>11.3</td><td>16.4</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M4S3</td><td>qualifying problem</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.5</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M5</td><td>Reporting results</td><td>10.4</td><td>18.8</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M6S1</td><td> Proposing options</td><td>2.3</td><td>1.8</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M6S2</td><td>Discussing option</td><td>0.9</td><td>2.0</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M7S1</td><td> Making recommendation</td><td>9.7</td><td>6.4</td><td>n.s.</td></tr><tr><td>M7S2</td><td>Reason for recommendation</td><td>0.7</td><td>4.4</td><td>Greater for high graded, U = 135.5, p = 0.0326, effect size</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>246.6</td><td>279.6</td><td>medium (0.34) n.s.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4. Quantitative comparison of high-graded and low graded assignments

# 4.1. Length of the analysed texts and marks awarded

Assignment guidelines required texts to be 2-3000 words long. Average word-length for the low-graded assignments was 2165 words, while high-graded assignments averaged 2741 words (Table 2). Two high-graded assignments exceeded the 3000-word limit while three low-graded assgnments were shorter than 2000 words. As Table 2 shows, the average mark for the 20 low-graded assignments was $5 6 \%$ , while for the high-graded assignments, the average mark was $9 1 \%$ . There was a moderate positive correlation between length and grade (R is 0.7197, $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 0 0 3 4 7 \mathrm { ) }$ , meaning a moderate tendency for assignments earning higher grades to be Ionger. This i understandable, because longer assnments can cover the required field in greater breadth and deth. This suggests that students are well-advised to ensure that their assignments are close to the upper range in length.

# .2. Attention given to each move/strategy in high- and low-graded assignment

Having analysed the moves in the two sets of assignments, we were interested in whether low-graded assgnments gave different levels of attention to certain rhetorical moves compared with high-graded assignments. One measure of this is number of words devoted to each move/strategy. Because there were more words in total in the high-graded set of assignments, Table 3 shows the number of words for each strategy normed per 1o00 words. Table 4 shows a diffrent measure of the attention given to the various strategies by the two groups: move frequency; for comparison this was normed per 10,000 words. The last column of both tables provides a statistical comparison of groups.

Tables 3 and 4 show some interesting differences between the two sets of data.Firstly, for Move 1, Organising text, a significant difference between the two sets of assgnments was found which suggestsdifferences in the way that students in the two groups organised their texts. Low-graded texts used significantly more words (Table 3, $\mathrm { U } = 3 0 4$ $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 0 5 0 9 9 .$ and significantly more instances (Table 4, $\mathrm { U } = 3 8 3$ $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 0 0 7 5 9 4 )$ of the Map to reader' (M1s3) strategy than high-graded assignments. As most instances of the Map to reader' strategy were subheadings, this suggests greater reliance on subheadings to organise their texts by low-graded writers. Evidence of this can be seen in Example 2 below.

The Move 2 strategy, Stating purpose (M2s2), appears to be a second important difference between high- and low-graded as. signments. Table 3 shows that high-graded texts used significantly more words/1o00 words $\mathrm { { T } } = 1 2 7$ $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 4 9 2 2 )$ and Table 4 shows they also used significantly more instances of the 'Stating purpose' strategy $[ \mathrm { U } = 1 1 7$ $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 2 1 4 6$ ) than low-graded texts did. In a second Move 2 strategy, high-graded texts tended to Establish importance (M21); Table 3 shows they used significantly more words $\mathrm { T } = 1 0 6$ ${ \bf p } = 0 . 0 1 0 0 7 )$ and Table 4 shows they used more instances of the strategy $( \mathrm { U } = 1 1 7 $ ${ \tt p } = 0 . 0 2 1 4 6 )$

Use of Move 3, Setting out frameworks and methods, showed some interesting differences between the two data sets. irstly, high. graded assignments used significantly more words in Defining terms' (M3s1) than did low-graded texts $\mathrm { { [ } } \mathrm { { = } } 7 8$ $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 0 0 6 8 1 6$ . The second difference was in the amount of attention paid to M3s2: 'Outlining framework' compared to M33: Showing relevance of framework'. High-graded texts gave approximately equal weight regarding numbers of words (Table 3) and number of moves used (Table 4) to these two strategies. In contrast, low graded texts used significantly more words $\mathrm { T } = 1 0 5 . 5$ $\mathtt { p } = 0 . 0 1 0 9 2$ , medium effect size) and more instances of the strategy 'Showing relevance of framework' (M3S3) $\mathrm { T } = 1 1 6 . 5$ $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 2 3 9 9$ , medium effect size) than they did in Outlining framework' (M3S2).

Regarding Move 4, M4S1, Raising a question, and M4S2 Identifying aproblem and Move 5, 'Reporting results', high-graded texts spent more words (Table 3) and more instances of these strategies (Table 4) than low-graded texts. However, these differences were not statistically significant.

Move 7, Making recommendations, showed some interesting differences between the two data sets. Move 7 contains twostrategies, Making recommendation' (M7S1) and 'Reason for recommendation' (M7s2). The combined number of words/1000 words fr these two strategies i about the same: 41 words/1000 words for low-graded and 40.4 words/1000 words for high-graded assgnments. Similarly, the combined number of moves for these two strategies i about the same for the two groups: 10.4 moves/10,000 words for the low-graded assignments and 10.8 moves/10,000 words for the high-graded asinments. What is dfferent, however, is that lowgraded texts expended most of their words and almost al their moves on the Making recommendation' (M7s1) strategy and failed to provide reasons for their recommendations (M7s2). In contrast, high-graded texts gave equal weight to both Making and Providing reasons for recommendations. Thus, high-graded texts used significantly more words (M7S2) $( \mathrm { U } = 1 3 4 . 5 $ $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 3 0 1 $ ) and significantly more moves $\mathrm { T } = 1 3 5 . 5$ $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 3 2 6 )$ than low-graded texts on providing 'Reason for recommendation'.

5. Qualitative analysis and discussion of high- and low-graded assignments

# 5.1. Features of the assignments valued by engineering faculty

In what follows we analyse the marker feedback on students' texts. It should be noted that this analysis relie only on in-text and terminal comments, as we did not have aces to the marking rubrics that were returned tostudents. It hould also be noted that one of the five markers was rather sparing of in-text and terminal comment and this marker may have relied on the rubric (see Appendix 2) to give feedback. It is interesting to note that the marking rubric, although developed separately from the move analysis, aligns with several moves in what it prioritises as important. This includes Identifies and describes main issues', (corresponding to M2S2 Providing background') Makes appropriate connections between the isues and course concepts (corresponding to M3s3 'Showing relevance of framework'), 'Draws thorough conclusions, [..] supported with evidence' (corresponding to M7s1 Making recommendation' and M7s2 Reason for recommendation'). Thus, analysis of instructor feedback showed that criteria by which the in. structors evaluated the assgnments focused on persuasive strategie that our move analysis (Table 1) identified as important for the case study genre. Building on this alignment, in the final section of this article, we outline a series of workhops reflecting how the results of this study have been useful in informing teaching of case responses in the programme.

The most frequently mentioned aspect in instructor feedback was faulty treatment of recommendations and conclusions (mentioned in in-text comments by all of the five markers). Instructors commented on lack of recommendations, on vague recommendations and conclusions, and on lack of evidence for conclusions and lack of reasons given for claims. This suggests that reasons and evidence were expected for recommendations, claims and conclusions, showing the importance of the Reason for recommendation' strategy (M7s2), which low-rated assignments neglected.

Also relevant to students' ability to provide evidence for what they claimed, was the praise given to high-graded assignments that used citioskilfly as eidnce for aments, G u f rere stfy me/suprt ft).  onrst, lackof references supporting claims in low-graded assignments was repeatedly mentioned (by four of the five markers), as was use of verbatim quotations, which is not standard for the discipline. A similar finding was noted in Miller et al. (2014).

Reflective of the importance of evidence, three of the five instructors mentioned depth and detal. Instructors commented that description of case lacked detail and explanations of ethical dilemmas' and 'argument not persuasive as missing explanation'. Attention to detal was mentioned by Conrad (2017) as being important to practising engineers. A related problem, irlevant detail, was also mentioned by instructors, e.g. irrlevant details in the analyss/lack of focus'). In contrast, comments on high-graded assignments mentioned ery cler expression f ides andrelevant detail This suggests the need for skilful choice of what to include in descriptive strategies such as providing background (M2s2). In our own reading of the assignments, we also noted that high-graded assignments showed skill in critically examining the case, interpreting the evidence, and justifying conclusions drawn.

Use of ethical frameworks for analysis was another genre feature that al five instructors comment on in in-text feedback. Lowgraded assgnments rceived comments such as frameworks introduced but no exploration of the concepts' This suggests that the outlining framework (M3s2) strategy was missing or insufficient. Another comment was frameworks not pplied with much depth to analysis, which suggests the omission or inexpert use of 'showing relevance of framework' (M3s3). This problem in low-graded assignments was reported also in Mitchell e al. (2021). Together these instructor comments suggest the importance of these trategies to engineering faculty.

Problem identification was mentioned as important by four of the five markers in their in-text comment. This made it clear that instructors saw value in the identifying a problem' strategy (M4s2). Ability to problematise is a key feature of high-graded assignments mentioned also in Lancaster (2016). Also criticised was lack of clear statement of the objective of the case study. This suggests

he importance of M1s2, the 'Stating purpose' strategy.

Our own close reading of the assignments identified that some low-graded asignments were not framed as case study responses. Some assignments were framed as informative recounts of the case, or as argumentative essays.

As well as the above genre features, features important in any academic writing, such as sentence and paragraph construction, and language and mechanics, were frequently mentioned in the feedback of four of the five markers. Instructors commented on poor paragraphing, sentence fragments and awkwardly-worded sentences'. A comment on a high-graded assignment showed elements of organisation that were valued by instructors: Well structured. Sections lead logically. Good signposting. Logical flow. Writers were urged to avoid informality, and overuse of personal pronouns, contractions and punctuation erors were also mentioned in negative terms.

The above analysis of instructor feedback is useful in suggesting that our move analysis identifies rhetorical strategies that are important to engineering faculty, and that instructors take account of these rhetorical meanings when they grade assgnments. In the next section, where we qualitatively analyse the features of the student writing, a number of the above features identified by the instructors in their feedback are evident..

# 5.2. Qualitative comparison of high- and low-graded case responses

In what follows we compare extracts from high- and low-graded assignments to investigate how the use of rhetorical moves in these extracts realises meaning in these two sets f writing. Although the focus of the current study is a comparison of use of rhetorical moves, we also mention the writers use of evidence to support arguments, and their use of evaluative language and logical connectors in persuading and convincing readers. A fuller analysis and discussion of evaluative language and logical connectors in the moves of high- and low-graded writing will be reported in a future articl, as word limits for the current aticle do not alow the inclusion of a fuller analysis.

# 5.2.1. Move 1: organising text

To consider the use of text-organising strategies, we compare Example 1, an introduction from a high-graded assignment with Example 2, an introduction from a low-graded assignment. As expected in an introduction section, both Example 1 and Example 2 use the strategies in Move 1: Organising text several times. Move 1 strategies are: Delimiting topic (M11), where the writer states what is included in/excluded from the case study; Stating purpose (M1s2) where the writer sates the purpose f the case study; and Map to reader (M1s3), which outlines the text's organisation. These three strategies make it easier for the reader to understand the purpose and focus of the text and to navigate it.

As shown in Table 3 above, low-graded assignments use significantly fewer words on the Stating purpose' strategy (M12) than the high-graded assignments, showing that this group gave les atention to this rhetorical meaning. In line 5 of Example 1, from a high. raded asigmet, the wite not only mentions the uroe to gain  ll understandngof the ssue .., they also stes why they fous on these areas and what the benefit of doing so is in providing an explanation of why .. Formal language is used, including nominalisations like understanding, explanation and decision.

Example 1. The Introduction section of a high-graded assignment (NZ1.2)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Line</td><td></td><td>Strategies</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>1. Introduction</td><td>Map to reader</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Whistleblowing is the act of exposing illegal or unethical conduct within an organisation [1]. There are two forms of whistleblowing: internal and external. Internal whistleblowing involves [...]</td><td>Defining terms</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>A recent example of a moral conflict involving whistleblowing was the Takata airbag crisis. Takata Corporation was a company which supplied automotive manufacturers with safety products for their vehicles.</td><td>Providing background</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>They are now infamous for knowingly manufacturing millions of airbags which were prone to exploding violently. This caused the largest intenational vehicle recall in history. The engineers which were employed by Takata to make these airbags were faced with a moral dilemma: Blow the whistle on Takata&#x27;s practices and face retribution, or stay silent and allow the dangerous devices</td><td>Establishing importance</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>to cause harm to the public? In this case study, I recount the events leading up to this moral dilemma in order to gain a full understanding of the isues at stake. I then examine the dilemma through the lens of contractualist and agent-centred deontological ethics frameworks. This provides an explanation of why whistleblowing is the morally right choice to make in the stuation, as well as a potential explanation for the decisions made by the Takata engineers.</td><td>Stating purpose</td></tr></table></body></html>

In contrast, two instances of the Stating purpose' strategy in a low-graded assignment (Example 2, lines 3 and 6) use rather casual and perfunctory language. For example, in contrast to the high-graded assignment in Example 1 (line 5), which sees to examine the dilemma through the lens of named frameworks, the low-graded assignment (Example 2, line 6) wil go over different unnamed ethical frameworks, which sounds both informal and as if the writer intends to merely go through the motions to satisy basic requirements.

As shown in Tables 3 and 4, low-graded assgnments use significantly more words and more moves on M1s3, the Map to reader. strategy. While important i orienting readersto the organisation of the text, the Map to reader strategy (e.g. line 1, Example 1 and Example 2) is more overtly structural than persuasive. As most instances of this strategy were subheadings, their greater frequency in low-graded assgnments suggests that writers of low-graded texts relied on subheadings as an organising resource. For instance, Example 2 uses subheadings in both line 1, and in line 4. Some low-graded writers provided a new subheading for most paragraphs, indicating that they neglected more discursive means of organising text.

Example 2. The introduction section of a low-graded assignment (NZ18.1)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Line</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>I.-INTRODUCTION</td><td> Map to reader</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>This report will cover the details f ethics, surrounding Wikileaks and how that effcts the matter of Public Safety and Welfare.</td><td>Delimiting topic</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Different ethical outlooks wil be taken into acount to analyse the potential issues or benefits that come with having a anonymous whistleblowing platform so accessible to the public.</td><td>Stating purpose</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>A.-What is Ethics Brown niversity defines thics a, thics provides a set of standards for behavior that helps us deide how we ought to act in a range of</td><td>Map to reader Defining terms</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>situations. In a sense, we can say that ethics i all about making choices, and about providing reasons why we should make these choices.&quot; [1]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>This report wil go over the different frameworks and justifications made for publishing classfied information through Wikileaks.</td><td>Stating purpose</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 5.2.2. Move 2: introducing case study

Three strategies realise Move 2: Introducing case study, these are M2S1: Establishing importance or relevance', M2S2: Providing background' and M2s3: Providing source. As Table 3 shows, low-graded assgnments used significantly fewer words than high. graded assignments on the M2s1 Establishing importance or relevance' strategy; similarly Table 4 shows significantly fewer instances of the strategy in low-graded assignments. By making a clam about why the case is important, this strategy increases the focus and interest of the readers, persuading them to view the case as the writer does. Persuasion can also be achieved through evaluative lexis, as Le (2008) and Lancaster (2014; 2016) discuss. This is exemplified in Example 1, line 4, from a high-graded assignment, which uses evaluative lexis such as infamous, exploding violently, dangerous as well as superlatives like largest .. in history.

Line 3, Example 1 uses the descriptive/recount strategy, M2S2: Providing background' to describe Takata, the company analysed in the case study. The persuasive M2s1 Establishing importance or relevance' strategy comes directly after this description of Takata and their business, and builds on it in line 4. Humphrey and Economou (2015) describe how persuasive discourse often builds on description in this way.

Using M2s3: Providing source, writers cite their references. Although this was used more frequently in high-graded assignments, suggesting that writers of high-graded assignments had consulted more source, this difference did not reach significance. Both Example 1, line 1 and Example 2, line 5 provide examples of this strategy. The greater skillof the high-graded assignment in citing literature in the expected way is evident i that Example 1 contains a paraphrase followed by a non-integral citation, [1, practices which are standard in engineering. Example 2, in contrast, uses a long verbatim quotation, which is not standard practice. This was a feature commented on by the instructors in their assinment feedack In addition, the writer of Example 2 does not comment on or interpret the verbatim quotation, rather using the words of the source in place of expressing the idea themselves, a practice which attracted negative comment from faculty grading the assignments as mentioned in Section 5.1.

# 5.2.3. Move 3: setting out frameworks and methods

Many case studies require students to show their understanding of theory or frameworks taught in their coursework (Nathan, 2013). This was so in this course particularly in Assignment 1. We found that ideally three Move 3 strategies work together to achieve this demonstration of understanding. These were M31: Defining terms', M3S2: Outlining framework', and M3S3: Showing rele. vance of framework'. Writers built on definition of terms to make outlining the framework understandable, before showing how the framework applies to the case under discussion. We se this in Example 3, where Duty ethics' i defined in line 1, and aspects of the Duty ethics framework are then outlined in line 2. Building on these two strategies, in line 3, the writer shows how the framework is applicable to the Takata case, a contrastive logical connector however, signals that by not reporting wrongdoing, the Takata engineers were putting their job over the life of ther people and ths using thers as a means to n end. Finally i line 4, the writer ulds further on the argument advanced with these three strategies ('Defining terms'-' Outlining framework'-'Showing relevance of framework) using Reporting results' (Move 5) to draw a conclusion about the ethicality of keping quiet. This ability to draw on disciplinary frameworks, apply them in the analysis, and then reach a conclusion based on this analysis was also reported of high-graded as. signments in Mitchell et a. (2021). Notably, in Example 3, the writer explicitly links these thee moves (Defining terms-Outlining framework'-Showing relevance of framework') by signalling the meaning relations of exemplifying (For example), contrast (However), and result (As such3).

Example 3.  Strategies in Move 3 in a high-graded assignment (NZ10.1)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Line</td><td></td><td>Strategy</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Duty ethics also known as Kantian ethics- judges an action&#x27;s morality on whether its maxim (the guiding rule/principle behind the action) could be implemented as a universal moral law. This means it should be posible for everyone to follow maxim, regardless of the circumstances.</td><td>Defining terms</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>For example, Kant believes lying is always immoral because nobody could trust one another if this maxim was universalised [...]. Kant states that people should not use others merely as a means to an end [4].</td><td>Outlining framework</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>However, by putting their job over the life of other people, the employee is indirectly using others as a means.</td><td>Showing relevance of. framework</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>As such, keeping quiet would be unethical. The more ethical action would be to inform others of the actions of Takata.</td><td>Report results</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Logical connectors are underlined in Examples 1-7.

As Tables 3 and 4 show, low-graded assgnments used far fewer words and produced significantly fewer instances of M3s1, the descriptive Defining terms' strategy. This shows neglect of an important basic rhetorical function, which allows writers to tel the reader what is meant by a particular term. In the case of Assignment 1, in particular, which is about ethics and engineering, this strategy is a starting point for outlining the ethical frameworks and then showing their relevance to the case. Neglect of Defining terms' makes 'Outlining framework' and 'Showing relevance of framework' lesseffective. As with Defining terms' low-graded asignments neglected the M3S2, Outlining Framework' strategy and focused instead on Showing relevance of framework' strategy. We see this in Example 4.

In fact, low-graded assignments used significantly more words and more instances of the strategy per 1o00 words on M3S3, Showing relevance of framework' than they did on M3s2, Outlining Framework'. Given the lower use of Defining terms' and Outlining framework', we found that some low-graded assgnments neglected these more basic strategies and moved straight to linking the framework to the case. This is shown in the higher number of words and instances of this strategy used in low-graded assinments (Tables 3 and 4). Perhaps writers assumed knowledge and understanding by the instructor as reader, forgetting the requirement for students to demonstrate their own understanding inassignments. They neglected to lay the groundwork llowing easy understanding by the reader as well as showing the instructor the student's knowledge and understanding of the frameworks. Example 4 shows this, with the writer moving straight to Showing relevance of framework' (line 3) without defining the term virtue ethics or outlining the virtue ethics framework. This makes it unclear what framework is being applied to the case in line 3, as virtue ethics is mentioned only in line 4. Faulty use of frameworks in supporting analysis and building an argument was mentioned by allfive instructors who graded the assignments.

Example 4. 'Showing relevance of framework' in a low-graded assignment (NZ18.1)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Line</td><td></td><td>Strategy</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>III.CASE STUDY</td><td>Map to reader</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>In 2013 Edward Snowden released confidential government documents to the press about the existence of government surveillance programs. According to many legal experts [..] his actions violated the Espionage Act of 1917, *which identified the leak of state secrets as an act of treason&#x27;[5] [...]</td><td>Providing background</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Having the information that the US government was spying on it&#x27;s citizens leaked out could mean that there could be protests and people could get hurt which i a concern for publi safety, the actions of Snowden could be seen as irresponsible and careless on the other hand the virtues that could be displayed are courage and concern for other people, but without knowing why he did this actions it is hard to determine if the actions were justified or not, also one could argue that Edward</td><td>Showing relevance of framework</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Snowden displayed disregard to the safety for his country by taking information that could harm people. A dilemma that arises with Virtue ethics is that some virtues are placed with higher significance between not only cultures but with people.</td><td>Identifying a problem</td></tr></table></body></html>

Example 4 also exemplifies the kind of sentence construction that atracted negative comment in instructor feedback. Line 3 contains both run-on sentences and problematic punctuation (it'scitizens). The run-on nature of line 3 makes the argument presented less clear. teps in the writers argument ae ignalled firstly by the contrastive connector on the other hand where the writer moves from negative appraisal, saying that Snowden could be sen as ireponsible, to the positive appraisal that his actions show courage and concern before switching again to a negative appraisal indisplayed disregard to safety. Confusingly the additive connector also is used. Thus, use of run-on sentences combines with confusing use of connectors in this poorly structured argument. As discussed in Section 5.1, faulty signposting and sentence construction were frequently mentioned by instructors marking the assignments.

# 5.2.4. Move 4: raising questions and problems

In Move 4, writers pose questions or identify problems relating to the case. Both M4s1 Asking a question' and M4s2 Raising a problem' are important rhetorical tategies in the Analys section of case responses, where they are used to guide reader thinking and raise reader expectations of an answer or solution which the writer can fulfil by analysing the question/problem. Example 5,from a high-graded assignment, uses the descriptive Providing background' strategy to provide information about the Human Genome Project in line 1, before citing a relevant principle from the Privacy Act in line 2. The writer then raises a problem in line 3, where the use of the contrastive connector However lerts readers that what fllows presents a contradiction to the previous line. Similarl, the writer also asks two questions in line 4 which also emphasisethe inconsistency between the actions of the Human Genome Project and the Privacy act. Line 5 raises further problem with theactions of the Human Genome Project, before n answer to the question and the problems is provided in line 6, which definitively concludes, using the connector Therefore, that the Human Genome Project does not comply with the Privacy act. Through this series of problems and questions, the writer succeeds in moving towards an answer to the overall question posed by the case study.

As shown in Table 4 both the raising a problem' and 'asking a question' strategies were used lessfrequently by low-graded as. signments. I partiular, the lower use f the denfying a problem stratgy in low-gradd asiments suggets les skilful anlysi of issues related to the case. This aligns with Lancaster's (2016) findings of a greater tendency for high-graded writing to problematise.

Example 5. Identifying a problem' and 'asking a question' in a high-graded assignment (NZ13.2)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Line</td><td></td><td>Strategy</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>The Human Genome Project dissociated personal information from the DNA samples in the early stages of the project It was, therefore, reducing the risk of personal information being disclosed alongside the findings of the project.</td><td>Providing background</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Individuals have *the right to access information about themselves [23]&quot; (Principle 7 of the 1993 Privacy Act).</td><td>Outlining framework</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>However, this is only posible and enforced when an agency holds personal information in such a way that it can readily be</td><td>Raising a problem</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>retrieved In the case f the Human Genome Project, does DNA count as personal information? If it does, does principle 7 of the 1993 Privacy</td><td>Asking a question</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Act apply if the information does not change? [...] If the Principle were to be enforced for DNA, it could be challenging to determine and update a DNA sample in the Human Genome</td><td>Raising a problem</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>project, as doing so would also undermine the work done to ensure that no one knew whose DNA was used. Therefore if DNA does count as personal information, the Human Genome Project does not comply with principle 7 of the 1993 Privacy Act.</td><td>Report results</td></tr></table></body></html>

As Move 5: Stating results and Move 7: Making recommendation often co-occur, they wil be discussed together after discussion of Move 6: Proposing and discussing options.

# 5.2.5. Move 6: proposing and discussing options.

Using Move 6, writers propose options (M6s1) and discuss possble options or solutions (M6s2) to problems. In Example 6 line 1, from a high-graded assgnment, the writer proposes an option for Huawei to mitigate restrictions placed on the company by the US government. In line 2, using the disclaim: counter structure described by Miller et al. (2014), the writer challenges this option by discussing the weaknesses that make this option unlikely to suceed. This writer skilflly uses logical connectors to suggest the shortcomings of the option proposed in line 1: a contrastive meaning relation, However, signals that the option is problematic, additive meaning in Furthermore and On top of this signal further details about this weaknes. In Example 6, the pairing of the proposing options and discussing options strategy is efective in alerting the reader to the problems with the proposal; in contras, in texts where a beneficial option is proposed and discussed, the two strategies can work together to provide support for the writer to make a recommendation.

Interestingly, low graded assignments used fewer words in Discussing options, than they did in Proposing options' (see Table 3) This is problemati in that Discussing options allows writers to persuade readers of the benefits and weaknese i options that have been proposed Like Move 5, Reporting results, Move 6 supports the making of recommendations, and the neglect of both Discussing options' (M6S2) and Reporting resuts (M5) by the low-graded assgnment is a missed opportunit to convince readers of the recommendations made.

Example 6. Proposing and discussing options in high-graded assignment (NZ2.2)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Line</td><td></td><td>strategy</td></tr><tr><td>1 2</td><td>Huawei has a few strategies that they could employ to mitigate or remove these isues. Firstly, they can ask Google to petition the government for a license to trade Android and it other software with them, and presumably they will already have done this. However, it i unknown whether Google would be wlling todo this for Huawei. Furthermore, even if they were wiling, they may not</td><td>Proposing options Discussing</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>have the politicl sway necessary to have the petition accepted. On top of this it would seem that the US government would be unwilling to do his as the license willonly be granted fthe trade pose o risk to US national scurity or foreig polic [11], which the US government likely believes it would or it would not have taken action in the first place.</td><td>option</td></tr></table></body></html>

5.2.6. Move 5: 'reporting results' and move 7: 'making recommendation'

Move 5: Reporting results', provides outcomes of the writer's argumentation and analysis. This is exemplified in Example 5 and Example 3. 'Reporting results' is one of the moves that supports making recommendations, which is important in a case study. Reporting results is also shown in Example 7, from a high-graded asignment, where line 2 draws together the results of the writer's prior argumentation in the Analysis section; this result leads into the writer's recommendation in line 3 (M7s1). Specific mention is made of negative elements of Amazon's culture which the writer has analysed previously. Interestingly the 'reason for recommendation (M72), which isfound in line 4, constittes aoncede + counter structure described by Miller etal. (2014); using While, writers concede the reasonablenes of an opposing perspective but then explain why it is not true. This structure shows tact towards the possible opposing opinion of the reader whil also persuading the reader to align with the writer's viewpoint. Low-graded assgnments used fewer words (see Table 3) and fewer instances see Table 4) on the reporting results move,although this was not statistically significant. Low-graded asignments also used significantly fewer words on the reason for recommendation' strategy. These differences suggest that the low-graded assinments provided les support and justification for the recommendations that they made. This agrees with the finding of Myskow and Ono (2018) that high-graded writers showed greater skil in using evidence to support their evaluations.

Example 7. Stating results', 'making recommendation' and reason for recommendation' in a high-graded assignment (NZ5.2)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Line</td><td></td><td>Strategy</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>V. Conclusion and Recommendations</td><td>Map to reader</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>With the above analysis, conclusions can be drawn about the culture at Amazon, such as the disregard of mental health and worker value, and an unbalanced review process. [...]</td><td> Reporting results</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>The adversarial and high-pressure culture at Amazon shows that companies need to be acutely aware of the effect their culture has on their existing workers mental wellbeing.</td><td>Making recommendation</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>While it might make economic sense to completely disregard this and focus on bringing in the &quot;stars&quot;, it disregards the impact on employees and their families, and in some sense, is unethical.</td><td>Reason for recommendation</td></tr></table></body></html>

A problem with the use of the 'making recommendation' strategy by low-graded assignments was a tendency for vagueness a problem mentioned by intructors in their feedack. This can be sen in Example 8 line 2, which vaguely suggests that work culure at Amazon be improved to meet  higher tandard. Similarl, the reporting results strategy (Example 8, line 1) lacks specificity in that it does not remind readers of what hs work culture entails or in what way Amazon was found to be violating th core concept of what makes an action ethical.

Example 8. Reporting results' and making recommendation' in a low-graded assignment   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Line</td><td></td><td>Strategy</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>In conclusion, after considering several ethical frameworks the consensus is that it was unethical for Amazon to push this work culture. With the exception of duty ethics, which was inconclusive, every framework considered found Amazon to be violating</td><td>Reporting results</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>the core concept of what makes an action ethical. This leads to the recommendation that the work culture at Amazon be improved to meet a higher standard of ethics.</td><td>Making recommendation</td></tr></table></body></html>

As Section 5.1 shows, vague and unsupported recommendations were negatively commented on by allinstructors who graded the assignments. Low-graded assignments used statisically fewer words on providing reasons for their recommendations (Table 3); a reason for rcommendation' is omitted in Example 8, for instance. This again misses an opportunit to persuade readers of the value and good judgement of the rcommendations. Writers may find it easier to make recommendations that are unsupported by reasons or by a restatement of results drawn from the analysis of the case.

# 6. Discussion and conclusion

Our analys of instructor feedback in Section 5.1 shows that instructors expected persuasive argument in students' writing. They valued several rhetorical features, including problem identification, depth and detail in describing the case, use of frameworks to support in-depth analysis, and providing reasons and evidence to support recommendations. Our analysis of instructor feedback suggested that the enginering instructors expected students to employ the rhetorical strategies shown in Table 1. This suggests that less accomplished writers would benefit from more explicit teaching of these strategies.

Our analysis of both instructor feedback on assignments and our quantitative and qualitative comparison of high- and low-graded case responses shows that low-graded assignments neglected several rhetorical trategie or used them inexpertly. Two strategies that skilful writers used in their case study introduction sections, but which les skilful writers used les frequently, were stating the writer's purpose' and establishing the importance' of the case. Our quantitative analysis shows that low-rated asignments used statisticall fewer words in 'stating purpose, and qualitative analysis showed perfunctory use of this strategy, suggesting that the writer was merely satisying requirements. Low-rated assgnments put statistically fewer words into 'establishing importance or relevance, thus neglcting an important rhetorical opportunity. Use of citations also caused dificultie in low-graded assignments. In providing evidence from published sources, which was an issue frequently mentioned by instructors, low-graded assignments tended to use verbatim quotation; in contrast, high-graded assignments showed greater kil in using citations to provide evidence for claims.

Key rhetorical strategies were also neglected or inexpertly used by les skilled writers in analysis of the case. They had dificulty applying the frameworks to their case analysis, and struggled to build a logical argument using the defining terms'--outlining framework'--showing relevance of framework' strategies to support the analysis of the case. High-graded assgnments used these three strategies to build up to conclusions in Move 5: Reporting results'. In contrast, low-graded assgnments tended to use fewer words to define terms or adequately outine frameworks, and move traight to aplying the framework to the analysis. This resulted in instructor feedback that ideas from the frameworks had not been adequately developed.

In addition, low-graded assgnments neglected the key strategies of asking a question' and in particular identifying a problem' These are strategies that skilful writer useto guide readers anticipation of an answer to a question or solution to a problem, which the writer can then provide. This aligns with Lancaster's (2016) finding of greater kill in problematising in high-graded asignments.

A move relevant to the Recommendations section of acase study is Move 6: Proposing and discussing options. These allow the writer to draw on the analysis to propose and discss potential solutions to the case. Using this move, silled writer can dissuade the reader of weak options and provide support for strong options that can then be the subject of recommendations. Argumentation is important in case responses but particularly in some moves such as Moves 6 (Proposing and discusing options) and 3 (Setting out frameworks and methods). Logical connectors, which are useful in argumentation, were sometimes used confusingly in low-graded texts (e.g. Example 4) to promote meanings that did not appear to align with writers' intentions, resulting in poorly structured arguments.

Instructors were critical of vague recommendations and conclusions, or ones unsupported with evidence. This suggests that strategies that support for the 'making recommendation' strategy, like 'reason for recommendation, discussing options' and reporting results' are important to enable writers to make well-supported and convincing recommendations. Low-rated assignments neglected these three strategies, and these are a potential focus for pedagogy.

To support improvement for esskilled writers, we suggest a staged approach, with the concepts of communicative purpose of the case study as well as audience being the subject of a first worshop; in this workshop it i helpful to allow small groups to analyse the assignment prompt and the guidance it provides about the identity the student writers are expected to asume (consultant or student). Three further workshops should consider each of the case study response sections Introduction-Analysis-Recommendations. In these three workshops, focus should be placed on strategies that were underused in low-graded assinments; focus should also be placed on how rhetorical strategies can work together to make a strong argument (as shown for instance in Example 3 and Example 7). In each case, students can be shown good examples of use of rhetorical strategies typical of these sections and which are underused by lowgraded writers, such as those noted above. Authentic high-graded examples by student writers should be used to demonstrate to students how strong writers develop arguments. The second workshop on the Introduction section should include use of important strategies that are underused in low-graded assignments such as M1s2: Stating purpose' and M2S1: 'Establishing importance or relevance'. In the third workshop, exemplars in which two or three rhetorical trategies work together to make a strong argument should be analysed and practised, including M3S1: 'Defining terms'-M2S2: Outlining frameworks'-M3S3: Showing relevance of frameworks' as well as M6S1: Proposing options-M6S2: Discusing options-M5: Reporting results' which are usualy situated in the Analysis section. In the final workshop, exemplars in which two rhetorical strategies typicall found in the Recommendation section work together M7S1: Making recommendations' -M7S2: Reason for recommendation' should be analysed by students in groups and practised. The role of logical connectors in linking part f an argument can also be highlighted. Students can also be guided to discuss faulty examples in small groups and suggest improvements. Final, as part of drafting their own case study assignment, students individually draft a paragraph from each section of the case study response and receive instructor feedback on this draft.

# Author statement

Jean Parkinson: Writing, Analysis (Investigation), Formal analysis (Statistics), Validation, Concetualisation, Funding acquisition, Methodology.

Craig Watterson: Conceptualisation. Data collection (Investigation).

Alexandre Sawczuk da Silva: Conceptualisation.

Erandi Kithulgoda: Data analysis, Validation.

# Acknowledgements

We acknowledge the generosity of the case study writers in allowing their writing to be included in the study. We acknowledge too the help of the engineering faculty in allowing their feedback on the student writing to be included in the study. Finally, we acknowledge the financial assistance of a grant from Victoria University of Wellington (Grant ID 225910).

# Appendix 1. Prompt for case study assignment

This assignment will be in the form of a case study of an Ethical dilemma. You will need to discus the situation and the ethical issues involved. This case study must refer to at least one Framework discussed in class and is expected to show a developed understanding of th ssues at stake. You must pick relevant casestudy involving one of the example ethical dilemmas that profesional engineers can encounter at work from the list below:

. Public Safety and Welfare: Airbags or WikiLeaks : Principle of Informed Consent: End User License Agreements . Conflict of Interest: WikiLeaks : Fair Treatment of Employees: Amazon or UBER

You are expected to appropriately support claims, and reference sources of information, with citations.

Appendix 2. Marking rubric   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Criteria</td><td>Excellent</td><td>Good</td><td>Poor</td></tr><tr><td>Identifies and describes main issues (20%)</td><td>sophisticated understanding of the main issues with relevant evidence</td><td>Shows understanding of issues; largely accurate description and use of evidence</td><td>Ethical dilemma not explained or lacks detail or is inaccurate</td></tr><tr><td>Analysis and evaluation of issues (20%)</td><td>Insightful analysis; systematic interpretation of evidence</td><td>Arguments are presented but may lack clarity or depth; plausible interpretation of the</td><td>Superficial, incomplete or inaccurate analysis</td></tr><tr><td>Draws valid conclusions (20%)</td><td>Balanced and critical view; supported with evidence; concrete recommendations;</td><td>evidence Sensible conclusions, in line with the analysis but may be one- sided</td><td>Conclusions ill- defined, illogical, or misaligned with the evidence and analysis</td></tr><tr><td>Links to course lectures (20%)</td><td>Makes appropriate connections between the issues and course concepts; relevant supplemental research</td><td>Appropriate connections between issues and course concepts; limited research</td><td>Superficial, inappropriate or no connections between issues and course concepts, no research</td></tr><tr><td>Written communication (Technical writing skills; vocabulary, structure and style; clarity and conciseness; use of sources and referencing) (20%)</td><td>Sophisticated use of vocabulary; accurate spelling, punctuation; appropriate formality; clear and concise; elegant paragraphing, sentence construction; references well-chosen and applied.</td><td>References used but some may be missing; may be some informality; punctuation may be faulty at times; generally flows well</td><td>no/faulty transition between ideas; informal language; poor punctuation; verbose; vague; lacks references to support argument; ideas unconnected; use of contractions.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Askehave, I (1999. Communicative purpose as genre determinant. HERMES-Jounal of Language and ommunication in Business 23, 13-23.   
as      f s Purposes, 11(2), 134-144.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2004). Analysing genre: Language use in professional setings. London: Longman.   
Conrad, S. (2017). A comparison of practitioner and student writing in civil engineering. Joumal of Enginering Education, 106(2), 191-217.   
Conrad, s. 2018). The use of psies and mperoa styl in civil engiing witing Jo of Bsss and ha omncatio, 321) 3876.   
avis, C.   2014.  s ining   ri,   .) ri hok of rn h (. 161-180) Cambridge University Press.   
stean,   . (004) Mk the   wk in hg s ish  s. h for i e, 23(2 137-161.   
ed  t n   t     e, 292, 78-93.   
Forman, J., & Rymer, J. (1999). Defining the genre of the "case write-up. Journal of Business Communication, 36, 103-133.   
Fredman, A, Am, C., & art, . (194). Wing suts to cass Simting ges ad simlations as gre. itn omntio, 11, 193-226.   
dr, Practice, 9(1), 13-35.   
Garder, . 016).  gtion ch h ishfr i   win  si  and erng Writing & Pedagogy, 8(1), 117-144.   
Gardner, S., & Nesi, H. (2013). A classification of genre families in universtystudent writing. Aplied Linguisics, 34(1), 25-52.   
Garner, B. (2016). Garner's modern English usage (4th ed.). Oxford University Press.   
Haws, D. R. (2001). Ethics instruction in engineering education: A (mini) meta-analysis. Journdl of Enginering Education, 90(2),223-229.   
Hey,  e 1 i f    te f sh   e, 202, 153-167.   
Humphrey, .L., & conomou, D. (2015). Peling the onion-A texual mode f critical analysis. Jol of Englis for adic Puoses, 17, 37-50.   
Lancaster, . (2014). Exploring valued pattens of stance in uper-lel student writing i the isilines. Write omnicatin, 31(1), 27-57.   
naster,  016). g st in d wig infic an ql.  of sh or  e, 23, 1630.   
Lee, S. H. (2008). Attitude in undergraduate persuasive essays. Prospect, 23(3), 43-58.   
Martin, J. R. (1984). Language, Register and Genre. Children Writing: Read, 1, 984.   
Mil,,   01   i o0-20 Purposes, 61, 117-131.   
Myskow, 018 mrf f  w  f eie d n   .  of d  n 41, 55-0.   
athan, P. (2013. Acdmic witin in he BsinessSchool: The e f the busines case rort Jonl of Egish for Ademic Pposes 12 5768   
Nathan, P. (2016). Analysing otions in pedagogical busines case rport: Gre, proces and language. nglishfor pecific Prposes,44, 1-15.   
Nesi, H., & Gardner, S. (2012). Genres across the disciplines: Student writing in higher education. Cambridge Universty Press.   
Pa      ./g 10.1016/j.esp.2022.05.002   
Peoa ., -c l, 20 thi nt   f  eh 12(2), 291-320.   
Peoa,   c    ti n language explicit. Journal of Management Education, 1052562921994892.   
ea tt  g 3(2), A117-A129.   
Saraj       or  2 (2), 193-211.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Jen akon c i t hof sic dled ag t atiarst f eingto. She  ublis ly on ice and technology discourse and language use in vocational education. ORCid 000o-o002-3395-2732

raa its ti   it equitable outcomes for students.

Alxandr       ahe f Arc  g   ve composition. ORCid: 0000-0002-2389-1972