# A Chinese doctoral student’s experience of L2 English academic writing in Australia: Negotiating practices and identities

Meihui Wang , Graham Parr

Faculty of Education Monash University, 19 Ancora Imparo Way, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia

# a r t i c l e i n f o

# a b s t r a c t

Article history:   
Received 13 March 2020   
Received in revised form 4 November 2020   
Accepted 16 November 2020   
Available online 23 November 2020

Keywords:   
L2 English academic writing   
Dialogic theory   
Identity   
Third space   
Narrative

Increasing numbers of international students are choosing to study abroad at English speaking universities, where their L2 English academic writing is assessed alongside local students’ L1 writing. Research has investigated the difficulties these student writers encounter, the deficits in their L2 academic writing products, and the strategies used to address these deficits. However, there has been little investigation into the experiences of L2 student writers of academic texts in particular international contexts, and the identity work associated with negotiating linguistic, cultural and institutional dimensions of these experiences. This narrative-based, qualitative case study addresses this gap in the literature by investigating the L2 English academic writing experiences of one Chinese student in an Australian university over the four years of her PhD candidature. Drawing on Bakhtinian dialogic theories of language and identity, in association with Gee’s theorising of identity, the authors show how the challenges experienced by the Chinese student both constrained and facilitated her writing practices. An ongoing process of negotiating tensions in her writer identity mediated these practices, surfacing differing dimensions of the student’s bilingual, transcultural, researcher-writer identity. The study offers recommendations for how students, academic supervisors and institutions can support this nuanced process of negotiation.

$^ ©$ 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Increasing numbers of international students are choosing to study abroad at English speaking universities, and for many this is a rewarding and productive experience (Martinez & Colaner, 2017). Central to their experience is an encounter with a range of linguistic, cultural and institutional challenges, such as the need to develop their academic writing skills in English, the language in which they will be assessed (Wang, 2016; Zhang, 2011). In Australia, like other countries that host large numbers of international students, universities have invested heavily to improve the quality and range of support for these students to develop their English writing. However, a range of issues associated with language, culture and identity continues to threaten the enjoyment and success of these students’ L2 English academic writing (Li & Vandermensbrugghe, 2011; Magalhaes et al., 2019).

In this article, we home in on a number of these issues, by investigating the four-year doctoral experience of one Chinese student studying in Australia, whom we call ‘Xiaoli’ (a pseudonym). Our focus is the L2 English academic writing experiences that Xiaoli negotiated while completing her PhD in Education, and the impact of these negotiations on her writing practices and identity. The study responds to calls in the literature for higher education research that focuses on identity issues experienced by internationally mobile students in particular contexts. For example, Gargano (2009) points out that research into international student mobility is “bereft of significant and robust concepts that bring into view international student experiences and identity reconstructions”. He believes this has had the effect of “homogenizing and generalizing the negotiations of international students when great dimensions of difference actually exist” (p. 331).

With notable exceptions (e.g., Zhang, 2011), most studies exploring Chinese international students’ academic writing in English are narrowly focused on deficits in students’ writing and the challenges of replicating western linguistic and scholarly norms (e.g., Biggs, 1996). Such research largely ignores the fact that large class sizes in Chinese schools and universities, which encourage teacher-centred instruction and discourage student interaction, may have had as great an influence on the way Chinese students learn to write in English as their philosophical heritage (Ryan & Viete, 2011). Our study offers an alternative to homogenizing, deficit-focused approaches to researching Chinese international students’ writing. Instead, utilising dialogic, narrative-based methodologies (Parr et al., 2015; Riessman, 2008), and drawing from Meihui’s PhD study (Wang, 2018)1 that researched nine participants from different disciplines and institutions, we explore one student’s distinctive experience of writing for a doctorate in an Australian university, and we investigate the importance of identity to this experience. Data for this exploration consist of transcripts from three semi-structured interviews conducted with Xiaoli over the course of 15 months (mid-candidature, just prior to submission, and two months after submission) and extracts from Xiaoli’s reflective writing from her research journal, which she kept throughout her PhD candidature. We explore the ways in which Xiaoli’s academic writing experiences were dialogically responsive to a range of voices, cultures, policies, texts and communities (Bakhtin, 1981). There are two questions that underpin our study:

1. How does a Chinese international doctoral student in an Australian university experience her development as a writer of L2 English academic writing before and during her PhD candidature? 2. How does the Chinese doctoral student negotiate her researcher-writer identity in that particular context?

We begin by presenting a critical review of the relevant literature.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Existing research into L2 English writing for academic purposes

Historically, there has been no shortage of studies investigating the challenges of eastern academic writers writing in English. One strand of this research focuses on eastern students’ writing ‘outputs’, and this strand is often underpinned by an assumed binary between eastern and western values (e.g., Hofstede, 1986). Such research has sometimes remarked upon the circular logic of eastern L2 writers’ texts, contrasting it with western L1 writers who supposedly rely on direct modes of address and linear structures (e.g., Jin, 2001; Tan, 2000). Another strand asserts that English writing produced by eastern writers, who have grown up in communities valuing Confucian, Taoist, or Buddhist philosophies, is driven by politeness and respect for authority, and that such writing inevitably adopts indirect forms of argument (e.g., Hinkel, 1997). Other research (e.g., Ryan & Viete, 2011; Straker, 2016; Wang, 2018) questions these binaries, citing examples of Chinese students’ writing in English that utilises a wide range of syntax, discourses and rhetorical strategies. These examples evince what Canagarajah (2004) calls ‘accommodation’ strategies (e.g., adopting English syntax patterns and writing structures in amongst Chinese language structures), while other writing shows evidence of Canagarajah’s notion of ‘transposition’ strategies (where the writing interweaves syntactic and rhetorical approaches from both English and Chinese writing traditions to create culturally hybrid texts).

In contrast to research that has focused predominantly on eastern writers’ L2 written outputs, a smaller number of studies has investigated the socio-cultural and cognitive dimensions of L2 writing practices, and their findings are mixed. Li (2006) examines a Chinese doctoral student’s experience in his own country, in terms of what Gee (1990) calls “disciplinary enculturation”: the student developed his L2 English academic writing through frequent and dynamic interaction with his supervisor, his research community and a range of English texts. Villamil and De Guerrero (2000) also report on the nature and value of social interactions in L2 writing, not only in terms of enhancing the practice of revising drafts, but also in helping students stay focused on task accomplishment. However, Sadykova (2014) and Zhu (2006) suggest that most international postgraduate students studying in the United States are not receptive to peer support response groups when attempting to improve their academic writing. Li and Vandermensbrugghe (2011), in Australia, claim that most eastern postgraduate writers initially feel embarrassed and uncomfortable with open criticism from their peers or supervisors. And yet in our study, as we will go on to show, Xiaoli greatly appreciated feedback offered by her student peers and her supervisor; these were two of a number of dialogic strategies she employed for improving her writing throughout her doctoral candidature.

# 2.2. Towards a dialogic framework for understanding L2 writing experiences

According to $\operatorname { O r r } ( 2 0 0 5 )$ , “What one says, and how one writes, links directly to one’s epistemological, ideological fiber, fiber that all the while is socially situated” (p. 56). That is, any act of speaking or writing is shaped by a variety of personal, cultural and social dimensions of the writer’s identity. Orr implies that any written artefact can be understood as arising from a writer’s engagement with other written artefacts, the discourses surrounding and embedded in these artefacts, and the anticipated engagement with new artefacts and discourses. This is consistent with Bakhtin’s (1981, 1984) theorising of language, such as in his widely quoted statement that every word we speak is “half someone else’s” (Bakhtin, 1981, p. 254). Bakhtin continues:

the word does not exist in a neutral and impersonal language … [R]ather, it exists in other people’s mouths, in other people’s contexts, serving other people’s intentions …. Each word tastes of the context and contexts in which it has lived its socially charged life (Bakhtin, 1981, pp. 254, 293).

In seeking to understand how Xiaoli experienced her L2 English writing, and drawing on Bakhtin’s insights, our study conceptualises written artefacts and writing practices as inherently dialogic. The study appreciates that there is inherent dialogic potential in all uses of language, especially those crossing different linguistic and cultural borders (Giroux, 2005). In the process of writing, this appreciation can prompt critical reflection upon not just one’s writing practices but also one’s identity (We will return to this in Section 3.3).

Following Bakhtin’s theorising of language, and the work of a range of Bakhtinian scholars (e.g., Emerson, 1997; Morson, 2004; Prior, 1995, 1998), we argue that any act of writing contains within it dynamic potential for dialogue. This dialogue can be between or within writers, texts, cultures or discourse communities. Prior (1998) suggests that when writing is conceptualised as situated activity, it “emerges as a confluence of many streams of activity: reading, talking, observing, acting, making, thinking and feeling as well as transcribing words on paper” (p. xi). We argue, similarly, that all research writing, whether it is undertaken by experienced researchers, or for that matter by Chinese postgraduate students studying in Australia, is located in a loose network of written and spoken conversations (actual or implied) among writer-researchers. Finally, any English academic writing or written artefact, whether it is in the writer’s home language or another language, emerges from and makes sense in terms of its dialogic relationship with other related research writing and research conversations (Bakhtin, 1981).

Culture plays a crucial role in our investigation into the dialogic dimensions of Xiaoli’s L2 academic writing practices and the negotiation of identity associated with those practices. Rather than treating culture as static or as only apparent in written products, we draw on Bakhtinian theory to show how dialogic engagement with other people, texts or cultures invariably mediates students’ identity construction, but this does not have to mean losing a sense of one’s identity. Quite the contrary. Bakhtin (1986) describes it this way: “[In the process of dialogic communication], I actively enter as a living being into an individuality, and consequently do not, for a single moment, lose myself completely or lose my singular place outside that individuality” (p. 93). Bakhtin suggests that writers who engage dialogically with language and culture, are able to simultaneously see that language, text and culture with new eyes. He refers to this space of engagement as a “contact zone” (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 345). A contact zone is where one can become more aware of dominant discourses that promote the kind of dialogue and reflection that is crucial for writing and identity development. This is similar to the perspective developed by scholars who argue for the value of a ‘third space’ of in-between-ness for acquiring knowledge, expanding ideas, and developing one’s identity (Kramsch, 1993; Moje et al., 2004).

For instance, Bhabha (1996) and Kramsch (1993) use the term ‘hybridization’ to describe what they see as a productive way for recognizing and negotiating differences in language and culture. Kramsch refers to an ‘intercultural third space’ as a dialogic meeting point of difference, where speakers and listeners, readers and writers, can grapple in productive ways with apparent differences that a host culture and other cultures bring to any act of communication. Like Bakhtin’s ‘contact zone’, the concept of a ‘third space’ helps us to understand how L2 writers develop a hybrid way of communicating, and this prompts valid questions about research that assumes ‘the problem’ lies with the deficits of international student writers who are not adequately acquiring or fitting in with host cultures and practices.

Kostogriz (2005) emphasises that it is not just international students who can profitably imagine and occupy this third space. Lecturers and research supervisors can assist by employing a “third space pedagogy”, in which they enable cultures and knowledge systems to learn from each other, rather than assume the learning is all one way in favour of the host culture. Prior (1995) goes further and suggests students’ L2 research writing can be “a two-way street” (p. 316) wherein the texts produced by the student are a hybrid of the student’s and the supervisor’s words and worlds. International students studying and writing in English, and their lecturers and supervisors, could all be more attentive, Prior believes, to the complexities of knowledge, language and culture in the intercultural third space of L2 communication (see also Ryan & Viete, 2011). For all these researchers, the trope of a third space or contact zone is helpful in understanding how L2 writing students (and their supervisors) can proactively contribute to shaping their writing practices. A third space can be a productive scaffold for international student writers to develop their identities, through engaging with multiple voices, texts and cultures, and seeking connections (not necessarily agreement) where there might otherwise appear to be only disconnections and incongruity.

# 2.3. Implications for the identities of L2 English academic writers

Bakhtin (1981) shows how language, in dialogic terms, is not merely a conduit for messages that are coded and decoded by individual interlocutors. Rather, language is situated in historical, cultural, institutional, and social contexts in which meanings have been, and continue to be, constructed and contested (see also Lea, 2005). This view of language acknowledges that when any writer seeks to communicate in a meaningful way with his/her anticipated readership, he/she does not mechanically take up some ready-made position or structure that predetermines how to communicate. The ‘position’ of Chinese international postgraduate students studying and researching in Australia is especially complicated when they are writing an extended academic artefact, such as a doctoral thesis. In all aspects of their academic writing, these students are engaged in dialogic practices of “positioning” of themselves (Giddens, 1984, p. 84) within and with respect to a range of often quite diverse communities. One of the significant aims of this research is to understand the complexity of this positioning, and in the process to explore the struggle of how individuals negotiate cultural and academic identities with respect to academic discourses and cultures they are, themselves, still in the process of learning about (Pavlenko & Blackledge, 2004). This links to Gee’s (2000) framing of identity, which acknowledges that identity is dynamic with respect to a combination of cultural, social, and institutional dimensions.

Gee (2000) proposes four perspectives from which to view and analyse identity: natural (or genetic), historical, institutional, and affinity perspectives. Importantly, the four perspectives are not mutually exclusive categories. The first, according to Gee (2000), is the nature perspective. It is a dimension of identity that is inherited biologically and sociologically. It exists outside a person’s direct control and is independent of the influences of the institutions they currently operate in, the discourses they draw upon and the groups with whom they associate. The second Gee labels the institutional perspective, which comes from the institution in which a person is (or has been) working or operating. The influence of the institution on identity will be felt most strongly through the institution’s regulations, traditions, principles or perhaps vision statements, which convey a sense of identity norms within the particular institution.

The third, the discursive perspective, pertains to the shared discourses that people with similar identities utilise. In academic settings, it points to the ways in which individual writers with similar academic identities will tend to conform to accepted norms for what scholarly writing entails (see also Ivanic, 1998). For example, what constitutes a “rational” written argument will be understood similarly by individuals who use similar academic discourses or norms of debate in their discourse communities (Gee, 2000, p. 103). Gee’s last category is the affinity perspective. He argues that people who comfortably participate in distinguishable social practices share an ‘A-identity’, and are thus part of an identifiable “affinity group”. According to Gee, in all but the nature perspective, individuals over time can contribute to or shape the discourses they draw on, the institutions they operate within, and the affinity groups they ‘belong’ to. In this way, identity is not so much a label that is chosen or bestowed upon an individual. Rather, it is multifaceted, dialogic and dynamic (cf. Bakhtin, 1981). And there is a dimension of individual identity which enables active shaping by that individual or group.

# 3. Methodology

In this small-scale case study, we draw on Bakhtinian theory to investigate the complexities and nuances of one Chinese doctoral student’s experience of L2 English academic writing in an Australian university. Bakhtin’s (1981, 1986) dialogic conception of knowledge has encouraged us to investigate a range of practices, activities, stories and beliefs in relation to Xiaoli’s L2 writing experiences. In order to make any claim about the experiences of a Chinese international doctoral student like Xiaoli, we need to consider the dialogic relationships within and between these various practices, activities, stories and beliefs and to explore the dialogic relationship between English academic writing and Xiaoli’s developing identity. As a counternarrative to research that focuses on the outputs and deficits of Chinese international students’ English academic writing, we explore Xiaoli’s experience of the hybrid third space in which her doctoral writing developed. We do not dwell on Xiaoli’s dissertation artefact for any significant time.

Our case study design is consistent with Merriam’s (2009) general principles of case study: that the research should be “particularistic, descriptive, and heuristic” (p. 43). This explains why we pay close attention to the physical, social, historical, cultural, and educational contexts of the study and of Xiaoli’s experience. An important dimension of this is understanding how Xiaoli’s writing experiences in her doctorate were socially, culturally and historically situated (Simons, 2009). Merriam (2009), like Simons (2009), urges case study researchers to weave together multifaceted and multi-voiced stories to produce detailed and contextualised descriptions of lived experience, believing that only through such descriptions and multiple perspectives on subjects can the intended particularity be achieved.

An important dimension of our study of Xiaoli’s experiences is narrative. We use the term ‘narrative’ to refer to the stories told by Xiaoli in her interviews, some of which reflected on her recent experiences and others that referred to events some time ago, and also to highlight the narratively inflected approach that we authors take in presenting and analysing the interview data. Narrative, in that respect, is both the medium and the method of investigation in this study (Richardson, 2000). Narrative-based research methods pay close attention to characters, relationships, and nuances of events as they unfold (Parr et al., 2015). In that respect, Xiaoli is a key character in the story she is telling and in the story that we researchers are telling about her (Mishler, 1991). Our analysis of Xiaoli’s experience explores her development as a character, and also the relationships that mediated her development. We are conscious that we as researchers are implicated as characters in this storytelling. This means, for example, when Xiaoli tells a story in an interview about her interactions with her PhD supervisor, this story will be mediated as much by the relationship between Xiaoli and that supervisor, as by the relationship between Xiaoli (interviewee) and Meihui (interviewer).

Although selected excerpts from Xiaoli’s research journal constituted some of the dataset, most of the data were transcripts from three semi-structured interviews conducted by Meihui (see Table 1 below). These occurred over a 15 month period and were structured as follows: in Interview 1, Xiaoli and Meihui explored Xiaoli’s writing history before commencing her PhD; Interview 2 (a month before Xiaoli submitted her dissertation) followed “talk around texts” protocols (Lillis, 2008), where Xiaoli was prompted to reflect on selected excerpts from her dissertation; and in Interview 3 (three months later), Xiaoli reflected on her experience of negotiating her researcher-writer identity in L2 English writing across all years of her PhD journey. Rather than merely asking a set of questions and recording Xiaoli’s answers in these interviews, Meihui was flexible and responsive to the reflective stories that Xiaoli was telling her. For example, in the ‘talk around texts’ interview, the conversation shuttled between Xiaoli commenting upon excerpts of her dissertation she had selected for discussion, reflecting on particular syntactic, grammar, structure and ideas in the excerpt, and describing and reflecting on the experience of writing that part of the thesis. Transcripts of the interviews, which were conducted in a combination of Mandarin and English, were transcribed and translated (where necessary) by Meihui and later member checked by Xiaoli. Ethics approval for the study was granted by the university in which the study was conducted.

The work of data analysis was collaboratively shared by Meihui and Graham over a period of three months, following the stages proposed by Vaismoadi et al. (2016) for thematic analysis. In Stage 1, Meihui and Graham read through the data separately and took notes of matters that pertained to L2 English writing experiences, negotiations, practices, and identity. After this, they met together to compare notes and critically discuss emerging issues and questions. Stage 2 was a separate conversation, where the authors dialogically grouped and classified similar ideas, language and experiences they had noted in the transcripts and excerpts from Xiaoli’s journal. In Stage 3, they chunked and rationalised these ideas to identify dominant themes, and in Stage 4 through an iterative process of writing and reflecting they developed and refined their findings, linking details of Xiaoli’s experiences and reflections to relevant literature. The three key themes generated in Stage 3 are the ones underpinning the case that follows below: (1) L2 English writing experiences in China and abroad; (2) Negotiating and developing writing practices; and (3) Negotiating and developing identity.

# 3.1. Xiaoli’s case

When Xiaoli was first interviewed by Meihui for the study, she was aged in her early 30s and at the start of Year 4 of her doctorate in Australia. Her reflections on her PhD journey, and her experiences of developing her academic writing in English, were communicated with complicated emotions, including disappointment, excitement and frustration e punctuated by moments of genuine pride for what she had been able to achieve in her L2 English academic writing. The first theme provides important background to the story of Xialoi’s PhD experiences in Australia. It begins with her earliest memories of writing in English in junior high school in China.

# 3.2. L2 English writing experiences in China and abroad

Xiaoli began to study English in junior high school, where it was a compulsory subject. Although she believed that she had “some talent” in English learning e she felt she was able to learn the language quickly e she did not enjoy her early English classes. Relationships between teachers and students were acutely hierarchical in these classes. Xiaoli’s teachers were required to manage class sizes of up to 60 students, and all adopted a test-oriented pedagogy. This pedagogy relied predominantly on repetitive drills to teach grammatical patterns, in a manner reminiscent of the most traditional grammaroriented pedagogy (Paulston, 1970). Xiaoli and her school classmates were required to write short essays which Chinese students call “zuo wen” (作文) in 150e200 words. In these essays, she used the ‘outline’ provided by her teacher, and answered specific closed questions the teacher had provided for each essay.

When Xiaoli began her university study in China, she might have hoped that the teaching and learning of English would be significantly different. It was not. She distinctly recalled preparing for regular English writing tests, where she would memorize the required text formats, sentence structures and commonly used phrases in the reading texts. Xiaoli admitted that she paid very little attention to ideas or logic in her essay writing at that time, as the criteria in the exams focused on the correct use of grammar and rote learning of vocabulary.

Table 1 Data sources for Xiaoli’s case study.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Form of data.</td><td>Timelines of data generation</td><td>Focus</td><td>Link to research. questions</td></tr><tr><td> Interview 1</td><td>Start of Year 4 of Xiaoli&#x27;s PhD candidature.</td><td>Xiaoli&#x27;s writing history, before commencing her PhD</td><td>RQ1</td></tr><tr><td>Interview 2</td><td>Late in Year 4 of her PhD candidature.</td><td>Talk around texts&#x27; (Lillis, 2008). Excerpts from Xiaoli&#x27;s RQs 1 &amp; 2 dissertation, selected by Xiaoli.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Interview 3</td><td>Start of Year 5 - after submitting revisions in response to examiners&#x27; requests</td><td>Negotiation of Xiaoli&#x27;s identity as a bilingual,. transcultural researcher-writer</td><td>RQ 2</td></tr><tr><td>Excerpts from Xiaoli&#x27;s L2 research journale</td><td>Across the whole period of Xiaoli&#x27;s PhD.</td><td>Reflections on Xiaoli&#x27;s writing practices, styles and identity in different contexts</td><td>RQ2</td></tr></table></body></html>

After successfully completing her bachelor’s degree, Xiaoli travelled to Belgium to pursue a Master of Education degree. While assessment in that course was still focused on syntactical and grammatical correctness, and vocabulary tests, Xiaoli was now required to write more often in English, exploring more open-ended questions. And the social environment was more encouraging of peer collaboration. She enjoyed a new sense of agency as a writer in English, helping peers with their English writing by checking and correcting grammatical and lexical errors in their assignments. By the end of one year in Belgium, Xiaoli would describe herself as “a happy and productive English writer”. However, at the time of the interviews with Meihui, she looked back on the writing that she had produced at that time and was highly self-critical of what she described as her “Chinese style of English writing”. Xiaoli described her approach at that time as attempting to “counter the influence” of her Chinese writing habits, developed over her childhood years. She recalled that she was learning to recognise what she saw as English or Chinese styles of writing (the latter including long and complicated sentences and clauses), hoping to avoid what she called the “Chinese-ness” of her English. And yet she invariably defaulted to her Chinese writing patterns when the content of the writing became more challenging.

Considered as a whole, these early memories trace Xiaoli’s narrative of developing technical competence, exploring social opportunities for working with others to improve their English writing (even if it was only to correct errors), and developing an awareness of the need to work across linguistic and cultural borders in developing her L2 English academic writing. There were the usual range of factors at the institutional and system level that discouraged Xiaoli from working in more dialogic ways in China: large class sizes; the institution and system prioritising grammar exercises; writing according to tightly framed templates; and testing regimes that focused on accuracy and the technical dimensions of language. Nevertheless, in Belgium, a richer sense of ‘third space’ (or ‘contact zone’) was supported at the institutional level with more opportunities for Xiaoli to work in more dialogic ways with her peers through discussing, sharing, and negotiating ideas and writing samples with them. At this time, she was developing early signs of some agency in her English academic writing and in her identity, even though this still was associated with what Canagarajah (2004) would term ‘accommodation’ strategies.

When Xiaoli began her doctoral studies in Australia, she felt she could be more discriminating in her understanding of Chinese and English writing. This had implications for her immediate writing strategies, as she felt she was then more successful in “fixing” the grammatical and lexical errors in her English writing. Her greater confidence in identifying and editing her own errors had a significant impact on her identity. Yet she still recalled being disappointed when she received critical feedback from her PhD supervisor on the first written work she submitted for review. “I lost all of my confidence. My supervisor had used the WORD correcting tool to correct my writing (in red font). I remember the whole article looked red. I felt so frustrated. I could not believe it”. In Interview 2, Meihui asked Xiaoli whether, over time, she became more resilient to negative criticism from her supervisor, especially now that she was approaching the end of her PhD. Xiaoli replied that she often felt that her English writing skills were not adequate for her to express all she wanted to say.

When I come up with a new concept or idea in my mind, I firstly develop it in Chinese. But I am not always able to 100 per cent accurately and precisely express it in English. I still have to shrink my ideas to 50 per cent of the original …. There is a glass wall between real English and me. Although English seems to be so close to me, I can never access the real English … (Xiaoli, Interview 2).

It is significant that Xiaoli is describing here her challenges in English academic writing by once again focusing on her deficits e she had to “shrink her ideas to $5 0 \%$ of the original” e as she aspired to “100 per cent” accuracy and precision. And yet, in Xiaoli’s response to Meihui’s question, she articulated her frustrations using a creative trope of "a glass wall".

In this trope, Xiaoli reifies “real English” as something that is “so close”, and yet, as she says, she can “never access it”. The trope allows her to characterize the glass wall that prevents her from achieving “real English” as a ‘real’ part of the intercultural third space in which she has been operating throughout her doctoral study. It is a trope suffused with richly dialogic complications, including lexical and grammatical accuracy, fluency of arguments, but also her identity as an L2 English writer. Through it, Xiaoli shows that her experiences in developing her English academic writing in this third space had helped her to understand and articulate her position so insightfully. This suggests a dynamic tension between accommodation strategies (focused on her fixing deficits) and transposition strategies (e.g., making decisions about meaning and context that are informed by a more nuanced appreciation of the cultural and linguistic hybridity of the writing she was producing).

# 3.3. Negotiating and developing L2 writing practices

In Xiaoli’s second interview with Meihui, as she was finalizing her dissertation, she bemoaned the fact that her writing processes had always been “very messy”. She described how she was currently engaged in a seemingly endless process of reading, writing, revising, reflecting, and more writing. This was partly an expression of her self-deprecating identity, as if she were almost apologising for this messiness. At the same time, she was providing an insight into the complexity of her (still) evolving L2 English academic writing practices. These practices, she explained, involved considerable investments of time looking for “evidence”, which she described as “listening to other voices”, when reading other academics’ published research. Xiaoli characterized her process of comparing her findings with others’ findings, and then writing about this, as “actively negotiat[ing] with the voices in the literature [Xiaoli’s emphasis]”. It seems Xiaoli greatly benefited from this kind of dialogical reading and writing as she sought to generate ideas and analyse her data (see Mu & Carrington, 2007; Prior, 2001).

Through ’talking around the text’ of her dissertation, Xiaoli was able to describe the analytical processes she employed in her study. They involved a similar dynamic to her reading and “negotiating with the voices in the literature” during the “first round” of reading the literature. She would use the act of writing to develop and clarify her understanding, fleshing out each concept by building in more details to the existing text along the way. This process continued when she began what she called her “second round” of reading, but in this second round she was more conscious of weaving in relevant scholarly language, noting the rhetorical structures and patterns that published researchers would use in literature she found most compelling, and then amending her existing text to take account of these structures and patterns. In Interview 1, Xiaoli had spoken about her painful experience of beginning to draft her review of the literature for her PhD. She described as “suffering” the experience of constantly revising what she was writing as she was writing: “Keeping reviewing my writing back and forth helped, but it was also a kind of torture.” In Interview 2, when Meihui reminded Xiaoli that she had said this, Xiaoli reflected with no hint of a smile or irony: “If I had not gone through these suffering processes, I would have never improved my writing”.

In all three interviews, Xiaoli often reflected that her PhD supervisor was the person and the voice with whom she had the most direct dialogue throughout her doctoral journey. She tended to defer to her supervisor’s expertise on the “linguistic or literal aspects” of her doctoral writing. Beyond that, she believed her spoken and written dialogue with her supervisor allowed her to better connect and negotiate with those other scholarly “voices” in the literature. Despite having a deep respect for her supervisor, Xiaoli admitted in Interview 3 that she eventually developed sufficient confidence to question or challenge her supervisor with regard to aspects of her English writing from time to time. Far from the passive stereotype that is supposed to characterize Chinese international students, Xiaoli recalled that she would sometimes write an additional set of reflections, in which she would explain to her supervisor why she disagreed with some of her supervisor’s feedback. Ultimately, though, she appreciated that her relationship with her PhD supervisor was a crucial factor in her successful doctoral journey, as were her relationships with her peers, colleagues and friends (Cotterall, 2015; Magalhaes et al., 2019).

Xiaoli felt more “relaxed” in the regular interaction she enjoyed with her fellow student researchers and friends. That interaction with peers not only helped her clarify her thinking; it also made the writing experience more enjoyable. She did, however, admit that she could be “stubborn” at times. For example, she recalled an interaction with a peer that concerned an issue she was passionately concerned about, the unequal distribution of education resources to minority groups in China. Although her peer held different opinions from her, Xiaoli was proud that she robustly debated with him and “never gave in”. When Meihui pressed her further about “being critical” in her more robust dialogue with others, Xiaoli invoked a classical Chinese saying:

I believe that a critical person should sometimes accept others’ ideas. In Chinese, we call it “Na Lai Zhu Yi” (拿来主义), which means that we need to absorb the right and good things. But now I have become stronger in my research, I am more confident to express my views and to insist on my standpoints. I accept the differences, but I resist being brainwashed. (Xiaoli, Interview 3).

This is further evidence of the benefits of the intercultural third space that Xiaoli had negotiated throughout her four-year doctoral journey in Australia. Her writing practices, her communication practices, and her sense of disciplinary enculturation in and around her writing, had evolved to the point where she could shuttle back and forth across linguistic and cultural fields. Thus, in the quote above, Xiaoli could explain in English a robust debate between Chinese students speaking in Mandarin in a western university by invoking a Chinese idiom! This suggests that several years experiencing an intercultural third space had enabled Xiaoli to enact more sophisticated transposition strategies in her communication practices, even while from time to time she still spoke in self-deprecating ways about her own efforts to accommodate western writing patterns and structures in her English academic texts.

# 3.4. Negotiating and developing identity

In the ‘Talk around texts’ (Lillis, 2008) interview (Interview 2), as Xiaoli was describing a concept she wished to communicate in a particular section of her dissertation, she became more and more animated. She wanted to explain about the complex ideas she had intended to write in this section. Then she paused. Following a deep breath, she admitted that she would probably never enjoy writing in English as much as writing in Chinese. She felt constrained by the English language when she wanted to articulate her thinking and to “arrange” the content:

I have to consider English speakers’ ways of thinking. For example, Chinese people like to criticize before making compliments e “Yu Yang Xian Yi” (欲扬先抑). I have to carefully get rid of all these cultural-oriented ways of writing in my English writing. (Xiaoli, Interview 2).

When Meihui asked Xiaoli whether she felt she could ever break free from these constraints, Xiaoli admitted that she did try a few times but failed due to the pressure from “professional persons” around her.

When she was feeling less agentic as a writer in English, Xiaoli reflected that her priority would be to accept and try to emulate English/western research writing norms and conventions. Her research journal records her feeling, “I cannot swim against the tide” and “I am writing in a locked box”. She considered that at least one of her examiners would be a “native English speaker”, and so she said that she felt she had a “responsibility” to ensure he and other English speakers could understand her writing clearly. Also, she talked about needing to “enculturate myself into the western discourse community”.

When Meihui asked about the likelihood of Xiaoli ‘losing’ some of her Chinese cultural identity as part of this enculturation, Xiaoli paused again. Collecting her thoughts, she answered that the writing context and potential readers in Australia urged her to “make writing sound more like a native English speaker’s”. To some extent, she felt she had to give up any hope of a hybrid ‘Chinese style’ of English academic writing. At one moment, midway through her PhD journey, in her research journal she had written: “I cannot follow my heart”. She was prepared to do what was required to write a successful PhD thesis, and to “get rid of all these culturally oriented ways of writing”, when there was a risk of them “interfering” with clear communication.

And yet, in the third interview when Xiaoli was feeling considerably more agentic, she explained that she had developed her own way of communicating a sense of her national and cultural identity in her dissertation. In her opinion, the better way of showing her national identity was through the “content” rather than crafting a particular “language style” in her writing.

I know I need to be objective as a researcher. But I am a human being not a god. I can not completely stand back to be an outsider because I am always a part of it. What I can do is to make a balance. I revised my thesis [in response to examiners’ requests] while trying to maintain my standpoints and identity as a Chinese. For example, I ‘corrected’ [she said, indicating inverted commas in the air with her fingers] words which were integrated with strong nationalistic emotions (Xiaoli, Interview 3).

Xiaoli reflected that the main lesson she had learnt from this experience was that she needed “culturally-grounded nationalism” rather than “political nationalism” in her thesis, since this is what that examiner wanted. At the same time, she wanted to maintain and show her Chinese cultural identity from “what I write” rather than “how I write”. Xiaoli believed that over time she could gradually learn to negotiate the cultural differences in a more scholarly way. But that was a work-inprogress.

In this final section of Xiaoli’s case, we have focused on the interconnections and tensions between Xiaoli’s stories of her diverse writing practices and her reflections on the complex way these practices helped to shape her identity. On the one hand, there is a pervasive sense of Xiaoli struggling to have her writing accepted in the face of hegemonic western linguistic and academic norms. This is reinforced in this last section through Xiaoli’s references to her needing to “enculturate” herself into the western discourse community, and to one of Xiaoli’s PhD examiners criticizing her expression of her “national and cultural emotions”, leaving her with apparently no choice than to “correct” the wayward words in her revised dissertation.

And yet, even as Xiaoli described what appeared to be her capitulation to the hegemonic English language requirements of the examination system in her Australian university, she asserted that she was still able to retain some of the “strong nationalistic emotions” in her writing. In spirited language, Xiaoli insisted that she could, in her English academic writing, “retain her standpoints” and “resist being brainwashed”. In less assertive moments of her interviews, Xiaoli returned again and again to her deficits and to her lack of confidence and agency as a writer in English: “[My writing processes] are messy”; “I cannot swim against the tide”; “I cannot follow my heart”; “[I must] shrink my ideas by 50 per cent”, and “I am writing in a locked box”. It is paradoxical, however, that these expressions of a lack of confidence and agency were so often associated with lucid insights into Xiaoli’s L2 English academic writing experience. And they are articulated through often highly imaginative tropes.

# 4. Discussion and conclusion

There are three major insights that emerge in Xiaoli’s case. The first insight, and this is affirmed in the findings of the other eight participants in Meihui’s PhD study (Wang, 2018), is that L2 English academic writing can be conceptualised as inherently dialogic in Bakhtinian understandings of that term. This insight had emerged in our theoretical framing in the earlier stages of this paper and again in our analysis of the stories that Xiaoli told. These stories referenced a wide variety of dialogic activities that Xiaoli pursued throughout her doctoral writing. They included: speaking with peers and supervisors to facilitate critical reflection on her writing; exploring dialogic links within and between research texts from different linguistic or cultural backgrounds; engaging with other researcher ‘voices’ from different cultures, countries, and discourse communities; and recognizing and negotiating the cultural hegemonies of western academic assessment regimes. We have characterized some of these activities, after Canagarajah (2004), as ‘accommodation strategies’ or ‘transposition strategies’. These all contributed to the significant growth in Xioali’s agency as a writer, even while she continued to harbor anxieties and beliefs about the deficits in her L2 writing, which had been deeply instilled through her early experiences of learning to write in English.

The second insight recognizes the value of intercultural ‘third spaces’ (Kramsch, 1993) or ‘contact zones’ for supporting Chinese international students to negotiate and develop their writing practices. In her doctoral study in Australia, Xiaoli’s English writing development was enhanced by environments and institutions that encouraged her to shuttle between and across different linguistic and cultural spaces. We have proposed the concepts of ‘intercultural third space’ (cf. Bhabha, 1993; Moje et al., 2004) and ‘dialogic contact zone’ (Bakhtin, 1986) as useful concepts for making sense of her L2 academic writing experiences. We used these concepts to describe how institutional cultures, including academics and peers in these institutions, can enable more open-ended academic inquiry, peer-to-peer collaboration, and border crossing (Giroux, 2005) which supported Xialoi’s writing development. Through long-term immersion in these spaces, Xiaoli began to understand, distinguish between, and negotiate a shared space of eastern and western, linguistic and cultural, knowledge and practices. This enabled her, for example, to move from just ‘listening to’ a wide range of voices in the literature and in her institution to actively ‘negotiating’ with those voices, as she continued to draft, re-draft and refine her English academic writing. Her writing practices continued to evidence a dynamic tension between accommodation and transposition strategies, but by the end of her PhD candidature she felt could “make a balance” between the competing writing demands.

The final insight offered by Xiaoli’s case appreciates the significance of identity in international students’ experience of developing their L2 English academic writing practices. Gee’s (2000) identity framework has been generative for our analysis of Xiaoli’s developing identity. There were some moments in the interviews when Xiaoli was concerned about retaining (or even losing) some of the fundamental ‘Nature’ dimension of her Chinese writer identity. And yet in her more agentic moments, she showed she was actively engaged in a dialogic process of negotiating her identity, a process mediated by the institution she was studying in, the disciplinary and cultural discursive spaces she worked in (in which her supervisors were most prominent), and the affinity groups to which she belonged and contributed. She developed a significant degree of agency as a Chinese international L2 English writer, evident in her more agentic claims (“What I can do is make a balance …. While trying to maintain my standpoints and identity as a Chinese”). But these remained in constant tension with her worry that this agency was threatened by the imperative, never far from the surface, that she must “enculturate [her]self into the western discourse community”. Whereas Prior (1995) speaks about enculturation as an empowering process, Xiaoli’s experience did not always feel empowering to her.

At a time when governments and universities in Australia and across the world are investing heavily to support the international student experience, this study provides much needed qualitative insights into the experience and challenges of L2 English academic writing in a particular international context. Our study stands in contrast to other research into Chinese international students’ L2 writing, which tends to focus on the deficits of L2 writing products, and to homogenise the diverse cultural backgrounds and experiences of Chinese international students writing in English. Our alternative approach, grounded in dialogic theories of language, culture and identity (cf. Bakhtin, 1981; Gee, 1990, 2000), appreciates that L2 academic writing practices are situated within, and shaped by, complex sociocultural contexts and histories, and that this had powerful implications for understanding and better supporting one Chinese international student’s L2 academic writing experiences.

Our analysis has drawn attention to the linguistic and cultural challenges Xiaoli faced, and we have shown how these challenges both constrained and facilitated the development of her L2 English academic writing practices. Canagarajah’s (2004) concepts of accommodation and transposition have been particularly helpful for analysing the particular L2 English strategies that Xiaoli employed in negotiating these challenges. The three insights we have highlighted above have particular implications for institutions and supervisors in western countries that wish to better support international Chinese students’ L2 writing. Beyond this, the research does not offer prescriptions or ‘tips and tricks’ for a generic Chinese international student to improve their English L2 academic writing while studying abroad. However, it does provide a conceptual and practical framework for better understanding how international Chinese students can themselves contribute to enhancing their L2 English writing and identity development in an international study abroad experience.

# Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Meihui Wang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Graham Parr: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing.

# Declarations of interest

None.

# References

Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays. In M. Holquist (Ed.), C. Emerson & M. Holquist (Trans.). Austin: University of Texas Press.   
Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. In C. Emerson, & M. Holquist (Eds.), V. McGee (Trans.). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.   
Bhabha, H. (1993). The location of culture. New York: Routledge.   
Biggs, J. (1996). Western misconceptions of the Confucian-heritage learning culture. In D. Watkins, & J. Biggs (Eds.), The Chinese learner: Cultural, psychological and contextual influences (pp. 45e67). Hong Kong: The University of Hong Kong.   
Canagarajah, A. (2004). Multilingual writers and the struggle for voice: Assessing some approaches. In A. Blackledge, & A. Pavelenko (Eds.), Negotiation of identities in multilingual contexts (pp. 266e289). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.   
Cotterall, S. (2015). The rich get richer: International doctoral students and scholarly identity. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 52(4), 360e370.   
Emerson, C. (1997). The first hundred years of Bakhtin. Princeton: Princeton University Press.   
Gargano, T. (2009). (Re)conceptualizing international student mobility: The potential of transnational social fields. Journal of Studies in International Education, 13(3), 331e346.   
Gee, J. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. New York: Falmer Press.   
Gee, J. (2000). Identity as an analytic lens for research in education. Review of Research in Education, 25, 99e125.   
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: Outline of the theory of structuration. Berkeley: University of California Press.   
Giroux, H. (2005). Border crossings: Cultural workers and the politics of education. New York: Routledge.   
Hinkel, E. (1997). Indirectness in L1 and L2 academic writing. Journal of Pragmatics, 27(3), 361e386.   
Hofstede, G. (1986). Cultural differences in teaching and learning. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 10(3), 301e320. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 0147-1767(86)90015-5   
Ivanic, R. (1998). Writing and identity: The discoursal construction of identity in academic writing. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Jin, W. (2001). A quantitative study of cohesion in Chinese graduate students’ writing: Variations across genres and proficiency levels. http://eric.ed.gov/ ERICDocs/data/ericdocs2sql/content_storage_01/0000019b/80/17/03/b1.pdf.   
Kostogriz, A. (2005). Cultural spaces of writing. In B. Doecke, & G. Parr (Eds.), Writing Learning (pp. 75e94). Northwood. SA: Wakefield Press and AATE.   
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language education. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Lea, M. (2005). Communities of practice in higher education: Useful heuristic or educational model? In D. Barton, & K. Tusting (Eds.), Beyond communities of practice: Language, power and social context (pp. 180e197). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Li, L., & Vandermensbrugghe, J. (2011). Supporting the thesis writing process of international research students through an ongoing writing group. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 48(2), 195e205.   
Li, Y. (2005). Multidimensional enculturation: The case of an EFL Chinese doctoral student. Journal of Asian Pacific Communication, 15(1), 153e170.   
Lillis, T. (2008). Ethnography as method, methodology, and “deep theorizing”: Closing the gap between text and context in academic writing research. Written Communication, 25(3), 353e388.   
Magalhaes, M., Cotterall, S., & Mideros, D. (2019). Identity, voice and agency in two EAL doctoral writing contexts. Journal of Second Language Writing, 43, 4e14.   
Martinez, M., & Colaner, K. (2017). Experience of international education of east asian students in English-speaking countries: A four-dimensional approach. Journal of Student Affairs in Africa, 5(1), 15e26.   
Merriam, S. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.   
Mishler, E. (1991). Research interviewing: Context and narrative. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.   
Moje, E., Ciechanowski, K., Kramer, K., Ellis, L., Carrillo, R., & Collazo, T. (2004). Working toward third space in content area literacy: An examination of everyday funds of knowledge and discourse. Reading Research Quarterly, 39(1), 38e70.   
Morson, G. (2004). The process of ideological becoming. In S. Freeman, & A. Ball (Eds.), Bakhtinian perspectives on language, literacy, and learning (pp. 315e332). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Mu, C., & Carrington, S. (2007). An investigation of three Chinese students’ English writing strategies. TESL-EJ, 11(1), 1e23.   
Orr, J. (2005). Dialogic investigations: Cultural artefacts in ESOL composition classes. In J. K. Hall, G. Vitanova, & L. Marchenkova (Eds.), Dialogue with Bakhtin on second and foreign language learning (pp. 55e76). New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.   
Parr, G., Doecke, B., & Bulfin, S. (2015). Stories: A common currency. Changing English, 22(2), 135e141.   
Paulston, C. (1970). Structural pattern drills: A classification. Foreign Language Annals, 4(2), 187e193.   
Pavlenko, A., & Blackledge, A. (Eds.). (2004). Negotiation of identities in multilingual contexts. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Prior, P. (1995). Tracing authoritative and internally persuasive discourses: A case study of response, revision, and disciplinary enculturation. Research in the Teaching of English, 29(3), 288e325.   
Prior, P. (1998). Writing disciplinarity: A sociohistoric account of literate activity in the academy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Prior, P. (2001). Voices in text, mind, and society: Sociohistoric accounts of discourse acquisition and use. Journal of Second Language Writing, 10(1e2), 55e81.   
Richardson, L. (2000). Writing: A method of inquiry. In N. Denzin, & Y. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (2nd ed., pp. 923e948). Thousand Oaks: SAGE.   
Riessman, C. (2008). Narrative methods for the human sciences. Thousand Oaks: SAGE.   
Ryan, J., & Viete, R. (2011). Chinese international students in Australia: Creating new knowledge and identities. In J. Ryan (Ed.), China’s higher education reform and internationalisation (pp. 151e168). London: Routledge.   
Sadykova, G. (2014). Mediating knowledge through peer-to-peer interaction in a multicultural online learning environment: A case study of international students in the US. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 15(3), 24e49.   
Simons, H. (2009). Case study: Research in practice. Thousand Oaks: SAGE.   
Straker, J. (2016). International student participation in higher education: Changing the focus from “international students” to “participation”. Journal of Studies in International Education, 20(4), 299e318.   
Tan, Y. (2000). What makes writing difficult for Hong Kong international students in Australian universities? Unpublished minor thesis. Melbourne, Australia: Monash University.   
Vaismoradi, M., Jones, J., Turunen, H., & Snelgrove, S. (2016). Theme development in qualitative content analysis and thematic analysis. Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 6(5), 100e110.   
Villamil, O., & De Guerrero, M. (2000). Activating the ZPD: Mutual scaffolding in L2 peer revision. The Modern Language Journal, 84, 51e68.   
Wang, W. (2016). Intertextual practices in academic writing by Chinese ESL students. Applied Linguistics Review, 7(1), 53e72.   
Wang, M. (2018). Chinese postgraduate students’ English academic writing in Australia: Negotiating practices and identity. Unpublished PhD thesis. Melbourne, Australia: Monash University.   
Zhang, Z. (2011). A nested model of academic writing approaches: Chinese international graduate students’ views of English academic writing. Language and Literacy, 13(1), 39e59.   
Zhu, W. (2006). Interaction and feedback in mixed peer response groups. In P. Matsuda, M. Cox, J. Jordan, & C. Ortmeier-Hooper (Eds.), Second-language writing in the composition classroom (pp. 186e209). Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s.

Dr Meihui Wang is a bilingual Chinese-Australian researcher and educator. She has taught Mandarin and English writing in secondary schools, and lectures in TESOL and leadership in the Faculty of Education, Monash University, Australia.

Dr Graham Parr is Associate Professor in English Education in the Faculty of Education, Monash University, Australia. His research interests include English and literature education, writing-based teacher professional learning, creativity in English language education, and global engagement in school and university education.