# An exploratory investigation of instructors' practices and challenges in promoting students' learning transfer in EAP education

Mark A. James

Arizona State University, PO Box 871401, Tempe, AZ, 85287-1401, USA

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords: Transfer of learning Teaching for transfer Teacher perspectives Teacher support

To be successful, English for academic purposes (EAP) education must lead to students transfer of learning to new situations beyond the EAP classroom. Research on learning transfer in EAP education contexts has tended to focus on students, leaving another perspective underexplored: EAP instructors'. While existing scholarly work points to concrete steps that could be taken in EAP education to promote learning transfer, little information is available about whether instructors are taking such steps or the kinds of challenges instructors may be experiencing. To help fill this gap, this article describes a qualitative investigation of EAP instructors' perspectives on promoting students' learning transfer. Participants were 26 instructors of EAP courses at a university and community colleges in a US metropolitan area. Semi-structured interviews revealed a variety of ways these instructors self-reportedly were promoting learning transfer, and a variety of challenges they self-reportedly were experiencing. These findings point to practical ways in which EAP instructors can be supported in their efforts to promote students' learning transfer.

A central goal of English for academic purposes (EAP) education is to help English learners to develop language-related abilities that are needed in English-medium academic programs. To achieve this goal, it i necessary for learning in EAP education to have an impact on students work in their academic programs. In other words, for EAP education to be ucesful, it must lead to learning that transfers to students' academic work beyond the immediate EAP learning situation. Transfer of learning, a phenomenon that has been studied for over a century acros several disciplines (e.g., Day & Goldstone, 2012; Ford, Baldwin, & Prasad, 2018; Larsen-Freeman, 2013), occurs \*when learning in one context or with one set of materials impacts on performance in another context or with other related materials" (Perkins & Salomon, 1994, p. 6452).

Achieving this goal can be difficult, however. Outside EAP education, research involving atempts to stimulate transfer, often under highly contrlled experimental conditions, have frequently been unsuccessul (Detterman, 1993; Haskel, 2001). Within EAP education, rearh sugs that instruction can d  trnser but ths transfer is constraned. tdies tht prodcdvidence f transfer of EAP learning typically involved situations in which there was a close connection between an EAP course and another course. For example, transfer from EAP courses has been observed in a writing course (Wilson & Soblo, 2020) and acommunication course Jwa, 2019), as well as in other courses that were thematicall linked to the AP course, such as transfer from a business-focused EAP course to busines courses (Shrestha, 2017) and transfer from an engineering-focused AP course to engineering courses Hill, Khoo, & Hsie, 2020). Furthermore, determining if EAP learning transfers is complicated:

Transfer can be viewed as a conscious process that involves adaptation of what was learned (e.g., DePalma & Ringer, 2011; Novacek, 2011) and also as an unconscious process that involves more direct aplication of what was learned (e.g., James, 2014; Barnett & Ceci, 2002).   
Evidence of transfer can be gathered through students' self-reports in response to questionnaire items (e.g., Green, 2015; Law & Fong, 2020; Tsou & Chen, 2014) or interview questions (Hil et al., 2020; Jwa, 2019; Kang, 2022; Shrestha, 2017; Wilson & Soblo, 2020), and through students' performance on course assgnments (e.g., James, 2010; Hil et al., 2020; Jwa, 2019; Kang, 2022; Shrestha, 2017; Wilson & Soblo, 2020), on tasks created for a study (e.g., James, 2008, James, 2009; Haghighi, Shooshtari, & Jalilifar, 2019), and during classroom observations (Kang, 2022).   
Transfer can involve knowledge of vocabulary, grammar, and language functions, as well a reading, writing, and critical thinking skills (James, 2014).

Transfer of EAP learning can therefore be an elusive goal, and this is rflected in the attention that learning transfer continues to receive in scholarly work on EAP education (e.g., Ho, 2018; Liu, 2018; Monbec, 2018, 2019; Shoshtari, Haghighi, & Bates, 2019, Wubalem, 2022) and second language (L2) education more broadly (e.g., Benson, 2016; Brown & Lee, 2015; Ha & Vanaphuti, 2022; Karim & Nassaji, 2020; Larsen-Freeman, 2013; Lee, 2021; Spada, Jessop, Tomita, Suzuki, & Vale0, 2014).

Fortunately, concrete steps can be taken in EAP education to promote students' learning transfer. The most comprehensive frameworks of practical suggestions are aimed at education in general.In an influential early artice, Perkins and Salomon (1988) explained that transfer occurs in two main ways: low-road transfer, which refers to well-practiced habits being transferred uncon. sciously because f contextual similarities or high-road transfer, which refers to abstract knowledge being transferred deliberately, without relying on contextual similarity. Perkins and Salomon recommended two corresponding teaching techniques: huging, which means making learning contexts resemble transfer contexts, and bridging, which means having students engage in abstract thinking and connection making. For example, a biology teacher who promotes transfer by presenting current real-world ecological problems like plastic pollution as a backdrop for introducing students to biology concepts is using hugging: Outside the biology classroom, students might encounter similar discussions of plastic pollution, and this resemblance to the biology classroom can stimulate low-road transfer of biology concepts that the student had learned. On the other hand, a history teacher who promotes transfer by asking students to identify factors that provoked an ancient war and to identify contemporary contexts where those factors are present is using bridging: When students try to identify general factors and try to make connections between ancient and contemporary contexts, the students are thinking astractly and making connections in a way that can prepare them for high-road transfer outside the history classroom. These two broad teaching techniques have been central in practical suggestions for promoting learning transfer in education in general e.g, Fogarty, Perkins, & Barell, 1992; Haskell, 2001; McDowell, 2021).

Comparable suggestions for promoting learning transfer have been made specifically for EAP education. This includes recommendations that EAP instructors design instruction so that it corresponds to transfer contexts (e.g., students' other courses) (James, 2014; Green, 2015; Zarei & Rahimi, 2014), and this can be done by incorporating similar content (James, 2006, James, 2008) or similar activities and genres (James, 2006, James, 2009). These recommendations involve making learning contexts resemble transfer contexts, and this reflects hugging. Furthermore, it has been recommended that EAP instructors lead students to think and learn abstractly and make connections (James, 2014; Green, 2015; Zarei & Rahimi, 2014); this can be done by having students:

focus on general concepts (e.g., understanding what genre is) rather than just concrete examples (Cheng, 2007);   
read and writ texts in a variet of familiar and unfamiliar genres and compare and contrast texts across and within genres (Cui, 2019; Johns, 1997, 1999; Jwa, 2019; Yayli, 2011) and across courses (James, 2008);   
become ethnographers in other courses to learn general rules for how language is used in those contexts (Currie, 199; Grujic. c-Alatriste, 2013; Johns, 1988);   
: reflect on strategies used to complete writing tasks (Johns, 1997, 1999).

These recommendations involve having students engage in abstract thinking and connection making, and this reflects bridging.

Thus, scholarly work has produced a detailed picture of concrete steps that can be taken to promote learning transfer in EAP education. However, this picture has emergd from reearch in which the fous was primarily on lerners .., leaners peretions of what they hae transferre, learners performance n transfer tasks, and this means littl attention has been given to the perspectives of the individuals who are responsible for promoting transfer in EAP education: the EAP instructors. In arecent study that did examine transfer from this angle, Jen (2021) reorted that an AP instructor had used only one main technque t promote transfer (. elling and regularl reminding students that what they were learning in the EAP course would be useful in other courses), and suggested that the instructor had faced challenges i.e, a disconnection between the EAP course and other courses, and students having limited motivation to transfer learning). However, this study involved only one instructor, and i ppears to be the only published investigation to focus on the promotion of transfer in EAP education from instructors' perspectives.

The limited attention that has been paid to EAP instructor perspectives on learning transfer is aconcern.First, Perkins and Salomon (1988) sugested that it may be common for instructors to just asume that transfer will take care of itelf If students acquire any knowledge and skill, alof this will more or les spill over to the many other context in and out of school where it might aply, we hope' (p.23). In other words, instructors may implicitl expect transfer but do litle if anything intentionally to facilitat it, therey leaving it to chance. However, as a vast body of research on learning transfer has made clear (see review by Day and Goldstone [2012]), leaning ds not ineitably lead  transfer, so f an EAP instructor's perspectiv is that transfer should be let to chance and the instructor thefore dos not take any stes to promote transfer, i i ikely tha students transfer wil be minimal. Furthermore, in a discussion of writing education in higher education, Moore (2012) suggested that "elven though many curricula are built on a foundational assumption that students will transfer knowledge from one course to the next, faculty often struggle with teaching for transfer (p.19) (emphasis added). In other words, instructors who do try to facilitate transfer may have challenges, a point echoed by Jeon (2021) in the stuy decrid aove f thee challg re sufficientl ar or pestet require tmuch ationa support an EAP instructor would have to reduce or discontinue efort to promote transfer, in which case students transfer too would likel e reduced or minimal. However, since littl research has examined EAP instructors' perspectives on learning transfer, this part of the picture is unclear.

Findings from other scholarly work may shed light here. First, research has investigated challenges reported by intructors who are promoting transfer in contexts other than EAP education. This includes research with instructors across disciplines at a US 2-year college (Lightner, Benander, & Kramer, 2008) and in math and science courses at secondary schools in the Netherlands (Tursucu et al., 2017). Findings suggest that instructors who promote transfer can find it difficult because of:

curriculum relevance, other courses involve dferent skils and have different requirements and ways of discussing matrial);   
curriculum flexibility (e.g., there is insufficient time in class to incorporate material from other courses);   
. teaching support (e.g, textbooks are insufficient in making connections to other courses, other instructors are unwilling to collaborate);   
student ability (e.g., students have not sufficiently learned course material or cannot see connections to other courses).

Although thee challeng occurd in non-AP context, they wereassocited withefforts to promot transfer, therfore, it s possible that similar challenges would be faced by instructors who promote transfer in EAP contexts.

Second, reearch has investigated challenges reported by L2 instructors, though not related pecifically to the promotion of learning transfer. This research has typically focused on instructors who are experiencing a currcular change like the introduction of a communicative or tak-based curriculum. Findings suggest that L2 instructor face difficlties like those listed in the previous paragraph as well as:

instructor abilit, such as abilit to use the L2 or to use a particular teaching methodology (Erlam, 2015; Li, 1998; Li & Baldauf 2011; Orafi & Borg, 2009);   
instructor afect, such as instructors' low motivation (Erlam, 2015), low confidence (Chen & Wright, 2017), or negative attitudes towards a particular teaching methodology (e.g., that they should not teach that way, that it will not work, or that it will lead to a loss of control) (Carless, 2004, 2007; Chen & Wright, 2017; Li & Baldauf, 2011; Orafi & Borg, 2009);   
student afect such as students low motivation (Hiep, 2007; Humphries & Burns, 2015; Ko, 2013), negative atitudes (Li, 1998), low confidence (Humphries & Burns, 2015), or high anxiety (Erlam, 2015).

These challenges were not associated specificlly witheffort to promote transfer; however, they were assciated withefforts to promote learning in L2 education contexts. Therefore, it is possible that similar challenges would be faced by EAP instructors who promote learning transfer.

To summarize, students' learning transfer is a fundamental-but-elusive goal of EAP education. Existing scholarly work points to concrete steps that could be taken in EAP education to promote transfer. However, EAP instructors' perspectives on this topic have been underexplored, so littl information is available about steps that are being taken and related challnges that are being encountered. Existing research points to challenges instructors can encounter when promoting transfer in other contexts or when dealing with other L2 teaching methodology issues; however, whether such challenges might extend to effrt to promote learning transfer in EAP education is uncertain.

Building on the scholarly work described above, the present study investigated the following research questions.

1. How, if at all, do EAP instructors self-reportedly promote students' learning transfer?   
2. What challenges, if any, do EAP instructors self-reportedly experience in promoting students' learning transfer?

# 1. Methodology

# 1.1. Design

To answer these questions, I used a qualitative research design involving semi-structured interviews with instructors. Given the underexploration of instructors perspectives in existing scholarly work on learning transfer in EAP education, a research design that focused on instructors perspecties was essential, and interviews are a suitable data collction tool for this. More specificall, the research questions ask about instructors' intentional decisions and subjective experiences, and these can be explored through interviews. Furthmore, giv the xploratry nature ofthis rearch, adesign that allowd for flexbilit in data collection and analysis was important, and this was provided by the semi-structured nature of the interviews. Similar qualitative designs have been used successflly in previous investigations of L2 instructors' perspectives on teaching methodology issues (e.g., Carles, 2007; Couper, 2017; East, 2012; Erlam, 2015; Hennebry, 2014; Li, 1998; Nissen & Tea, 2012).

Although a qualitative research design involving semi-structured interviews fits well with the study's research questions, such designs can have weaknesses. One concern is that these designs may focus on self-reported behaviors, and these do not always align with actual bhaviors. Given hat the current study was exploratory, it was difficult to predct when, where, and how thee participants may have been promoting transfer, so a focus on self-reported data was reasonable; however, future research might include additional types of data such as classroom observations for triangulation. Another concern is that these designs often involve small numbers of research sites and participants as this can raise questions about the genealizability of astdys findings. To help addres this concern, the following sections provide details about the research methods and procedures so it i clear how findings and conclusions were generated, and details about the context and participants so readers can make informed decisions about the findings' and conclusions' relevance to other settings.

# 1.2. Context and participants

This research design involved gathering data between Sept. 2019 and May 2020, and the context of this data collection was EAP courses at a university and community collees in a large city in the Us. The university and community colleges offer a pair of credit bearing firt-year EAP writing courses, EAP107 and EAP108 (pseudonyms). At these institions, allstudents are required to take first year academic writing courses as part of their degree programs, and there are several versions of these courses available (e.g., a standard two-semester version that is taken by most incoming students; an advanced one-semester version that is taken by incoming students who have relatively high scores on the standardized tests that are used for admissonto the institution); EAP107 and EAP108 are versions that are taken by students with English-as-a-second-language (ESL) needs. The courses focus on general types of academic writing (eg., expository, persuasive, arumentative, reearch-based writing), and classes are not separated by discipline (i.., a class typically includes students from a variety of disciplines). EAP107 and EAP108 are therefore examples of a relatively general approach to teaching EAP (i.e, Englishfor general academic purposes [EGAP]). Hyland (2016) pointed out that a such an aproach is common in some contexts e., preparation courses for standardized academic English tests, pre-sessional EAP courses, EAP courses that are taken as part of a common core frst year) and can be suitable in contexts where students are expected to cros disciplinary boundarie (e.g., through interdisciplinary degrees, joint degrees, double majors, unrestricted elective courses). Flowerdew (2016) pointed out that EGAP courses are very often the only kind of EAP support that students have available. As for formal assesment, in agiven semester in EAP107 or EAP108, students typically have to complete 3 or 4 multidraft writing assinments totaling about 300 to 5000 words. The relevance of learning transfer is apparent in curriculum documents: At the university, the stated purpose of the courses includes preparation of students to successully participate in university work; at the collges, the stated focus of these courses includes development of college-level writing strategies, and presumably this means strategies for writing not only in the EAP course but also across the college. (See Appendix for examples of course materials and assignments.)

As for qualifications needed to teach these courses, this varies with institution. At the community colleges, instructors typically need a minimum of a master's degree in a relevant discipline (e.g, English, applied lingustics, rhetoric and composition), and are required to take a teaching methodology course that is provided by the colleges. At the university, instructors are required to have a doctoral degree in a relevant disciline, or to be a doctoral student in a relevant discipline at the universty; the instructors who are doctoral students are required to take a teaching methodology course that is provided by the university.

Regarding employment conditions such as amount of teaching expected of these instructors, this can vary with employment status, since the courses can be taught by full-time instructors or part-time instuctors. In an academic year (i.e., an autumn semester of approximately 15 weeks followed by a spring semester f approximately 15 wees),full-time instructors typically teach five courses per semester. At the colleges, part-time instructors can teach up to three courses per semester, and at the university, part-time instructors (including intructors who are doctoral students) can teach up to two courses per semester. Full-time instructors typically receive an annual salary, and part-time instructors typically are paid per course or, if they are doctoral students, receive a stipend and tuition waiver.

After receiving research ethics approval from my own institution, I searched for participants in two main phases. The first phase was in fall 2019, when I searched for participants at the universty. I chose this universty for relevance and convenience: As a large public institution with a wide range of academic programs, it is simila to many other universities where EAP courses may be taught, and  had contacts there and physialacces to the campus. I was able to create a it of al current instructor of AP107 and EAP108 by searching the university's online catalog of current courses. I was also able to create a ist of instructors who were not currently teaching one of these courses but had done so recently: EAP107 and EAP108 courses have often been taught by graduate teaching assistnts who are students in the university's English department doctoral programs, and through contacts I was able to reach out to students in that program and find those who had taught one of these courses recently. I invited all individuals on these lists to participate in this study. The second phase was in spring 2020, when I searched for instructors of EAP107 and EAP108 at local community colleges. In thiscity, there are multiple colleges organized into a district, and like the university, these are public in stitutions that collectivel offer a wide range of programs. The college offer the same AP courses as the university because this can help students who start studying at a college transition to studying at the university: These students are able to get credit at the universit for having taken the EAP courses a the college. I visited the online course catalogs of allof the colleges in the district to identify which collges were currently offering EAP107 and EAP108 and to get contact information for all instructors who were teaching these courses. Then, I emailed ll of the instuctorsto invit them to participat in this study. esides roviding details about the study, the invitations also explained that participants would receive a monetary token of appreciation (i.e., a $\$ 20$ gift card).

As a result of this search, a total of 26 instructors agreed to participate in this study. This number seemed suitable given that other interview-based studies of L2 instructors' perspectives on teaching methodology issues have involved similar numbers of participants (Carless, 2007; Couper, 2017; East, 2012; Erlam, 2015; Hennebry, 2014; Li, 1998; Nissen & Tea, 2012). The current study's participants were from 3 institutions: 21 participant from the university, 3 participants from one community college, and 2 partic. ipants from another community college. Regarding age, the range was 26-69 years, with an average of 42 years. (This age data excludes 2 participants who did not report age.) Regarding sex, 19 participants reported female and 7 participants reported male. Regarding langage, 16 participants rortd that thr frst ngag was alanguage ther than glishi.., Arabic, engali, Chine, German, Hindi, Khmer, Korean, Macedonian, Persian, Spanish), and 10 participants reported that their first language was English, furthermore, 24 participants reported that they peak English and at least one additional language, and 2 participants reported that they speak only English. Regarding formal qualifications, all 26 participants reported that they had received some kind of teacher education and/or training, and ths included workshops, courses (.g., a graduate teaching methodology course or currculum design course, ateaching practicum), certificate programs (eg., TEsOL certificate, secondary school teaching certificate), and degree programs (e.g., bachelor's or master's degree in education, master's degree in TEsOL). Regarding general teaching experience (i.e., not limited to EAP107/108), the range was 2-25 years, with an average of 12.5 years. Regarding teaching experience specifically with EAP107/108, 3 participants reported that this was the frst time they had taught one of these courses, and the other 23 participants reported that they had taught the course previously, in some cases many times.

# 1.3. Data collection

Data collection involved semi-structured interviews with the participants. Each participant was interviewed once, either in person or online viaa video-conferencing tol. Each intervie involved a series of planed questions aout the participant's fforts to promote students' learning transfer and associated challenge (see Appendix) and, deending onthe participant's responses, un-planned followup questions (e., asking for clarification, asking for concrete examples). This meant that the studys two reearch questions were each addressed by multiple interview questions; the aim was to give participants multiple opportunities and a variety of ways to discuss transfer-related efforts and challenges, and thereby to generate rich data to answer the study's two research questions. I emailed the questions to each participant at least 24 hours in advance of the interview, so they could familiarize themselves with the questions if they chose. I also asked participants to bring to the interview their course syllabus, textboo, and any other samples of instructional materials they might like to share; during the interviews, participants sometimes referred to these items when giving pecific examples in their answers. The interviews ranged in length from 37 minutes to 78 minutes, with an average of $5 2 \mathrm { m i n }$ . The interviews were audio recorded and transcribed for subsequent data analysis.

# 1.4. Data analysis

Data analysis involved reading the transcripts to identify themes that helped answer the research questions. I divided the transcripts into units of analysis, each of which began with one of the interview's planned questions and included the participant's response and any follow-up questions and reponses. Then, to answer the first reearch question, I useda proces that drew on suggested techiques for inductive analysis of qualitatie data (Auerbach, 2003; Corbin & Strauss, 2014; Lincoln & Guba, 1985). I looked through each interview transcript and identified each unit in which the participant had described an efort to promote students' learning transfer. These units could be from any part of the interview transcript, since my primary aim was to answer the reearch question rather than to focus on interview questions individuall. Then, I put each unit into a category that reflected the kind of efort the participant had described. These were categories that I created based on the content of the units. To illustrate, one unit included a participant's statement that the participant had told students that whatever they learned in the EAP course could be applied in the students other courses; based on this content,  crated a cateory calle tellingstudents that leing is directly transferable and  put this unit in that category. I put units with similar content into the same category, and I checked each category's units multiple times to ensure each category rerented allf its uts nd was distinct from ther catorie. In this way, the analys for the irt rech question led to a set f catri that reflets allf the intructors self-rorte eforts t romot lerning transfer. o anwer the econd reseach question, I used a similar proces, but this time fcusing on units in which participants had described challenges they experienced while promoting lening transfer. Therefore, the analys for the second rearch question led to a set of categories that reflet all of these instructors' self-reorted challenges in promoting learning transfer. (Specific examples for ll of the categories for both research questions are included in the findings sections below.)

To check the quality of this analytic procedure, I took two steps. First, I carried out a check of inra-rater reliability. About six months after I had analyzed the complete set of data, I randomly selected $2 0 \%$ of the units of analysis and categorized them again. This involved making 60 decisions. Using a formula recommended in the widely-cited book on qualitative data analysis by Miles and Huberman (1994, p.64), I calculated that the agreement with the 60 decisions I had made during the original analysis was $9 3 . 3 \%$ . The second step was to check inter-rater reliability. For this, I was assted by an individual with relevant qualifications and experience: a holder of a graduate degree in language ducation with experience conducting qualitative research, doing inra-rater reliability checks for qualitatie reearch studies, and participating on supervisory committes for graduate students qualitatie reearch, as wllas 20 years of experience as an EAP educator and teacher educator. I asked this individual to analyze the randomly-selected $2 0 \%$ of the units of analysis. I compared this individual's decisions with my original decisions and calculated that the agreement was $9 0 \%$ I took the results of these two steps as an indication that the set of categories, label, and descritions I had created during the original analysis were sufficiently clear and therefore of acceptable quality.

# 4. Findings

Although the interviews involved numerous questions, the main purpose of these interview questions was to generate data to answer the study's two research questions; therefore, this section presents findings in two main sections, one for each of the study's research questions.

4.1. Research question 1: How, if at all, did these EAP instructors self-reportedly promote students' transfer of learning?

The data analyses suggested that all 26 $( 1 0 0 \% )$ of the participants did promote students' transfer of learning in one or more ways. The participants' self-reported effrts can be placed into ix categorie, the first three of which were relatively common and the last three of which were relatively rare. These six categories will be described here in order of frequency (i.e, most common first) (see Table 1).

The first category I created is teling students that learning can transfer directly, and this included data from 17 participants $( 6 5 \% )$ These were participants reports that they told students that the students can apply their developing AP abilities directly in situations outside the course (e.g., in other courses, in graduate programs, and in workplaces), and this aplication might lead to outcomes like less stres or more suces. In the fllowing transcript excerpt, aparticipant stated that when teaching students a procedure that they can use for writing, the participant tells the students that this procedure can be used directly in other contexts:

Participant: I dotry to point t it, that what we are doing here would work eqully wel in this way or would be a similar processin this field and a similar process in this field. So it involves the process of looking at the problem carefull, writing a careful report, putting your points one by one, methodically. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 4)

The second category I created is having students practice authentically, and this included data from 17 participants $( 6 5 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that they had students practice using their academic English knowledge and skill, in many cases with materials, topics, and activities that students would encounter outside the EAP course (e.g, in their ther courses, in their personal lives) Participants described various ways of having students practice, including having students interact with each other and one-to-one with the instructor, encouraging students to attend extra-curricular tutoring sessions, and having students blog or frewrit. Participants also described various ways of making practice authentic, including having students write about crrent social isues (e.g, ocal gun control laws), topics from their major areas f study, or topics from their personal experience (e.g., a childhood memory). Inthis example, a participant sated that one of the characteristics of the EAP course that helped with transfer was the participant'suse of "real' tasks:

Table 1 Participants' self-reported efforts to promote students transfer of learning.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Part.</td><td></td><td></td><td>Effort</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Tell students that learning can transfer directly</td><td>Have students practice authentically</td><td>Demonstrate with examples</td><td>Encourage students to think abstractly</td><td>Ask students how they might be able to transfer learning</td><td>Have students practicee writing the same content for different audiences</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>J</td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>J</td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td></td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>J</td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>14</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>16</td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>17</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>19</td><td>J</td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>20</td><td></td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>21</td><td></td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>22</td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>23</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>24</td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25</td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>26</td><td>J</td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>17</td><td>17</td><td>14</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>1</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. "Part." $=$ participant. " indicates that a participant reported making the kind of effort described in that column's heading.

Participant I think making the tasks as real as possible [helps the students to transfer]. That is just, think, god instruction. They have to demonstrat the competences, and they can do it by tellin fairytales, or writing a five paragraph essay, something useful. I think thats an ideal, to make sure that ll of the ssgnments, as many as possble, involve real-life writing tasks. That's going on. Like turning in an essay is a real-life writing task. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 25)

The third category I created is demonstrating with examples, and this included data from 14 participants $( 5 4 \% )$ . These were participants reports that they gave students examples of procedures that the students were expected to be able to use (e.g., steps for doing research) or products that thestudents were expected to be able to generate (e.g., an effective paragraph). Participants stated that they shared examples from their own experience as students (e.g., having taken busines courses) or as employees (.g., as a teacher, as a writer in corporate and industrial workplace settings), or examples they found online (e.g., TED talks, commercial advertisements). As this transcript ecerpt illstrates, a participant stated that when teaching students a procedure that can be used for doing reearch, the participant used a concrete personal example to demonstrate to students how this procedure can work:

Participant: I want them to see, we talked about how research is iterative, you can end up halfway through your research and having to get rid of the entire thing. Ibrought in my example of how I was doing my own coursework and I struggled finding a topic and the research question, and I had to go back and change it. And itsokay. If they think my research questionis not god enough, we tlked bout how it's okay to tweak the question So Ithink that helps them to see as normal, t see research as acomplicated process, and there's not really a binary right or wrong, you have to stick with a research question throughout the process So I think that processis something that I intentionally wanted to teach them and I wanted them to take away from this course. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 20)

The fourth category I created is encouraging students to think abstractly, and this included data from 3 participants $( 1 2 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that they asked students to describe general principles or procedures (e.g, grammar rule, writing conventions, steps in a writing process), or that they themselves described such principles or procedures to students. In the fllowing transcript excerpt, a participant stated that to promote students transfer of a procedure for choosing writing topics, the participant had individual conversations with students during which the participant asked the students to describe a procedure for finding a meaningful topic to write about:

Participant: So that really helps I think, having this one-on-one conversation but also restating how we came to that result how we came to that ste where we commtted to a topic that is really related to something I am already interested in, but willserve me beyond this classroom experience. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 26)

The fifth category I created is asking students how they might be able to transfer learning, and this included data from 2 participants $( 8 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that they questioned students about transfer, either informally as part of classdiscussions or formally as required written reflections on completed assgnments. This questioning was done with a target context in mind (e.g., asking students how they can use what they have learned in the EAP course in their major areas of study) or without a target context in mind (e.g, asking students what they can do with what they have learned in the EAP course). In this example, a participant stated that to promote students transfer of eaning of how to write proces essays, the participant as students to think about how this learning could be applied in their major area of study (i.e., early childhood development):

Participant: Okay, process esay. You have to write a processesay. Now you're interested in early childood development. How would that it? What kind of things do you think you might write about? Why would you do a proces essay? Everything. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 22)

The sixth and final catory I crtd is havin stdents practice writing the ame content for diferent audience, and this includeddata from 1 participant $( 4 \% )$ . As this transcript excerpt ilustrates, when asked about any efforts to promote transfer, this participant referred to an ePortoliotool that students were required to use, and statd that having students post their work on two differen digital platforms (i.e., using the ePorfolio tol, which is for sharing work mainly with just an instructor, and on a blog, which is for sharing work with a larger audience) should help with transfer:

Participant: Yes, Digication [i.e., an ePorfolio tool]. That is a good way of teaching them the concept of transfer. Because I can talk about logging and they can post something. So it's like the same writing, but you post on a different platform. Once you post it, it becomes a different genre. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 13)

4.2. Research question 2: what challnges, f any, did these EAP instructors self-reportedly experience in promoting students learning transfer?

The data analyses suggested that all 26 $( 1 0 0 \% )$ of the participants did experience one or more challenges when promoting students' learning transfer. The participants self-reported challenges can be placed into nine categories, which will be described here in order o frequency (i.e., most common first) (see Table 2).

The first category I created is curriculum relevance, and this included data from 20 participants $( 7 7 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that their eforts to promote transfer were influenced by disconnection between the AP course and students' needs or goals. The majority of these reports were about the students being from a wide range of major areas of study or having a wide range of postgraduation goals. In addition, some reports were about the students not needing academic English skillsafter they graduate (e.g, because they willnot have academic careers or willive in countries where English i not widely used) or other courses being substantill different from the AP course ., because they are large lecture courses). In the following transcript excert, a participant stated that some eforts to promote transfer would not be possble because the students ar from a large number f ifferent maor areas of study:

Researcher: [Do you think it would be possible to make your EAP course resemble students' other courses?]

Participant: That's impossible. There' too many different majors, too many differen clssrooms. And even within the same major, they have different classroms. Maybe, no, I don't think much of that If you're in high school, because I taught a lot in public schools, yes. Higher education, uh-uh. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 16)

The second category I created is student affect, and this included data from 13 participants $( 5 0 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that their eforts to promote transfer were nluenced y students affetive reactions to the EAP coure. lmostall of these reorts were about students' limited motivation to learn and transfer learning from the EAP course. This category also included reports about students rctions to particular kinds of classactivities, more pecifically that students dsliked working collaboratively or wre afraid of writing. In this example, a participant stated that engineering students often question the value of the EAP course and appear to resist learning transfer:

Table 2 Participants' self-reported challenges in promoting learning transfer.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Part.</td><td colspan="5"></td><td colspan="5"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>curric. relev.</td><td>Stud. affect</td><td>curric. flex.</td><td>stud. ab./exp</td><td>inst. ability</td><td>teach. support</td><td>inst. time</td><td>inst. affect</td><td>stud. time</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>14</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>16</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>17</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>19</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>20</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>21</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>22</td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>23</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>24</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>J</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>25</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>26</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Tot.</td><td>20</td><td>13</td><td>12</td><td>12</td><td>11</td><td>7</td><td>6</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. "Part." $=$ participant; "curric. $=$ curriculum"; "relev." $=$ relevance; "stud." $=$ "student"; "flex." $=$ flexibility; "ab./exp." $=$ "ability or experience"; "inst." $=$ instructor; "teach." $=$ teaching; "Tot." $=$ total; $" \checkmark "$ indicates that a participant reported experiencing the kind of challenge described in that column's heading.

Participant: A lot of students, they think "I don't want o take English, what'sit going to do for me, I'm an engineer, what's i going to do for me?". A lot of my students are engineers. Aerospace, mechanical. \*We're not going to use this, we don't want to use this" (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 8)

The third category I created is curriculum flexibility, and this included data from 12 participants $( 4 6 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that their effrts to promote transfer were inluenced by limitations in th flexibility of the EAP course curriculum. Most of these reports were about the general structure of the EAP course in terms of time or content, in other words that there was a limited amount of time available or a large amount of required content to be covered. This category also included reports about more specific requirements for teaching the EAP course, including being required to use a particular digial tol, to include a particular number of assignments, or to include particular types of assignments. As this transcrit excerpt llustrate, a participant stated that an effort to promote transfer was not always possible because the provided curriculum prescribed content that had to be covered:

Researcher: What has been the main barrier for you doing that so far?

Participant: We are told what we have to teach. When you teach [these EAP courses], you'regiven the curriculum that you need to follow. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 5)

The fourth category I created is student ability or experience, and this included data from 12 participants $( 4 6 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that their fforts to promote transfer were influenced by limitations in the ability or experience students brought to the EAP course. Most of these reports were about students' ability, and this included general ability (i.e., students' limited current 2 proficiency) as well as abilities more specficll related to teaching for transfer (i.e., students not being able to se connections between courses, and students not being able to understand a particular teaching technique). This category also included reports about students experience; these were reports that students had not had experience with particular teaching techniques, such as being asked to write long essays. In the following transcript excerpt, a participant stated that in thi AP context, students current level of English proficiency is relatively low, and this makes some efforts to promote transfer difficult:

Participant: I think it depends on the students competence. If students are  beginning lel or intermediate level, if you ask them to come up with abstract things, from my experience it's so hard. I can never do it. But once you reach a certain level, you have that ability, and you actually can come up with these abstract ideas on your own. I think EAP107, they are intermediate level students So in that case I think it's just so hard. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 15)

The fifth category I created is instructor ability, and this included data from 11 participants $( 4 2 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that their effrts to promote transfer were influenced by limitations in their own knowledge. Almost al of these reports were about limitations in participants' knowledge of contexts where they hoped students would transfer learning. In addition, this category included reports f limitations in participants nowledge about teaching toos (e., digital technology) or techniques (.g., how to get students to generalize learning). In this example, a participant stated that i would be dificult to make an EAP course resemble students' other courses because the participant does not know what instructors do in other disciplines like psychology:

Participant: And the other constraint is my prior knowledge. I will notfel comfortable or secure if I try to have this kind of simulated context. I am not comfortable with that.

Researcher: Why?

Participant: That isrelated to my work experience. I'm used to teaching English language, grammar, reading, writing, listening, pronunciation. Everything about language. So I know what the language teaching looks like. But in terms of psychology, how canI know how a professr in psychology teaches? Or what would be the specific requirement for their research papers, should look like?I don't have this kind of mindset. If I just wanted to do what other professors do, I don't have a clue. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 2)

The sixth category I created is teaching support, and this included data from 7 participants $( 2 7 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that their fforts to promote transfer were influenced by having reeived a limited amount f professional support from administrative staff or other colleagues. Some of these reports were relatively general, referring to not feeling part of a professional community, having to few faculty metings, and being uncertain about how administrative staff would like faculty to teach. Other reports were more specifi, referring to colleagues limited interest in transfer or limited use of a particular teaching technique, a lack of transferspecific techingguidlines, and teaching traning having a lack f atentionto ling trnsfer. As this trascrip excrpt illstrates, a participant stated that the program does not include a supportive community in which ideas about promoting transfer can be shared with colleagues:

Participant: But this s another problem. We don't have a community. Other teachers, I can say what did you do'. We don't have that. If I have that, the ability to talk with other teachers, see what you guys do, that would be helpful. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 8)

The seventh category I created is instructor time, and this included data from 6 participants $( 2 3 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that their ffor  pot rasfer wrlc y is onthr ime. Athr challege, criuflexli, is alaedto instructors time; however that chllenge is about limited time within the EAP course rather than outside the EAP course.) Some of these participants rferred generally toa lack ftime others explained more pecifically that their time was limited beause in addition to teaching EAP courses, they also taught other courses or were involved in the development of online versions of courses. In the following transcrip excerpt, a participant stated that the participant wants to make eforts to promote transfer, but has not had enough time:

Researcher: Is there anything that you have wanted to do but haven't been able to?

Participant: Yes. Any number of things. There is so much that I want to try but just haven't had time. So for me, I have astructure that works right now, so what I do i I make small changes. The biggest overhaul that I did was last year and I ditched the third writing project in the middle of the semester. I realized that it wasn't going to be as useful s something elsethe students needed. So I made a new writing project. There was a lot of sleepless nights. Because I had to change a third of my class 2 weeks before the project started. So the idea of time and development. It was definitely trial by fire. In terms of working out how to talk about it with the students. I didn't have enough time to think about it myself. So having time to develop curricula outside normal working hours, that is something that's really important. Working on it over the break is different. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 7)

The eighth category I created is instructor affect, and this included data from 2 participants $( 8 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that their fforts to promote transfer were omtimes inluenced by their affective states.More pificall, thi ncludd participants references to having either low confidence or high anxiety about teaching. These participants also offered reasons for these affective states: One participant explained that it was the result of concern about being a non-native speaker of English; the other participant explained that it was the result of concern about how students would react to the participant's personality. In this example, a participant stated that the participant's limited confidence in teaching writing might lead students to question the participant's choice of teaching techniques:

Participant: On the other hand, I'm not a native speaker of English, so I don't have full confidence in teaching writing. That's why they [i.e., students] might question some activities. (emphasis added)

(Transcript from interview with participant 13)

The ninth and final category I created is student time, and this included data from 2 participants $( 8 \% )$ . These were participants' reports that their eforts to promote transfer were influenced by students time restrictions outside the EAP course. (Another challenge, curriculum flexilit, is also related to students' time; however that challenge i about limited time within the EAP course rather than outside the EAP course.)Both of the participants who reported such time restrictions referred specifically t students taing a large number of other course or academic credits in addition to the EAP course. As th following transcript excerpt illstrates, a participant explained that fforts to promote transfer might not be effective because students are taking so many courses that they might be too busy to benefit:

Participant: For them [i.e, the students in my class], they are just finshing undergraduate courses, when I see the kind of courses they're taking, it's usull seven or eight courses in the same semester, so it's hard for them to understand what I am learning, I have to learn here, and it's not that useful.

Researcher: Is it because of taking so many courses?

Participant: Yes. They're taking so many courses. (emphasis added) (Transcript from interview with participant 9)

# 5. Discussion

Regarding the first research question, the findings indicate that the participants self-reportedly did promote students' learning transfer. Allof the participants reported making an efort to do this. Given the persistent concern about learning transfer in EAP education (e.g., Ho, 2018; Liu, 2018; Monbec, 2018, 2019; Shooshtari et a., 2019; Wubalem, 2022) t i ressuring that intructors are making such eforts. While it has often been suggested that efforts should be made in EAP education to promote students' learning transfer (., James, 206, James, 2008, James, 2009, James, 2010, James, 2014; Chng, 2007; Crre, 199, Gen, 2015; Jwa, 2019, Yayli, 2011; Zarei & Rahimi, 2014), littl information has been available about whether such effrts are made. While it may be common in somection contts for transfer to be eft to chance cse f assumptions that i wil just ake care f itf (Perkins Salomon, 1988), in the EAP education context investigated in this study, this was not the case.

Also related to the first research question, the findings show that there is variety in these participants' self-reported promotion of learning transfer. Onef the most common techques the participan reorted tllin dens tha ling cansfer direl, sem similar to the technique used by the EAP instructor o promote transfer in Jeon's (2021) study. However, the participants in the present study collectively reported a wider range of techniques. Beides tlling students that leaing can transfer diretl, the other techniques commonly reported here were having students practiceauthenticaly and demonstrating with examples. These three techniques appear to fit with recommendations that EAP instructors design instruction to resemble transfer contexts (e.g., students other courses) (James 2006, James, 2008, James, 2009, James, 2014; Green, 2015; Zarei & Rahimi, 2014) and with the notion that transfer can occur with well-practiced habits and beause f ontextual similaitie (i.., low-oad transfer (Perkins & Salomon, 1988). For example, by elling students that leng can transfer to ther thr coures diretl, intctors are alerting stdents to similarities btween hose courses and the EAP course. Furthermore, though les common, these participants' self-reported effrts o promote transfer also involved ncouraging studnts to think stractl, asking studnts how they might be able totansfer laing, and hving stuents practice witing the same content for different audiences. These techniques appear to fit with recommendations that EAP instructors have students engage in abstract thinking and connection making James, 2008, James, 2014; Cheng, 2007; Cui, 2019; Currie, 199; Green, 2015; Grujici. c-Alatriste, 2013; Johns, 1988, 1997, 199; Jwa, 2019; Yayli, 2011; Zarei & Rahimi, 2014), and with the notion that transfer can occur with abstract knowledge and despite contextual dferences (i.., high-road transfer) (Perkins & Salomon, 198). Although the actual impact of these techniques is uncertain here (i., this was not part of the study's research questions so was not investigated), these findings show that the techniques these instructors reported using do reflect recommended techniques for promoting learning transfer in EAP education, in particular recommendations to design instruction to resemble transfer contexts and thereby promote low-road transfer.

Regarding the second research question, the findings indicate that the participants self-reportedly experienced a variety of chal. lenges in promoting students' leaning transfer. The challenges were related to the curriculum (i.., its relevance, flexibility, and support), to stts i., thr aiity or expri, time, d afet), n to the rtints thmee (.. ther aiit, tme, and affect. There is some overlap here with the limited previous research on EAP instructor perspectives on learning transfer (Jeon, 2021), in which it was suggested that an instructor can be challenged by a disconnection between an EAP course and other courses and by students having limited motivation to transfer leaning. Furthermore, there is overlap with other research that investigated instructor challenges. Effrts to promote students' learning transfer have been assciated with a variety of challenges in non-EAP education contexts (i.e., Lightner et al., 2008; Tursucu et al., 2017), and this was aso the case in the EAP education context investigated in this study. Also, in L2 education contexts, eforts to promote students learning have been associatd with variet of challenges (Cares, 2004, 2007; Chen & Wright, 2017; Erlam, 2015; Hiep, 207; Humphries & Burns, 2015; Ko, 2013; Li, 1998; Li & Baldauf, 2011; Orafi & Borg, 2009), andthis was also the case with effort to romote students leaning transfer in this study. t ppears, then, that promoting learning trasfer in EAP dcation is dficult not only bse transfer is elusive (Deman, 193; Haskel, 2001) ut aso eause it is associated with a variety of instructional challenges.

These findings have practical implications for EAP education, in particular for supporting instructors. First, in determining what kind of transfer-related support might be needed by instructors in a given EAP education context, i makes sense to begin by asking the instructors what they may already be doing to promote tansfer. It is posible that intructors are promoting transfer in ways that overlap with recommended techniques. Ifso, instructors can keep doing what they are already doing. It is also possible, though, that instructors are using a limited range of techniques. As Table 1 shows, for most of this study's participants (i.e., 18 $[ 7 0 \% ] )$ , only one or two techniques were reported, and for most of the participants (i.e., $2 0 [ 7 7 \% ] $ , the reported techniques are only those associated with designin instctio remble trnsfer contts (i the thre chqes onth let si f the table), andnt those ascied with having students engage in abstract thinking and connection making (i.., the three techniques on the right id f the table). In a case like this, instructors can aim to use a wider range of techniques to address both of the ways that transfer can occur (i.e, low-road transfer and high-road transfer), which \*practically guarantees making the most of whatever potential transfer a subject matter af fords" (Perkins & Salomon, 1988, p.30). Furthermore, regardlessof what instructors may already be doing to promote learning transfer, reflecting on this can be beneficial for instructrs according to Brown and Lee (2015), such a reflective approach i "the key to healthy teacher development" (p.546).

Second, thistudys findings point in specific directions that could be taken to help EAP instructors repare for challenges they may face in promoting students' learning transfer. Providing such help seems prudent, given that most of the participants (.e., 22 $[ 8 5 \% ] )$ reported experiencing multiple challenge see Table2) For instance, to address the challenge that was most common here, curriculum relevance, it may be possible to arrange for EAP courses to be discipline-specific. Grouping students in this way would facilitate the instructor designing the course to resemble transfer contexts; as a result, this should help with low-road transfer. However, this approach might be complicated structurall (e.g., requiring substantial changes to existing systems for student placement and assesment, as wllas eisting instructional materials) and might not be supported by administrative staf (e.g., an EAP program's director, or a director of the unit or larger intitution in which an EAP program is housed). In these cases, an instructor could instead focus on having students engage in astract thinking and connection making, perhaps by regularlyasking students where and how they can apply what they lean in the EAP course in their major areas of study. This should help with high-road transfer, which by definition (Perkins & Salomon, 1988 i essensitive to context and therfore lesslikely to be affcted by differences in students major areas of study.

Another common challenge here was student affect, and to address this instructors could use techniques to try to increase students motivation. Research suggests that EAP students' motivation to transfer learning can be influenced by their perceptions that they are able to use academic nglish skils efectively and that transfer will benefit them (James, 2012). It could therefore be helpul for EAP instructors to try to make students aware of (a) improvements in their EAP abilities (., by providing peformance feedback regularly and having students track improvements) and (b) concrete benefits that learning transfer can have in other courses (e.g., by providing samples of other courses' assignment prompts that indicate quality of language use is graded).

One more common challenge here was curiculum flexibilit. In contexts where EAP instructors are provided with a curriculum that prescribes content and materials and leaves littleclass time for alternative, an instructor could find and use techniques that are relatively easy to insert into class. This could include techniques like elling students that learning is directly transferable and asking students how they might be abl to transfer learning, such techniques are relatively unintrusive and therefore could be used easily and regularly, with little negative impact on class time.

These ways of helping EAP instructors to prepare for transfer-related challenges underscore the importance of in-service support. Brown and Lee (2015) suggest that such support can be provided by building communities of practice in which instructors can communicate about professional isues. This might include helping instructors to observe each other's classes, to video record their own teaching so they can revie the recordings with colleages, to conduct collaboratie classroom-base reearch, and to team teach or work together on currculum development. With any of these activities, the focus can be learning transfer. For example, observations of clases can focus on how transfer-promoting teaching techniques are being used, classroom-based research can focus on whether such techniques are having a positive impact from students perspectives, and currculum development can involve the creation of transfer-related goals and objectives, teaching materials, and assessment tools.

In providing such support, an important consideration will be instructors conditions of employment. For instance, in this study's context, the amount f teaching expected f instructors varie crossthe type f intitution and across emploment status cateries e. g, fl-time, part-time). As a result, some intructors may be teaching large numbers of courses on a permanent basis, whil other instructors may have smaller numbers of courses and be employed on a temporary basis and may have other academic or professional commitments such as completig their own graduate degres. With such diverse circumstances, it may be helpful for intructor support to be provided in multiple ways. For instance, for instructors who fel they have limited knowledge of contexts where they hope students wil transfer learning, a program's administratie saff could arrange for instructrs to be provided with aclear set of needs analysis results, tols that can be used by instructors themselves to conduct informal nees analyses, and opportunities and time to participate in program-wide formal needs analyses. Furthermore, in situations where intructors fel limited control or ownership of the curriculum, the curculum that is provided to instructors might be desiged in a way that addresses learning transfer, for example by including teaching materials that systematically incorporate techniques like hugging and bridging. Such options would help instructors to find support that fits their individual circumstances and needs.

# 6. Limitations and future directions

This study has important limitations. First, this study was conducted with a small number of instructors from a small number of similar academic institutions in one specific geographic location. This approach was sufficient for answering the research questions, and the scope was similar to previous studies of L2 instructors perspectives on teaching methodology sues (Carles, 2007; Couper, 2017; East, 2012; Erlam, 2015; Hennebry, 2014; Li, 1998; Nissen & Tea, 2012) and to previous studies of learning transfer in EAP contexts (Hill et l., 2020; Jwa, 2019; Kang, 2022; Law & Fong, 2020; Shrestha, 2017; Wilson & Soblo, 2020). However, it ispossible that including instructors from other EAP education contexts would reveal different patterns e., fewer or more teaching techniques, fewer or more challenges), and with this in mind, it would be worthhil for future reearch to investigat similar reearch questions in other EAP education contexts. Since this study focused on acontext where the EAP approach was general (i.., EGAP), studies could be conducted in contexts where approaches are more discipline-specific (i.e., English for specific academic purposes [ESAP]. Discipline-specificty can help an EAP course to reemble transfer contexts (.., ugging), so studies in these contexts might investigate Whether istructors view discipline-specificit as sufficient for promoting transfer, or whether they promote transfer in other ways too, such as having students engage in abstract thinking and connection making (i.e., bridging). Such studies could lead to interesting comparisons with this study's findings.

Second, this study focused on instructors perspectives. This made sense given the lack of research on EAP instructors' perspectives on learning transfer, and since the research questions' dealt with instructional decision making and challenges, a focus on instructors perspectives was critical. However, an important limitation of such an approach is uncertainty about the degree of correspondence between instructors self-reports and their actual behavior. In research on language teacher beliefs, Borg and Alshumaimeri (2019) pointed out that the relationship between what instructors say and what instructors do is complex, and that discrepancies are likely. With this in mind, it is possile that including additional sources of data, such as classrom observations, or interviews with students who take the courses and administrative staff who evaluate the courses, would be useful. Such data might reveal that an instructor unintentionally or unknowingly promotes learning transfer, or that students do not notice the techniques that an instructor inten. tionally uses. Such findings would be helpful in determining with precision what steps need to be taken in EAP education to promote students' learning transfer.

Third, the studys findings are categories that I created. As described in the section above on data analysis, I crated category labels based on the content of the units I was reading in the interview transcripts. Such an inductive approach is common in qualitative research and made sense given the exploratory nature of the current study. Furthermore, the procedure I used for checking inter-rater reliability demonstrated the clarity of the category labels and descriptions that I had created. Nevertheless, these labels and de. scriptions reflect my perspective on the data. For example, I created one category calld student time"; someone else might have labeled this "student workload' or "student duties".

Fourth, this study focused on the kinds of efforts instructors make to promote students learning transfer, but did not focus on the frequency with which such efforts are made. This aproach was suitable for the study's research questions; however, information about frequency would alsobe valuable. More pecificall, two instructors may use the same techniques to promote students learning transfer, but if one instructor does so only sporadicall, and the other instructor does so regularly, the impact on students' learning transfer could be quite different. Thi is reflected in a concern expressed by Perkins and Salomon (198), that although instructors may use techniques that could promote transfer, "rarely i this done perstently and systematically enough tosaturate the context of education with attention to transfer' (p.29. Future research that investigates the frequency of EAP instructors efforts to promote

transfer is a way to address this concern.

Finally, and related to the prvious limitatio, this study did not examine resons for variation in the frequency of different types of reported efforts. Techniques associated with desiging instruction to resemble transfer contexts (ie, the three techniques on the eft side of Table 1) were much more commonly reported here than techniques ssociated with having students engage in abstract thinking and connection making (i.., the threetchniques on the right side of Table 1). This variatin is important because the es common techniques are the kind associated with high-road transfer. In contrast to low-road transfer, high-road transfer does not rely on contextual similarity, so it can cover greater distances; as a result, promoting high-road transfer may be a particularly desirable goal. Reasons for this variation are uncertain: Perhaps the more commonly reported techniques are more often covered in teacher education programs, or might be more salient to instructors who are reflecting on how they teach for transfer,or might more naturally emerge through teaching experience. These reasons may point to further research questions about the role of individual differences, such as whether instructors dicilinary backround, laguage roficiency, g, or profesional expriece influences thei efforts to promote transfer. Research that investigates such reasons and further research questions would be worthwhile, helping to shed light on the kinds of support that might be most helpful for intructors and that might have a particularly valuable impact (e.g, promoting highroad transfer).

Despite it imitations, this study indings are valuable. The promotion of learning transfer isvital to the succes of EAP education, and instructors are the front line of institutionalefforts to promote EAP students learning transfer; owever, instructors' perspectives have been understudied in research on learning transfer in EAP education. This study explored EAP instructors perspectives i detail, revealing the kinds of eforts instructors self-reportedly make to promote students' learning transfer and the kinds of challenges instructors self-reportedly facein doing so; as a result tis study helps to add a new dimension to our understanding of learning transfer in EAP education.

# CRediT author statement

Mark James: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Formal analysis, Resources, Writing - original draft Writing - review and editing, Visualization, Project administration.

# Appendix 1

Examples of materials and assignments from EAP107 and EAP108 syllabi

Coursebooks:

: Axelrod, R.B., & Cooper, C.R. (2018). The St. Martin's guide to writing (12th ed.). Bedford/St. Martin.   
. Ferris, D.R. (2014). Language power: Tutorials for writers. Macmillan.   
. Lunsford, A.A., Ruszkiewicz, J.J., & Walters, K. (2012). Everything's an argument (6th ed.). Bedford/St. Martin.   
. Mangelsdorf, K., & Posey, E. (2010). The world of writing: A guide. Pearson.   
. Mauk, J., & Metz, J. (2016). Inventing arguments (4th ed.). Cengage.

Brief descriptions of multi-draft 3000-5000 word writing assignments:

: Analyze a concept (e.g., environmental fragility, biological evolution, economic demand)   
. Analyze a text (e.g., the text's audience and purpose, and strength of the text's argument)   
. Argue a position (e.g., about an environmental issue, a social issue)   
: Create an annotated bibliography   
. Describe an event that impacted you   
: Describe a problem and propose a solution   
. Explain a concept that is of interest to you   
. Investigate the cause of an event   
. Provide an extended definition of an abstract term

# References

Auerbach, C. F. (2003). Qudlitative data: An introduction to coding and analysis. New York, NY: New York University Press.   
Benson, S. D. (2016). Task-based language teaching: An empirical study of task transfer. Language Teaching Research, 20(3), 341-365.   
Brown, H. D., & Lee, H. (2015). Teaching by principles: An interactive approach to language pedgogy (4th ed.). White Plains, NY: Pearson.   
Carless, D. (2004). ssues in teachers' reinterpretation of a task-based innovation in primary chools. Tesol Quarterly, 38(4), 639-662.   
Carles, D. (2007). The suitailit f task-based approaches for secondary schools: Perspectives from Hong Kong. System, 35, 595-608.   
heng, 2007). Tnsferrg gnric fres ad ronxalizing e ares Uderandng wting pance in th  e-ased iteracy framework. English for Specific Purposes, 26, 287-307.   
Chen, Q., & Wrigh, C. (2017). ntxalization and thnicty in T: ies from hine aroms. ngge echin c, 1(4), 517-538.   
C  01 i q    t   ti.   
Couper, G. (2017). Teacher cognition of pronunciation teaching: Teachers' concerns and issue Tesol Quarterly, 51(4), 820-843.   
Cui, w. (2019). Teaching for transfer to first-year L2 writers. Journal of International Students, 9(4), 1115-1133.   
Currie, P. (1999). Transferable skills: Promoting student research. English for Specific Purposes, 18(4), 329-345.   
Day, . e  012 h t of   in  t of rf  g o st 47, 153-176.   
Dett (1993.  for t otiofer a n hn  Den  J.terg ds.) Tfer n i i, cognition, and instruction (pp. 1-24). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corp.   
ast,  2012). k-d nge th romhe tchers ptiv nhs rm  d. Amst, The lan Jo ns Publishing.   
Erlam, R. (2015). 'l New tricks': Teachers talk about task-based language teaching. Babel, 50(1), 4-11   
Flowerdew, J. (2016). English for specific academic purposes (ESAP) writing: Making the case. Writing & Pedagogy, 8(1), 5-32.   
Fogarty, R., Perkins, D., & Barell J. (1992). How to teach for transfer. Palatine, IL: Skylight Publishing.   
Ford, J.K, awin, , Fod, J. (2018). Traser f tng Th knw nd h n. l eew f Oiol Phoy d zon Behavior, 5, 201-225.   
Green, J. H. (2015). Teaching for transfer in EAP: Hugging and bridging revisited. English for Specific Purposes, 37, 1-12.   
rjiiste  013).  dnrs ef i e g  s fnser ond-language and composition studies. Journal of Second Language Writing, 22, 460-464.   
Hghig, i01i t  nti  or e. TESOL Journal, 10, Article e00431.   
Haskell, R. E. (2001). Transfer of learning: Cognition, instruction, and reasoning. San Diego, CA: Academic Press Inc.   
Ha H, Vti,. (202)g rnr t the w st f tgish an rg n h.    ng 34(1) 110-131.   
Hennebry, M. (2014). anguage teaching for European citizenship: Insights for teacher education. Language Leaning Jounal, 42(3), 289-306.   
Hiep, P. H. (2007). Communicative language teaching: Unity within diversity. ELT Journal, 61(3), 193-201.   
Hil, ,   e  0 inti  the n er of ish r    ng klo Singapore. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 48, Article 100908.   
Ho, C.H e  tion. 13837750) [Doctoral dissertation, Chinese University of Hong Kong]. ProQuest.   
Humphries, S., & Burns, A. (2015). In reality it's almost impossible': CLT-oriented curriculum change. ELT Jounal, 69(3), 239-248.   
Hyland,  (2016. al and sfic AP.  K Hland, & . Shw s.) Th Re hndook of Eih for dic es (p. 17-29. Rutege.   
James, M. A. (2006). Transfer of learning from a university content-based EAP course. TEs0L Quarterly, 40, 783-806.   
Jaes 08. if   k s e  w i,76-10.   
James, M  (2009). ar tranfer f lng outcomes from an SL witing couse: an the gap be bridd? Jounal of Second Lnge Writing 18, 9-84.   
ames, 010). n itigi f lg se inis-orl wig intio.  f  gwing 19, 183-206.   
James, M. A. (2012). An investigation of motivation to transfer second language learning. The Modern Language Jounal, 96, 51-69.   
Jae, 014 nr c   s   14,11.   
Jen  201).x th       AP  . h/./.11733809740 e publication.   
Johs, A (1988. The r iesd fin fble sills r te a me. ish for ific P, 7,55-60.   
Johns, A. M. (1997). Text role, and context: Developing academic iteracies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Jons, M(19 g r dor n litt apc (A g it .  Hk,  Ly,   .) Generation 1.5 mees collge compositio: sses in the teaching of writin to US-educated laners of ESL (pp. 119-142). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Jwa.  019 n t    h   3, 109-118.   
ang,.f     a  ti  e  pi.  of is fr es 56, Article 101096. Research, 24(4), 519-539.   
Ko, M-Y. (2013). A case study of an EL techer's criticl literacy teching ina eding las in Twan. uage chng Rch, 171), 91-108.   
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2013). Transfer of learning transformed. Language Learning, 63(supplement 1), 107-129.   
Le, . (2021). mpriso wig s  wtin d irstr otion   st of on sit.  hn ch, 253) 360-377.   
Li ..   t Quarterly, 32(4), 677-703.   
Li, M  f, 11  m   fi h   l, 4 93-80.   
Ligher, R, nder, R, & Ker,  F. (200). Fcy an stt ait at tranfer f lg Inight Jo of harly hig 3, 586.   
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.   
Liu, J. Y. (2018). Exploring genre pedagogy of learning transfer in L2 writing. The Asian Journal of Alied Linguisics, 5(1), 46-59.   
McDowell, M. (2021). Teaching for transfer: A guide for designing learning with real-world appication. Bloomington: Solution Tre Pres.   
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebo Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications   
Monbec, L. (2018). Designing an EAP currculum for transfer: A focus on knowledge. Jounal ofAcademic Language and Leaming, 12(2), 88-101.   
Monbec, L. (2019). Transfer from English for academic purposes to disciplinary modules [doctoral thesis]. The Open University.   
Moore, J. L. (2012). Designing for transfer: A threshold concept. Journal of Faculty Development, 26(3), 19-24.   
Nisse,E., & Tea, E. (2012). Going blended: New challenge for second generation L2 tutors. Computer ssed Languag Leming, 25(2), 145-163.   
Orafi, s. M. S., & Borg, S. (2009). Intentions and relities in implementing communicative curriculum reform. System, 37, 243-253.   
Perkins, D. N., & Salomon, G. (1988). Teaching for transfer. Educational Leadership, 46, 22-32.   
Perkin   199)fr    .  .d. . o on . 6452-6457). Oxford, UK: Pergamon.   
Shoshtr 01s a    n  iate LTSI. Asian ESP Journal, 14(1), 193-219.   
hrea t    rite potential of dynamic assessment. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 25, 1-17.   
a  ki Teaching Research, 18(4), 453-473.   
Tu   h014   n  ititshi e, 3, 39-53. university education. International Journal of Science Education, 39(5), 587-604.

Wison, J.A o H (2020. fer d rftin n mlin stt wing Jo of Eish for Ac Pes,44, il 100812. a  r    i 17. Yayli, D. (2011). From gre awareness to coss-re awaress study in an EFL context. Joal of English for Ademic Puposes, 10, 121-129 Zarei, G. R., & Rahimi, A. (2014). Learning transfer in English for general academic purposes writing. SAGE Open, 1-12. January-March.

Mark nd J i a asa orf apld insic  th ish t t Aont sit. . Jam s g L a pled gi       J ,  n cnd language education, in particular practical and theoretical aspects of learning transfer.