Book review

Writing the Research Paper: Multicultural Perspectives for Writing in English as a Second Language (Teaching and Learning English Language and Literacy Skills), Philip M. McCarthy, Khawlah Ahmed. Bloomsbury Academic, London (2022). 224 pp Hardback: US\$ 95; Paperback: US\$29.95; E-book: US $\$ 26.95$ .

The title of this book may give readers the wrong idea that it has to do with writing two major genres in academic writing, namely research articles and theses (Hyland, 2008). The truth is that the genre discussed in the book is argumentative writing as an undergraduate-level course assignment in an L2 context. As the authors have stated in the introduction (p. 5), the term argumentative is used to “refer to the style of writing a research paper”.

This book is a valuable contribution to L2 writing because argumentative writing is an essential marker of second language proficiency, and it is a critical genre for academic literacy assessment across disciplines (Chuang & Yan, 2022; Wingate, 2012; Wu et al., 2023). It is the most prevalent genre in university settings and standardized English tests (e.g., GRE, IELTS, TOEFL). Several studies have reported the difficulties of argumentative writing in L2 contexts (e.g., Hirvela, 2017; Abdi Tabari, 2021; Hirvela & Belcher, 2021; Yoon & Abidi Tabari, 2023; Li & Wang, 2024). Furthermore, Hirvela (2017) noted that, compared to the wealth of argumentative industry in an L1 context, there is a deficit of resources dedicated to teaching and practicing argumentative writing in an L2 context such that we hardly know how argumentative writing, in particular, is taught and learned in different educational contexts. In attempting to fill this gap, Hirvela and Belcher edited a collective volume in 2021 on argumentative writing in an L2 context. While their book concerned research and pedagogy, the present book under review—Writing the Research Paper: Multicultural Perspectives for Writing in English as a Second Language—is mainly oriented towards teaching, not research. This book presents a pertinent addition to pedagogical resources by delving into various theories, insights, and strategies for mastering argumentative writing in an L2 setting.

The book consists of fifteen chapters divided into three parts. The first part introduces key concepts to help readers understand and think critically about the content they will need for their argumentative writing. Part 2 is more practical and covers the core skills involved in argumentative writing, such as theme and topic selection (ch. 3), question statement (ch. 4), searching for evidence (ch. 5), and integrating sources (chs. 6 and 7). The final section covers aspects and components of the entire writing process, including planning (ch. 8) and drafting processes (ch. 9), the introduction (chs. 10 and 15), the main body (chs. 11, 12 and 13) and the conclusion (ch. 13).

As Yoon and Abidi Tabari (2023) recently noted, a course on argumentative writing should focus on critical thinking and analytical writing skills (Yoon & Abidi Tabari, 2023). Thus, in the opening chapter, the authors introduce the concept of critical thinking, defined as the ability to ask a series of “uncomfortable but honest questions” with disconcerting answers. The authors use one of their own writing samples to show how to ask critical questions. The fourteen listed questions illustrate what to ask and answer. Chapter 2 defines the purposes and essential factors that affect the quality of a piece of argumentative writing. Both the general purpose, which aims to develop the field, and the specific purpose, which aims to change the reader’s perspective, are briefly discussed. However, understanding the purposes alone is not enough to produce a piece of good argumentative writing. According to the authors, a piece of good argumentative writing should incorporate four ‘scholarly practices’: critical thinking, source evaluation, argument organization, and article presentation.

The first step in writing an argumentative essay is establishing a theme and topic. In Chapter 3, the authors use examples and tools from multiple disciplines to show how to select an appropriate theme and topic. They use a critical thinking method to help readers reflect on the topic’s viability, rationality, practicality, and originality. The requirements in one’s country and department, interests, the availability of resources, and topic flexibility are essential in choosing the topic. It should be noted that requirements are easily neglected, as the authors mention some topics are exciting and vital, but infringe on local laws, customs, and traditions. These are issues that writers should know before writing, especially in some Asian and Middle East countries. As L2 writing teachers ourselves who teach introductory research writing classes at Nanjing Medical University and Nanjing Normal University, we follow this advice by telling our students at the beginning what positions they should or should not take on specific topics and the topics that cannot be discussed. After the topic selection, writers must consider their position (ch. 4) and how to support it (ch. 5).

In Chapter 4, the authors use a comparative method to illustrate these acceptable and problematic question statements. They list different types, resources, and qualities of sources. They also direct readers to various electronic databases. Finding and integrating sources into writing is a critical challenge for our undergraduate students, especially for L2 learners (Plakans & Gebril, 2017; Kwon et al., 2018).

Essential skills such as summarizing, synthesizing, and paraphrasing are required to integrate the main idea into a text and uphold an opinion. However, these skills are cognitively complex to learn because of the high demands in terms of critical literacy (Yoon & Abidi Tabari, 2023). Chapters 6 and 7 deal with exactly this problem. Using authentic examples, the authors first illustrate three primary forms of plagiarism (direct plagiarism, mosaic plagiarism, and ghostwriting). Numerous students commit plagiarism (especially mosaic plagiarism) because they do not fully understand how to paraphrase, summarize, and quote. The authors show the same source can be used in different ways by having three students paraphrase, summarize and quote them, so that they would learn to distinguish the three modes properly. However, the difference is not the point. According to our teaching experience, new L2 writers may be still unaware of their inappropriate use of a source text. It would have been helpful, however, if the authors could have used data-driven learning to prompt students to explore the structural models and language resources they can use to summarize, paraphrase and quote.

Part 3 is devoted to the writing process and the three crucial components of argumentative writing: the introduction, body, and conclusion. Planning is critical, being the logical first step before writing. Nine elements should be considered when creating a writing plan: theme/topic, introduction, research method, annotated bibliography, scheduling, concerns, outline, writing style, and reference section. In each section, the authors formulate questions to develop critical thinking about writing. Some questions are useful (e.g., Who is your audience? What do you know about these people?), while others are redundant and seem unrelated to the topic (e.g., Do you need to celebrate the success of having gotten this far? How well did you do in previous writing courses?). Questions such as “what is your topic” and “what is your thesis” recur again and again. Chapter 8 does not focus on writing techniques, such as structure, language conventions, or conveying information. It is more of a reflection on writing a plan. One would assume that some sequential steps (first draft, revision, seeking feedback, revision, and final draft) would be dealt with in Chapter 9, since the title refers to the drafting process. However, the authors only briefly describe five ingredients that writers should consider throughout the writing process. These are the structure of the presentation, the coherence of the writing, the content of the paper, the tone of the article, and the persuasiveness of the argument.

At the end of the book, the authors discuss different components of argumentative writing. The introduction was categorized into two types: the writers’ introduction (ch. 10 “the first full draft introduction that you write” p.120) and the reader’s introduction (ch. 15 “last full draft introduction—the one you will submit at the end of the course” p.120). Students may not readily understand the different definitions and purposes of the two types of introductions. This unnecessary categorization could lead to cognitive load and confusion among readers. The authors use suitable and familiar topics such as climate change and cybersecurity to illustrate the ingredients of an introduction: research questions, definition of key concepts, supporting evidence, counter-evidence, and importance of the topic.

For the writers’ introduction, the authors recommend a four-paragraph approach: a brief introduction of the topic, reasons for choosing it, alternative views, importance, and significance. They also use a student example to show the division of the introduction into four paragraphs and provide a short commentary. Apart from structural considerations, they propose the concept of ‘frozen expressions’ and provide several examples to show the use of these academic formulas in the introduction. However, these examples are meager compared to Fang’s (2021) language resources to instantiate each move. Introducing a corpus-based analysis to teach students to explore more language resources would have been more instructive.

The body of the text, showcasing the writer’s argumentative skills, is not explored in depth in this book. In Chapter 11, the authors emphasize the organization of evidence, give five commonly used formations for the body, and briefly discuss formatting issues and the topic of subtitles. The authors also illustrate the three different functions of sentences: topic opener, supporting sentences, and topic closer. The most expected things, like moves and language resources to instantiate each move, how to find evidence, and how to construct logical reasoning to support the position taken in the body section, are not presented or fully explored in this chapter. Chapters 12 and 13 discuss paragraph organization and coherence, but the guidance provided lacks specificity, considering a public of undergraduates in L2 contexts.

The conclusion (ch. 14) “serves the purpose of providing the audience with the take-home message of a paper” (p. 165). The authors provide five heuristics for the conclusion: presentation, consistency of content, consistency of tone, and persuasiveness. What makes this section highly practical is the clear distinction between what should and should not be included in the conclusion. However, some points need to be critically examined and require more discussion. For example, the authors state there is no need for definitions or subheaders in the conclusion. It’s not true in some cases. At the end of the chapter, the authors give an example of a conclusion, followed by a short analysis. The extended example without highlights or marks accompanied by a concise analysis may cause a reading overload.

This book is designed for advanced writing courses with the goal of facilitating L2 students producing argumentative writing. It can be a practical introduction to argumentative writing for undergraduate students in L2 contexts and a useful resource for writing teachers. Firstly, the language in this book is not technical, making it very student-friendly. At the beginning of the book, the authors devote twelve pages to a glossary with easily understood definitions of more than one hundred words and phrases. The chapter format—starting with a five-point recap to summarize what has been discussed in the previous chapter and ending with a closing summary of “five things I have learnt”—reinforces student learning. In addition, the book is backed by a website (writingtheresearchpaper.com) offering chapter summaries, exercises, quizzes, PowerPoints, teaching materials, and technical assistance. The website also contains numerous authentic examples of students’ papers at each critical stage of the writing process. It provides teachers

with rich resources they can integrate into lessons.

The chapter titles indicate the broad areas covered by this book. To our disappointment, some important concepts like coherence, counterarguments, and essential skills like synthesizing and summarizing are not closely scrutinized, turning the book into a mere short introduction. It is not a complete overview of argumentative writing. Students will need extra support from teachers to understand the concepts and use the skills brought up in the book. This is an unfortunate reality, as the length of each chapter is no more than twenty pages.

The authors encourage students to ask critical questions about their writing. These questions are useful for writers to reflect on, but of little use in drafting. To help students write an annotated bibliography, the authors have listed nine questions to make students think about their sources. We would expect to see a list of practical skills, such as how to help students summarize multiple sources and information into one coherent text and integrate them into the argument. In addition, authors should make their language more accurate. For example, when defining an introduction, the author uses an analogy like “It is very formulaic and looks and feels like an abstract” (p.120). This is not very rigorous and may even mislead beginners because abstracts and introductions differ in length, aims, and moves. Another example is the definition of qualitative research: “qualitative data are generally collected from a large number of participants” (p. 57).

Although this book has some shortcomings, there is a lack of research on L2 argumentative writing, teaching, and research. This book fills a gap by helping readers understand argumentative writing in an L2 context. Although this book covers various aspects of argumentative writing in an L2 context, future studies can explore this book’s concepts and skills in more detail, and it is recommended that the socio-cultural and psychological aspects of L2 writers be included.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Liping Chen: Writing – review & editing. Lu Huang: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

# References

Abdi Tabari, M. (2021). Task preparedness and L2 written production: Investigating effects of planning modes on L2 learners’ focus of attention and output. Journal of Second Language Writing, 52. Article 100814.   
Chuang, P. L., & Yan, X. (2022). An investigation of the relationship between argument structure and essay quality in assessed writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 56. Article 100892.   
Fang, Z. (2021). Demystifying Academic Writing: Genres, Moves, Skills, and Strategies. New York: Routledge.   
Hirvela, A. (2017). Argumentation & second language writing: Are we missing the boat? Journal of Second Language Writing, 36, 69–74.   
Hirvela, A., & Belcher, D. D. (2021). Argumentative Writing in a Second Language: Perspectives on research and pedagogy. The University of Michigan Press.   
Hyland, K. (2008). Academic clusters: Text patterning in published and postgraduate writing. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 18(1), 41–62.   
Kwon, M. H., Staples, S., & Partridge, R. S. (2018). Source work in the first-year L2 writing classroom: Undergraduate L2 writers’ use of reporting verbs. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 34, 86–96.   
Li, J., & Wang, J. (2024). A measure of EFL argumentative writing cognitive load: Scale development and validation. Journal of Second Language Writing, 63. Article 101095.   
Plakans, L., & Gebril, A. (2017). An assessment perspective on argumentation in writing. Journal.   
Wingate, U. (2012). Argument!’ Helping students understand what essay writing is about. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 11, 145–154.   
Wu, Q., Jin, T., Chen, J., & Lei, J. (2023). Peer leadership in collaborative argumentative writing: A qualitative case study of blended design. Journal of Second Language Writing, 60. Article 100995.   
Yoon, H., & Abidi Tabari, M. (2023). Authorial voice in source-based and opinion-based argumentative writing: Patterns of voice across task types and proficiency levels. Journal of English for Academic Purposes. Article 101228.