# BALEAP news - Introduction to SIGs – Law

We have invited individual SIGs to showcase their activities in this and upcoming instalments of BALEAP news – our third is: BALEAP Law SIG:

The Law SIG was set up in April 2022 after interest from the BALEAP community was evident during the BALEAP Conference in April 2021. Given the growing popularity of studying law in English, it was felt that a SIG devoted to issues surrounding English for Academic Legal Purposes (EALP) would be a useful addition to the BALEAP SIG portfolio. The main goal of the SIG is to provide a useful forum within which EALP practitioners can share their knowledge and experience with others to improve their own practice and ultimately the experience of our learners. It could also be of interest to law academics who themselves face challenges teaching students whose first language is not English, as it may give them a greater insight into the linguistic challenges law students face, and how these challenges could be addressed.

There are many areas of interest that we hope to be able to explore through the SIG, addressing issues that have already become apparent through communication with our members. Developing legal literacy is important for learners as it is fundamental to their being able to engage with different legal genres, such as legislation and case law, in a critical way. However, it can be difficult for EALP practitioners to support learners with this because it requires them to develop their own legal literacy as well, which can be a daunting and somewhat time-consuming prospect. Linked to this is the necessity to help learners to understand legalese, which involves the comprehension of complex grammatical structures and legal jargon. Given that many EALP practitioners may themselves find legalese difficult to understand, this can pose a significant challenge.

A further area we hope to explore in the SIG is the creation and use of materials to support learning. Given the difficulties outlined above, it is not always easy to find or create materials that will help to develop learners’ legal literacy while still enabling the EALP practitioner to create a positive learning environment in which both the learners and the practitioner feel confident and safe.

It is hoped that through providing a forum where ideas, challenges, and experience can be shared, the Law SIG will help practitioners to develop their EALP practice to the benefit of their learners. We held our first online event in June 2022, during which four committee members delivered short presentations on different issues in EALP, touching on contextual issues, criticality, encouraging communication in the classroom, and vocabulary development. The second online event was held in November 2022, the theme of which was the provision of EALP support throughout the academic year. Some members delivered lightning talks on problems and solutions related to EALP provision.

We are also planning to hold monthly informal events online during which members can attend and talk about whatever they wish related to EALP. These events will be called The Robing Room, which is a reference to the room at court in which advocates change into their court attire and often have informal conversations with their colleagues about their cases or their lives in general. We hope to replicate that at these monthly events.

Those interested in the Law SIG's activity can visit our website at https://baleaplawsig.co.uk, where there are details about our committee members and past and future events.

Samantha Stark (University of Leeds) – Chair Jill Northcott (University of Edinburgh) – Deputy Chair Smaragda Kampouri (University of Nottingham) – Treasurer Neil Allison (University of Glasgow) – Secretary Chris Pajak (University of Leeds) - Communications/Promotions Officer Jenny Kemp (University of Leicester) - Research and Scholarship Officer