# Intercultural rhetoric research: beyond texts

Ulla Connor

Indiana University—Purdue University at Indianapolis, Cavanaugh Hall, Room 129, 425 University Boulevard, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5143, USA

# Abstract

This paper proposes a set of new methods for intercultural rhetoric research that is context-sensitive and, in many instances, goes beyond mere text analysis. It considers changes in the field as intercultural rhetoric has moved from the EAP study of student essays to the study of writing in many disciplines and genres. New developments in text, genre, and corpus analyses are introduced to enable researchers and teachers in the field to consider these new writing products and processes in their specific contexts. It is emphasized that future intercultural rhetoric research continues using a variety of research tools to determine base line comparisons, with appropriate tertia comparationes, to explain differences and similarities in written products, as well as in the activity of writing through a number of qualitative approaches.

$©$ 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: EAP; Text analysis; Genre analysis; Corpus analysis; Ethnographic approach; Tertium comparationis

# 1. Introduction

Intercultural rhetoric research is interdisciplinary in its theoretical and methodological orientation. It draws on theories and research methods from second language acquisition, composition and rhetoric, anthropology, translation studies, linguistic discourse analysis, and genre analysis. Recently, there has been a call for reexamination of methods of intercultural rhetoric so that the increasing number of empirical studies can build a cohesive set. Such a concentrated effort would help establish the field and enhance the generalizability of the applications (Matsuda, 2002; Mauranen, 2001), as well as particularize the understandings of the results.

In considering a research methodology, we need to be mindful of new definitions of culture. Atkinson’s (1999, 2003, this issue, in press) research on culture is useful for new formulations of cross-cultural writing or intercultural rhetoric. In an ethnographic study of two university writing programs (one for native speakers and the other for ESL students), Atkinson and Ramanathan (1995) showed the importance of understanding the different program cultures and their implications for students. In subsequent publications, Atkinson has advanced understanding about culture in second language teaching.

In this issue, Atkinson proposes a model of culture for contrastive rhetoric that both considers culture as a product instead of a process and examines ‘‘big’’ culture versus ‘‘small’’ culture. Instead of focusing on the big culture (i.e. national or ethnic culture), intercultural rhetoric research needs to consider the complexly interacting small cultures in any educational or other intercultural situation. Drawing on the work of Holliday (1994, 1999), Atkinson shows how small cultures (i.e. classroom culture, disciplinary culture, youth culture, student culture, etc.) interact with the national culture. According to Atkinson (this issue: p. 17), ‘‘In no sense, then, could the ‘cultural action’ taking place in any particular educational setting be accounted for solely in terms of the national culture in which that educational setting appeared to be located, as has often been done in the past.’’

This paper examines developments in methods of intercultural rhetoric research from its early start as linguistic text analysis in the 1970s and 1980s, to more recent research on the social contexts of discourse. Intercultural rhetoric research has identified features of particular types of discourse and examined the use of language in social interaction. Today, we need to continue quantitatively oriented textual analyses. These analyses are often applied to English for academic purposes (EAP) texts, using a disciplined corpus approach with strict adherence to design features such as tertium comparationis (common platform of comparison or shared similarity) between texts and analyses. Examples of such large-scale studies are those of Moreno (1997, 1998, this issue), which examine academic research articles in English and Spanish. Nevertheless, a need still exists for deeper analyses of processes, contexts, and purposes of discourse, whether applied to student writing or business writing across cultures. Instead of focusing on products, intercultural research needs to change its focus to the processes that lead to the products. Hyland (2000) provides examples of interview and survey studies to explain cultural, situational, and contextual differences in EFL writing.

Both major approaches—corpus-based text studies and qualitative contextual studies—need to be aware of the changing definitions of ‘‘culture,’’ which range from the ‘‘received’’ definition of culture as static (referring to ‘‘big,’’ ethnic cultures) to alternative definitions of culture as dynamic (often referring to ‘‘small’’ cultures, e.g. disciplinary, classroom, local) (Atkinson, this issue; Holliday, 1994). This paper will suggest directions for future intercultural rhetoric research that will be faithful to the rigorous empirical principles of the area of study but still consistent with postmodern views of culture and discourse. The first section, ‘‘From texts to social contexts,’’ situates the study of intercultural rhetoric in the current understanding and practice of written discourse analysis in general. The emphasis, no longer text based, is increasingly context sensitive. The following sections evaluate three major methodological approaches for written intercultural rhetoric research and mention sample studies. The approaches are text analysis, genre analysis, and corpus analysis. The three categories are non-exclusive. A common thread running through these three sections is that the new intercultural rhetoric should be sensitive to processes, contexts, and particular situations. The final section, ‘‘Ethnographic approaches for intercultural rhetoric,’’ introduces an entirely new concept to the analysis of intercultural rhetoric, namely, the inclusion of oral discourse. As the least developed section of the paper, it looks into the future of intercultural rhetoric research and focuses on new genres of study such as business communication.

# 2. From texts to social contexts

Since 1966, when Kaplan’s original work on contrastive rhetoric appeared, and 1996, when my book on contrastive rhetoric was published, many new trends have appeared in research approaches and methods. The change has been affected by two major developments, namely an expansion of genres under consideration and a move to emphasize contexts of writing. First, there has been an increase in the types of written texts that are considered the purview of second language writing around the world. EAP classes teach other types of writing besides the student essay required in college classes. Other important genres are the academic research article, research report, and grant proposal. Writing for professional purposes, such as business, is also now considered a legitimate type of second language writing and worthy of research and teaching.

In addition to the expansion of genre, the field has moved to emphasize the social situation of writing. Today, writing is increasingly regarded as being socially situated; each situation may entail special consideration to audience, purposes, level of perfection, and correspondingly may require varying amounts of revision, collaboration, and attention to detail. The expectations and norms of discourse communities or communities of practice (cultural and disciplinary), of course, may shape these situational expectations and practices. Social construction of meaning as dynamic, socio-cognitive activities is a term used to describe this approach to texts. Instead of analyzing what texts mean, we want to understand how they construct meaning. Bazerman and Prior (2004: p. 6) pose three questions to guide the analysis of writing: ‘‘What does the text talk about? How do texts influence audiences? And how do texts come into being?’’ Thus, two major reasons—the acknowledgment of more genres with specific textual requirements and the social contexts of writing—have motivated scholars of intercultural rhetoric to adjust and supplement research approaches in their work.

These changes in teaching and research of writing are reflected by Flowerdew in a recent book, Academic Discourse (2002). Flowerdew divides research on written academic English into four different methodological categories: genre analysis, corpus-based studies, contrastive rhetoric, and ethnographic/naturalistic approaches.

According to Flowerdew, genre analysis is textual analysis and provides narrow (specific to certain genres, not to all academic discourse) and deep descriptions of academic discourse by focusing on specific genres such as the academic research paper (Swales, 1990) or the work on business, academic, and legal discourses of Bhatia (1993). Genre analysis produces generic structures of moves that provide the basis for the development of pedagogic materials as in Swales and Feak (1994, 2001). Corpus linguistics allows for the consistent and accurate analyses of large databases. Contrastive rhetorical analysis of academic discourse, according to Flowerdew (2002), shows that there are preferred expectations about how information is organized in different languages and cultures and that these preferential expectations can be used in the development of pedagogic materials. The ethnographic approach views text as only one feature of the social situation in which writing takes place. In addition to textual analysis, ethnographic methods emphasize direct observation, interviews, and other modes of analyzing the situational context. Unlike applications of the other three methodologies, Flowerdew (2002: p. 4) maintains that ethnographic academic discourse analysis, being contextually restricted, may be ‘‘less amenable to large-scale application to pedagogic materials.’’

Flowerdew (2002) considers contrastive rhetoric as one of the four approaches or methods of academic discourse analysis. I would argue that contrastive rhetoric is not a specific method, but rather a substantive approach or goal, which itself employs various methods. These methods include text analysis, genre analysis, corpus linguistics, and ethnographic approaches. All are needed; each produces different kinds of information.

Hyland, in his book Disciplinary Discourses: Social Interactions in Academic Writing (2000), provides a reasoned framework for the study of EAP writing, which is equally useful for intercultural rhetorical studies. He sketches a methodology for investigating published academic writing as the outcome of social interactions: ‘‘[. . .] rhetorical action should be seen as situated in the historically-specific assumptions that community members make about reality and the ways they seek to influence that reality through writing’’ (Hyland, 2000: p. 132). Hyland admits that such situated writing has been studied through ethnographies that have focused on particular writers and readers in L1 writing research, and has provided valuable understanding about the ways writers negotiate immediate writing situations. However, according to Hyland, such situation specific descriptions will still need to be understood as socially and institutionally constituted. Writers use strategies that have been socially and institutionally stratified.

Hyland (2000) advocates the use of large numbers of texts to gain insights into the core values and beliefs of the practices of the communities, but he cautions that, ‘‘We do, however, need to examine what is conventional and typical in the behavior of skilled writers as they construct the meaning of potential texts, constrained by the sense of a reader’s expectations’’ (Hyland, 2003: p. 136). He recommends using large corpora to establish the common tendencies, and supplementing them with interviews of writers and readers to confirm findings and establish reasons for strategies and choices that writers make. Text-based interviews are especially recommended.

In summary, there is a renewed interest in the study of written discourse in applied linguistics and EAP writing research. The focus is on context-sensitive text analyses, and the methods of study are diverse.

# 3. Text analysis

As I have shown (Connor, 1996), text linguistic analyses have been the major research approach in contrastive rhetoric. In a survey of contrastive rhetorical studies, I described how they have moved from the rather simple analysis of paragraph organization in Kaplan’s (1966) seminal study to sophisticated analyses of texts written for a variety of purposes. I divided the major schools of thought that helped shape contrastive text analysis as follows: the Prague School of text linguistics, systemic linguistics, and the new school of written discourse analysis.

The Prague School of text linguistics began in the 1920s and was developed by a large number of Czech linguists including Danesˇ and Firbas in the 1950s and 1960s. The Prague School’s greatest contributions to text linguistics were the developments in ‘‘theme’’ and ‘‘rheme.’’ A strong advocate of the Prague School has been the Finnish text linguist Nils Erik Enkvist, whose own work has been on stylistics and text linguistics with a recent interest in contrastive rhetoric and its benefits for language and intercultural studies (Enkvist, 1997). A great many studies in applied text linguistics and contrastive rhetoric have used the Prague School functional sentence perspective as their theoretical approach.

Systemic linguistics, developed by Halliday (1985) and influenced by the Prague School, had a major influence on text analyses in applied linguistics and contrastive rhetoric. In Halliday’s theory of language and discourse, language has three major functions: an ideational or content-bearing function; an interpersonal function, which signals the writer’s attitude function; and a textual function, which enables the creation of a text. Halliday’s systemic text linguistics has had an enormous influence on contrastive rhetoric, including the use of his cohesion system in numerous studies. In addition, as my 1996 survey showed, a popular object of study in contrastive rhetoric has been the operationalization of metatextual features that can be applied to texts in order to study the interpersonal function.

Under ‘‘the new school of discourse analysis,’’ I included work whose focus has been interdisciplinary and applied. Educational and psychological theories and methods have equal importance as linguistic theories in this approach. The efforts of such text linguists as Nils Enkvist, Robert de Beaugrande, Teun van Dijk, Stephen Witte, and John Hinds have been characterized by an interest in the teaching of scientific and EAP writing rather than pure linguistic inquiry. The work of this applied, new school of discourse analysis gave rise to such important large scale studies of student writing as the NORDTEXT and NORDWRITE projects.

The evolution of methods of contrastive written discourse analysis, first from sentence-based to discourse-based analyses, and later from discourse-based analyses to studying social context and ideology, is consistent with the shift in both applied and general linguistics. Since the 1970s, linguists increasingly directed their investigations beyond the level of syntax to discourse of texts, as shown in the pioneering discourse analysis of Enkvist (1974) and van Dijk (1985), and in the research of de Beaugrande and Dressler (1981), whose work gave the field the tools to elaborate and specify the discourse features of texts. More recent discourse studies have examined discourse in context, identifying the features of particular types of discourse and examining the use of language in social interaction (Bazerman, 1994; Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995).

Two recent publications—one by L1 composition researchers Barton and Stygall (2002), the other by an L2 composition researcher Hyland (2003)—have lamented the neglect of discourse analysis as a method of inquiry in their respective fields of study. These authors blame the process movement’s focus on the individual writer. Barton and Stygall (2002) name the sentence combining exercises of composition teachers in the 1970s as a reason for the dampened enthusiasm in linguistics. Until the late 1980s, linguistics remained connected with transformational grammar. Studies of cohesion and coherence (Witte & Faigley, 1981) revived some interest in discourse analysis, only to be dampened again by Faigley’s (1992) critique, in which he belittles the contributions of linguistics to EAP writing with the exception of the growing interest in critical discourse analysis.

Hyland (2003) makes a strong case for the use of discourse analysis in L2 composition research and mentions four major reasons for the warranted increasing interest in L2 discourse: (1) growing recognition that tasks and materials must be grounded in the analysis of real texts, (2) recent discourse analysis tools that allow us to see how discourse features are linked ‘‘to issues of writer purpose, identity, audience expectations, cultural schemata, disciplinary perceptions, and so on’’ (p. 166), (3) growing curiosity about the ways EAP students actually write, and (4) available technology, through corpus analysis of language use and patterns in student writing, for the purpose of studying systematic variation.

An example of context-sensitive text analysis using Halliday and Hasan’s (1976) text linguistic concepts of cohesion, ellipsis, and reference is a recent study by Yli-Jokipii and Jorgensen (this issue). The researchers investigated what happens to Danish and Finnish writers’ English texts when edited by native English-speaking editors for publication on the World Wide Web. They employed cohesion devices to help establish the rhetorical qualities of explicitness and implicitness of the genre which they call academic journalese. They traced and identified the types of changes to which the texts were subjected during editing to make them compatible with editorial requirements for the genre and for standards of UK English. The study is noteworthy in that it employs time-honored cohesion analysis for the purpose of explaining rhetorical strategies of editors in a specific context of European Union academic journalese. Thus, the researchers are not merely counting cohesive devices for their own sake, but are subjecting the analysis to the goals of explaining rhetorical and editorial strategies in a particular discourse community.

In addition to conducting linguistic text analysis for stylistic purposes, studies like the ones mentioned above would benefit from the analysis of processes in the production or reception of the resulting texts. Interviews with writers or focus groups would be helpful in determining the success of the editorial revisions in YliJokipii and Jorgensen (this issue) sample texts.

# 4. Genre analysis

As the domain of writing in EAP has expanded from essay writing to other genres in academic and professional contexts, genre analysis1 has provided methods of analysis that supplement the discourse analysis methods used in previous contrastive rhetoric research. The book-length studies of Swales (1990) and Bhatia (1993) on academic writing and professional writing, respectively, provide generic structures that are useful for analysis as well as pedagogical applications. In addition to the essay, subsequent research (Connor, 1999, 2000; Connor & Mauranen, 1999) has looked at genre-specific structures, including grant proposals and business letters.

The development of genre analysis has been beneficial for intercultural rhetoric research as it has forced researchers to compare apples with apples. In addition, genre analysts’ focus on generic superstructures and rhetorical functional analysis of specific genres has advanced intercultural rhetoric to other academic and professional genres.

The number of comparative empirical genre analyses has been staggering in the past decade. As my recent TESOL Quarterly review (2002) shows, published studies have compared the rhetorical moves and linguistic features of the research article in a number of disciplines in various countries (e.g. Duszak, 1994; Golebiowski, 1998; Moreno, 1998; Ventola & Mauranen, 1991). Other genres that have been studied across cultures include the business request letter (Kong, 1998; Yli-Jokipii, 1996), sales letter (Zhu, 1997), grant proposal (Connor & Mauranen, 1999), application letter (Upton & Connor, 2001), and letter of recommendation (Precht, 2000). Upton and Connor (2001) used computerized corpus analysis to investigate the text linguistic discourse moves of the genre. It is fair to say that, in addition to the disciplinary culture of the genre, the majority of the cited studies have often only considered a national or ethnic culture as the variable. Most have not isolated other smaller cultures related to age, gender, experience, etc.

Connor (2000) is an example of a genre study which includes both textual genre analysis and context-sensitive interview method to investigate differences and similarities in grant proposals written by humanists and scientists. The cultures studied were not ethnic, but disciplinary. In addition, gender was considered a variable.

Connor’s study included case studies of five writers. The design and data collection included text-based interviews with the writers as an integral part of the study. The interviews provided invaluable information about the strategies and choices the writers made while writing proposals for a variety of granting agencies.

As intercultural rhetoric continues to use genre analysis, the hybridity and fluidity of genres will need to be acknowledged. Bhatia (1995, 1997) speaks of genres as consisting of a mixture of different genres. Equally important is the consideration of genres as systems. Bazerman (2004) provides a step-by-step method for analyzing genre systems in an academic setting, which can be applied to intercultural situations as well. Thus, in grant proposal writing, for example, the actual proposal is intermixed with other written and oral genres such as letters and phone calls to the grant agency (van Nostrand, 1994, 1997).

# 5. Corpus analysis

Corpus linguistic methods have been an important part of empirical genre-based studies, in both academic and professional genres. ‘‘A computer corpus is a body of texts put together in a principled way and prepared for computer processing’ (Johansson 1998: p. 3). Johansson writes about the importance of corpora for contrastive research and translation studies and classifies them into three categories: comparable corpora (corpora of comparable original texts in two or more languages), translation corpora (corpora of original texts and their translations), and learner corpora (corpora of learner language).

Each type of corpora has its advantages and disadvantages for intercultural rhetoric research. Comparable corpora enable true cross-linguistic comparisons; translation corpora enable development of a translator’s standard; and learner corpora enable investigation of learning problems in the second language and testing of hypotheses concerning contrastive analysis and rhetoric.

The rigor introduced by corpus linguistics into design, data collection, and analysis is a welcomed standard for intercultural studies. An important concept has emerged from these studies, namely equivalence or tertium comparationis. In contrastive analyses, it has been important to compare items that are comparable. The contrastive analyst James (1980: p. 169) writes:

The first thing we do is to make sure that we are comparing like with like: this means that the two (or more) entities to be compared, while differing in some respect, must share certain attributes. This requirement is especially strong when we are contrasting, i.e. looking for differences—since it is only against a background of sameness that differences are significant. We shall call this sameness the constant and the differences variables.

In translation theory, this factor of sameness has been referred to as equivalence or tertium comparationis (Chesterman, 1998). Tertia comparationes can be placed at any level of textual organization, from microlinguistic levels (i.e. phonological, lexical and syntactic) to macrolinguistic levels (i.e. textual levels).

In a chapter for the Robert Kaplan Festschrift Directions in Applied Linguistics: Language Education, English for Academic Purposes, Contrastive Discourse Analysis, and Language Policy and Planning (in press), Ana Moreno and I explain how tertia comparationes should be established at a variety of levels of intercultural research. We argue that constants of the comparison should be established at two major phases of the research (1) choosing the primary data, and (2) establishing comparable textual concepts, which again will lead into comparable analyses of the linguistic and textual data.

In the chapter, we show how tertia comparationes were identified and employed in a study of EAP research articles written in Spanish and English (Moreno, 1998). We proposed the following steps (Table 1) for intercultural rhetoric research using such comparable corpora.

Given that intercultural analysis needs large-scale textual analyses of written genres for baseline comparisons, the research described above in genre and corpus studies is significant. The results are especially helpful for EAP teaching situations where English teachers have more linguistically homogeneous students. When and if differences are found to exist across texts, they can then be explained to students.

Table 1 Steps toward establishing tertium comparationis   

<html><body><table><tr><td>1</td><td>Formulating clear hypotheses about the relationship between writing cultures and how textual meanings are expressed.</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Defining the population of accomplished, or expert, L1 texts that can be considered compar- able and specifying the basis of the similarity constraints.</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Selecting a representative sample of that population in each writing culture compared.</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Identifying comparable textual units (e.g. moves, such as establishing the territory or creating a niche, discourse functions such as defining or evaluating, pragmatic functions such as requesting or apologizing, or relational functions, i.e. coherence relations, such as cause-effect or claim-</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>support. Validating those units of analysis as recognizable functional or pragmadiscursive units by lan- guage users in each culture either through literature review or further research (e.g. through interviews with L1 informants). This would allow the researcher to propose these units as language/textual universals, which can be taken as qualitative constants for the two (or more)</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>languages compared, and therefore, allow juxtaposition of comparable rhetorical phenomena. Quantifying the occurrence of these textual universals in each corpus. This may allow the researcher to propose these categories as quantitative constants if they occur with similar frequency in both languages.</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>Devising objective criteria to describe the textual realizations of the universals proposed in the two languages. This phase would imply designing specific criteria that do not privilege one lan- guage over the other. In other words, the criteria should not be biased towards any particular</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>descriptive model of any of the languages compared. Applying the devised analytical criteria to the description of the two corpora independently.</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>Juxtaposing the taxonomies.</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>Contrasting the quantitative results for each comparable qualitative category.</td></tr><tr><td>11 12</td><td>Interpreting the significance of quantitative similarities and differences by statistical analysis. Drawing conclusions about the relation between writing cultures and how textual meanings are expressed on the basis of the comparative results.</td></tr></table></body></html>

We have to be careful, however, that such a rigorous approach to genre identification and comparison of genres across cultures will not lead into purely structuralist, received cultural interpretations. In other words, in establishing tertia comparationes, we are often forced to find prototype genres, essentialize discourse communities, and belittle individual variation in the production and reception of the genres studied. Another danger is that whether or not we find differences between the genres we compare, we may not try to seek answers for the reasons behind the similarities and differences. Answers about differences and similarities can emerge from ethnographic, observational, and other qualitative studies, done either simultaneously or after the textual comparisons.

Moreno’s studies (1997, 1998) demonstrate the inherent difficulty of incorporating contextual analysis, which would include ethnographies, interviews, and observations. The journal articles in her study had been written and published years before she conducted her study and it would have been difficult to locate the writers or editors of the articles for interviews. To defend studies like Moreno’s, one can argue that published articles in journals have undergone a strict peer review and editorial scrutiny. This assures that articles published in the journal are fairly representative of the journal genre in terms of content and style.

There are other alternatives, however, to interviewing writers themselves. Hyland (2000) has shown how focus groups consisting of potential writers or readers can constitute the interviewee group. In his work, EAP writers have been interviewed about textual and linguistic preferences as exemplified by other EAP writers’ work. In a similar manner, student writers have been interviewed about their strategies.

The interview methodology advocated by Hyland is used in some recent intercultural rhetoric research. Li (1996), a Chinese-born researcher who teaches at a US university, has resorted to interviews in her published work on Chinese students’ writing. She compared the comments by native English speaking and native Chinese English teachers’ comments about, and evaluations of, essays written by Chinese students in English. Li’s (2002) study showed distinct differences in what was valued in good writing across the two societies. A more recent publication that appeared in an edited book by Foster and Russell (2002) continues this line of research. The focus is on the analysis of two EAP essays written for high school graduation by two students as graded and explicated by two master Chinese teachers. Li’s research is noteworthy in its use of text analysis that is supplemented by interviews and rich discussion of L1 writing traditions.

# 6. Ethnographic approaches for intercultural rhetoric

Ethnographic approaches are gaining in importance because of the increasing awareness of the social nature of discourse. Theories such as Gee’s (1999) ‘‘big D’’ discourses, Berkenkotter and Huckin’s (1993) discourse communities, and Barton, Hamilton, and Ivanicˇ’s (2000) situated literacies have explained the social situatedness of writing and its mediated nature. Gee (1999: p. 17) describes big D discourses as involving ‘‘acting–interacting–thinking–valuing–talking (sometimes writing–reading) in the ‘appropriate’ way with the ‘appropriate’ props at the ‘appropriate’ times in the ‘appropriate’ places.’’ Barton et al. (2000: p. 1) emphasize the fact that ‘‘all literate activity is indicative of broader social practices.’’ Discourses, and therefore language, involve situated identities, coordinated with and by other people, other things, other technologies, other places, and other times, and involve characteristic, expected actions.

Scollon and Scollon (1995) espouse a similar attitude about the social situatedness of intercultural communication. They maintain that the study of intercultural communication needs to involve a discourse analysis approach that investigates people in social interaction with each other.

Potential contributions of contrastive rhetoric for disciplines other than EAP have been pointed out by Enkvist (1997), who recommends that contrastive rhetoric be pursued according to varying aims and methods within institutions, at universities, in language centers, business communication units, and departments of translation. Since communicating interculturally is a concern in such pursuits, contrastive rhetoric principles can be helpful. Basic EFL skills have been learned in terms of language. In these situations, communicators learn English but will have to accommodate or adjust their communication styles toward those of their interlocutors in order to be successful.

In 1999, I published an ethnographic study about a Finnish fish broker, fluent in English, who adjusted his style of fax writing to the level or type of his interlocutors. For Estonians, from whom he bought fish, he simplified his language and used words he knew they would recognize. For Japanese, on the other hand, although he used simplified English, he included many more formal politeness features which he thought the Japanese would understand. Varying sorts of accommodation strategies (Giles, Coupland, & Coupland, 1991) were also used with other clients and suppliers from Norway, Germany, and the United States.

Business people and others communicating internationally will benefit from the research that collects cross-cultural corpora and data sets of intercultural communication. Research by the INBUS group was designed to study the speech and writing of international managers in global companies. Louhiala-Salminen’s (2002) research describes the research methodology which included miniethnographics of ‘‘shadowing’’ of managers. The methodology allowed for the analysis of how tasks were accomplished in a business through e-mails, letters, face-to-face meetings, phone calls, etc. The goal of the research was to generate descriptions of ‘‘slices of life’’ of managerial discourse in different cultures. After the descriptions were generated, comparisons of discourses and of how to get things done using discourses could be conducted. With comparative data sets in a variety of cultures, international business communication practices could be compared.

The development of corpora of such discourses is an ambitious task. Collecting and analyzing spoken and written data present challenges for the intercultural researcher, who is often familiar with the analysis of either spoken or written discourse. Nevertheless, such research has a great deal of promise for applications, especially when corpora are collected in L1, as well as in English as a second language. The latter corpora will allow for the analysis of international Englishes.

# 7. Conclusion

In this paper, I have attempted to update contrastive rhetoric research with a special focus on research methodology. Changing definitions of written discourse analysis—from text-based to context sensitive—and of culture—from static to dynamic—contribute to the changing focus of intercultural rhetoric research, a new term that better reflects the dynamic nature of the area of study. Text analyses, genre analyses, and corpus analyses are necessary tools for the intercultural rhetoric researcher. Yet, we need to consider the small cultures interacting with the big national culture as we collect, analyze, and interpret the data. Furthermore, for intercultural rhetoric to continue as a viable area of research with practical implications, it has to be mindful of the powerful interactions of oral and written discourses in message formulation in intercultural communication.

# References

Atkinson, D. (1999). TESOL and culture. TESOL Quarterly, 33, 625–653.   
Atkinson, D. (2003). Writing and culture in the post-process era. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 49–63.   
Atkinson, D. (this issue). Contrasting rhetorics/contrasting cultures: why contrastive rhetoric needs a better conceptualization of culture [Special issue on Contrastive Rhetoric]. Journal of English for Academic Purposes.   
Atkinson, D. (in press). Culture in TESOL and applied linguistics: Modernism, postmodernism, and beyond. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Atkinson, D., & Ramanathan, V. (1995). Cultures of writing: an ethnographic comparison of L1 and L2 university writing/language programs. TESOL Quarterly, 29, 539–568.   
Barton, D., Hamilton, M., & Ivanicˇ, R. (2000). Situated literacies: Reading and writing in context. London: Routledge.   
Barton, E., & Stygall, G. (2002). Discourse studies in composition. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.   
Bazerman, C. (1994). Constructing experience. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.   
Bazerman, C. (2004). Speech acts, genres, and activity systems: how texts organize activity and people. In C. Bazerman, & P. Prior (Eds.), What writing does and how it does it: An introduction to analyzing texts and textual practices (pp. 309–339). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Bazerman, C., & Prior, P. (Eds.) (2004), What writing does and how it does it: An introduction to analyzing texts and textual practices. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (1993). Rethinking genre from a socio-cognitive perspective. Written Communication, 10, 475–509.   
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (1995). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication: Cognition/ culture/power. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analyzing genre: Language use in professional settings. London: Longman.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1995). Genre-mixing and professional communication: the case of ‘private intentions’ v. ‘socially recognised purposes’. In P. Bruthiaux, T. Boswood, & B. Bertha (Eds.), Explorations in English for professional communication (pp. 1–19). Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong Press.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1997). Genre-mixing in academic introductions. English for Specific Purposes, 16, 181–195.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Critical academic writing and multilingual students. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Chesterman, A. (1998). Contrastive functional analysis. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Connor, U. (1996). Contrastive rhetoric: Cross-cultural aspects of second language writing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Connor, U. (1999). How like you our fish? Accommodation in international business communication. In M. Hewings, & C. Nickerson (Eds.), Business English: Research into practice (pp. 115–128). Harlow, UK: Longman.   
Connor, U. (2000). Variation in rhetorical moves in grant proposals of US humanists and scientists. Text, 20, 1–28.   
Connor, U. (2002). New directions in contrastive rhetoric. TESOL Quarterly, 36, 493–510.   
Connor, U., & Mauranen, A. (1999). Linguistic analysis of grant proposals: European Union research grants. English for Specific Purposes, 18, 47–62.   
Connor, U., & Moreno, A. I. (in press). The concept of ‘tertium comparationis’ in contrastive analysis and translation studies. In P. Bruthiaux, A. Atkinson, W. G. Eggington, W. Grabe, & V. Ramanathan (Eds.), Directions in applied linguistics: Language education, English for academic purposes, contrastive discourse analysis, and language policy and planning. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
de Beaugrande, R., & Dressler, W. (1981). Introduction to text linguistics. London: Longman.   
Duszak, A. (1994). Academic discourse and intellectual styles. Journal of Pragmatics, 21, 291–313.   
Enkvist, N. E. (1974). Tekstilingvistiikan peruska¨ sitteita¨ [Basic principles of text linguistics]. Helsinki: Gaudeamus.   
Enkvist, N. E. (1997). Why we need contrastive rhetoric. Alternation, 4, 188–206.   
Faigley, L. (1992). Fragments of rationality: Postmodernity and the subject of composition. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.   
Foster, D., & Russell, D. (2002). Writing and Learning in cross-national perspective: Transitions from secondary to higher education. Urbana, IL: NCTE.   
Flowerdew, J. (Ed.) (2002), Academic discourse. London: Longman.   
Gee, J. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. London: Routledge.   
Giles, H., Coupland, N., & Coupland, J. (1991). Accommodation theory: communication, content, and consequence. In H. Giles, N. Coupland, & J. Coupland (Eds.), Contexts of accommodation: Developments in applied sociolinguistics (pp. 1–68). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Golebiowski, Z. (1998). Rhetorical approaches to scientific writing: an English–Polish contrastive study. Text, 18, 67–102.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985). Spoken and written language. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London: Longman.   
Holliday, A. (1994). Appropriate methodology and social content. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Holliday, A. (1999). Small cultures. Applied Linguistics, 20, 237–264.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. Harlow, UK: Pearson.   
Hyland, K. (2003). Genre-based pedagogies: a social response to process. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 17–29.   
James, C. (1980). Contrastive analysis. London: Oxford University Press.   
Johansson, S. (1998). On the role of corpora in cross-linguistic research. In S. Johansson, & S. Oksefjell (Eds.), Corpora and cross-linguistic research: Theory, method, and case studies (pp. 1–24). Rodopi: Amsterdam.   
Kaplan, R. B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education. Language Learning, 16(1), 1–20.   
Kong, K. (1998). Are simple business request letters really simple? A comparison of Chinese and English business request letters. Text, 18, 103–141.   
Li, X. (1996). ‘Good writing’ in cross-cultural context. Albany: SUNY Press.   
Li, X. (2002). ‘Track (dis)connecting’: Chinese high school and university writing in a time of change. In D. Foster, & D. Russell (Eds.), Writing and learning in cross-national perspective: Transitions from secondary to higher education (pp. 49–87). Urbana, IL: NCTE.   
Louhiala-Salminen, L. (2002). The fly’s perspective: discourse in the daily routine of a business manager. English for Specific Purposes, 21, 211–231.   
Matsuda, P. K. (2002). Mission impossible? An agenda for contrastive rhetoric in the 21st century. Paper presented at the Contrastive Rhetoric Roundtable, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, October, 2002.   
Mauranen, A. (2001). Descriptions or explanations? Some methodological issues in contrastive rhetoric. In M. Hewings (Ed.), Academic writing in context (pp. 43–54). Birmingham, UK: University of Birmingham Press.   
Moreno, A. I. (1997). Genre constraints across languages: Causal metatext in Spanish and English RAs. English for Specific Purposes, 16, 161–179.   
Moreno, A. I. (1998). The explicit signaling of premise-conclusion sequences in research articles: a contrastive framework. Text, 18, 545–585.   
Moreno, A. I. (this issue). Retrospective labelling in premise-conclusion metatext: An English–Spanish contrastive study of research articles on business and economics [Special issue on Contrastive Rhetoric]. Journal of English of Academic Purposes.   
Precht, K. (2000). Patterns of stance in English. Unpublished dissertation, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.   
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (1995). Intercultural communication: a discourse approach. Malden, MA: Blackwell.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (1994). Academic writing for graduate students. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2001). English in today’s research world: A writing guide. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Upton, T., & Connor, U. (2001). Using computerized corpus analysis to investigate the textlinguistic discourse moves of a genre. English for Specific Purposes, 20, 313–329.   
van Dijk, T. A. (1985). Handbook of discourse analysis (Vol.1–4). New York: Academic Press.   
van Nostrand, A. D. (1994). A genre map of R&D knowledge production for the US Department of Defense. In A. Freesman, & P. Medway (Eds.), Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 133–145). London: Taylor and Francis.   
van Nostrand, A. D. (1997). Fundable knowledge: The marketing of defense technology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Ventola, E., & Mauranen, A. (1991). Non-native writing and native revising of scientific articles. In E. Ventola (Ed.), Functional and systematic linguistics (pp. 457–492). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Witte, S. P., & Faigley, L. (1981). Coherence, cohesion, and writing quality. College Composition and Communication, 32, 189–204.   
Yli-Jokipii, H. (1996). An approach to contrasting languages and cultures in the corporate context: Finnish, British and American business letters and telefax messages. Multilingua, 15, 305–327.   
Yli-Jokipii, H., & Jorgensen, P. E. F. (this issue). Academic journalese for the Internet: a study of native English-speaking editors’ changes to texts written by Danish and Finnish professionals [Special issue on Contrastive Rhetoric]. Journal of English for Academic Purposes.   
Zhu, Y. (1997). An analysis of structural moves in Chinese sales letters. Text, 17, 543–566.

Ulla Connor is a researcher in intercultural communication and linguistics, and has published widely in the areas of literacy and second-language writing. She is most recently co-editor (with Diane Belcher) of Reflections on Multiliterate Lives (2001) and author of Contrastive Rhetoric: Crosscultural Aspects of Second Language Writing (1996). She has taught and lectured in many countries including Egypt, England, Finland, Israel, Japan, Malaysia, Slovakia, Sweden, and Venezuela. She is currently the Barbara E. and Karl R. Zimmer Chair in Intercultural Communication at Indiana University—Purdue University Indianapolis and director of the Indiana Center for Intercultural Communication.