# A Response to Nassaji's\`Towards Integrating Forum-focused Instruction and Communicative Interaction in the Second Language Classroom' in Light of Issues Related to Focus on Form

Ronald Sheen

Abstract: This response to Nassaji's (1999) article contends that although it contains useful suggestions for communicative activities, it is vulnerable to serious criticism in terms of an incoherent theoretical justification, a failure to provide a promised discussion of relevant empirical evidence, and an unmotivated restriction on the nature of the tasks the author proposes.

Resume : Dans cette critique, l'auteur pretend que I'article de Nassaji (1999) propose certes des activites communicatives utiles, mais qu'il s'expose a des critiques severes, puisque ses fondements theoriques ne sont pas entierement coherents, la discussion promise au sujet de donnees empiriques pertinentes n'est pas menee a terme, et la nature des taches proposees par I'auteur est limitee inutilement.

Nassaji (1999), basing his ideas on an integrative approach to teaching, proposes that focus on form activities should always be a part of communicative tasks; in doing so, he implicitly precludes a number of instructional options. Although he proposes useful ideas to teachers, I would argue that he has accepted the focus on form constraints without being sufficiently rigorous, stringent, and critical of the principles involved. To justify my critique, I will address, first, his \`theoretical justification'; second, his presentation and discussion of \`relevant empirical evidence on the effectiveness of such [communicative] tasks'; and, third, the restrictive nature of his focus on form tasks.

Before coming to these, I will make some comments on the focus on form movement, particularly in relation to Doughty and Williams (1998b), since they will constitute a necessary background to the critique of Nassaji's article. First, however, I need to clarify the use of terms. Focus on form, without quotation marks, will be used to cover the movement in general, while\`focus on form,' in quotation marks, will be used with the meaning of its originator, Long (1991), and as used in Long (1996), Long and Crookes (1992), and Long and Robinson (1998): that is, a\`focus on form' that necessarily arises from meaningful activity and is purely incidental to the interactive communicative activities that constitute the core of classroom practice. Furthermore, such a focus involves no pre-planning in terms of linguistic forms to be covered. To these restrictions on its meaning, Long and Robinson add further constraining features. First, assuming the validity of Schmidt's (1993) premise that essential features of the acquisition process are attention and noticing, they maintain that the intended outcome of\`focus on form' is noticing. Second, the means by which focal attention is to be used to bring about noticing is to be negotiated between teacher and students.' These restrictions, therefore, preclude normal synthetic syllabi (see Wilkins, 1976), as do those explored in Long and Crookes (1992) and Long and Robinson (1998).2

Given the restrictive nature of this definition, there is a need for a more general term that covers the wide range of options concerned with form/function/meaning relationships and considers them an integral, planned part of any syllabus. Lightbown (1998) and Spada (1997) use the term \`form-focused instruction' to differentiate their approach from \`focus on form' without rendering their difference with Long and Robinson (1998) explicit. However, their approach also entails restrictions, for, although it accepts the need for grammar instruction to be on occasion separate from communicative activity, it does so only when some problem in that activity justifies it. It apparently does not allow, for example, for the treatment of forms in a general sense, as when a teacher, based on past experience, may feel that students need to understand the range of uses of, say, a form such as the present perfect. The term\`focus on forms' is used in Doughty and Williams (1998) with the defining characteristic of dealing with forms in isolation. However, this is also too restrictive and inappropriate, for no contemporary approach would restrict itself to such treatment. What is needed is a term that allows for all forms of instruction, whether they be direct, as in explicit grammar instruction, or indirect, as in strategies that use various means (such as highlighting) to bring about noticing; or whether they be directly linked to a communicative activity or not; and whether they be spontaneous or planned. For such a range of options, I will use the term planned grammar instruction' (PGI). Using a term covering such a wide range of teaching options might be problematic in contexts in which the goal is to differentiate levels of effectiveness. That is not the purpose here; rather, I wish to differentiate \`focus on form' from other options. With that restriction in mind, PGI will suffice. To summarize, then, I will use \`focus on form, as characterized by Long and Robinson (1998), \`form-focused instruction, as described by Spada (1997) and used by Lightbown (1998), and PGI to cover these and any other options, whether directly linked to a specific communicative activity or not. PGI is thus by definition wider in scope than either \`focus on form' or \`form-focused instruction' since it imposes no restrictions on permitted forms of instruction, whether direct or indirect, planned or spontaneous, activitylinked or not.

Multiple references to focus on form in the literature are misleading, in that they tend to create the impression that those applied linguists working in this field are of like mind on the central issues. However, this apparent consensus is not borne out by a scrutiny of the work of a number of the advocates of a focus on form approach. A reading of the contributions to Doughty and Williams (1998a), a fairly good representation of contemporary thought on the subject, reveals divergence and even conflict in the implicit underlying principles upon which the contributors base their writings. Thus we have views stretching from DeKeyser's, proposing skills learning-based synthetic syllabi founded on declarative knowledge and on controlled and automatic processing, to Long and Robinson's, advocating \`focus on form' with its implicit exclusion of what DeKeyser and other contributors propose. Close reading of the nine substantive articles reveals a clear division between Long and Robinson's, with its doctrinaire arguments putatively justifying certain restrictions, and the other eight, which opt for instructional strategies covered either by \`form-focused instruction' or by PGI. That is, they all implicitly reject Long and Robinson's exclusion of planning, for they all accept the necessary inclusion in a syllabus of language forms to be covered. This said, it needs to be pointed out that they differ in their degree of difference with Long and Robinson. DeKeyser and Swain exhibit the greatest divergence, advocating in different ways and to different degrees the treatment of linguistic forms without their necessarily always being tightly enmeshed in communicative activity, while Harley proposes a PGI option in a situation previously thought unsuitable for such instruction. Lightbown distinguishes her chapter with, among other things, the acceptance, albeit somewhat hedged, of the occasional need for instruction separate from communicative tasks. White begins her piece by espousing a view similar to Long and Robinson's but ends with a conclusion more in keeping with the positions of the previous authors mentioned, favouring the provision of PGI in the case of L1-L2 contrasts. The other three papers - Doughty and Varela, Williams and Evans, and Doughty and Williams - are most similar in outlook to Long and Robinson, but, as the editors point out, they afford greater salience to linguistic form and, in fact, pre-plan their instruction, thus failing to respect Long and Robinson's restrictions. In fact, Doughty and Williams, in their thorough summarizing concluding chapter (1998b, p. 261) rightly point out (possibly in oblique reference to Long and Robinson) that the range of possibilities offered by focus on form\`should not be theoretically proscribed.' It is for this sound reason that those writing in the domain of focus on form need to clarify their position in relation to the restrictive nature of Long and Robinson's \`focus on form.' Unfortunately, the other contributors to Doughty and Williams (1998a) refrain from doing this, though they do so implicitly - some less implicitly than others. Neither DeKeyser nor Swain, for example, makes any reference whatsoever to Long, while Harley makes only one, and that one unrelated to \`focus on form.' One wonders whether their long experience with the realities of teaching has brought them to distance themselves from the, in my view, unrealistic restrictions of Long and Robinson.

As to the specifics of Nassaji's article, he states (p. 390) that\`\`focus on form" ... attempts to draw the student's attention to linguistic forms as they arise in activities whose primary focus is on meaning.' He then goes on to say that\`it is this idea of focus on form in communicative contexts which is supported by both theory and research.' This is correct if one is comparing the option with an exclusive focus on meaning. However, once the need for an attention to form has been established, the crucial issue then concerns the manner in which this should be achieved. Herein lies the problem, for, in the strategies Nassaji proposes, he implicitly excludes many of the options covered by PGI and any separation from communicative tasks. In doing so, he ostensibly bases his teaching proposals on Long and Robinson's (1998) position and, presumably, its exclusion of options already discussed. Yet the substance of the article reveals that Nassaji also subscribes to positions contrary to those of Long and Robinson. Before he broaches his proposals for the use of communicative tasks, he provides his underlying \`theoretical justification' (pp. 388-391). He gives brief summaries of the interactive and cognitive perspectives and states that he integrates insights from both, without identifying which ones. He offers no critical comment on either and, therefore, gives the impression that he accepts both. But this entails wedding two irreconcilable options: Long's interactive hypothesis, characterized by its restrictive\`focus on form,' with Anderson's (1993, 1995) proposals based on declarative knowledge and on controlled and automatic processing; DeKeyser's (1998) specific application of Anderson's approach to foreign and second language teaching; and McLaughlin's (1990) proposals related to the two forms of processing in the Anderson model. Thus, although the tasks Nassaji proposes are to some degree compatible with Long and Robinson's interaction hypothesis, it is difficult to see how he would reconcile their underlying justification with DeKeyser's, for example. DeKeyser views foreign language learning as akin to the learning of other skills; Long and Robinson do not. DeKeyser's model is based on an initial declarative knowledge attained by a variety of means, including direct PGI separate from communicative activity; Long and Robinson preclude such a strategy, as does Nassaji (p. 390), albeit implicitly. DeKeyser's model necessarily entails practice in order to transform declarative knowledge into procedural knowledge and subsequent automatization; Long's model implicitly excludes it.

Nassaji does not endeavour to reconcile these conflicting positions. In fact, as his communicative tasks do not entail exploiting the Anderson (1993, 1995), DeKeyser (1998), or McLaughlin (1990) models, one wonders why he included them in his theoretical justification. One possibility is to motivate the introduction of McLaughlin's concept of \`restructuring,' which he then uses (p. 390) to bring in\`attention to form'; he then cites Schmidt (1993) as contending that \`attention to form' triggers restructuring. Unfortunately, there is a serious flaw in this line of argument, for Schmidt and others in the focus on form movement use \`attention' with an essentially different meaning than McLaughlin. According to the former, the \`attention' is directed to input in order to trigger \`noticing' and thus learning/acquisition. According to McLaughlin, on the other hand, \`attention'comes into play post-learning; that is, he maintains that learners need different degrees of attention to carry out tasks at the controlled processing stage, which will then lead to automaticity and restructuring. Thus, the fact that Nassaji equates these two different meanings, in addition to implicitly marrying irreconcilable learning models, renders his \`theoretical justification' largely incoherent.

Nassaji could have avoided this incoherence simply by not discussing either the cognitive models or McLaughlin's restructuring, since the communicative tasks he proposes do not entail exploiting them. He would then have been basing his communicative tasks on Long and Robinson's focus on form' model. Even here, however, he is still vulnerable to criticism, for he does not, in fact, respect Long and Robinson's constraints. He proposes that the teacher decide in advance which forms to focus on, a method that necessarily precludes the collaboration between students and teacher proposed by Long and Robinson. He could have avoided this contradiction by subjecting the Long and Robinson advocacy to critical review rather than treating the differing proposals for \`focus on form' strategies as an undifferentiated whole. He might then have opted for

Lightbown's \`form-focussed instruction' or PGI rather than for the restrictive \`focus on form' recommended by Long and Robinson. This would have permitted him to outline coherent underlying principles consistent with the tasks he proposes.

In his abstract, Nassaji promises us that, concerning the effectiveness of form-focused activities, \`relevant empirical evidence on the effectiveness of such tasks will be presented and discussed.' In fulfilment of this promise, the author provides a paragraph-length description of the use of the dictogloss in such studies as Swain (1998). He maintains that such use is an example of \`focus on form,' although it entails a metalinguistic discussion of grammatical problems quite contrary to Long's position on\`focus on form' and quite different from the activities he proposes. Furthermore, Nassaji contends that the studies show that the use of the dictogloss leads to \`great improvement in students' knowledge of grammar.' In actual fact, no such claim is made, and with reason, for there is no true evaluation of the improvement in their grammatical knowledge. Swain is sensibly prudent in making claims for the effectiveness of the strategy, stating that \`the results point to the potential usefulness of collaborative work in promoting output and second language learning' (p. 79). The\`presentation' does not, therefore, live up to what is promised. As to the\`discussion,' there is none. This is a pity, for it would have provided Nassaji with an opportunity to bring out the fact that in all the empirical findings cited by those in the focus on form movement, none has demonstrated that direct PGI, for example, is any less effective than the options he himself proposes. True, Lightbown (1992) and Spada (1997) contend that no significant differences were found in the method comparison research (MCR) of the 1960s and 1970s, which entailed deductive instruction (i.e., direct PGI). However, their contentions are unfounded. Spada (1997) cites Chastain (1969), Scherer and Wertheimer (1964), and Smith (1969), while Lightbown (1992) cites Chastain (1970) and adds Levin (1972) and Smith (1970), characterizing as\`sad' the history of MCR (p. 354). But in all the cases cited, significant positive differences were found in favour of deductive instruction in the teaching of specific skills. This applies not only to the studies mentioned but to the many others carried out at that time. Von Elek and Oskarsson (1973) provide a detailed summary of such research, including an account of their own rigorous research plus a replication study from which they conclude that\`in the teaching of foreign grammar to adults, such techniques as grammaticalexplanations, deductive presentations of the subject matter, translation, the use of the native language, and contrastive analysis are jointly superior to the combination of techniques constituting the implicit method' (p. 201).

Furthermore, other respected applied linguists such as Chastain (1988), Diller (1985), Fisiak (1981), Spolsky (1989), Stern (1982), Strevens (1987), and numerous others would agree in whole or in part with this conclusion. All these authors reject the Krashen sufficiency principle in terms of the effects of comprehensible input and advocate an approach based on an enlightened eclecticism that includes elements proposed by Von Elek and Oskarsson (1973).

It is possibly partly because of Nassaji's failure to consider the published evidence concerning deductive instruction that, in discussing his task proposals, he opens with this statement:\`From a communicative perspective, the most effective way to assist language learning in the classroom is through communicative tasks' (p. 391). No supportive empirical evidence is offered in support of this absolutism. It is simply proposed as if it had axiomatic status. As a consequence of this belief, Nassaji implies that all learning must occur within a communicative task environment. However, there is a great deal of evidence to support the view that PGI removed from a communicative task context can contribute to improved language proficiency (see, for example, Chastain, 1988; DeKeyser, 1998; Diller, 1985; Von Elek & Oskarsson, 1973). It is, therefore, quite unnecessary to constrain one's teaching options as Nassaji does. In fact, possibly unwittingly, in proposing to exploit the communicative tasks of Ur (1981, 1988), he is allowing in something of a Trojan horse, for she is very much an advocate of direct PGI and disagrees with Nassaji's statement at the beginning of this paragraph. Ur states that\`the ability to communicate effectively is probably not attained most quickly or efficiently through pure communication practice in the classroom' (1993, p. 140). In fact, she proposes the exploitation of direct PGI, which Nassaji excludes from his options without offering any wellmotivated argument for doing so. I regret Nassaji's insistence on the necessity of exploiting communicative tasks for language learning, first, because the\`necessity'is unmotivated and, second, because it precludes options covered by PGI. This, unfortunately, contributes to a spurious contemporary wisdom that tends to make teachers feel guilty if they are not continually engaged in such tasks or if they dare to resort to direct PGI unrelated to some specific communicative activity.

# Summary

In this response to Nassaji, I contend that those writing in the domain of focus on form need to clarify their position vis-a-vis that of the originator of the \`focus on form' movement, Long (1991), and this because Long adopts a doctrinaire stance that entails certain unnecessary and unjustified restrictions. Nassaji, unfortunately, offers no such clarification, for he refrains from a critical review of \`focus on form' principles and fails to provide the promised discussion of the relevant empirical findings. This, in part, results in his adopting a theoretical stance that does not withstand scrutiny, for he apparently attempts to wed incompatible theoretical positions. Furthermore, what he proposes in terms of teaching strategies are not compatible with Long and Robinson's (1998)\`focus on form, which he ostensibly endorses. He then exacerbates this problem by adopting an unjustified constraint on the nature of pedagogical tasks, for there is nothing in the literature to justify limiting them to communicative activities.

Ronald Sheen is Professor of Applied Linguistics and English at the Universite du Quebec a Trois-Rivieres. He has taught in various parts of the world and published articles in a variety of well-known journals. His research interests are centred on methodology in second/foreign language learning.

# Notes

1  It is of interest to note that Long and Robinson (1998) do not appear event to consider the possibility that students may not agree with their\`focus on form' approach and might well prefer an approach more akin to planned grammar instruction (see p. XX). This would almost certainly be the case if the students were of the class identified in Carrell, Prince, and Astika (1996) as the\`Sensing-Thinking-Judging' types who constituted the overwhelming majority of students in their study and whom the authors expect\`to be guided by concrete facts and sequential learning rather than by abstractions, to prefer logic, rules and examples over social interaction, and to prefer order, organization, and formalized, structured instruction' (p. 96), features manifest in synthetic syllabi.

2It is of general interest to note that Long and Robinson's extreme restrictions are not empirically motivated in terms of application to real classrooms. They are largely based on their perception of the nature of SLA and its assumed consequences for the classroom. However, whether that perception be valid or otherwise, they offer no empirical evidence to demonstrate that their\`focus on form' approach is more effective than any

other.

# References

Anderson, J. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Anderson, J. (1995). Learning and memory: An integrated approach. New York: Wiley.   
Carrell, P.L., Prince, M.S., & Astika, G.G. (1996). Personality types and language Learning in an EFL context. Language Learning, 46, 75-99.   
Chastain, K.D. (1969). The audiolingual habit theory versus cognitive codelearning theory: Some theoretical considerations. International Review of Applied Linguistics, 7, 97-106.   
Chastain, K.D. (1970). A methodological study comparing the audio-lingual habit theory and the cognitive code-learning theory: A continuation. Modern Language Journal, 54, 257-266.   
Chastain, K.D. (1988). Developing second-language skills: Theory and practice. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.   
DeKeyser, R.M. (1998). Beyond focus on form: Cognitive perspectives on learning and practising second language grammar. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom language acquisition (pp. 42-63). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Diller, K.C. (1985). The language teaching controversy. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.   
Doughty, C., & Varela, E. (1998). Communicative focus on form. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom language acquisition (pp. 114-138). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (Eds.). (1998a). Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (1998b). Pedagogical choices in focus on form. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom language acquisition (pp. 197-261). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Fisiak, J. (Ed.). (1981). Contrastive linguistics and the language teacher. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Harley, B. (1998). The role of focus-on-form tasks in promoting child L2 acquisition. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom language acquisition (pp. 156-174). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Levin, L. (1972). Comparative studies in foreign language teaching: The GUME Project. Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell.   
Lightbown, P.M. (1991). What have we here? Some observations on the influence of instruction on L2 learning. In R. Phillipson, E. Kellerman, L. Selinker, M. Sharwood Smith, & M. Swain (Eds.), Foreign/second language pedagogy research (pp. 197-212). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Lightbown, P.M. (1992). Can they do it themselves? A comprehension-based ESL course for young children. In R. Courchene, J. St. John, C. Therien, & J. Glidden (Eds.), Comprehension-based language teaching: Current trends. Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press.   
Lightbown, P.M. (1998). The importance of timing in focus on form. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 177-196). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Lightbown, P.M., & Spada, N. (1990). Focus on form and corrective feedback in communicative language teaching: Effects on second language learning. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 12, 429-448.   
Long, M.H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot, R. Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch (Eds.), Foreign language research in cross-cultural perspective (pp. 39-52). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Long, M.H. (1996). The role of linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In C.R. Ritchie & T.K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). New York: Academic Press.   
Long, M.H., & Crookes, G. (1992). Three approaches to task-based syllabus design. TESOL Quarterly, 26, 27-56.   
Long, M.H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom language acquisition (pp. 16-41). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
McLaughlin, B. (1990). Restructuring. Applied Linguistics, 11, 113-128.   
Nassaji, H. (1999). Towards integrating form-focused instruction and communicative interaction in the second language classroom: Some pedagogical possibilities. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 55, 385-402.   
Scherer, G., & Wertheimer, F. (1964). A psycholinguistic experiment in foreign language teaching. New York: McGraw-Hill.   
Schmidt, R. (1993). Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 13, 206-226.   
Sheen, R. (1994). A critical analysis of the advocacy of the task-based syllabus. TESOL Quarterly, 28, 127-151.   
Smith, P.D. (1969). The Pennsylvania foreign language research project: Teaching proficiency and class achievement in two modern languages. Foreign Language Annals, 3, 194-207.   
Smith, P.D. (1970). A comparison of the cognitive and audiolingual approaches to foreign language instruction: The Pennsylvania Foreign Language Project. Philadelphia: Center for Curriculum Development.   
Spada, N. (1997). Form-focussed instruction and second language acquisition: A review of classroom and laboratory research. Language Teaching, 30(2), 73-87.   
Spada, N., & Lighbown, P.M. (1993). Instruction and the development of questions in the L2 classroom. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 15, 205-221.   
Spolsky, B. (1989). Conditions for second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Stern, H.H. (1982). Issues and options in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Strevens, P.D. (1987). The nature of language teaching. In M.H. Long & J.C. Richards (Eds.), Methodology in TEsOL: A book of readings. Boston: Heinle & Heinle.   
Swain, M. (1998). Focus on form through conscious reflection. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom language acquisition (pp. 64-81). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Ur, P. (1981). Discussions that work: Task-centred fluency practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Ur, P. (1988). Grammar practice activities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Ur, P. (1993). Teaching Grammar. In A communicative methodology (pp. 139-145). Jerusalem: Israeli Ministry of Education.   
Von Elek, T., & Oskarsson, M. (1973). Teaching foreign language grammar to adults: A comparative study. Stockholm: Almquist and Wiksell.   
White, J. (1998). Getting the learners' attention: A typographical input enhancement study. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom language acquisition (pp. 85-113). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Wilkins, D.A. (1976). Notional syllabuses. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Williams, J., & Evans, J. (1998). What kind of focus and on which forms. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom language acquisition (pp. 139-155). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.