# Discriminatory discursive strategies in online comments on YouTube videos on the Hong Kong Umbrella Movement by Mainland and Hong Kong Chinese

Meilin Chen Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong

John Flowerdew Lancaster University, UK; Birkbeck, University of London, UK

# Abstract

This article examines the discriminatory discursive strategies adopted in the online interactions between different power groups from Mainland China and Hong Kong in their response to two YouTube videos about the Hong Kong Umbrella, or Occupy Central, Movement. A corpus of 4329 comments made by 2157 posters from Mainland China and Hong Kong was coded regarding commenters’ place of residence and their perceptions of the Umbrella Movement and then tagged based on Flowerdew et al.’s previous taxonomy of discriminatory discursive strategies. The results show that a wide range of discriminatory discursive strategies, used by two power groups from Hong Kong and one from the Mainland, were found in the majority of the comments, including four sub-strategies not identified by Flowerdew et  al. While studies to date on the Umbrella Movement have mainly focused on Hong Kong data, our study contributes to the literature by adding the perspective from Mainland China. The findings of this study provide insights into the increasing social and political tensions between Hong Kong and its mother country as well as the current situation in the divided city.

# Keywords

China, critical discourse analysis, critical discourse analysis in historiography, discriminatory discursive strategies, Hong Kong, identity, Occupy Central movement, Umbrella Movement

# Introduction

The Hong Kong Umbrella Movement (also known as Occupy Central (OC) campaign), a mass civil disobedience movement that involved over 200,000 people and lasted 79 days, brought Hong Kong’s key business and commercial districts to a standstill and remained a headline news story the world over for several months in 2014. This social movement has also drawn immediate scholarly attention, especially in media (e.g. Chan, 2015; Lee et al., 2015), social (e.g. Erni, 2015) and critical discourse studies (papers collected in Flowerdew and Jones, 2016). However, these studies mainly focused on the Hong Kong perspective, without extending the context to China, the country that reclaimed sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997 but has very different political and judicial systems from the latter.

This study explores how people from both Mainland China and Hong Kong perceive the Umbrella Movement by examining online comments they made on two Occupy videos clips on YouTube. From the perspective of critical discourse analysis (CDA), the study examines how the discriminatory discursive strategies identified in previous studies were used by multiple power groups in the context of the Umbrella Movement. Discriminatory discursive strategies can be defined for the purposes of this study as a range of linguistic processes through which a targeted social group may be referred to in a discriminatory way. Different from previous research, which focuses on racial discrimination, this study shows how discriminatory strategies may be applied by opposing social groups from the same ethnic backgrounds.

In this article, following Wodak’s (2015) discourse historical approach and Flowerdew’s (2012, 2017) critical discourse analysis in historiography (CDH) approach, we first briefly sketch the socio-historical background of the Occupy event. We then provide a review of discursive strategies in prejudiced communication in previous studies, followed by detailed descriptions of the process of data collection, coding and analysis. In the ‘Findings’ section, we present a taxonomy of discriminatory discursive strategies found in our data and exemplify each of the categories. In the discussion, we summarise the major findings and suggest their implications for studies of linguistic discrimination, on the one hand, and for understanding the social conflicts in Hong Kong during and after the campaign, on the other.

# The socio-historical context

As an interdisciplinary approach to analysing written and spoken texts that views language as a form of social practice and focuses on the way in which social and political domination are constructed and reproduced (Fairclough, 1995), CDA emphasises both textual and contextual analysis. In his early work, Fairclough (1992) argued that CDA should be a method for multidimensional, multifunctional and historical analysis. Wodak (2015) draws attention to different layers of context, that is, the socio-historical context as well as the current context, in her discourse-historical approach to CDA. Van Dijk (2001) distinguishes between the macro (global) and micro (local) contexts, the former being defined by the socio-cultural and historical structures of a discourse. Flowerdew (2012, 2016) proposes a historiographical approach to CDA, pointing to the importance of taking a diachronic perspective, emphasising how discursive events are linked to previous historical discourses. He also emphasises that critical discourse analysts should also be considered as historians, as they contribute to the formation of knowledge by critically deciphering critical discursive ‘moments’ as they manifest themselves in the on-going creation of history.

Before we start probing into the perceptions of Mainland and Hong Kong Chinese about the Occupy event, it is important to briefly review the long process of the formation of different ideologies in Mainland China and Hong Kong in a parallel yet sometimes intertwined way (Flowerdew, 1998). During the colonial period from 1848 up until the Second World War, Hong Kong was ruled by a colonial establishment headed by a governor appointed by the British government without much involvement of local Chinese. During this time, Mainland China was at the mercy of foreign troops from different countries and various Chinese warlords and at the same time undergoing the painful process of overthrowing the Manchu regime. The development of both territories halted temporarily during World War II when Japan invaded China and Hong Kong. In the Mainland, during and slightly after that period, the Communist Party won a civil war against the Nationalists and China developed a communist social system. After World War II, Hong Kong reverted to its colonial, capitalist system, with an emphasis on trade. The change of regime in the Mainland resulted in an influx of tens of thousands of refugees from there to Hong Kong. Such a massive wave of refugees occurred again in 1962 when huge numbers of Mainlanders fled from the famine caused by the failed Great Leap Forward campaign and again during the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1972 (Chen, 2010).

During the 1960s and 1970s, Hong Kong experienced its first transformation to a manufacturing hub. On the Mainland side, however, the Cultural Revolution greatly affected the country economically and spiritually for more than a decade, and the economic and cultural backwardness in the Mainland formed a sharp contrast with the rapid development of Hong Kong as a sophisticated modern economy. It was during that period that a more distinct Hong Kong identity emerged, with Hong Kong people perceiving themselves as sophisticated and westernised in contrast to their ‘less civilised’ Mainlander counterparts (Flowerdew et al., 2002; Lam et al., 1999; Ma and Fung, 1999).

During the decade or more leading up to the handover of sovereignty to China in 1997, Hong Kong transformed itself into a centre for financial and professional services and continued to thrive as one of the ‘four dragons of Asia’. It is during this period that many of the university students – who initiated the class boycotts that grew into the citywide Umbrella Movement – were born. Studies conducted since the mid-1990s have shown that the Hong Kong identity evolved into a unique hybrid of Chinese traditional values and British norms, with a tendency for Hongkongers to see a growing gap between themselves and Mainland Chinese, particularly among adolescents (e.g. Lee and Leung, 1995; Ma and Fung, 2007).

The 1980s and 1990s were also a period that witnessed a rapid growth in the pursuit of democracy in Hong Kong. The British government wanted to democratise Hong Kong as part of its colonial legacy. To the surprise of many, during the long negotiations leading up to the Sino-British Joint Declaration of 1984, which set out the terms of the transfer of sovereignty from Britain to China in 1997, the Chinese government agreed to allow Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy as a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China to be governed under a system of gradually developing democracy, under a policy of ‘one country two systems’. Prior to the implementation of the Joint Declaration, however, in 1989, the violent repression of demonstrations in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square by the People’s Liberation Army led to local democratic activists in Hong Kong initiating a mass rally in protest at this intervention. This rally, in which more than a million people took part, is considered a milestone in Hong Kong’s fledging pro-democracy movement. Shocked by the Tiananmen Square incident, local Hong Kong people further distanced themselves from Mainland China and expressed a stronger desire for democratic development. Partly because of these events, between 1992 and 1997, the last British governor, Chris Patten, introduced a series of constitutional reforms that increased the pace of democratisation in Hong Kong, although these reforms were hotly contested by the Mainland government and were dismantled by the incoming SAR government in 1997.

Meanwhile, in Mainland China, under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping and his slogan of ‘Socialism with Chinese Characteristics’, the 1980s to 1990s was a period of economic reforms and a moving away from self-imposed isolation towards an opening up to international trade, with people gradually gaining access to the outside world. The political and social systems, however, were still dominated by communist values.

The post-1997 period in Hong Kong has been plagued with frequent social and political conflicts and economic crises. Although Hong Kong has a high degree of administrative and judicial independence under the ‘one country, two systems’ policy, the central government’s intervention has been resented. The SAR government’s inability to narrow the increasing wealth gap and mitigate the conflicts between local people and Mainland immigrants makes Hong Kong society even more divided, resulting in more people calling for greater autonomy, while Chinese loyalists are in favour of Beijing’s authority. Since 1997, there have been more than 50,000 protests, earning for Hong Kong the designation of ‘city of protests’ (Garrett, 2014: v). OC can be viewed as an important landmark in Hong Kong’s struggle for democracy, in discursive terms what Flowerdew (2012) refers to as a ‘critical moment’.

The divided society is also reflected in local people’s perception of their identity. Polls indicate that in December 2013, a minority of only around $3 7 \%$ of Hong Kong locals called themselves ‘Chinese’ or ‘Chinese in Hong Kong’, while a majority of $6 3 \%$ of respondents identified themselves with the designation of ‘Hongkonger’ or ‘Hongkonger in China’ (The University of Hong Kong, n.d.). The percentage of people who identified with the label of ‘Chinese’ decreased to around $32 \%$ in June 2014, that is, 3 months before the Occupy campaign, while those who considered themselves as ‘Hongkongers’ increased to $6 8 \%$ (The University of Hong Kong, n.d.).

In the Mainland, on the contrary, since the 1980s, China has experienced rapid economic growth and become the second largest economic power in the world. This to some extent seems to successfully rid Mainlanders of the national humiliation of the country’s vulnerability to foreign imperialism a century ago. The pride of being a Chinese, a member of a ‘great nation’ again, has increased dramatically, even though social problems such as wealth inequality, political corruption and environmental pollution are evident.

The socio-historical context outlined in this section reveals two divergent paths taken by Mainland China and Hong Kong. The social, political and historical contexts are likely to influence different power groups’ attitudes towards the Umbrella Movement in the two territories.

The decision to focus this study on discriminatory discursive strategies was motivated by an initial subjective perception of the frequent use of such discursive strategies in public and social media discourse in Hong Kong. Furthermore, Hongkongers’ negative attitudes towards Mainland Chinese (although not Mainland Chinese attitudes towards Hongkongers) have been documented in the literature (e.g. Ladegaard, 2011; Lam et al., 1999). The online comments attaching to the two selected videos to be analysed in this study present an exemplary case study of how these strategies are performed in the two specific contexts.

# Previous work on discriminatory discursive strategies and the model developed in this study

Van Dijk (1983, 1991, 1993) carried out a series of studies examining how people in Amsterdam and the United States systematically deny their discrimination against minority groups across a range of genres consisting of interviews, newspaper articles and parliamentary debates. A number of strategies (referred to by Van Dijk as ‘socio-cognitive’ strategies) identified in prejudiced discourses include positive self-presentation, negative other-presentation, problematisation, blaming the victim, apparent sympathy, fairness, top-down transfer and mitigation.

In their research into anti-semitic discourses in Austria, Wodak and her colleagues (De Cillia et al., 1999; Wodak, 1995; Wodak et al., 2009) identified a set of macrostrategies and their sub-strategies utilised by right-wing extremists and neo-Nazis to construct a national identity and hence exclude other ethnic groups, such as Jews:

1. Constructive strategies: linguistic procedures which constitute a ‘we-group’ through particular acts of reference, presupposing intra-national sameness or similarity (singularisation), and emphasising differences between in-groups and out-groups (dissimilation);   
2. Perpetuation and justification strategies: positive self-presentation, negative other-presentation, disempowering the out-group;   
3. Transformation strategies: positive self-presentation, warning against heteronomy, devaluation or negative connotation, vitalisation;   
4. Dismantling or destructive strategies: heteronomination, negative presentation of others, assimilation, dissimilation/exclusion, strategy of pronouncing somebody/ something dead.

Other research investigating prejudiced discursive strategies include Bar-Tal et al.’s (1989) classification of delegitimization strategies from the psychological perspective, Gruber’s (1997) analysis of strategies of justification by right-wing extremists in Austria and

Teo’s (2000) strategies on the part of the Australian press for othering a Vietnamese gang in Australia. In a study investigating the systematic use of discriminatory discourse strategies in news stories in Hong Kong’s leading liberal English language newspaper directed at Mainland immigrants, Flowerdew et al. (2002) carried out an extensive review of discriminatory discourse strategies identified in the literature and developed a composite taxonomy of four macro strategies and a range of sub-strategies to account for their data. The present study follows and slightly expands the taxonomy of Flowerdew et al. (2002) by adding a number of sub-strategies not identified by that study, but present in the above review. An expanded model of Flowerdew et al.’s (2002) strategies is given in Table 1.

It is worth noting that the taxonomy is based on findings from a body of research that mainly focuses on racial discrimination (e.g. anti-Semitism, European and Australian white population against immigrants), with the exception of Flowerdew et al.’s (2002) study in which both groups belong to the same ethnic background. In this study, we would like to further test the taxonomy against data that involve different social groups of the same ethnic background. This study also differs from that by Flowerdew et al. (2002) in that, while Flowerdew et al. examined how Mainland immigrants are discriminated against in the Hong Kong press, this study looks into multi-lateral interactions between Mainlanders and Hongkongers as well as between two different social groups of Hong Kong people, that is, Hongkongers who support the Occupy campaign and those who oppose it. The first pair, as mentioned earlier, makes sense, given that Mainlanders and Hongkongers have developed divergent ideologies due to the influence of disparate social, economic, cultural and political systems in the two territories and that Hong Kong people’s negative attitudes have been recorded in the literature. The second pair may appear surprising, as the strategies in previous studies were mostly drawn from discourses of ethnic prejudice. However, we would argue that different types of prejudice exist besides ethnic prejudice, and the discourse strategies used in prejudiced communications might also apply in other types of social context besides ethnicity. The following section details the process of collecting, coding and analysing the data.

# The data

The data used in this study consist of online comments downloaded in November 2015 attaching to two YouTube videos about OC.1 The rationale for choosing these two videos was that they attracted the most comments among YouTube videos on the movement (1858 and 2440 comments, respectively, see Table 2). The first video (NHK [romanised acronym for Japan Broadcasting Corporation, source of the video] hereafter), titled ‘Youth rebellion: the 75day Occupy Central movement’ (translated from Chinese), is a 48-minute documentary produced and uploaded by the Japanese TV station NHK. It narrates the whole process of the movement mostly from the young protestors’ (usually university students) perspective. The story is narrated in Japanese with Chinese subtitles, while people involved in the video mostly speak Cantonese, the mother tongue of the majority of Hong Kong people.

The second video (CWB [Causeway Bay, where the video was filmed] hereafter), which lasts 12minutes, was recorded by an anonymous protester with a cell phone and later uploaded to YouTube. Being given a rather provocative title, ‘Anti-Occupy people dismantle road blocks in Causeway Bay, grab a female protester’s legs and go under people’s crotch’ (translated from Chinese), the second video depicts confrontations of two groups of people: Occupy protesters and anti-Occupy Hongkongers. In the video, the anti-Occupy group accuses protesters of blocking the main road, which seriously impairs their daily commute to and from work. During the process, one of them becomes very emotional and has physical contact with a few protestors when he tries to lie down on the ground, and thereby being accused of molesting a female protester by her fellow protesters.

Table 1. Taxonomy of discriminatory discursive strategies in prejudice discourse developed from Flowerdew et al. (2002: 329–341).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Discursive strategy</td><td>Sub-strategy</td><td>Description of strategy</td></tr><tr><td>Negative other</td><td>Negative attributions</td><td>Fore-grounding the negative traits of the out- group.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Labelling</td><td>Assigning negative traits by labelling the out-. group with adjectives and stereotyping the out-group with nouns.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Scare tactics</td><td>Construction of conspiracy theories against in-group*</td><td>Exaggerating the hostile characteristics of the out-group (Gruber, 1997).</td></tr><tr><td>Dehumanisation*</td><td>Categorising the out-group as inhuman or inferior race or animals (Bar-Tal et al., 1989).</td></tr><tr><td>Predicting threats to interests of the in-group</td><td>Stirring worries among the in-group members usually by exaggerated statistics.</td></tr><tr><td>Predicting threats to public order and</td><td>Exaggerating the threat to public order by criminalising and abnormalising the out-group.</td></tr><tr><td>political stability Use of quasi-objective statistics</td><td>Manipulation of statistics in the favour of the interests of the in-group.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Blaming the victim</td><td>Use of quasi-theory*</td><td>Making quasi-objective arguments by quoting apparent theories (indicating or without indicating the source).</td></tr><tr><td>Self-justification/ positive discrimination</td><td>Justifying the prejudiced attitudes of the in-. group by emphasising the negative attributes of the out-group or resorting to a comparison with a &#x27;notorious&#x27; other community in another</td></tr><tr><td>Distortion</td><td>region or country. Making explicit negative fallacies about the</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Delegitimation</td><td>Concession*</td><td>out-group. Formulating first a positive opinion in order to be able to formulate a negative opinion later</td></tr><tr><td>Magnifying voices</td><td>(Van Dijk, 1983). Problematising issues concerning the out-group</td></tr><tr><td>against the group Pointing to illegitimate status/activities</td><td>Discrediting and disempowering the out-group</td></tr></table></body></html>

\*New categories derived from our data are marked with an asterisk.

Table 2. The profile of the corpus of YouTube online comments.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>NHK</td><td>CWB</td></tr><tr><td>Tokens (Chinese characters)</td><td>214,195</td><td>211,279</td></tr><tr><td>Comments</td><td>1858</td><td>2440</td></tr><tr><td>Commenters</td><td>678</td><td>1445</td></tr></table></body></html>

The comments attaching to the two videos are mostly in Chinese. Although Mainlanders mainly speak Mandarin and/or other regional dialects, while Hongkongers speak Cantonese, the two regions share the same written language, except that traditional characters are used in Hong Kong and simplified characters in the Mainland. However, Mainlanders have little difficulty reading and typing traditional characters and Hongkongers are somewhat familiar with the simplified system. Before the analysis, the data were transcribed and cleaned by deleting duplicate comments made by individuals in order to avoid skewing of the overall results. After cleaning, there remained 1858 comments made by 678 YouTube users under NHK and 2440 comments made by 1445 users under CWB (see Table 2).

The second step involved identifying and coding commenters’ place of residence, based on a combination of different types of information:

1. The Internet username that commenters choose, because two very different phonetic and morphological systems are used in Hong Kong and Mainland China.   
2. Ethnic claims made by the commenters themselves (e.g. ‘. . . as a Mainlander, I live in Hong Kong . . .’).   
3. The contextual clues in the comments (e.g. ‘. . . many of my Hong Kong friends . .’) and pronouns such as we, you and they used by the commenters when referring to in-group or out-group members.

The third step was to code the comments based on the commenters’ attitudes towards the movement. The comments were categorised into four types: (1) those that support OC, (2) those that are against the movement, (3) those that do not address the event itself but individual commenters from the in-group or the out-group, and (4) those that are neutral in stance or undefinable. During the final step of the data analysis, discriminatory discursive strategies were coded where they occurred in the data. The next section presents findings from the analysis.

# Findings

Before moving onto the discriminatory discursive strategies identified in the online interactions, we present brief quantitative data with regard to the comments in order to show an overall picture of the groups of people involved and their backgrounds (Table 3). First, the analysis of commenters’ place of residence reveals that both videos appeal to people of different regions in different ways. While the majority $( 6 3 . 5 1 \%$ ; percentages referred to in Tables 3 and 4 in this section are bolded) of the comments on the NHK video are made by Mainlanders, comments under the CWB video are mainly given by

Table 3. Online comments made by users in different regions.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">NHK</td><td colspan="2">CWB</td></tr><tr><td>Comments</td><td>%</td><td>Comments</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Mainlanders</td><td>1180</td><td>63.51</td><td>683</td><td>27.99</td></tr><tr><td>Hongkongers</td><td>359</td><td>19.32</td><td>1239</td><td>50.78</td></tr><tr><td>Overseas Chinese</td><td>195</td><td>10.50</td><td>172</td><td>7.05</td></tr><tr><td>Unidentified</td><td>102</td><td>5.49</td><td>346</td><td>14.18</td></tr><tr><td>Taiwanese</td><td>22</td><td>1.18</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1858</td><td>100</td><td>2440</td><td>100</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4. The number and the percentage of online comments by Mainlanders and Hongkongers based on their attitudes towards OC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">NHK</td><td colspan="2">CWB</td></tr><tr><td>Mainlanders</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Supporting OC</td><td>81</td><td>6.86%</td><td>33</td><td>4.83%</td></tr><tr><td>Against OC</td><td>951</td><td>80.59%</td><td>552</td><td>80.82%</td></tr><tr><td>Hongkongers</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Supporting OC</td><td>312</td><td>86.91%</td><td>412</td><td>33.25%</td></tr><tr><td>Against OC</td><td>36</td><td>10.03%</td><td>512</td><td>41.32%</td></tr></table></body></html>

OC: Occupy Central.

Hongkongers $( 5 0 . 7 8 \% )$ , with less participation from Mainland China $( 2 7 . 9 9 \% )$ . Western websites such as YouTube and Facebook are prohibited in the Mainland, but Mainland Chinese still show strong interest in accessing information outside the ‘great firewall’. The videos also attracted discussion from overseas Chinese, who account for $10 \%$ and $7 \%$ of the comments on both videos, respectively, and a number of Taiwanese who commented on the NHK video. Finally, there are a number of comments that are rather opaque in terms of the writer’s place of residence. Due to space constraints, this study will only focus on people from Mainland China and Hong Kong.

When commenters were further categorised based on their attitudes towards the campaign, interesting differences emerged. As shown in Table 4, while most of the comments by Mainlanders on both videos explicitly or implicitly show the writer’s opposition to the campaign $( 8 0 . 5 9 \%$ of the comments by Mainlanders under the NHK video and $8 0 . 8 2 \%$ of those under the CWB video), the majority of the comments by Hongkongers $( 8 6 . 9 1 \% )$ on the NHK video support the movement. However, only $3 3 . 2 5 \%$ of Hongkongers show their support for OC under the CWB video; more people $( 4 1 . 3 2 \% )$ express their disapproval of the movement. These differences in levels of Hongkongers’ support for OC across the two videos can perhaps be understood if consideration is given to the nature of the two videos.

The NHK video ‘Youth rebellion: the 75 day Occupy Central movement’ is a documentary that shows problems and challenges students encountered during the campaign and their reflections on their decision to rebel against the government. This video takes the students’ perspective when telling the story. It, therefore, tends to attract more comments from Hongkongers who wish to defend the students. The CWB video ‘Anti-Occupy people dismantle road blocks in Causeway Bay, grab a female protester’s legs and go under people’s crotch’, on the other hand, shows serious confrontations between Occupy protestors and the anti-Occupy group. In this video, the protesters react passively to the questioning from anti-Occupy activists. The provocative title of the video, that accuses an anti-Occupy person of molesting a protester, appears to have triggered outrage within the anti-Occupy group, as judging by the video, the accusation seems to be false.

Table 5. The number and the percentage of online comments in which discriminatory discursive strategies were used.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>NHK</td><td></td><td>CWB</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Discursive strategies used</td></tr><tr><td>Comment</td><td>1367</td><td>73.57%</td><td>1668</td><td>68.36%</td></tr><tr><td>User</td><td>530</td><td>78.17%</td><td>1049</td><td>72.60%</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Discursive strategies NOT used</td></tr><tr><td>Comment</td><td>491</td><td>26.43%</td><td>772</td><td>31.64%</td></tr><tr><td>User</td><td>148</td><td>21.83%</td><td>211</td><td>14.60%</td></tr></table></body></html>

The remainder of this section investigates how commenters use discriminatory discursive strategies to serve their own purposes during online interactions. As comments by Mainlanders who support OC account for less than $1 0 \%$ of all the comments from this group (see Table 4), they will not be included in the analysis. We will focus on three major groups: (1) Mainlanders who are against OC, (2) Hong Kong people who support the campaign and (3) Hongkongers who are against the movement.

Table 5 shows that discriminatory discursive strategies were identified in the majority of the comments. Around $70 \%$ of the comments on both videos involve at least one discriminatory discursive strategy. This indicates the intense tension between the three groups. Previous studies (e.g. Flowerdew et al., 2002; Ladegaard, 2011; Lam et al., 1999) have found that Hongkongers hold prejudicial attitudes against Mainland Chinese, but little research has been carried out on Mainlanders’ attitudes towards Hong Kong people. The results of this study show that Mainlanders may also be prejudiced against Hongkongers.

Furthermore, the three groups all make frequent use of a wide range of discriminatory discursive strategies. Table 5 shows that, for both videos, over $70 \%$ of the commenters used such strategies. Although the numbers are not further broken down by groups in Table 5, our observation during the coding and analysis of the data was that all three groups resort to similar strategies, except for scare tactics: use of quasi-theory and quasi-objective statistics and deligitimation: pointing to the illegitimate status/activates, both of which will be elaborated in the corresponding sub-sections. Therefore, in Table 6, which provides frequency data for each of the various discriminatory discursive substrategies, no distinction is made between groups.

As can be seen from Table 6, the full range of discriminatory discursive sub-strategies listed in the expanded taxonomy are found to be present in our data. Moreover, the most frequent seven sub-strategies in comments on both videos are the same. The order of these sub-strategies in terms of frequency is very similar as well. To highlight the most common sub-strategies in the data, we will first discuss the five most frequent strategies in Table 6, using specific examples. The remaining eight sub-strategies will then be analysed under the four major categories shown in Table 1, that is, blaming the victim, scare tactics, and delegitimation. All the examples included are translated from Chinese.

Table 6. Discriminatory discursive sub-strategies according to their frequency.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">No.</td><td colspan="2">NHK</td><td colspan="2">CWB</td></tr><tr><td>Discursive sub-strategy</td><td>No. of comments</td><td>Discursive sub-strategy</td><td>No. of comments</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Negative Other: negative attributions</td><td>692</td><td>Negative Other: negative attributions</td><td>873</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Blaming the victim: self- justification</td><td>358</td><td>Blaming the victim: self-justification</td><td>379</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Negative Other: dehumanisation</td><td>358</td><td>Negative Other: dehumanisation</td><td>258</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Negative Other: labelling</td><td>252</td><td>Scare tactics: threat to interests</td><td>218</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Scare tactics: threat to interests</td><td>103</td><td>Negative Other: labelling</td><td>153</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>Blaming the victim: concession</td><td>77</td><td>Negative Other: construction of conspiracy theories against the in- group</td><td>135</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>Negative Other: construction of conspiracy theories against the in-group</td><td>72</td><td>Blaming the victim: concession</td><td>88</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>Delegitimation: magnifying voices against the group</td><td>55</td><td>Scare tactics: threat to public order</td><td>72</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>Blaming the victim: distortion</td><td>57</td><td>Delegitimation: magnifying voices against the group</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>Scare tactics: threat to public order</td><td>36</td><td>Blaming the victim: distortion</td><td>39</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Scare tactics: use of quasi- theory</td><td>19</td><td>Delegitimation: pointing to illegimate status/activities</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>Delegitimation: pointing to illegitimate status/activities</td><td>9</td><td>Scare tactics: use of quasi- theory</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>Scare tactics: use of quasi- objective statistics</td><td>9</td><td>Scare tactics: use of quasi- objective statistics</td><td>10</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Negative other: negative attributions

A common accusation made by OC supporters against Mainlanders is that they do not fight for their rights or freedom. In Examples 1 and 2, the word freedom appears frequently. OC supporters frequently associate Mainlanders with freedom in a negative way (they do not care about freedom, or freedom is a taboo in the Mainland) to differentiate themselves from Mainlanders. They also associate Mainlanders with servility and portray them as an inferior group that only cares about basic needs for survival (food).

1. These fucking Chinese people don’t fight for freedom but enjoy it in other countries. They only care about food, but have they ever thought whether they would have food without a good government?   
2. You Mainlanders need to get rid of your servility. You don’t want to change; it doesn’t mean that Hong Kong and Macau people don’t. The only improvement in the Mainland is economy. Freedom is still a taboo.

The word freedom is also frequently referred to by Mainlanders in their comments (see Examples 3 and 4). Their typical argumentation is that Occupy protesters are young and brainless and that they pursue freedom at the expense of economic development and social stability. Another Mainlander critique of Hongkongers is that the protesters are not sophisticated or mature enough and are probably manipulated by western anti-China forces.

3. Do these Hong Kong dogs know that revolution always involves blood-shedding? These brainless students have no social experience and feel that they are doing something really great. In fact, they don’t even know what they really want.   
4. These young people care little about national ethos and pursue so-called ‘freedom and democracy’. They are certain to be manipulated by western anti-China forces. Don’t you have any national ethos? How would you fight for freedom and democracy and secure national prosperity?

Being young and not mature is also the negative trait of OC protesters frequently attacked by anti-Occupy Hongkongers. In Examples 5 and 6, commenters refer to the protesters in the second or third person, establishing a distance between the in-group (anti-Occupy people) and the out-group (OC protesters). Similar to the strategy revealed in the comments by Mainlanders, young protesters’ ‘naïve’ behaviour and the serious consequences ensuing are reiterated by anti-Occupy Hongkongers.

5. I studied Economics. I am a person who does not care much about politics. It is so obvious that the economic development of Hong Kong has been seriously affected by the movement. Your behaviours are extremely naïve. I can’t bear to see how bad the situation will become.   
6. Don’t you find it strange that most Occupiers are young kids? Aren’t adults smarter (more sophisticated) than you? Pursuing democracy is like worshiping pop stars for you. Only young people are like this.

It is worth noting that 200,000 people from different social classes and of all ages participated in the campaign. However, both Mainlanders and Hongkongers who disapprove of the movement often choose to blame students. They conveniently choose students as the representative of the out-group in order to achieve discursive dominance over the Other.

# Blaming the victim: self-justification/positive discrimination

Wodak (1995: 8) suggests that strategies of self-justification enable the speaker or writer to make normative evaluations of the out-group and assign guilt or responsibility to them, thereby allowing them to ‘present themselves as free of prejudice or even as victims of so-called “reverse” prejudice’. This strategy is well illustrated in Examples 7–11. When OC supporters overtly admit their hatred towards China or Mainland Chinese, the statement is often followed by their justification for the prejudice (see Examples 7 and 8). They argue that their negative attitudes towards China are due to its corrupt political system and Mainlanders’ indifference to the problem, and that they detest Mainlanders because they behave like colonialists. Through strategies of self-justification, OC supporters present themselves as victims of Mainlanders’ arrogance and China’s hegemony.

7. Why do you think Hong Kong people are against you? It is because of your corruption and deception. You are a group of slaves that merely know how to serve the government.   
8. We hate China for a reason. The Chinese government treats Hong Kong as a colony and is much harsher to Hong Kong people in comparison with the British government. There is no doubt that Mainland Chinese come to Hong Kong as colonists.

Mainland Chinese, on the other hand, justify their derogatory comments about Hongkongers by vilifying them as ungrateful and non-cooperative people. In Examples 9 and 10, both commenters point to the fact that Hong Kong never had democracy during the period of British rule in order to justify the reluctance of the central government to introduce universal suffrage. They also list different benefits that Hong Kong receives from China as a SAR to create the image of ungrateful Hongkongers. In these examples, the commenters refer to Hongkongers in general rather than young students, thereby revealing commenters’ prejudice against Hong Kong people in general.

9. Hongkongers are just like those Taiwanese. Did you have democracy under the rule of UK? Now China decides to democratise Hong Kong gradually, but you do not want this to happen. Do you really think Hong Kong is still one of the ‘four dragons in Asia’? The central government loosens the restrictions upon Mainland visitors to Hong Kong so as to boost the economy. You are against this as well.   
10. (During the colonial period) Not a single Hongkonger was appointed to be the Chief Executive (nobody complained). After the handover, Hong Kong is led by Hong Kong people (now they start complaining). Hong Kong never pays tax. Hongkongers never have to fulfil military duty. Why on earth do they deserve all these?

Hongkongers who disapprove of the campaign consider OC supporters as losers. They categorise protesters as the out-group and the rest of the Hong Kong population as the in-group and accuse them of depriving the in-group members of their basic human rights. Moreover, as can be seen in Example 11, the commenter also includes

Mainlanders as in-group members and portrays them as victims of OC supporters’ ‘double standards’.

11. These are typical viewpoints of Hong Kong losers. To pursue the right to vote for the Chief Executive, they choose to block the roads even if they know it is illegal, and they call it civil disobedience. Mainlanders use VPNs to access Youtube in order to know the outside world better. These losers ask Mainlanders not to use VPN. This is again typical double standards set by Hong Kong losers. They are always lenient with themselves but harsh to others. Because of losers like you, Hong Kong will become worse and worse.

The fact that negative attributions of the out-group and self-justification are the two most common strategies in our data points to commenters’ tendency to apply a double strategy of positive self-presentation and negative other-presentation in order to effectively set a boundary between them and the Other. This boundary can sometimes be mobile. To serve their purpose of obtaining discursive dominance, Mainlanders sometimes treat Hong Kong students as the out-group and stand alongside the rest of the Hong Kong population, yet at other times, they show overt discrimination against Hongkongers in general. Similarly, in the discourse of the Hong Kong anti-Occupy group, Mainlanders are usually invisible; however, occasionally, the anti-Occupy group would include them in order to achieve dominance over the Occupy group. This can also be counted as a delegitimation strategy (magnifying the voice against the out-group).

# Negative other: dehumanisation

Dehumanisation involves categorising a group as ‘inhuman either by using categories of subhuman creatures such as inferior race and animals, or by using categories of negatively evaluated superhuman creatures such as demons, monsters, and Satans’ (Bar-Tal et al., 1989: 172). It is a strategy that sharpens intergroup differences to an extreme. Dehumanisation is the third most frequently used strategy in our data. Table 7 shows the most frequent dehumanising words or phrases used by different groups.

It is interesting that anti-OC Mainlanders and Occupy supporters make use of a similar set of words and phrases to delegitimatise each other. While Occupy supporters refer to Mainlanders as Chinese dogs, Mainlanders call OC supporters dogs of UK or USA. Occupiers stigmatise Mainlanders as slaves of the communist party, whereas Mainlanders call them slaves of British colonists. Anti-Occupy Hongkongers, however, opt for a completely different set of expressions. 仆街, 撚鳩 and its variations on9 and 撚樣 refer to male sexual organs, while 臭化閪 is an extremely vulgar expression associated with female genital organs. Frequent use of these expressions reveals anti-Occupy Hongkongers’ strong resentment or intensive disgust towards Occupiers. Another expression worth mentioning is social scum. When differentiating themselves from Occupy protesters, both anti-Occupy Hongkongers and Mainlanders label the out-group as social scum or trash, thereby indicating their will to attain social superiority over Occupiers.

Table 7. Lexicon of dehumanisation by different groups.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Hongkongers supporting OC</td><td>Mainlanders against OC</td><td>Hongkongers against OC</td></tr><tr><td>HB/HK (Chinese pigs)</td><td>/J, EJJ (dogs of UK, USA)</td><td>1Mj (f**kers)</td></tr><tr><td> (Chinese dogs)</td><td> (trash, social scum)</td><td>#, on9, # (d*ck head)</td></tr><tr><td>t, #tX (CPC slaves)</td><td> (f*king retarded)</td><td>1L (female genital organ)</td></tr><tr><td>3 (bastards)</td><td>(slaves that are eager to please their masters) E/\ (SOB)</td><td> (trash, social scum)</td></tr></table></body></html>

OC: Occupy Central.

Table 8. Derogatory labels used by different groups.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Hongkongers supporting OC</td><td>Mainlanders against OC</td><td>Hongkongers against OC</td></tr><tr><td>5E (50 cents)</td><td>$/=$ (second/ third-class citizens)</td><td>} ([dollar] cents)</td></tr><tr><td>(citizens of the superpower)</td><td>JE (rebels)</td><td> (cowards)</td></tr><tr><td>HE, # (CPC gangsters)</td><td>2 (grassroot youth)</td><td>T# (Red Guards)</td></tr><tr><td>iT, J (traitors)</td><td> (losers)</td><td>E, #E (a mob)</td></tr><tr><td> (simplified</td><td>T# (Red Guards)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(handicapped) Chinese)</td><td> (traitors)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>} ([dollar] cents)</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

OC: Occupy Central.

# Negative other: labelling

Similar to the function of dehumanisation, commenters also frequently use derogative epithets when referring to out-group members in order to further distance themselves from the out-group (Table 8).

The tension between anti-OC Mainlanders and Occupy protesters is again reflected in the correlation in choice of words by both groups. Occupy protesters refer to Mainlanders as 50 cents, a term originally used by Mainland Internet users to address people who allegedly get paid to post positive messages about the Communist Party (rumour has it that they are paid 50 cents per post). Mainlanders, in return, call Occupy protesters [dollar] cents indicating their close relation with western anti-China forces. Both groups call each other traitors. Occupy protesters label Mainlanders as traitors on the ground that their tolerance of the Communist Party will lead to the fall of China (despite its rapid economic growth). Mainlanders, on the contrary, consider Occupiers as traitors, thinking that the Umbrella Movement is a conspiracy by western anti-China forces to overthrow the communist regime.

There are also overlaps in the labels used by Mainlanders and anti-Occupy Hongkongers. Both groups consider the Occupy group as rebels or a mob and call them [dollar] cents. Both groups label the protesters as Red Guards, a term originating from the Cultural Revolution, in order to distinguish themselves from Occupy protesters who are, in their eyes, like the Reds Guards, capable of absurd and irrational deeds.

# Scare tactics: threat to interests

The fifth most frequently used strategy is scare tactics: predicting threats to the interests of the in-group, that is, making arguments that appeal to fear or threats. When using this strategy, anti-OC Mainlanders reiterate that negotiating with the government will only make things worse and eventually it is the Hong Kong public who pays the price (Example 12). It is interesting to see how Mainlanders position themselves as a neutral third party and blame the OC group for putting the interests of the rest of the population in danger. Anti-OC Hongkongers, on the other hand, usually highlight the scary consequences of the event, that is, OC has stunted the economic growth in Hong Kong (Example 13).

12. Hong Kong young people can occupy central a hundred times; the central government will still not to negotiate with you. It is always Hong Kong Other people who suffer.   
13. These people are dragging Hong Kong down step by step, starting from Occupy Central. Hang Seng Index plummets. Shop-owners have families to support. Within a few days, they are now facing bankruptcy because of you.

OC supporters also use this tactic to accuse the anti-OC group of being too indifferent to the problems experienced in the Hong Kong society. They argue that these people are equally or even more responsible than the government for the deteriorating situation in Hong Kong (see Example 14). Because of their indifference and short sightedness, Hongkongers are at the mercy of real estate tycoons and big business monopolies.

14. Just because there is no democracy, Hong Kong is now facing problems such as the government being controlled by large corporates, corruption, soaring real estate prices, etc. Hong Kong is doomed not because of these problems, but because of short-sighted people like you. Wake up!

So far we have reviewed the five most frequent sub-strategies identified in the data. We will now present the remaining eight sub-strategies starting with the major category negative other.

# Negative other: construction of conspiracy theories against the in-group

Apart from predicting threats to the interests of the in-group and stirring up fears, the commenters in this study also frequently accuse the out-group of intentionally jeopardising the interests of the in-group and undermining social stability, arguing that there must be $a$ conspiracy by the out-group. This is the second sub-strategy that is unique to our data.

When making such an allegation against the OC group, Mainlanders tend to do it in a sarcastic way. They position themselves above the Occupiers and refer to the conspiracy in a pitiful tone (e.g. poor stupid kids in Example 15); they claim that the Occupiers are simply the pawns in a chess game played by foreign anti-China forces. They have been manipulated by anti-China forces yet are still not aware of it (Example 16).

15. Poor stupid kids, this belongs to internal affairs. It is f\*\*king obvious that this is the conspiracy of western countries.   
16. Some people want to use this to stir up the tension between the Mainland and Hong Kong. You have been used yet are still not aware.

This claim is also been made by anti-OC Hongkongers (Example 17). Moreover, they associate OC with democratic parties in Hong Kong, accusing them of being pseudodemocrats, conspiring to bring down the incumbent Chief Executive, Leung Chun-Ying, through their movement (Example 18).

17. Those f\*\*kers betray their own country, occupy the land and create unnecessary garbage. . . . They want to build a puppet government that is controlled by foreign forces in the future.   
18. The quasi-democrats want to bring down Leung Chun-Ying (the Chief Executive). They have been brainwashing Hongkongers for their own political agenda.

Sympathisers of the OC group, on the contrary, argue that anti-OC Hongkongers have close ties with the central government and that they have been helping the party to gradually implement full control over Hong Kong, depriving Hong Kong of the juridical, administrative and financial independence that was specified in the Joint Declaration (see Example 19).

19. These idiots dare not fight against the authorities that deprive Hongkongers of their rights to vote, collude with the Communist Party and lie to Hong Kong people. They pretend to be patriotic, but once the Communist Party controls Hong Kong, they will regret.

In many comments, the writers try to exaggerate the deeds of the out-group and the consequences that will follow by associating the out-group with a covert and more influential power group that has evil intentions.

# Blaming the victim: distortion

Apart from the negative other strategy, another major strategy adopted by the commenters is blaming the victim. Sometimes, the blame may be exaggerated or even involve serious distortions of the out-group. As can be seen from Examples 20 and 21, antiOccupy Mainlanders would take full credit for the success of Hong Kong, claiming that the economic growth in Hong Kong after 1997 is solely due to the support from the central government.

20. Hong Kong can be so developed solely because of the Communist Party.   
21. After 1997, without great financial support from the central government and the support from Mainland tourists, the economy in Hong Kong would have crashed long time ago.

Occupiers magnify the negative traits of the Mainland by saying that ‘everything in China is fake’ and that ‘China has always been the lowest’ (see Examples 22 and 23). Anti-OC Hongkongers, on the contrary, distort the image of Occupiers by falsely referring to specific crimes they have committed (Example 24).

22. Everything in China is fake. Fake people, fake law, fake officials, fake baby formula, even their daddies are fake.   
23. Mainlanders have been brainwashed since their birth. . . . I cannot think of any race that have worse manners than you. China has always been the lowest in terms of both politics and morality of civilians.   
24. They (Occupiers) are worse than thieves because they steal electricity, sell drugs, destroy public roads and plantation, dig bricks out of streets and beat people. Yet they argue that the police should not arrest them. They are worse than animals.

In these comments, the hatred towards the out-group is reflected in the absolute certainty of the argument. The use of boosters such as solely, everything, any and always reflects the strong repulsion the commenter reserves for the out-group.

# Blaming the victim: concession

Apart from aggressive sub-strategies such as dehumanisation and distortion, the commenters sometimes also adopt an indirect approach, that is, making a concession. In about 70–90 comments under either of the two videos, commenters would first acknowledge something positive about the out-group and immediately add negative comments.

In Example 25, a Mainlander acknowledges protesters’ right to pursue democracy, but this is immediately followed by the conjunction however, showing his or her disapproval of Occupiers’ naïve and impulsive behaviour. In a similar pattern, an anti-OC Hongkonger points to the naïveness of the Occupiers by first admitting their right of free speech in Example 26. This kind of discursive move is also found in pro-OC comments (Example 27). By doing so, the commenters apply a double strategy of positive self-presentation and negative other-presentation.

25. It is right to pursue democracy. Every country should aim to achieve democracy. However, I do not support either the Tiananmen Square event or the Occupy movement, as neither events are started by rational people. They are blind and immature. I am doing a Master’s degree in the university. I know very well how naïve and impulsive my fellow students are. Let alone secondary school kids.   
26. I am a student, too. I respect your right of expressing your opinions. However, your behaviour has been barbaric and aggressive. Even if you were allowed to vote for the Chief Executive, are you certain that the person selected by you

would be the best choice? . . . Your behaviour is extremely naïve. I cannot bear to witness this.

27. Yes. You have earned your place in the society and can support your family and contribute to the society with your knowledge and hard work. However, weren’t you a student yourself before? . . . How come being a student equals being unemployed? How come not paying tax equals losers?

# Scare tactics: threat to public order

The scare tactic, predicting a threat to the interests of the in-group, is the fifth most frequent sub-strategy in our data. In addition to this, the commenters also make use of other scare tactics, that is, pointing to a threat to public order, and use of quasi-theory and quasi-objective statistics. Public order or social stability is considered vital for national or regional prosperity in both China and Hong Kong (Flowerdew et al., 2002). Pointing to the threat to public order caused by the out-group enables the commenter to gain superiority over the Other. The anti-OC Mainlander in Example 28, for instance, comments directly that the Occupiers are destroying public order simply because they want attention. The anti-OC Hongkonger in Example 29 blames the OC group for not being brave enough to confront the central government but only making a mess in Hong Kong.

28. These young people are eager for attention and have too much energy, so they start destroying the public order in the name of pursuing democracy.   
29. You have lost the support of Hong Kong people. . . . If you are brave enough, go and occupy the Tiananmen Square! Now you’ve made Hong Kong such a chaos.

The use of quasi-theory is a category not found in Flowerdew et al.’s (2002) data. Both quasi-theory and quasi-objective statistics seem to be more favoured by anti-OC groups than pro-OC groups in our data. As can been seen from Example 30, the antiOC Mainlander refers to universal suffrage as da guo fan (big rice bowl), a unique concept in China due to cultural/historical reasons. In Example 31, the Mainlander denigrates Occupiers’ pursuit of democracy by pointing out the dark side of capitalism, that is, it is built upon the exploitation of resources in other countries.

30. True universal suffrage will never happen. Why? First, one person one vote is basically a ‘da fuo fan’ (‘big rice bowl’) in political terms. History has shown that ‘da guo fan’ will certainly fail. Second, where the votes go is decided by different powers, for example, economic, cultural and even violent. The influence of certain votes will inevitably be stronger than others. . . . Fourth, universal suffrage will lead to rich people buying votes.   
31. My dear stupid kids who pursue democracy, the prosperity of western countries is due to the fact that they plundered other countries for resources and wealth. It has nothing to do with democracy.

As for quasi-objective statistics, this is also a strategy more frequently used by both anti-OC Mainlanders and Hongkongers. Very often, reference is made to the economic loss caused by the campaign.

32. Let me tell you. The economic loss caused by the 75-day Occupy movement is 350 million! Are you sure the movement was initiated by students? It is a conspiracy by the UK and the US!

In their Hong Kong data, Flowerdew et al. (2002) noted the frequent use of quasiobjective figures by the Hong Kong government against Mainland immigrants. Again, during the OC movement, the government disseminated figures to urge an end to the protest (see Chow et al., 2014). Frequent references to these figures in our YouTube comments clearly show how quickly and effectively the prejudiced discourses have been reproduced through media and consequently picked up by the protestors (Van Dijk, 1993).

# Delegitimation

The last major strategy adopted by the commenters is delegitimation. Anti-OC Mainlanders and Hongkongers try to include the rest of Hongkongers in their argument against the OC group. In Example 33, the Mainland commenter assumes that, apart from the 200,000 odd people who have participated in the movement, the rest of the 8 million who did not participate must be against OC.

33. If $90 \%$ of the Hongkongers want democracy, there won’t be only such a small number of people participating in the movement. You cannot represent the whole Hong Kong population.

This is a sub-strategy we refer to as magnifying voices against the group. Another delegitimation sub-strategy used by the commenters is pointing to the illegitimate status of the out-group. Blocking the road without permission from a court is an argument frequently used by the anti-OC groups (see Example 34). Along with the use of quasi-theory and quasi-objective statistics, this is the third sub-strategy that is more frequently used by anti-OC groups than pro-OC groups. In all, $6 6 . 6 6 \%$ and $8 0 . 5 5 \%$ of the comments involving this strategy are made by anti-OC Hongkongers and Mainlanders under the NHK and CWB videos, respectively.

34. No matter how peaceful they are, occupying the roads illegally is wrong and the behaviour of losers.

Moreover, anti-OC Hongkongers also point out that the Federation of Students itself was not set up based on votes by all Hong Kong students, thereby questioning the legitimacy of the federation to lead the campaign and disempower their rights of pursuing democracy (see Example 35).

35. Hong Kong Federation of Students itself was not established based on votes by all Hong Kong students. They never disclose their financial status. On what grounds are they qualified for launching this movement? It is just a group of ignorant young kids yelling and screaming.

This sub-strategy seems to be less effective for the pro-OC groups. Among the few occasions when the latter groups use this strategy, they tend to target Mainlanders by discrediting their legitimacy on the grounds that they are interfering in Hong Kong affairs.

36. Hong Kong people occupy Central. It’s none of your business. Shut up, Mainlanders.

# Discussion

From a theoretical point of view, in this article, we have reviewed discursive strategies identified in previous studies and used them to account for the multi-lateral interactions between different social groups in Mainland China and Hong Kong in the context of OC. Findings show that a previous taxonomy developed by Flowerdew et al. (2002) is robust in accounting for our data, although we have added a small number of sub-categories not included in Flowerdew et al. In the conclusion to their study, Flowerdew et al. (2002) noted some local characteristics to their data, as represented in their sub-categories. Again, in this study, we have needed to add several sub-categories. As with the earlier study, some of the sub-categories might also be specific to local situational features. Flowerdew et al.’s (2002) data consisted of formal news reports while our data are made up of very informal social media data. In addition, we cannot discount the possibility that the differences between the results of the two studies might be in part due to the smaller data set of the earlier study. Although our analysis is based on just two case studies and cannot lead to broad generalisations, the large number of comments and Internet users involved adds weight to the conclusions drawn. Commenting on Flowerdew et al.’s (2002) study, Renkema (2004: 290) stated that ‘[t]he benefit of [Flowerdew et al.’s] scheme is that a discourse analysis based on these strategies is more systematic than a more or less impressionistic list of anecdotal or disputable examples’. We would argue that this is also a strength of this study.

Findings from this study further contribute to the field of intercultural political discourse analysis and build on Flowerdew et al. (2002) by adding evidence from both Hong Kong and China, not just Hong Kong. The analysis of interactions among the three power groups, that is, OC supporters, anti-Occupy Hongkongers and anti-Occupy Mainlanders, and the historiographical approach adopted allows for a better understanding of the complex socio-political situation in post-colonial Hong Kong. Our results show that Mainlanders may also be prejudiced against Hongkongers, a fact that has not previously been investigated in the discourse literature, which has focussed on Hong Kong people’s (negative) attitudes towards Mainlanders. We may note here that our study is, to our knowledge, unique in the discourse literature on the Hong Kong Umbrella Movement to date (Flowerdew, 2016) in providing a Mainland perspective on the issue.

Although the Occupy event took place in 2014, in taking a historiographical perspective (Flowerdew, 2012, 2017), in addition to its theoretical contribution with regard to intercultural political discourse and discriminatory discursive strategies, this article offers some insights into current problems and social tensions in Hong Kong society that have subsequently become worse rather than better. Looking at the event retrospectively, the end of the Occupy campaign was in fact the beginning of a bitter process of Hong

Kong becoming more divided due to divergent ideologies triggered by the event. After OC, some of the young protesters formed or joined more radical associations, such as localist, nativist, and separatist political groups (e.g. People Power-League of Social Democrats, Hong Kong Indigenous and Hong Kong National Party). Prior to Occupy, there had been a tacit agreement in Hong Kong society that there should be no calls for independence and that Hong Kong was an integral part of China. Since Occupy, however, the genie has escaped from the bottle and there is widespread discussion of localism and even independence for Hong Kong, especially among the young. The Beijing government, on the other hand, has become more vocal in its indictment of localist groups and some have been jailed. This has led to the mass demonstrations going on at the time of writing (June 2019) against the attempt by the Hong Kong government to introduce legislation allowing for extradition from Hong Kong to Mainland China. In spite of the current worsening relations between the Mainland and Hong Kong both at a political and an individual level, an important function of this study is in helping to understand how divergent perspectives are manifested. Such an understanding, we would argue, is facilitated by the historiographical approach taken in this study.

# Declaration of conflicting interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

# Funding

The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

# Note

1. The videos are accessible from https://youtu.be/_ediOgTBIFw and https://youtu.be/6DUD WUdj6_Q.

# References

Bar-Tal D, Kruglanski A and Klar Y (1989) Delegitimization: The extreme case of stereotyping and prejudice. In: Bar-Tal D, Graumann C, Kruglanski A, et al. (eds) Stereotyping and Prejudice: Changing Conceptions. New York: Springer, pp. 169–182.   
Chan KC (2015) Contested news values and media performance during the Umbrella Movement. Chinese Journal of Communication 8(4): 420–428.   
Chen BA (2010) Da tao gang. Guangzhou, China: Guangdong People’s Press.   
Chow V, Nip A and Zhao S (2014) Business groups, John Tsang urge end to protests, citing harm to economy. South China Morning Post, 4 October. Available at: https://www.scmp. com/news/hong-kong/article/1609109/business-groups-john-tsang-urge-end-protests-citingharm-economy   
De Cillia R, Reisigl M and Wodak R (1999) The discursive construction of national identities. Discourse & Society 10(2): 149–173.   
Erni JN (2015) A legal realist view on citizen actions in Hong Kong’s umbrella movement. Chinese Journal of Communication 8(4): 412–419.   
Fairclough N (1992) Discourse and Social Change. London: Longman.   
Fairclough N (1995) Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of Language. London: Longman.   
Flowerdew J (1998) The Final Years of British Hong Kong: The Discourse of Colonial Withdrawal. London: Macmillan Press; New York: St. Martin’s Press.   
Flowerdew J (2012) Critical Discourse Analysis in Historiography: The Case of Hong Kong’s Evolving Political Identity. London: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Flowerdew J (2017) Understanding the Hong Kong Umbrella movement: A critical discourse historiographical approach. Discourse & Society 28(5): 453–472.   
Flowerdew J and Jones R (2016) Occupy Hong Kong: Historicizing protest. In: Flowerdew J and Jones R (eds) Introduction to Special Edition of Journal of Language and Politics. Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing Company, pp. 519–526.   
Flowerdew J, Li D and Tran S (2002) Discriminatory news discourse: Some Hong Kong data. Discourse & Society 13(3): 319–345.   
Garrett D (2014) Counter-hegemonic Resistance in China’s Hong Kong: Visualizing Protest in the City. London: Springer.   
Gruber H (1997) The rhetoric of trivialization: The coverage of Right Wing extremism and Neonazism in Austria’s most read tabloid. Belgian Journal of Linguistics 11: 139–156.   
Ladegaard H (2011) Stereotypes in the making: Prejudice and cultural generalizations in Hong Kong students’ discourse. Journal of Asian Pacific Communication 21(1): 133–158.   
Lam S, Lau I, Chiu C, et al. (1999) Differential emphases on modernity and Confucian values in social categorization: The case of Hong Kong adolescents in political transition. International Journal of Intercultural Relations 23(2): 237–256.   
Lee M and Leung S (1995) Democracy, Capitalism, and National Identity in Public Attitudes. Kowloon, Hong Kong: Hong Kong Polytechnic University.   
Lee P, So C and Leung L (2015) Social media and Umbrella Movement: Insurgent public sphere in formation. Chinese Journal of Communication 8(4): 356–375.   
Ma E and Fung A (1999) Re-sinicization, nationalism and the Hong Kong identity. In: So C and Chan JM (eds) Press and Politics in Hong Kong: Case Studies from 1967 to 1997. Sha Tin, Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, pp. 497–528.   
Ma E and Fung A (2007) Negotiating local and national identifications: Hong Kong identity surveys 1996–2006. Asian Journal of Communication 17(2): 172–185.   
Renkema J (2004) Introduction to Discourse Studies. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing.   
Teo P (2000) Racism in the news: A critical discourse analysis of news reporting in two Australian newspapers. Discourse & Society 11: 7–49.   
The University of Hong Kong (n.d.) Public opinion polls conducted by Public Opinion Programme. Available at: http://hkupop.hku.hk/chinese/popexpress/ethnic/eidentity/poll/datatables.html (accessed 20 January 2015).   
Van Dijk T (1983) Cognitive and conversational strategies in the expression of ethnic prejudice. Text – An interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of Discourse 3(4): 375–404.   
Van Dijk T (1991) Racism and the Press (Critical Studies in Racism and Migration). London: Routledge.   
Van Dijk T (1993) Elite Discourse and Racism. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE.   
Van Dijk T (2001) Multidisciplinary CDA: A plea for diversity. In: Wodak R and Meyer M (eds) Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Sage, pp. 95–120.   
Wodak R (1995) The development and forms of racist discourse in Austria since 1989. In: Graddol G and Thomas S (eds) Language in a Changing Europe. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, pp. 1–15.   
Wodak R (2015) Critical discourse analysis: Discourse-historical approach. In: Mazzoleni G (ed.) The International Encyclopedia of Political Communication. New York: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 1–14.   
Wodak R, de Cillia R, Reisigl M, et al. (2009) The Discursive Construction of National Identity. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

# Author biographies

Meilin Chen is a Lecturer at Hong Kong Baptist University (HKBU). She received her PhD in English from City University of Hong Kong. Before joining HKBU, she taught English academic writing to students from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds in two other Hong Kong universities. She is interested in corpus linguistics, learner corpus research, English for academic purposes, critical discourse analysis, data-driven learning and computer-assisted discourse analysis.

John Flowerdew is a Visiting Chair at the University of Lancaster and a visiting research fellow at Birkbeck, University of London. He was previously a professor at City University of Hong Kong. His research interests focus on political and academic discourse. In political discourse, he has developed a theory of critical discourse analysis in historiography (CDH) and has published two books and a series of papers on Hong Kong’s transition from British to Chinese sovereignty. With John Richardson, he is co-editor of The Routledge Handbook of Critical Discourse Studies.