# Obituary: Pippa Stein

It is with deep sadness that we bring news of the recent death of Pippa Stein, a JEAP Editorial Board member and specialist in the field of English education and academic literacy. She passed away in August after a long period of illness, losing the battle against cancer. She was 53 years old.

Pippa was an early recruit to the board of JEAP and a supporter of the journal for several years. She was an Associate Professor in English Language and Literacy Education in the School of Literature and Language Studies at the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg where she had worked since the mid 1980s. She had a strong interest in the areas of New Literacy Studies, Multiliteracies, multimodality and social semiotics in relation to teaching literacy in contexts of cultural and linguistic diversity. I met her a few times in London where she studied for a PhD under the supervision of Gunther Kress and was always impressed by her enthusiasm and vitality.

Her experience as an English Second Language and Literacy teacher ranged from early childhood through to secondary school and tertiary level classroom teaching. It also included teaching literacy to homeless children in inner city street shelters and working as an English teacher-educator in township and suburban schools in Johannesburg. While a student at Wits in the mid-1970s, Pippa was a key member of the Junction Avenue Theatre Company, one of South Africa’s leading workshop theatre groups, and she maintained a strong association with the group. Her passion for social change led to her initiating the Soweto English Language Project, out of which grew a highly regarded series of textbooks for the teaching of English on which she worked with a team of like-minded innovators in English language pedagogy. She was also joint leader of the Wits Multi-literacies Research Project, a research team of academics and teachers across a range of disciplines including language, literature, the visual arts and science.

Pippa’s many publications spanned the fields of educational and semiotic theory and practice, as well as art and culture more generally. Pippa published on socio-cultural approaches to literacy, multiliteracies and multimodal pedagogy in international journals such as the Harvard Educational Review, the Journal of Early Childhood Literacy and TESOL Quarterly. Her most prestigious publication was perhaps an article in Perspectives in Language and Literacy: Beyond the Here and Now, published by the Harvard Educational Review Reprint Series, a selection of fifteen seminal articles from the Harvard Educational Review since 1964. Recent book chapters are in B. Norton and K.Tooney (eds) Critical Pedagogies and Language Learning (Cambridge University Press) and C. Jewitt and G. Kress (eds) Multimodal Literacies (Peter Lang). Pippa’s last major work, based on her doctoral research, published this year by Routledge, was Multimodal Pedagogies in Diverse Classrooms: Representation, rights and resources. The book has already garnered high praise from reviewers, one of whom remarked that ‘‘the book breathed life into theory’’.

Her services to Wits and the high regard in which she was held by many was given public recognition when the University awarded her the prestigious Academic Citizenship Award in 2007. She will be missed by her students and the academic community.