# Integrating essential learning outcomes and electronic portfolios: Recommendations for assessment of student growth, course objectives, program outcomes, and accreditation standards

Kerri L. Sowers1 Shelly Meyers2

1 Board-Certified Clinical Specialist in Neurologic Physical Therapy, Stockton University, Galloway, NJ

2 Stockton University, Galloway, NJ

# Abstract

Stockton University is a mid-size liberal arts institution in Southern New Jersey. Degree seekers must complete required course work in both liberal studies and core, specialized areas, such as business, health sciences, hospitality, education, social and behavioral sciences, or organizational leadership. Stockton emphasizes Essential Learning Outcomes (ELOs) in undergraduate programs, aligning them to course goals and program outcomes. Faculty implement ELOs in many courses, across disciplines, providing students with opportunities to generalize ELOs in different contexts, in meaningful and relevant ways. Electronic portfolios (ePortfolios) are used to give students opportunities to develop their own personal profiles and expand their goal setting practices, by choosing artifacts that most represent who they are as learners and who they will be as future employees. Students enrolled in the courses included in this case study were encouraged to maintain an electronic portfolio that facilitates skill acquisition of reflective thought, self-assessment, authentic learning, self-determination, critical thinking and problem solving in preparation to successfully participate in a $2 1 ^ { \mathrm { s t } }$ century global world. Together with ELOs, ePortfolios give students a means of promoting their value to a future employer. This paper explores multiple case studies through courses that have integrated ELOs and ePortfolios for the purpose of assessing student growth, course objectives, program outcomes, or accreditation assessment. The case studies highlight the use of ELOs merged with ePortfolios for: first-year students and their involvement in campus and course activities to assess personal and academic growth; first-year students and the development of their research and information literacy skills to assess academic growth and course objectives; upper level undergraduate students and reflective assessment of student growth and course outcomes; and graduate students and reflective assessment of student growth and evidence for documenting accreditation standards. Examples of how ELOs and ePortfolios can be merged for different disciplines, and different student levels, are explored in detail. Suggestions for additional opportunities to embed ELOs into ePortfolios are discussed and provided for faculty who are interested in the utilization of these merged concepts for the assessment of student growth, course objectives, program outcomes and accreditation standards.

# BACKGROUND

Stockton University is a mid-size liberal arts institution in southern New Jersey and offers a breadth of programs that afford students opportunities to earn undergraduate and graduate degrees in hospitality, business, health sciences, education, social and behavioral sciences, humanities and the arts. Stockton’s administrators, faculty and staff recognize the importance of collaboration between and among programs to guarantee an interdisciplinary approach to higher education. Upon graduation, Stockton’s students exhibit acquired competencies in the liberal arts and their specialized programs of choice.

Stockton’s interdisciplinary model relies on its stakeholders to create a culture of student-centered learning while maintaining consistency in assessment, defining course goals and outcomes while aligning assignments with professional standards. The introduction of Essential Learning Outcomes (ELOs) and electronic portfolios (ePortfolios) to the university at large was a positive step to achieve a strong connection between academic and co-curricular aspects of students’ educational experiences.

Students enter the university and are introduced to ELOs and ePortfolios in their firstyear classes. As they proceed with course work toward graduation, students are regularly exposed to the ELOs and a systematic process of ePortfolio development and use. This manuscript utilizes multiple case studies to examine the value of integrating ELOs and ePortfolios for the purpose of assessing student growth, course objectives, program outcomes, or accreditation assessment. The utilization of ELOs and ePortfolios can promote students’ sense of control and accountability for their own learning and better prepare them for their future careers.

ELOs became part of the fabric of Stockton University’s academic programs through a methodical adoption process starting in 2010; this process closely followed the steps outlined by Andrade (2013). Administrators, faculty and staff investigated models used by other liberal arts colleges while also incorporating the work of scholars who study the benefits and challenges associated with ELOs. A study completed at Stockton University which investigated the impact of ELOs, found that ELOs provide significant learning opportunities; these learning opportunities progress from foundation skills and move through the continuum of application, problem-based learning, reflective thought, and metacognitive practices (Cydis et al., 2015). A cross-section of Stockton’s constituents met to identify and define specific ELOs that reflected the university’s unique culture. Separate committees for each ELO convened to create curricular maps for all instructional programs; one member from each subcommittee formed a steering committee so that all academic, athletics and co-curricular activities were represented. The at-large committee developed flow charts that illustrated the universal application of ELOs throughout the university.

The successful implementation of ELOs at Stockton University rests on the interdisciplinary philosophy that is Stockton’s mission. The ease with which Stockton’s chosen ELOs compliment course outcomes and professional standards result in greater willingness from administrators, faculty, and staff to incorporate them. Consistency in student assessment led to Stockton’s adoption of the VALUE rubrics (Rhodes, 2010), adding another layer of uniformity in assessment. Providing students with formative feedback, while referencing criteria on each rubric, strengthens the university-wide initiative to design quality learning activities and experiences reflective of the ELOs (Hood, 2017).

Students are familiar with ELOs in their coursework, which adds to their relevancy in all realms of their educational experiences (Laird et al., 2009). The intentional practice of aligning ELOs in all courses strengthens the connectivity of the outcomes in a holistic approach, rather than looking at each in isolation (Reed et al., 2017).

Then came the discussion of how students would keep their various work samples and artifacts in one location during their years at the university. ePortfolios emerged as a means for students to collect artifacts and would serve as a receptacle that contained works from academic, club, athletic, community engagement, and employment experiences. The ePortfolios would also ensure that faculty had access to students’ work for a wide variety of assessment purposes. ELOs and ePortfolios emerged as a united project shared by all programs of study for the purpose of ensuring that students attain the skills and knowledge for successful postuniversity endeavors.

# LITERATURE REVIEW

# Essential learning outcomes

The increased demands on institutions of higher education to provide evidence of student learning for accountability purposes has required colleges and universities to revise and rethink their methods of delivery and assessment of course content. This movement emphasizes a more competency-based, student centered approach rather than teachercontrolled instruction, (Crossen & Orcutt, 2014). Colleges and universities turned to the adoption of ELOs to assist faculty in considering the course outcomes and then fine-tuning their approach to designing assessment that reflects the course goals and objectives. Cydis et al. (2015) offer a rationale for ELOs that highlights the importance of guiding students as they acquire competencies in their chosen fields, by explaining to them why certain skills are necessary to master, in preparation for post school goals. The ELOs do just that, as faculty integrate them into the required course assignments so that students see the connection (Cydis et al., 2015).

ELOs, when implemented with integrity, promote educational quality. As faculty align course goals and assessment with specific ELOs, students have a better understanding of how the course content relates to the acquisition of competencies (Steen et al., 2011). The inclusion of ELOs also allows students to demonstrate their learning through meaningful assessment which is more in line with a competency-based approach. This, in turn, adds to a more student-centered learning environment whereby students then assume more responsibility for their own learning (Andrade, 2013).

As faculty consider ways to facilitate competency mastery as it applies to course delivery, there are research proven developmental stages to follow. First, faculty provide information and basic content knowledge at a concrete level. Once students have the foundation, they begin to apply the skills in different contexts, which leads to generalization of the skills, which become part of their repertoire of knowledge. When students fully recognize the significance of the skills, the acquired proficiencies are most meaningful and valuable. A final stage is when students recognize how their own learning has evolved, (Cydis et al., 2015). Literature supports the value of integrating ELO’s into all higher education programs of study.

# Portfolios defined

For the purpose of this manuscript, ePortfolios are constructed by students and include examples of work they have engaged in during their educational experiences. Students present artifacts which display work they are proudest of; these works are meant to illustrate their achieved competencies and expertise (Chye et al., 2013). Portfolios are an organized collection which can represent many types of media and include examples of growth over time (Frunzeanu, 2014). Students appreciate the portfolio as an opportunity for them to exhibit sample work that establishes their individual identities (Holt et al., 2016; Robins, 2006). Included in the portfolio are items that should appeal to different audiences, such as future employers, accreditation agencies, faculty, and the students themselves, to foster a sense of pride in the student’s accomplishments (Parker et al., 2012). In fact, much of the portfolio is designed to appeal to the procurement of employment in their career of choice (Pope & Fulcher, 2019; Kahn, 2014). The authentic emphasis of the portfolio is valuable as a tool for competency-based achievement that has a significant impact on skills needed for professional occupations (Chambers & Wickersham, 2007). Students recognize the value in developing a quality portfolio that can be used to showcase their competencies to employers and graduate programs.

# Quality driven portfolios

ePortfolios can be used to highlight professional and program standards and show evidence of skill mastery. Students should be guided to select artifacts they believe best reflect their competencies and growth over time (Frunzeanu, 2014). Competency-based artifacts are valuable to the students’ marketability and lead to the strengthening of the metacognitive processes when students describe the impact of the tasks they complete (Cambridge, 2008). When students are permitted to choose how to display what they learned, they take ownership of the process, making the skills and knowledge their own (Kahn, 2014). This adds to students’ reflective practice as they self-assess (Ring, 2015).

Quality portfolios contain artifacts that are related to course work and showcase the multi-layered opportunities for university engagement (Yancey, 2015). Examples of highly valuable artifacts include community contributions, service-learning activities, clubs, athletics, campus service, and mentorship responsibilities. All these activities found outside the traditional academic assignment help to contribute to a well-rounded educational experience (Strawhecker et al., 2007).

# Role of faculty

Faculty guidance in the construction of students’ portfolios promotes the quality and value of the artifacts. Faculty act as facilitators of learning as they help students to define the purpose and organization of sample work and present a consistent approach to assessment (Denton & Wicks, 2013). Faculty teach students how to self-assess and reflect on their growth in the learning process, as they take ownership of crafting their own educational goals (Rafeldt et al., 2014; Parker et.al, 2012).

Faculty support students by defining the criteria for content proficiency, along with providing specific feedback so that students who choose to improve their work have direction. Students are encouraged to add co-curricular artifacts that represent a well-rounded practice of learning (Oakley et al., 2013). Ultimately, the value of the portfolio leads to job acquisition (Chambers & Wickersham, 2007) or graduate program enrollment. The adoption of portfolios with an interdisciplinary emphasis contributes to a university-wide culture of student-centered learning (An & Wilder, 2010).

Faculty training in the development and use of ePortfolios is highly recommended. Specific skill areas for the purposes of this case study include the following: technology, ePortfolio platforms, rubric development for assessment, program curricular mapping, integration of professional standards and outcomes in assignments that align with ELOs (Ntuli et al., 2009). As students establish their ePortfolios, faculty should encourage them to review the ePortfolios of their peers. Faculty educate students about methods to evaluate others’ work by providing specific feedback as they share their individual approaches to showcase their competencies and achievements (Ring, 2015). Students learn from each other and can fine tune their own work, as part of the evaluation process (Frunzeanu, 2014).

# Advantages and benefits

Literature records the benefits of ePortfolios, which include increased student reflective practice, improved abilities to self-assess, and motivation to pursue life-long learning (Chye et al., 2013). The artifacts show the interdisciplinary connection between curricular theory and practice in all program-specific courses (Holt et al., 2016). Reference to the constructivist theory of learning reflects the ePortfolio. Advantages, such as abilities to analyze, evaluate, reflect, create, set goals, and make choices, trigger students to construct their identity within academic and personal realms (Abd-Wahab et al., 2016). Kahn (2014) suggested that portfolios lead to improved student achievement, with higher graduation rates, more engaged learning, and better choices for artifacts that reflect their expertise. Students learn to use multi-modal designs, different technology platforms, and creative endeavors to build a document that represents personal and professional dispositions (Oakley et al., 2014). Students report the value of using the portfolio to monitor their growth in acquiring competencies related to their courses of study. Students believe that having autonomy in choosing the portfolio artifacts increases their motivation and engagement as they progress in their educational journey (Wang & Jeffrey, 2017). When faculty facilitate students’ expression of their own learning, the education becomes student driven. Another benefit is that students’ work becomes organized and visible in one space. It is accessible and convenient for faculty to access and for employers or graduate programs to review (Karami et al., 2019).

# Challenges

Faculty may be reluctant to use ePortfolios for several reasons. Strudler & Wetzel (2008) noted that faculty spend a good deal of time aligning professional and program standards with specific assignments. Rubric construction is tedious, though necessary, for consistent assessment purposes. Program faculty may have difficulty establishing one or two “signature” assignments to include in the ePortfolio that all members of the program agree on; an additional challenge is the standardization of methods to teach ELO and portfolio content and the assessment of portfolios while maintaining uniform delivery of content (Hubert, 2016).

Faculty report that students require an extensive rationale for the value of a portfolio, refusing to believe it will have a long-term impact once they graduate, (Ntuli et al., 2009). Students also question the control over the content they truly have, since the faculty mandate the assignments that are included; this can often not reflect the students’ individual career goals (Abd-Wahab et al., 2016). In fact, when faculty direct the same student products, it lessens the individuality, which is the purpose of the portfolio concept (Bruneau & Bie, 2008). If the ePortfolio platform is not user friendly, faculty are not prepared with essential skills, or faculty have not embraced the value of ePortfolios, the university-wide practice on incorporating ELOs and ePortfolios is undermined (Pope & Fulcher, 2019). There are a variety of ePortfolio platforms available; accessibility and ease of use varies for each. Stockton University began the ePortfolio journey using the ePortfolio embedded in the Blackboard course platform (Stockton University, 2020a). Recognizing the limitations in the creativity and individuality of this ePortfolio platform, Stockton moved to using Digication (Stockton University, 2020b).

Digication permitted the faculty to design templates and permitted users some unique design features. Despite this, Digication proved to have restrictions that faculty and students found cumbersome to work with. Individual faculty at the university have explored the platforms Wix (Wix, 2020) or Weebly (Weebly, 2020), which are both designed as free website design platforms that are user friendly and easy to customize. Recently, Stockton University has started utilizing the Google Sites platform (Google, 2018) for free website design; this is another easy to use website design platform that integrates with the Google Suite already used by the students.

Another significant challenge identified by Strawhecker et al. (2017) is a lack of research to support the significance of an ePortfolio in the employment process. Some employers may consider the portfolio as a distraction during an interview. The review of the portfolio reduces the time spent talking to the applicant and it is not certain that the contents of the portfolio reflect the job required aptitudes. The authentic nature of the portfolio is not always clear to the hiring organization. Students perceive challenges associated with portfolios. A primary complaint has been the amount of time they spend crafting the ePortfolio format and then adding and editing samples of their work. Students also reported that when some faculty required portfolios and others did not, they were less likely to maintain a quality portfolio throughout their educational experiences (Wang & Jeffrey, 2017).

# Summary

Universities that combine ELOs and ePortfolios help drive student attainment of $2 1 ^ { \mathrm { s t } }$ century skills, preparing students to compete in the global world. Students learn to construct their own learning, as they build upon the content taught in their course work, relating it to real-world experiences (Kahn, 2014). Faculty intentionally teach skills, identified as

ELOs, including teamwork, collaboration, creativity, information literacy, leadership, critical thought, global awareness, and quantitative analysis. Students exhibit their skills and competencies, contributing to an interdisciplinary display that is portfolio worthy (Holt et al., 2016). Learning to reflect and evaluate their own competencies constitutes advanced thinking and problem solving (Frunzeanu, 2014). Graduating highly competent and selfconfident individuals is a primary goal of higher education, reflecting the mission of Stockton University and the programs included in these case studies. This manuscript illustrates examples of the instructional processes utilized by multiple faculty to emphasize and align ELOs to course assignments and professional standards while simultaneously integrating ELO competencies and self-reflection into student ePortfolios.

# CASE STUDIES

# Case study 1: Integrating ELOs with ePortfolios in a first-year seminar course

This first case study will describe the integration of ELOs with ePortfolios in a first-year seminar course to encourage involvement in course and campus activities and to help students assess their personal and academic growth. The course, Disability and Sports, is a first-year seminar course that is open to students in all majors at Stockton University. All students were first-time students in their first semester. This course, and the ELO and ePortfolio activities discussed here, have been taught several times to different first-year cohorts. The course, Disability and Sports, was designed to explore the social, emotional, and physical restrictions of disability in the context of sports participation. As a first-year seminar, this course is specifically focused on helping students develop skills in communication and information literacy, as well as helping students adapt to change as they navigate a new environment.

During the course, the students are introduced to the ELOs through course lectures and sharing of the Stockton ELO website. The value of the ELOs and how they connect to personal and professional growth are discussed. Students are assigned an ELO ePortfolio to be completed by the end of the semester. The objectives of this assignment are to: (1) enhance students competency in several ELO areas, specifically Information Literacy and Communication Skills; (2) build academic skills related to the development of an ePortfolio, through the use of various platforms (including Digication, Google Sites, Wix, or Weebly); (3) encourage personal and academic growth through the requirements of the ePortfolio; (4) assess course promotion of specific ELO areas, based on student perception.

For this assignment, students were required to complete reflections on how the course helped them achieve greater understanding and competency in the ELOs of Information Literacy and Communication Skills; course assignments that represented growth in these areas were also uploaded to the ePortfolio. They were also required to upload a certification of completion of a plagiarism tutorial (to the ELO area they felt this was represented by), and a reflection about the first-year Convocation experience (again, to an appropriate ELO area). Finally, the students were required to attend three different events (one from a sport or arts event, one from an educational or academic experience outside of class, and one from a community service or club event); proof of attendance at the events was uploaded to the ePortfolio, and students completed a reflection for each event that discussed their personal and academic growth.

# Case study 2: Integrating ELOs with ePortfolios to develop first-year academic skills

The second case study describes the integration of ELOs with ePortfolios in the development of research and information literacy skills to assess academic growth and course objectives in a first-year class. The course, Inclusive Education, is a required course in the Stockton University undergraduate teacher education program. This survey course examines educational theories and inclusive evidence-based practices to support diverse learners. Course concepts include historical perspectives of disabilities, educational programs for students with disabilities and language differences, state and federal legislative requirements, such as Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEIA) and The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the social and emotional aspects of teaching and learning.

The students enrolled in the course have declared majors and minors in a wide range of disciplines within many university programs. Although the course is a School of Education requirement, students choose the course as an elective in Liberal Arts, an extension of their preparation in Health Sciences, Social Sciences, Global Studies and Business. In addition, most students are second or third year, with few first-year students.

Course assignments are aligned with ELOs, which are identified and defined in the syllabus. Faculty introduce ELOs through an explicit instructional approach during the firstclass session each semester. Next, faculty engaged students in a reflective exercise whereby students review the ELOs and interpret the definitions in small groups. Students shared their own perspectives as to how the ELOs relate to their own personal experiences and future career goals. For example, when they discuss “adapting to change,” as one ELO, they disclose occasions when they themselves have had to adapt to unknown or unfamiliar circumstances. This exercise readies the students for later reflection as they expand their understanding of ELOs and the value ELOs add to their educational and professional endeavors.

As the course content unfolds throughout the semester, students further their understanding of ELOs in the context of an interdisciplinary course of study that is the foundation of Stockton University. The ELOs apply to all spheres of university life: academic, co-curricular, athletic and social. Faculty facilitate the integration of ELOs to the holistic university experience by designing assignments that emphasize professional competencies and then guiding students in the completion of assignments so that they acquire the correlated skills and knowledge.

Within this course, faculty distinguish between high and low stakes assignments. The high stakes projects are those which are uploaded to electronic portfolios, but the low stakes assignments are not required for portfolio submission. There is also a difference in the inclusion of Essential Learning Outcomes in high and low stakes tasks. Faculty identify ELOs that associate with the low stakes and note those on the syllabus. High stakes work requires students to choose the ELOs they believe relate to the assignment. This method increases the student-centered approach to the integration of ELOs as students must interpret and apply them.

High stakes products are referred to as “signature assignments” and are long-term projects with several parts. Faculty ensures that the assignments contain skill requirements that would provide evidence of the students’ proficiencies in professional standards as well as expecting students to recognize the ELOs based on their personal interpretations. Stockton University encourages all faculty and students to initiate an ePortfolio for first-year courses so that artifacts are collected in all course work and different aspects of university life. The electronic portfolio is required in this course and high stakes “signature assignments” are uploaded as part of the course grade. The undergraduate students are willing to generate a portfolio and they use a few different platforms such as Google Sites, Weebly and Wix. A smaller number of students use the Blackboard portfolio or the free version of Digication, both of which the university makes accessible. In the end, students select the assignments that they are most proud of and that showcase their abilities, skills and knowledge that would distinguish them to a potential employer or graduate school admissions committee.

# Case study 3: Integrating ELOs with ePortfolios in an upper level writing course

This third case study will explore the use of ELO ePortfolios in an upper-level undergraduate writing course specific to students in the health science major. The students in this course produced a reflective assessment of academic growth and achievement of course outcomes. The course, Writing and Editing for Health, is a core program course for the Bachelor of Science in Health Science major offered at Stockton University. The course focuses on teaching students critical writing and research skills that will be needed for healthcare professions. All students in the course are health science majors and most are juniors. The ELO ePortfolio assessment described in this case study is used in a 3000 level, writing intensive program course.

During the course, students are introduced to the ELOs; emphasis is placed on how ELOs connect to key skills valued in the healthcare professions (with an emphasis on critical thinking, teamwork, information literacy, and communication). As part of the writing requirement of the course, students are required to produce a reflective ePortfolio at the end of the semester. Students are permitted to use a variety of platforms for their ePortfolio (including options such as Google Sites, Wix, Weebly, or Digication).

The ELO ePortfolio assignment has several objectives: (1) to develop student competency in the design and organization of a professional/academic ePortfolio; (2) to enhance student awareness and understanding of ELOs; (3) to help students reflect on how they have achieved a better understanding and competency level relating to ELOs due to course content. For the ELO ePortfolio assignment, students must create an ePortfolio using a digital platform of their choosing. Instructions or links to instructions for various digital platforms are provided in the class. Students are asked to complete the Introduction section by providing some academic background information. They are required to complete reflective writing for the ELOs of Communication and Information Literacy (the two primary ELOs selected by the course manager). The students are also required to complete reflective writing for two additional ELO areas; these areas are selected by the student and represent ELOs they feel the course has helped them to develop greater competency in. In the reflective writing, students are asked to discuss how they felt certain course assignments and activities contributed to their growth in the ELO area. Students were required to upload all primary assignments completed during the course into ELO sections they felt best matched the development of their competency due to the specific assignment.

The reflective writing in this assignment helps students to identify areas of personal growth as it relates to specific ELOs. Uploading specific assignments to ELO content areas in the ePortfolio further helps them to understand their progression towards competency in that ELO area. Finally, allowing students to select two unspecified ELO areas provides a way for the course instructor to gain a better understanding of ELOs met by the course. This can highlight ELO areas that the instructor did not realize were being addressed throughout the course. For example, for this writing course, students often select the ELO of Teamwork and Collaboration. This is expected, as there is an emphasis on group assignments, even in the online sections of the course. What was not expected was that students also selected the ELOs of Adapting to Change or Creativity and Innovation. Upon reading the reflective comments for those who selected Adapting to Change, students felt that they learned to adapt to writing using a different style. For the students who selected Creativity and Innovation, students identified the need to be creative when completing specific assignments, such as the scientific poster or the heath provider argument letter.

# Case study 4: Integrating ELOs with ePortfolios in a graduate program

The fourth case study examines the integration of ELOs with ePortfolios for reflective assessment of student growth and evidence for documenting accreditation standards in a graduate program. The course, Assessment and Correction of Learning Disabilities, is a graduate level course and prepares students to evaluate and score academic evaluation tools that are administered to students who are suspected of having a disability. Through laboratory experiences, students use the most current assessment instruments to evaluate children ages 3–21. Once assessments are administered, students score them using a computer scoring system or by following a step by step procedure in a scoring manual. After results are identified, students interpret the scores and as a team, determine whether the children have a disability. If a disability exists, students design appropriate instructional interventions and accommodations for general education participation.

Faculty make sure to link professional standards and essential learning outcomes to assignments as an introduction to the course. Both are explained in detail on the syllabus and infused into course content. At the graduate level, there is more emphasis on the application of standards and competencies and the requirements for reflection are a significant component of graduate study. The graduate students who teach in their field see the natural connection between standards and ELOs in their professional practice. Therefore, faculty do not directly teach standards and ELOs but rather infuse them into instruction and assignments.

Students enrolled in this course are post master’s degree candidates, with educational endorsements in several areas of prekindergarten to twelfth grade subject areas and have taught for at least 3 years. Unlike other graduate courses, this course meets weekly at the university. The instructional format requires students to acquire the skills and competencies by using the assessment instruments directly, so class attendance is mandatory. The course includes a vast amount of information as students learn the intricacies of special education law, reliability and validity of the assessment tools, policies and procedures required for special education evaluation and proper methods of administering the tests and scoring them.

The Assessment and Corrections of Learning Disabilities course includes only high stakes “signature assignments” because of the intensity of the course content and required competencies. Faculty introduce ELOs at the start of the semester and they are listed on the syllabus. The graduate students choose the ELOs that they believe align with the assignments and include them with a rationale for their choice upon completion of the assignments.

Students are required to test four children, score the tests and interpret the results. They write a detailed report using a prescribed template that includes all required components as mandated by special education legislation. Students then compose a written reflection where they respond to prompts, which indicate professional standards referenced in the assignment. They also choose one or two ELOs and a rationale that explains their choice. Both face to face and online graduate students share their commitment to integrating ELOs into their practice. They recognize the specific competencies and their value in special education teacher preparation.

ePortfolios are a requirement of the School of Education Graduate Program. The artifacts are used as evidence that professional standards were achieved. Most graduate students in this course do not recognize the value of portfolios as a career building resource because they are employed in their chosen field; however, they comply with the requirement because points are assigned toward their final grade. There are challenges associated with the design of portfolios that contribute to students’ reluctance to use them. One problem is the portfolio platform may be cumbersome and not easy to navigate. Students perceive portfolios as time consuming and unfamiliar technology is difficult, and they are not willing to expend the additional effort for a task they believe is not significant to their current career status.

There is a difference between students who meet face-to-face in the assessment course and the many graduate students who take courses in an online format. The students who attend class have access to help from faculty, but students online are left without support in the portfolio adoption process. Faculty work to facilitate the ePortfolio training and promotion of its value to all students through instructional videos and university technology resources, but this is not enough. The university has recognized the obstacles that prevent students from portfolio development by increasing webinar training and providing additional technical support.

# DISCUSSION

The four case studies described in this article provide examples of how ELOs can be integrated with ePortfolios to encourage student academic and personal growth and provide a personalized representation of work for a prospective employer or graduate program. These case studies provide a summary of courses taught in different formats (face-to-face, hybrid, and online) and to different student academic levels (first-year through graduate students). ELOs can be introduced at any stage of learning, and students will benefit from ongoing discussion and education about ELOs throughout their academic journey. The format of course delivery may influence how ELO and ePortfolio content is communicated to students.

Regardless of the course format, the development of an ePortfolio should always be student-driven instead of teacher-driven. This is critical in the development of the reflective process of the student and to obtain maximum creativity and individuality of the ePortfolio. ELOs are vehicles that offer students an articulated statement that explains a goal; aligning ELOs to specific assignments gives students a reason for why the task is important to personal and professional aptitude attainment. Once faculty assess the different assignments, students then choose the artifacts they believe reveal their best work and they add them to their ePortfolios. When students ready themselves for graduation and the next steps in their career or educational pursuits, their ePortfolios contain artifacts from liberal studies, specific disciplines related to their fields of study, extracurricular participation, and examples of personal growth that they wish to share. Portfolios lend themselves to a holistic, well rounded view of a student as a future employee or graduate student.

A review of the case studies differentiates not only the student population but the methods that faculty use to introduce, implement and evaluate essential learning outcomes as well as the importance of the ePortfolio development and maintenance. For example, firstyear students and upper classmen were more enthusiastic in their adoption of ELOs and the alignment of ELOs to course requirements; this strengthened the significance of each assignment as it related to course goals. These students also embraced the use of ePortfolios as they are comfortable with technology and enjoyed choosing their own platform to create a site that mirrored their individual characteristics. The graduate students, especially those who were already employed in their career of choice, did not adopt the ePortfolio as willingly, because they experienced difficulties in navigating the technology involved in creating the ePortfolio. They did, however, appreciate the ELOs and recognized their value in providing a rationale for each assignment. The case studies also serve to illustrate how faculty introduce ELOs differently, reflective of individual teaching styles. Some faculty use direct instruction whereas others introduce and allow students to investigate on their own. Some faculty allow students to choose the ELOs they believe correlate with the assignment, while others identify the ELOs for the students as listed on the syllabus. Either way, ELOs and ePortfolios are commonly accepted at Stockton University, although the extent of the acceptance varies among and between faculty and programs.

An interesting phenomenon at Stockton University is that although all programs use ELOs, individual schools have their own criteria for implementing them. There has been some resistance to the ELO concepts, these often relate to the required curriculum mapping of ELOs to specific courses and programs and the subsequent assessment requirements by the university. Some schools require faculty to create curricular maps to show which ELOs are emphasized in which courses. Faculty often embrace the ideological premises surrounding the ELOs but resist the burden of the additional administrative work to organize and identify the ELOs on a program and course level. There are no universal requirements that every school or program must adhere to for evaluation of ELOs in students’ work or to the extent to which they are implemented for faculty and student accountability. The same is true for ePortfolios; students are receptive to the idea of archiving their work, but many faculty members are not in support of the ePortfolio concept. Some do not see the value of ePortfolios and others do not wish to spend the class time assisting students in the development of a ePortfolio and then add the time commitment associated with grading them. The challenge remains in the concept of a required academic ePortfolio, which would require additional assessment or grading; this would add a burden to faculty already taxed with course grading and program and university service requirements. Nevertheless, increasing the presence of ELOs and ePortfolios throughout the university is a priority. Efforts are underway by representative faculty and administration to encourage others to enhance their courses and students’ educational experiences by integrating these tools into their instructional practice.

# FUTURE IMPLICATIONS

There are a multitude of benefits that can be obtained by integrating ELOs and ePortfolios into courses. The use of ELO ePortfolio assignments can promote student academic and personal growth using the reflective process. Signature assignments that integrate ELOs and ePortfolios can be utilized to meet both course assessment and program assessment needs.

Faculty can benefit from identifying key ELOs that are addressed through their course materials and align with course outcomes. Once the key ELOs are identified, signature assignments can then be developed to help students achieve the desired academic outcomes. These assignments can also be identified as key academic markers in course assessment or program assessment. Faculty should also become familiar with the various ePortfolio platforms that exist and identify several platform options that can be shared with students. By giving students a choice in the selection of the ePortfolio development platform, students will retain their ability to be individual and creative in the creation of their ePortfolio.

Stockton University acknowledges the challenges of requiring faculty to use ELOs and ePortfolios in their course design and instruction, yet there is a continued effort across the university to underscore their importance for the students. The original ELOs Task Force is still an active group. Members offer workshops to faculty which include professional development sessions throughout the regular school year and intensive institutes during summer months. Additional training opportunities take place through Stockton University’s Institute for Faculty Development for all new faculty hires in their first semester. In addition, The Center for Teaching and Learning Design provides individual and small group face-to-face meetings and videos that introduce different portfolio platforms and demonstrate ways to use them. Increased meetings are in the planning stages to reduce the resistance of faculty and increase their comfort and confidence in using available technology.

A main hurdle is for all faculty to understand the vision and resources available to them for ELOs and ePortfolios. The ELO Task Force and Center for Teaching and Learning Design personnel are working with university administration to strengthen the institutional support and add resources for faculty. The goal of both mechanisms is to develop the personal, academic, and professional competencies of the student body so that upon graduation, they are prepared to contribute to a $2 1 ^ { \mathrm { s t } }$ century global economy, a central principle that drives Stockton University’s vision. Understanding the vision and resources available for ELOs and ePortfolios at the individual institution is critically important to the successful integration of these concepts and practices. If there is a lack of institutional support and faculty training, there will be a greater challenge in integrating these concepts into course and program planning and assessment. Many institutions offer support to faculty through an Institute for Faculty Development, Center for Teaching and Learning Design, or equivalent program to develop pedagogy. If there is a lack of institutional support, there are external resources, such as those provided by the Association of American Colleges and Universities (AACU) LEAP campaign (AACU, 2020). Ultimately, the goal is to help develop the personal and academic competencies of the student, preparing them for a successful future in their chosen career. This manuscript presented case examples which highlighted the integration of ELOs and ePortfolios for the assessment of student growth, course objectives, program outcomes, and accreditation.

# R E F E R E N C E S

Abd-Wahab, S. R. H., Che-Ani, A. I., Johar, S., Ismail, K. & Abd-Wahab, M. Z. (2016). ePortfolio: A descriptive survey for contents and challenges. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning, 11(1), 4–10. https: //doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v11il.4900   
An, H. & Wilder, H. (2010). A bottom-up approach for implementing electronic portfolios in a teacher education program. Journal of Digital Learning in Teacher Education, 26(1), 84–91.   
Andrade, M. S. (2013). Launching ePortfolios: An organic process. Assessment Update: Progress, Trends, and Practices in Higher Education, 25(3): 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1002/au.253.   
Association of American Colleges and Universities (AACU). (2020). Essential learning outcomes. https://www. aacu.org/leap/essential-learning-outcomes   
Bruneau, O. & Bie, A. (2008). The developing portfolio: Assisting college students in creating quality portfolios. The International Journal of Learning, 15(6), 83–87.   
Cambridge, D. (2008). Universities and responsive learning organizations through competency-based assessment with electronic portfolios. The Journal of General Education, 57(1), 51–64.   
Chambers, S. M. & Wickersham, L. E. (2007). The electronic portfolio journey: A year later. Education, 127(3), 351–360.   
Chye, S. Y., Liau, A. K. & Liu, W. C. (2013). Student teachers’ motivation and perceptions of ePortfolio in the context of problem-based learning. Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 22(4), 367–375.   
Crossen, P. & Orcutt, B. (2014). A Massachusetts and multi-state approach to statewide assessment of student learning. Changing, 46(3), 24–33.   
Cydis, S., Galantino, M. L, Hood, C., Padden, M. & Richard, M. (2015). Integrating and assessing essential learning outcomes: Fostering faculty development and student engagement. Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 15(3), 32–52.   
Denton, D. W. & Wicks, D. (2013). Implementing electronic portfolios through social media platforms: Steps and student perceptions. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 17(1), 123–133.   
Frunzeanu, M. (2014). Digital portfolios: Powerful tools for demonstrating teachers’ professional development. Journal Plus Education, Special Issue, 117–124.   
Google. (2018). Let Google build your first website for free. https://www.google.com/intl/en_us/business/ website-builder/   
Holt, D., McGuigan, N., Kavanagh, M., Leitch, S. & Ngo, L. (2016). Academic leaders’ perspectives on adopting ePortfolios for developing and accessing professional capabilities in Australian business education. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 32(5), 1–8.   
Hood, C. L. (2017). Bringing students’ voices into campus conversations about essential learning outcomes: An exploratory survey of students at Stockton University. Journal of Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 11(2), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.20429/ijsotl.2017.110211   
Hubert, D. (2016). ePortfolios, assessment and general education transformation. Peer Review, 18(3), 25–28.   
Kahn, S. (2014). ePortfolios: A looks at where we’ve been, where we are now and where we’re (possibly) going. Peer Review, 16(1), 1–6.   
Karami, S., Sadighi, F., Bagheri, M. S. & Riasati, M. J. (2019). The impact of application of electronic portfolio on undergraduate English majors’ writing proficiency and their self-regulated learning. International Journal of Instruction, 12(1), 1320–1334.   
Laird, T. F. N., Niskode-Dossett, A. S. & Kuh, G. D. (2009). What general education courses contribute to essential learning outcomes? The Journal of General Education, 58(2), 66–76.   
Ntuli, E., Keengwe, J. & Kyei-Blankson, L. (2009). Electronic portfolios in teacher education: A case study of early childhood teacher candidates. Journal of Early Childhood Education, 37, 121–126. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10643-009-0327-y   
Oakley, G., Pegrum, M. & Johnston, S. (2014). Introducing ePortfolios to pre-service teachers as tools for reflection and growth: Lessons learned.Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 42(1), 36–50.   
Parker, M., Ndoye, A. & Ritzhaupt, A. D. (2012). Qualitative analysis of student perceptions of ePortfolios in a teacher education program. Journal of Digital Learning in Teacher Education, 28(3), 99–107.   
Pope, A. M. & Fulcher, K. H. (2019). Organizing for learning improvements: What it takes. Assessment Update, Progress, Trends and Practices in Higher Education, 31(3), 1–3.   
Rafeldt, L. A., Bader, H. J., Czarzasty, N. L., Freeman, E., Ouellet, E. & Snayd, J. M. (2014). Reflection builds twentyfirst century professionals. Peer Review, 16(1), 1–7.   
Reed, C. R., Garcia, L. I., Slusser, M. M., Konowtz, S. & Yep, J. (2017). Linking essential learning outcomes and interprofessional collaborative practice competency in health science undergraduates. Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 17(1), 15–23.   
Rhodes, T. (2010). Assessing outcomes and improving achievement: Tips and tools for using rubrics. Association of American Colleges and Universities.   
Ring, G. L. (2015). Implementing a peer mentoring model in the Clemson portfolio program. Theory into Practice, 54(4), 326–334.   
Robins, J. (2006). Electronic portfolios as a bridge. Intervention in School and Clinic, 42(2), 107–113.   
Steen, T., Peterson, L., Donovan, A., Pitcher, R. & Tews, B. (2011). The North Dakota story: One state’s path toward collaboration and LEAP. Peer Review, 13(2), 26–28.   
Strawhecker, J., Messersmith, K. & Balcom, A. (2007). The role of electronic portfolios in the hiring of K-12 teachers. Journal of Computing in Teacher Education, 24(2), 65–71.   
Stockton University (2020a). Blackboard ePortfolio—Instructors. https://stockton.edu/blackboard-tutorial/ instructor-tutorials/blackboard-eportfolio.html   
Stockton University (2020b). Digication ePortfolios—Instructors. https://stockton.edu/blackboard-tutorial/ instructor-tutorials/digication-eportfolios-instructors.html   
Strudler, N. & Wetzel, K. (2008). Costs and benefits of electronic portfolios in teacher education: Faculty perspectives. Journal of Computing in Teacher Education, 24(4), 135–142.   
Wang, P. & Jeffrey, R. (2017). Listening to learners: An investigation into college students’ attitudes towards the adoption of ePortfolios in English assessment and learning. British Journal of Educational Technology, 48(6), 1451–1463.   
Wix. (2020). Creating a website, you’re proud of. https://www.wix.com/   
Weebly. (2020). Build a professional website that grows with your business. https://www.weebly.com/   
Yancey, K. B. (2015). Grading ePortfolios: Tracing two approaches, their advantages and their disadvantages. Theory into Practice, 54, 301–308.