# Scaffolding Summary Writing through the ‘Reading to Learn’ Pedagogy

Huifang Li Academic Skills Office, University of New England, Australia

Ingrid Wijeyewardene SiMERR National Research Centre, University of New England, Australia

# Susan Stackhouse

Academic Skills Office, University of New England, Australia

# Abstract

Summary writing is a core competency for students pursuing university studies, but the demands of the reading-to-writing process can be fraught for those students new to the university context, particularly international students for whom English is an additional language. This paper reports on a study that investigated the effectiveness of using the Reading to Learn (R2L) pedagogy for students’ summary writing in an online environment. International English as an additional language students enrolled in four separate iterations of an advanced academic literacy unit offered by an Australian university, and were taught academic reading and summary writing online using the R2L pedagogy. Pre- and posttests were administered in the first and last weeks of the unit each trimester. In the weeks between the tests, tutorials $2 \ h { \times } 9$ weeks) consisted of structured and scaffolded teacher–student interactions, which guided the students through reading and summarising and moved from a high level of teacher input to greater student independence in the reading-to-writing process. Results found significant improvement in students’ abilities to comprehend and summarise key ideas from a source text and to write grammatically sound and complex sentences. However, the instruction did not show any impact on cohesion, vocabulary or punctuation. Despite the limitations of the study, the results confirm previous results as to the value of R2L, which provides a scaffolded approach to reading and writing.

# Keywords

Summary writing, Reading to Learn (R2L), academic literacy, English as an additional language (EAL), university education

# Introduction

The past decades have witnessed widened student participation and global mobility of foreign students in higher education. The student cohort in higher education, especially in developed countries such as the United Kingdom and Australia, has become diversified to include first-in-family, mature students, students who use English as an additional language (EAL) and students who have been admitted from mixed pathways programmes (Glew et al., 2019). Due to increased access, universities offer numerous programmes to support the retention and success of the students admitted, for example, peer mentoring and orientation/transitioning programmes (Eather et al., 2022). Underpinning these support programmes is the requirement that students must adhere to rigorous academic and professional standards, and academic literacy is critical if students are to meet these standards.

However, despite the provision of these various support programmes, ample literature has documented that university students struggle to meet the academic literacy demands of set tasks. For decades, research (e.g. Holschuh, 2019; Lea and Street, 1998) has pointed out that academic staff complain about university students’ lack of ability to read and write at the appropriate level of proficiency. This lack of ability partly results from the varied and complex academic literacy demands (Holschuh, 2019). Holschuh (2019: 600) states that academic literacy tasks are ‘typically multidimensional, developmental, and goal focused’, require ‘greater discipline-specific literacy demands’ and need a familiarity with sociocultural contexts. Lea and Street (1998) explain that forms of writing required in different disciplines, such as the use of an impersonal style, can expose the students to affective and identity conflicts.

Among the academic literacy demands required of university students, summary writing has long been essential. University students need to read and extract meaning from academic texts to demonstrate understanding in their written assignments. Summary writing reflects this reading-to-writing process, in which students understand the key messages in a source text, take note of them and reproduce them in a condensed written version. Kirkland and Saunders (1991) state that this process involves reading-to-writing activity that is highly complex and recursive, and which can cognitively overload students. Research, for example, Ivanova (2020), found that university students experience various difficulties in summary writing, such as understanding the gist of the text or the interrelation of ideas/themes, referencing, paraphrasing, reducing the text and sentence making.

These difficulties are compounded for EAL students, especially those who come from overseas. International EAL students have greater difficulties in transitioning to a different environment and managing their university study and life (Taylor and Ali, 2017). Language difficulties and cultural differences in education have a direct and dramatic impact on students’ academic performance (Sawir, 2005; Taylor and Ali, 2017). Zhang and Mi (2010: 382) discussed the difficulties that international EAL students experienced in reading and writing at Australian universities. A student, like many others who participated in their research, commented, ‘The key difficulty in the use of English is my inaccurate expression and my inability to express the most crucial meaning precisely … The longer I am here, the more aware I become of the seriousness of my reading and writing problems.’

Recognising the need to support EAL students, in the past decade, the research site for this current study has offered a credit-bearing foundational unit to develop advanced academic English for successive cohorts of students enrolled in a Bachelor of Business degree programme. The difficulties experienced by students undertaking this unit over the years resemble those of EAL students that have been discussed in the literature. Therefore, the lecturers who deliver this unit have sought to find a teaching method that encompasses the reading-to-writing process that university students undertake to complete their written assignments. Consultation of the literature on summary writing reveals that many studies have investigated the features of language and strategies necessary for the reading-to-writing process (e.g. Chang and Lin, 2017; Chew et al., 2020; Segev-Miller, 2004). For example, based on Kintsch and van Dijk (1978), Chew et al. (2020) developed and assessed an online tool to assist students with summary writing that incorporated tasks to activate prior knowledge and instruction in strategies for summarising texts,. However, in alignment with Hood (2008), the authors believe that the linguistic changes necessary from source text to summary is often intuited in these studies and should be made more explicit to students due to the complexity of the task. Hood (2008: 361) suggests that the R2L pedagogy can ‘explicitly articulate, model and practise with students the ways in which content meanings can be generalised and abstracted in the process of summarising’.

# Reading to Learn

The R2L methodology emerged from the genre-based approach to literacy pedagogy developed by the Sydney School and is underpinned by systemic functional linguistic theory (Rose, 2018; Rose and Martin, 2012). It is delivered over three cycles of support: preparing for reading; detailed reading; and sentence making. The cycles move from a focus on the whole text to a focus on shorter sections of the text and on sentences. Each cycle guides students through tasks starting with greater teacher control and working towards tasks in which students assume greater control.

The first cycle, that is, preparing for reading, involves an introduction to the genre and field of the text. This stage helps to reduce the cognitive load for students and assists them in gaining an overall understanding of the text. The teacher first previews the topic and assesses how the stages of the text unfold. With factual texts, as in the current study, the teacher may follow the preview by introducing and reading each paragraph and highlighting the main points and language features of the genre (De Silva Joyce et al., 2008; Rose, 2018). Preparing students for reading in this way allows the teacher to embed language learning within the content of the discipline (Rose, 2018).

In the second cycle, that is, detailed reading, the teacher reads through shorter extracts from the text sentence by sentence, focusing on language details such as lexical meanings and how cohesion is achieved across sentences. Students are guided to assign meanings to words in the sentences that the teacher can then elaborate on. Then, with guidance from the teacher, students jointly plan and write a new text based on the original extract using their notes or highlighted text. Finally, students rewrite or summarise the text individually, again based on the original text, before writing a new text, drawing on what they have learned in the preceding lessons (De Silva Joyce et al., 2008; Rose, 2018).

The third cycle is sentence making, which focuses on sentence grammar, spelling and punctuation. The teacher writes selected sentences from the text onto strips of paper, reads them with the students and then guides them in cutting up the sentences. The students then reconstruct the sentences to help them recognise features of grammar and word order in various sentence types. There is also a focus on spelling in this third cycle if necessary (De Silva Joyce et al., 2008; Rose, 2018).

The R2L methodology is flexible in that teachers can tailor lessons to the needs of the students and the curriculum. For more advanced students, a greater focus on the genre and register of the text may be more appropriate for addressing their needs, whereas for students who require greater support, it may be more suitable to select stages from each cycle, as needed (Kartika-Ningsih, 2019). For example, De Silva Joyce et al. (2008) used a six-step cycle in their project using the R2L pedagogy in an adult literacy context, the six steps being as follows: preparing for reading; detailed reading; preparing for writing; joint rewriting; individual rewriting; and independent writing. An additional cycle of sentence writing, sentence making and spelling can also precede the preparing for writing stage in the cycle if necessary.

Although originally developed to address inequalities in literacy outcomes for Indigenous students in Australia (e.g. Koop and Rose, 2008; Rose, 1999), the R2L pedagogy has been adopted in mainstream primary and secondary schooling in Australia (e.g. Acevedo and Rose, 2007; Rose and Acevedo, 2006) and overseas (e.g. Becerra et al., 2020), and in tertiary and adult education both in Australia (e.g. de Silva Joyce et al., 2008; Rose et al., 2003) and internationally (e.g. Millin and Millin, 2014; Ramirez, 2020). The close interaction between teacher and students, particularly in the earlier phases of the pedagogy, makes it ideal for teaching in face-to face settings. However, with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020, classes with successive cohorts had to move fully online. This may have resulted in challenges with regard to managing the very close interactions between teacher and students, and these needed to be addressed during the online delivery (2020–2022). As far as we know, no other research paper has addressed the effectiveness of R2L in the context of online teaching.

# Research Question

This study aims to explore whether and how the participating students would improve their summary writing ability if given R2L pedagogy instruction in the context of online teaching and intends to address the following research question: How effective would online R2L instruction be in helping students with summary writing?

# Method

# Context

The current study was conducted using the aforementioned foundational unit offered by an Australian university. Each iteration of the unit was delivered within a 13-week teaching period, with 2 of those weeks being the term break. The weekly readings and the written assignments selected for the unit were on the topic of gender equality in the workplace in the Asian region, chosen because it was relevant to the students’ discipline. The written assignments included a reflective journal containing three entries, an annotated bibliography for three sources, an essay plan and a final research essay, and each previous assignment was designed to prepare the students for the following one. To avoid students from previous iterations of the unit sharing assessment tasks, new readings on the same topic were selected and previous readings were shuffled each trimester.

Two academic skills lecturers taught the foundational unit, alternating over the four iterations. One lecturer has a master’s degree in teaching English to speakers of other languages (TESOL) and a PhD in discourse analysis and educational linguistics. The other lecturer also has a master’s TESOL degree and a diploma in teaching. They both have many years of experience in teaching and training in TESOL, academic writing and communication skills, and business communication. They are conversant with the R2L pedagogy, one having completed two short courses on the R2L approach and the other having used the approach with Bachelor of Education students at another Australian university.

# Participants

The study was conducted between 2020 and 2022. Altogether, 45 students were involved in four separate iterations of the unit. Of the 45, 20 were enrolled in Trimester 1, 2020, 10 in Trimester 2, 2020, 7 in Trimester 2, 2021 and 8 in Trimester 1, 2022. The majority were Chinese nationals entering the university on an international pathway programme to complete their final two years of undergraduate study. These students had Mandarin as their mother tongue and were around 20 years old. They had studied English for at least eight years in the formal Chinese education system, six years at secondary school and the first two years of their undergraduate degree in their Chinese universities. The majority of these students had met the university’s English language requirement by studying at its English Language Centre. In addition to the Chinese students, in Trimester 1, 2022, one Sri Lankan student was enrolled in the unit.

# Pre- and Post-Tests and Instruction

The design of the study contained a pre-test in the first week followed by instruction in using the R2L pedagogy, and a post-test in the final week. For the pre- and post-tests, the participating students were provided with a short essay on the topic of gender equality in the workplace (850–1100 words), selected from both peer-reviewed and non-peer-reviewed scholarly publications/periodicals. They were asked to read the essay and then write a summary (250–300 words) assisted by guided questions, and had up to $6 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ to complete this task. The guided questions were intended to help students structure their summaries by focusing on the central topic, the thesis, the key points and the significance of the topic and were linked to the criteria in the marking rubric (see below in Marking). The pre- and post-tests did not count towards the students’ final grade for the unit.

Between the pre-test and the post-test, the instruction followed the R2L pedagogy. These lessons were conducted during the compulsory two-hour tutorials that took place weekly (nine weeks) and were recorded for uploading to the Moodle site. In the tutorial following the pre-test, the teacher guided students through a re-reading of the pre-test text and a model summary of the text following the scaffolded R2L procedure, highlighting in particular the structure of the summary and changes in wording between the two texts. In the following weeks prior to the mid-trimester break, the teacher and students worked with a new essay on gender equality through each of the R2L cycles: preparing for reading; detailed reading; and sentence making. Each cycle began with highly structured and scaffolded teacher–student interactions and moved to greater student independence. Students were then asked to write a summary of the essay and a reflection on the R2L process to submit as part of their assessment for the unit. This was one of the reflective journal tasks. The same process was followed in the weeks after the mid-trimester break with a new reading and summary writing assessment task, which was submitted as another reflective journal task. The reflective journal assessment tasks comprised $10 \%$ of the final mark for the unit.

# Marking

The marking rubric used for the pre- and post-tests was the same as that used to assess the students’ reflective journal tasks. The rubric had 10 marks in total and covered the examination of content, significance of the topic and sentence writing, as well as cohesion, vocabulary and punctuation.

The content dimension focused on the participating students’ ability to identify the central topic, the thesis and the key points presented in the essay. It examined close reading, comprehension and the ability of the writer to summarise the essential ideas of the source text in his/her own words. This dimension was allocated five marks. The significance of the topic dimension examined the students’ evaluation of whether the topic presented in the text was significant and why. This dimension was allocated two marks. The sentence writing dimension focused on the ability to write grammatically sound and well-constructed sentences, with appropriate use of various sentence types. It was also allocated two marks. The cohesion, vocabulary and punctuation dimension examined the appropriate use of cohesive devices within the paragraph, such as repetition, tracking of participants and logical connections between sentences, and appropriate word choice, spelling and punctuation. One mark was allocated to this dimension.

Two markers marked each piece of summary writing submitted for the pre- and post-tests independently. Moderation meetings were then organised to discuss the scores of each marked piece and an agreement was reached if the two markers differed significantly. It should be noted that with regard to the analysis, this study only focuses on three of the dimensions in the marking rubric: content; sentence writing; and cohesion, vocabulary and punctuation.

# Results

This study involved students who were enrolled in four iterations of a foundational unit offered by an Australian university to examine whether the R2L pedagogy instruction would have a positive impact on their summary writing ability. The examination involved the comparison of the pre- and post-test results, adopting either the paired-sample $t { \cdot }$ -test or the Wilcoxon signed ranked test. The paired-sample $t \cdot$ -test requires normal distribution of the data collected, whereas the Wilcoxon signed ranked test is applied to the skewed data set. Consequently, the paired-sample $t \cdot$ -test was performed for the examination of the content dimension, whereas the Wilcoxon signed ranked test was performed for the examination of the other two dimensions. For each test, the significance value (two-sided) $p$ was set to be equivalent to or less than .05. Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of the pre- and post-test scores for the three dimensions of summary writing that were examined and the $p$ -value results that were achieved via the analyses.

Table 1. Average Scores and $\boldsymbol { \hat { p } }$ -Values.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>n =45</td><td colspan="2">Pre-test</td><td>Post-test</td><td>t-test</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M SD</td><td>p .05</td></tr><tr><td>Contente</td><td>2.47</td><td>.83</td><td>2.86 1.14</td><td>.019</td></tr><tr><td>Sentences</td><td>1.12</td><td>.34</td><td>1.32 .38</td><td>.012</td></tr><tr><td>Cohesion and vocabulary</td><td>.57</td><td>.19</td><td>.61.17</td><td>.14</td></tr></table></body></html>

M: mean; SD: standard deviation.

With regard to the impact of the R2L pedagogy on the participating students’ ability to comprehend and summarise the key ideas of a source text, the paired-sample $t \cdot$ -test showed a substantially significant improvement in test results from the pre-test $( \mathbf { M } =$ 2.47, $\mathrm { S D } = . 8 3 ,$ ) to the post-test $( \mathrm { M } = 2 . 8 6$ , $\mathrm { S D } = 1 . 1 4 )$ , t $( 4 4 ) = - 2 . 4 3$ , $p = . 0 2 4$ . Cohen’s d (1.07) indicated a large effect size. For example, Student 06 (S06) in the academic year 2021, one of the majority of students who scored within 1 SD to the mean in the pre-test, did not fully identify the topic/thesis or outline the main points in a logical manner. The topic of the article used for the pre-test was the contribution of women to the economies of Northeast and Southeast Asia, and the thesis was that to maintain growth in prosperity and economic development, East Asian countries will have to ensure that women play a greater role in the workforce. Instead, S06 wrote: ‘This text is talk aout issues and solutions for gender equality. Nowaday, in Southeast Asia need to once again unleash and engage the female labour force to sustain prosperity and development.’ S06 introduced the topic in the first sentence with the reference nouns of ‘issues’ and ‘solutions’ and with gender equality as the focus. The second sentence referred partially to the thesis but was copied directly from the source text. Two problems were then presented to support the thesis: ‘females choose go to work, but most of the hoursework and childcare is still done by women. … In the workplace, there is also a huge gap between men’s and women’ salaries, which leads to many women to give up on marriage or to make it a tool for exchange.’ However, the nature of the problems was vague due to the lack of accurate explanation of the key points. The notion of further consequences present in the original text was not summarised and the solution was not logically developed. In the post-test, S06 was able to identify the topic more accurately and outline details of the text, with only some minor inaccuracies. S06 wrote, ‘The central theme of this article is Unique Barriers to Women-Owned Businesses. The author discuss the challenges women entrepreneurs face in starting a business and how to help women overcome these challenges.’ The text continued, ‘The authors note that … There are four major factors that limit female entrepreneuship’, with each major factor being elaborated in the subsequent sentences. The text finally stated the significance of the topic and the usefulness of the article, although more detail could be expected. On the whole, the student’s summary in the post-test is more polished with regard to genre, register and lexicogrammar. However, it is important to exercise caution because there is uncertainty with regard to whether the student utilised technology tools, such as translation software or similar generative artificial intelligence (AI) software, to compose the summary. Further discussion on this topic will be presented in the Implications section below.

With regard to the impact of the R2L pedagogy on the participating students’ ability to write grammatically sound and complex sentences, the Wilcoxon signed ranked test also revealed a statistically significant improvement in test performance from the pre-test to the post-test, $z = 2 . 5 2$ , $p = . 0 1 2$ , with a medium effect size $( \mathrm { r } = . 3 8 )$ ). The median score for the test performance increased from the pre-test $( \mathrm { M d } = 1 . 0 $ ) to the post-test $\mathrm { ( M d = }$ 1.4). Student 18 (S18) in the academic year 2020, whose score is also located within 1 SD of the mean in the pre-test, produced eight sentences in 150 words. The eight sentences contain a mix of simple, compound and complex sentences and show some grammatical errors, such as subject–verb agreement errors, missing articles and some verb tense errors. To illustrate, the first half of the text is as follows:

The topic of this text is … in Japanese labour market [missing article], and the treatment of women in Japanese society. The author’s thesis statement is that the treatment of women in Japanese labour market [missing article] is unfair … Women have done a lot in the history [unnecessary article] and the mordern [spelling error] families [unnecessary article], but with the development of Japan’s economy, Japanese women lose their working opportunities [verb tense]. I think the issue is important. There are more higher [problematic comparative form] requirements of women in the modern society [unnecessary determiner], the woman who do not have degree is difficult to jobs and get people’s respect [subject–verb agreement/ missing article/missing verb/run-on sentence]. Most of women are in poverty, because of the gender-unequal [wrong form of word].

In the post-test, S18 wrote 18 sentences in 314 words, with a mix of sentence types:

The author describes that the solution for the decline of birth rate [missing article] in Southeast Asia is to share the burden. In recent years, the fertility rate in Southeast Asia is the lowest in the world [verb tense], and Japan is the first country in the region whose birth rate is lower than the population replacement level. Decades of low fertility have resulted in Japan’s aging population and labour shortage. Increasing migration or increasing the birth rate may solve the problem of population decline. Improving the participation rate of female labour force [missing article] in East Asia can alleviate the problem of labour shortage [missing plural form]. However, there is a conflict between women’s work and parenting. The widespread inequality between men and women has an inhibitory effect on the increase of birth rate [missing article].

Although errors occur, there is clear evidence of a greater ability to structure grammatically correct sentences.

Finally, for the dimension of cohesion, vocabulary and punctuation, the Wilcoxon signed ranked test indicated a non-statistically significant difference in the median score from the pre-test $[ \mathrm { M d } = . 0 5 )$ to the post-test $( \mathrm { M d } = . 0 6 )$ , $z = 1 . 4 7$ , $p = . 1 4$ . Again, among the students located within 1 SD of the mean in the pre-test, Student 10 (S10) in the academic year 2020 used cohesion only through repetition of lexical items, employed vocabulary that was mainly copied from the original text and inserted full stops incorrectly. S10 wrote in the pre-test summary:

The central topic of the document is Japanese society remains a deeply gender-unequal one. This article mainly explains that Japan is an unequal society from several aspects such as the inequality of women in the labor market. The important point raised by the author is discrimination. The author use different examples to explain discrimination in Japan. Such as ‘dual-track’ and Non-standard employment. I think the topic is very important. Because this article explains why Japanese women are unequal in society and family.

In the post-test, although statistical significance was not reached for the whole cohort, S10 displayed some improvement in terms of greater variation of cohesive devices with repetition of lexis and the use of some conjunctions and conjunctive adjuncts. The text in the post-test develops as follows:

The solution to decline in birth rates in East Asia is to reduce the burden. This article mainly discusses the low fertility rate in East Asian countries and further reflects the issue of gender equality. The authors argue that increasing migration flows and raising birth rates are two solutions to the declining birth rate. At the same time, it is important to balance the tension between working women at home and the workplace. I think the point made by the author is very important. Because it’s hard for working women to do well at home and at work. Some young single people rarely go out on dates or take care of their families because of their jobs. Even if some people get married and have children, their children are taken care of by their parents. That’s probably why so many young couples these days don’t want children. So one reason for the decline in fertility is that working women are having a hard time balancing work and family.

# Discussion

The positive impacts that the instruction treatment may have yielded with regard to the content dimension of summary writing could result from multiple elements contained in the R2L methodology. The first cycle, that is, topic preview and explanation of how the text unfolds, assists in gaining an overall understanding of the text, in particular a grasp of the organisation pattern. Understanding of the latter is vital for the comprehension of a text (Horowitz and Wilburn, 2017), which, in turn, assists students to recognise and outline the key points in their summary writing (Hood, 2008). The second cycle, that is, detailed reading of shorter extracts from the text, including an explanation of lexical meanings and cohesion, joint construction of a new text with guidance from the teacher and, finally, independent construction of the original text, models the process of how changed wording in summary writing still conveys the meaning of the original text (Hood, 2008) and provides opportunities for applying what has been learned. The current study used two texts for the instruction and for each text the instruction followed the R2L pedagogical cycles. In the independent construction stage, the students wrote a summary of each text, which was part of the assessment for the unit, and received feedback from the lecturer. Having received the instruction, which offered various methods for improving summary writing, according to the post-test results, the participating students seemed to improve their summary writing ability. However, this improved post-test performance could not be purely a result of the instruction treatment. Such improved performance could also, to a lesser extent at least, result from the students’ familiarity with the topic and the test procedure.

The positive impacts that the instruction treatment may have yielded with regard to sentence writing could have resulted from the third cycle of the R2L methodology. The instruction focused on sentential features of academic writing, such as use of nominalisation, passive voice and modality. With regard to complex sentences particularly, the instruction isolated elements of the sentences and offered reconstruction opportunities. Given that the participating students had met the English language requirement of the university and had sufficient grammatical knowledge of sentence construction, such explicit instruction should further enhance their ability to apply their knowledge base and write grammatically sound sentences of various types. In a review of the then-existing empirical literature, Ortega (2015) states that instruction containing sufficient writing practice contributes to the production of various diverse and elaborated syntactic structures. The instruction in the current study, which followed the R2L pedagogy as described previously, provided the participating students with abundant opportunities for writing practice and likely resulted in the improved performance of sentence writing in the post-test.

Surprisingly, the instruction treatment seems to be ineffective in improving the participating students’ performance in relation to cohesion, vocabulary and punctuation. Although cohesion and vocabulary learning are distinct concepts, they are interconnected because a large vocabulary enhances a person’s ability to recognise and utilise cohesive devices effectively in writing. Taking a broad and inclusive approach to cohesion and vocabulary learning, the authors believe that this ineffectiveness could partly result from the fact that vocabulary learning occurs incidentally during comprehension-oriented activities (Hulstijn, 2013) and gain from incidental vocabulary learning is limited (Teng, 2022). It is possible that the limited vocabulary that has been learned incidentally from the texts during the instruction treatment may not be applicable to the production of another text. Unlike the learning of vocabulary, learning how to construct sentences is rule based, and the organisation pattern across the texts used in this study (e.g. topic sentences and the introduction and conclusion) presents similarities. The participating students had opportunities to apply what they noticed or what their consolidated learning had taught them when isolating text elements in the post-test, which might then have contributed to their improved performance in the content and sentence writing dimensions.

# Implications and Conclusion

This study adopted a pre-test/instruction treatment/post-test design and used an existing foundational unit that taught advanced academic English to undergraduate EAL students. It was found that the participating students improved their summary writing skills in the content and sentence writing dimensions but not in the cohesion, vocabulary and punctuation dimension. These results were explained in relation to the R2L pedagogy and the differing learning paths of the three dimensions.

Although the effectiveness of the R2L pedagogy has been demonstrated in face-to-face settings (e.g. Acevedo and Rose, 2007; Becerra et al., 2020), the findings of this study show the applicability of the pedagogy to an online instruction context. With higher education increasingly offering online and hybrid learning options, those who teach academic literacy should feel confident in applying the R2L pedagogy to their online teaching as a result of the development of online learning tools such as Zoom and Google Docs. These tools make it possible to replicate to some degree the collaborative learning involved in the pedagogy, for example, detailed reading and joint rewriting. Recognising the convenience that technology affords online R2L instruction, we, the authors, also want to bring highlight the fact that student engagement may not be as robust as it is in traditional face-to-face settings. In this study, some students claimed that their internet connection was slow and they turned off their cameras for the class; therefore, the teachers were not sure whether and to what extent the students engaged with the instruction materials. The interaction between the teacher and the students or between the students themselves for the exchange of information seemed to take longer, and the teachers then had to deal with reduced instruction time. Furthermore, given the increasing significance of AI in educational discourse and uncertainties with regard to the students’ possible use of generative AI in their summaries, it is crucial to explore the integration of AI into online R2L pedagogy.

On delving into the implications of this study, it is worth noting that the results have to be interpreted with caution. One of the limitations of the study design was that it lacked a control group. This makes it hard to claim the effects gained in this study are purely due to the application of the R2L pedagogy. That said, it was not pedagogically feasible to have a control group because this research was classroom based. Another limitation could result from the rubric used. This study adopted the rubric that had already been developed and used in the unit prior to the study for assessing the participating students’ summary writing in the pre- and post-tests. Therefore, the rubric did not undergo a rigorous process to examine its reliability and validity. Moreover, the rubric did not examine paraphrasing, which is an essential element in anybody’s skill set for summary writing, although the two examiners did consider this element in their marking of the pre- and post-tests. Finally, the pre- and post-tests were conducted online, and no detection tools were used to prevent the use of technology tools such as Google Translate and ChatGPT. As far as this research is concerned, it is not known whether the participating students used such tools to understand the text and write the summary in the pre- and post-tests. Even if they did use these tools, the pre- and post-test conditions were similar in this regard, which may not constitute a confounding factor in the comparison of the test results. Nevertheless, future research that intends to examine the effectiveness of the R2L pedagogy for improving writing is strongly encouraged to take a more rigorous design, including the ability to distinguish between texts that have been produced with or without the use of AI.

# Funding

The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.

# ORCID iD

Huifang Li $\textcircled{1}$ https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1442-2701

# References

Acevedo C and Rose D (2007) Reading (and writing) to learn in the middle years of schooling. PEN 157. Primary English Teaching Association.   
Becerra T, Herazo J, García P, et al. (2020) Using Reading to Learn for EFL students’ reading of explanations. ELT Journal 74(5): 237–246.   
Chang MM and Lin MC (2017) Experimental study on strategy-oriented web-based English instruction for EFL students. Journal of Educational Computing Research 56: 1238–1257.   
Chew CS, Wu WV, Idris N, et al. (2020) Enhancing summary writing of ESL learners via a theorybased online tool: System development and evaluation. Journal of Educational Computing Research 58(2): 398–432.   
De Silva Joyce H, Hood S and Rose D (2008) Revisiting reading: Exploring an intensive reading pedagogy in adult literacy. Literacy & Numeracy Studies 16(1): 77–94.   
Eather N, Mavilidi MF, Sharp H, et al. (2022) Programmes targeting student retention/success and satisfaction/experience in higher education: A systematic review. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management 44(3): 223–239.   
Glew PJ, Ramjan LM, Salas M, et al. (2019) Relationships between academic literacy support, student retention and academic performance. Nurse Education in Practice 39: 61–66.   
Holschuh JP (2019) College reading and studying: The complexity of academic literacy task demands. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy 62(6): 599–604.   
Hood S (2008) Summary writing in academic contexts: Implicating meaning in processes of change. Linguistics and Education 19: 351–365.   
Horowitz R and Wilburn M (2017) Creating a macrostructure in academic writing: Contributions of tutor–tutee interaction when performing a text revision. Reading & Writing Quarterly 33(4): 364–379.   
Hulstijn JH (2013) Incidental learning in second language acquisition. In: Chapelle CA (eds) The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics. Hoboken: Wiley Blackwell, 1–5.   
Ivanova I (2020) Making sense of research: University students’ difficulties in writing academic summaries. Studies in Linguistics, Culture and ELT 8: 16–34.   
Kartika-Ningsih H (2019) Implementing the Reading to Learn bilingual program in Indonesia. In: Rajandran K and Abdul Manan S (eds) Discourses of Southeast Asia: A Social Semiotic Perspective. New York: Springer, 145–163.   
Kintsch W and Van Dijk TA (1978) Toward a model of text comprehension and production. Psychological Review 85(5): 363–394.   
Kirkland MR and Saunders MAP (1991) Maximizing student performance in summary writing: Managing cognitive load. TESOL Quarterly 25: 105–121.   
Koop C and Rose D (2008) Reading to learn in murdi paaki: Changing outcomes for indigenous students. Literacy Learning: The Middle Years 16(1): 41–46.   
Lea MR and Street BV (1998) Student writing in higher education: An academic literacies approach. Studies in Higher Education 23(2): 157–172.   
Millin T and Millin M (2014) Scaffolding academic literacy using the Reading to Learn intervention: An evaluative study of a tertiary education context in South Africa. Per Linguam 30(3): 26–38.   
Ortega L (2015) Syntactic complexity in L2 writing: Progress and expansion. Journal of Second Language Writing 29: 82–94.   
Ramírez A (2020) The case for culturally and linguistically relevant pedagogy: Bilingual Reading to Learn for Spanish-speaking immigrant mothers. System 95: 1–16.   
Rose D (1999) Culture, competence and schooling: Approaches to literacy teaching in indigenous school education. In: Christie F (eds) Pedagogy and the Shaping of Consciousness: Linguistic and Social Processes. New York: Continuum, 217–245.   
Rose D (2018) Languages and schooling: Embedding literacy learning with genre-based pedagogy. European Journal of Applied Linguistics 6(1): 59–89.   
Rose D and Acevedo C (2006) Closing the gap and accelerating learning in the middle years of schooling. Literacy Learning: The Middle Years 14(2): 32–45.   
Rose D, Lui-Chivizhe L, McKnight A, et al. (2003) Scaffolding academic reading and writing at the Koori Centre. Australian Journal of Indigenous Education 32: 41–49.   
Rose D and Martin J (2012) Learning to Write, Reading to Learn: Genre Knowledge and Pedagogy in the Sydney School. Sheffield, UK: Equinox.   
Sawir E (2005) Language difficulties of international students in Australia: The effects of prior learning experience. International Education Journal 6(5): 567–580.   
Segev-Miller R (2004) Writing from sources: The effect of explicit instruction on college students’ processes and products. Educational Studies in Language and Literature 4: 5–33.   
Taylor G and Ali N (2017) Learning and living overseas: Exploring factors that influence meaningful learning and assimilation: How international students adjust to studying in the UK from a socio-cultural perspective. Education Sciences 7(35): 1–25.   
Teng F (2022) Incidental L2 vocabulary learning from viewing captioned videos: Effects of learnerrelated factors. System 105: 1–12.   
Zhang Y and Mi Y (2010) Another look at the language difficulties of international students. Journal of Studies in International Education 14(4): 371–388.