# More is more: Explicit intertextuality in university writing placement exam essays

Amy Lombardi

University of California at Davis, USA

# a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history:   
Received 30 December 2019   
Received in revised form 12 December 2020   
Accepted 16 December 2020   
Available online 26 December 2020

Keywords:   
Writing placement   
Source-based writing   
Citation   
Reading-to-write

# a b s t r a c t

The ability to draw on information from published sources within one’s own texts is an important skill in academic writing at the university level. This study analyzed the source integration techniques employed by 99 students on an integrated reading-to write placement exam at an American university, with particular focus on direct quotes and citation phraseology. Patterns of direct quotation varied by course placement level, with advanced writers quoting more frequently and selecting shorter segments of source material. Writers at all four levels favored integral over non-integral (parenthetical) citation, and most often employed the Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb phrasing pattern. Advanced writers cited more frequently, selected a wider variety of reporting verbs, and employed more “writerly act” verbs to express their own evaluation of the cited content. The implications for pedagogy, and placement are discussed.

$^ ©$ 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Incorporating information from previously published sources into one’s own writing is an essential skill in academia, and thus a topic of interest in both writing studies and second language writing. From newly admitted undergraduates to advanced graduate students, writers at all levels grapple with selecting, understanding, and integrating source texts into their own written prose. This process is influenced by the difficulty level of the source texts, the students’ depth of knowledge of the topic about which they are reading/writing, and their linguistic skills. Outside of these individual factors, disciplinary and genre conventions, along with faculty and institutional expectations, impact writers’ source integration practices. Much university-level writing may be considered intertextual, as it weaves multiple voices together; that intertextuality may be explicit, visible to the reader through citation and/or quotation marks, or it may be occluded if the writer fails to use quotation marks and/or to document source texts (Pecorari, 2006). Badenhorst (2019) refers to levels of “intertextual flexibility” in student writing, explaining that such flexibility extends far beyond the mechanics of citing into level of engagement with text, and rhetorical purpose for including cited material.

Given that students will need to write from sources from their first year as college undergraduates, it is useful to examine the range of strategies, the “tools for evidence integration” (Liardet  & Black, 2016, p. 48) they have already acquired before they arrive on campus. The present study explores the visible patterns of intertextuality as demonstrated on a writing placement exam by multilingual students transitioning from secondary to university education. To better understand how student writers make intertextuality visible, I first examine the frequency and length of direct quotations, then move on to analyze patterns of attribution with particular emphasis on reporting verbs.

# 1. Studies of intertextuality as a response to plagiarism

Addressing concerns of plagiarism, scholars have sought to understand when, how, and why students reproduce the language of the sources they consult. A substantial body of research conducted on university student citation practices has focused on textual borrowing. These studies have analyzed the extent to which student writers copy source texts verbatim, versus paraphrasing or summarizing them. Such research has focused on native English speakers in the U.S. (Howard, 1992; Howard, Serviss, & Rodrigue, 2010; Jamieson, 2013; Serviss and Jamieson, 2018), as well as non-native English speakers in the US and elsewhere (Pecorari, 2003, 2006, 2010; Shi 2012; Wette, 2016). Some have also compared the practices of native and non-native English speakers(Hyland, 2009; Keck 2006, 2014).

Howard (1992) recognized that novice writers attempting to enter a new discourse community may rely heavily on the wording of more expert authors, resulting in attempted but incomplete paraphrasing, a technique for which she coined the term “patchwriting.” Howard claimed that patchwriting, the process of “copying from a source text and then deleting some words, altering grammatical structures, or plugging in one-for-one synonym substitutes” (1992, p. 233), should be acknowledged as an unavoidable stage in the learning process. Howard, Serviss, & Rodrigue (2010), and Jamieson (2013) confirmed the ubiquitous presence of patchwriting in college level research writing, while also putting forth ample evidence that students may not be reading the sources they cite as closely as we would hope.

A parallel set of studies has investigated textual borrowing by non-native speakers (Pecorari, 2003, 2006, 2010; Davis, 2013; Flowerdew & Li, 2007; Li & Casanave, 2012; Shi, 2004; Wette, 2017a). These studies have concluded that student writers, including at the graduate level, tend to rely on patchwriting, and often fail to use citation practices that conform to conventional academic expectations. Keck (2006) found that non-native speakers relied more heavily than did native speakers on source text language in her sample corpora, but recognized (2014) that her previous findings had been skewed statistically by a few outliers who borrowed extensively from the original texts. With heightened focus on the frequency of this “transgressive intertextuality” (Chandrasoma et al., 2004), less attention has been given to the uncontroversial “legitimate textual borrowing” (Petric, 2012) or “nontransgressive intertextuality” (Chandrasoma et al., 2004) practices.

# 2. Direct quotation

One major form of explicit intertextuality examined in this study is the use of direct quotation. Conventional academic writing practice requires that exact wording from a borrowed text be set apart with quotation marks, thus alerting the reader of the non-original status of the borrowed phrasing. Direct quotation makes intertextuality visible (Pecorari, 2006). Several factors may complicate a decision to use or to avoid quotation marks. It may not always be clear which phrases should be placed inside of quotation marks, since idiomatic phrases may be freely recycled without quotations, and even among college professors, there is wide variation as to what kind of textual borrowing is considered appropriate without demarcation (Davis & Morley, 2015; Pecorari & Shaw, 2012). Studies of professional academic writing indicate that quoting is rare in STEM disciplines (Hyland, 1999), and therefore students are often discouraged from quoting directly (Davis, 2013; Wette, 2017b). Wette’s (2017a) skill trajectory for writing from sources indicates that an overreliance on quoting is common at the novice level, and that quotes are used more sparingly as students gain proficiency. Davis (2013) and Pecorari (2010) have noted that conscientious students may quote more than necessary in order to avoid accusations of plagiarism.

But the use of direct quotations is not always viewed as problematic or correlated with lower proficiency writing. Petric’s (2012) study of Master’s theses in Gender Studies at an English-medium university in central Europe revealed a high frequency of short direct quotations, often consisting of less than a complete clause. Petric calls this technique “mosaic” writing, noting that it may be considered similar to, but more sophisticated than, patchwriting, and suggesting it may be identified as another stage in the learning process. Petric further explains that skillful incorporation of direct quotes, the successful blending of voices while also clearly marking their boundaries, may require a more advanced level of academic literacy than is often recognized. A tendency of higher-rated student texts to contain shorter quotes than lower-rated texts has also been observed on placement tests (Weigle and Parker, 2013). Pecorari (2010) has noted that considerable linguistic skill is required to incorporate phrasal quotes into one’s own sentence structure, as opposed to quoting complete sentences.

# 3. Attribution: giving credit to the source

A second major form of explicit intertextuality examined in this study is attribution. No matter the textual form of borrowed information (exact wording, paraphrased, or summarized) it is the writer’s responsibility to attribute or “document” (Hyland, 2009), the source from which it was borrowed. This involves another set of potentially complicated decisions. Disciplinary expectations and citation styles will once again influence a conscientious writer’s choices, as will students’ linguistic skill and awareness of conventions, or lack thereof (Pecorari, 2006).

The simplest form of attribution is the parenthetical or “non-integral citation” (Swales, 2014). The non-integral technique, as illustrated in the sentence right before this one, requires no mention of the cited author within one’s own sentence, thus allowing the writer to focus exclusively on concepts, never shifting focus to human actors. Integral attribution, as illustrated in the two sentences following this one, draws attention to the human agent behind the borrowed idea by including the cited author within the sentence structure. Hyland’s (1999) study of published academic writing from eight academic disciplines found that non-integral attribution was overwhelmingly preferred in STEM, while about two thirds of citations in Social

Sciences articles, and only about one third of citations in Philosophy articles, were non-integral. Swales’ (2014) study of upperlevel student writing in biological sciences also revealed a preference for non-integral over integral attributions, yet Swales notes that samples from Molecular Biology (a highly experimental subfield) relied even more heavily on the non-integral citation style as compared to samples from Evolutionary Biology (a more theoretical and interdisciplinary subfield). These results suggest a continuum ranging from “hard” sciences on one end, where the non-integral is highly preferred, to the “softer” disciplines on the other end in which integral attribution is accepted or even preferred.

Wette (2017a) concludes, based on her study of multilingual undergraduate writers in New Zealand (Wette 2010, 2017b), that a heavy reliance on integral attribution is a feature of novice writing, and is largely supplanted by use of non-integral citation as writers move toward greater proficiency. Wette’s 2017b study examined third year college students writing for a range of courses outside of STEM. Though students were observed increasing their use of non-integral attribution and decreasing their use of integral attribution as they gained proficiency in disciplinary writing (Wette, 2017b), this trend may diverge according to discipline as writers attain professional level communication skills in their fields. While $6 5 \%$ of citations in Philosophy articles analyzed by Hyland (1999) were integral, only $3 4 \%$ of citations in Applied Linguistics articles were integral, indicating that, even within the Humanities and Social Sciences, citing conventions for academic publication vary widely.

Integral attribution, in which the writer incorporates the cited author’s name into his/her own prose (e.g. “According to Jones …, Jones insists that …“) can take a variety of forms. Common phrasal patterns for integral attribution have been identified, and their frequency in various contexts analyzed (Charles, 2006; Hyland, 1999; Swales, 2014). Hyland (1999) identified three major phrase structures, some that place focus on the author and his/her actions, and others that, while mentioning the author, remain focused on concepts or procedures. The common structure of Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb (e.g., “Smith argued …“) which places the author firmly in the subject position both grammatically and semantically, is more common in the Humanities than in the Social Sciences, and unusual in STEM writing. Hyland further notes that Humanities and Social Science writers were not only more likely to use integral attribution, but also more likely to assign the semantic role of subject to those they cite. Similarly, Charles (2006) observed a much higher prevalence of attribution phrases containing human subjects in academic writing from Politics as compared to Materials Science. A survey of the literature thus reveals wide variation in citation forms across disciplines.

# 3.1. Reporting verbs as a key element of attribution

Reporting verbs are at the core of integral attribution. They may carry strategic rhetorical impact in academic prose, and thus have been studied and categorized extensively. Reporting verb taxonomies have been proposed by Thompson and Ye (1991), Hyland (1999), Charles (2006). The present study adopts Thompson and Ye’s (1991) multilayered system for categorizing reporting verbs, as it highlights the complex nuances that may be contained in a single lexical choice. In this system, reporting verbs are closely linked to evaluation, in recognition that reporting verbs may reveal the citing writer’s stance toward the cited proposition, and at the same time, may also indicate the cited author’s stance and/or actions in relation to the cited proposition.

Reporting verbs represent a challenge for many writers. As Aull (2015) explains, the highly valued trait of “critical thinking” or “critical evaluation” is often expressed through reporting verbs. Yet, as Liardet and Black (2019)  have observed, student writers may tend to over-rely on neutral verbs (i.e. “says,” “states”) that lack critical evaluative impact. Pecorari (2006) notes that subtle differences in meanings of evaluative reporting verbs may result in difficulty for student writers to use them accurately and with precision, particularly if they are using English as an additional language. Wette (2017b) similarly documents L2 students’ difficulty in selecting the most contextually appropriate reporting verbs. Awareness of subtle reporting verb semantics may contribute substantially to skillful attribution.

# 4. Previous studies of read-to-write placement tests for multilingual college students

The skillful incorporation of source material presents numerous challenges, and students will continuously refine their strategies and techniques throughout their college careers. In anticipating pedagogical needs, it will thus be instructive to investigate patterns of source use students have developed before beginning their academic programs. Three studies have examined student’s source use in the context of an integrated reading and writing placement exam (Gebril & Plakans, 2013; Hyland, 2009; Weigle & Parker, 2012). Each of the studies focused on the extent to which students had replicated the language of the original source texts, noting the use (or lack) of quotation marks and attribution to source texts. By these measures, the results showed mostly small variations at different proficiency levels. Weigle and Parker’s (2012) analysis of textual borrowing in 63 placement exams concluded that the patterns of borrowing were not substantially different across the four levels, except for a few students who borrowed extensively from the source text, thus throwing off the mean. Gebril and Plakans’s (2013) analysis of 136 texts written by undergraduates at an English-medium Middle Eastern university concluded that students at all three levels used a similar frequency of direct quotes and uncited copying. Hyland’s (2009) study of incoming first year university students (96 L1 and 29 L2) found little statistical difference in source use between the L1 and L2 writers; patchwriting and vague referencing were common among both groups.

Though the researchers found textual borrowing practices to be generally similar across proficiency levels and linguistic backgrounds, a few points of differentiation were noted. Gebril and Plakans (2013) observed that the lowest level students used fewer paraphrases and summaries, which lead the authors to believe the lower proficiency students might have had difficulty understanding texts. Hyland (2009) noted in turn that when interviewing exam-takers individually, those who were less skilled tended to take the reading material as “fact,” as opposed to debatable positions. While basic comprehension may not have been at issue in the latter case, students had apparently experienced difficulty with critical interpretation of texts. The challenge of reading critically may in turn have impeded these students from skillful integration of sources.

Other notable findings suggest that students may be unaware of the need to use quotation marks or attribute ideas to sources, especially in a testing situation when source texts are known to the reader. Hyland (2009) noted that 12 of the 96 of the L1 texts, and five of the 29 L2 texts, contained no attempts to cite or quote references appropriately. Text-based interviews with 41 of the participants revealed that some students thought it was unnecessary to cite because the reader would already know the source. Weigle and Parker (2012) reported that undergraduates, some of whom had attended high school in the U.S, cited more than did the graduate students, who were all new arrivals to the U.S. This would suggest that the citing practices expected in the U.S. may not be as consistently taught in high school curricula abroad.

Each of the three studies above focused primarily on issues related to plagiarism. Their authors explored the extent to which writers had copied text without using quotation marks, and/or had borrowed ideas from sources without attribution. With heightened focus on the frequency of this “transgressive intertextuality” (Chandrasoma et al., 2004), less attention has been given to the uncontroversial “legitimate textual borrowing” (Petric, 2008) or “nontransgressive intertextuality” (Chandrasoma et al., 2004) practices of test-takers. The present study does NOT attempt to identify instances of plagiarism or patchwriting, but instead analyzes instances in which writers have properly and explicitly marked intertextuality. The study investigates patterns of direct quotation as well as patterns of attribution as applied to any borrowed material regardless of specific form (quotation, patchwriting, paraphrasing, or summary). This exclusive focus on non-transgressive practices allows for detailed linguistic analysis and nuanced description of students’ quoting and attributing patterns, providing a glimpse into their developing mastery of these techniques as they emerge from secondary education. Students at this level have presumably not yet begun the process of specialization. Patterns of quotation and attribution in this sample may therefore differ substantially from those observed in specialized disciplinary writing. These cross-sectional data may carry implications for curricular design of undergraduate writing-intensive courses and suggest ways in which proficiency in writing from sources develops over time.

# 4.1. Research questions

1. What patterns of direct quotation do incoming undergraduate university students use in a placement test argument essay?   
2. What patterns of attribution do the students use to signal intertextuality (regardless of the form in which that attributed information appears: quotation, patchwriting, paraphrasing, or summary)?   
3. Do the patterns of explicit intertextuality identified in questions 1 and 2 above vary across four placement levels?

# 5. Methods

# 5.1. Setting and description of the placement exam

The texts analyzed in this study were written on May 13th, 2017 as part of a placement exam taken by multilingual students admitted as undergraduates to a highly competitive research university for fall of 2017. Performance on the exam was used to determine which writing course(s) each student would need to complete. Students were allowed $^ { 2 . 5 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ to complete the exam remotely on their own computers. The exam required students to read two brief texts on a controversial topic (in this instance, driverless cars), respond to a series of comprehension questions, and finally write an argumentative essay of roughly 350e500 words. Regarding source use, the instructions advise students to take care that “Quotations and ideas from both articles [are] introduced appropriately.” Essays were scored by instructors with expertise in multilingual writing who teach the writing courses into which students were being placed, according to a rubric that includes source use as part of its criteria. The rubric used for evaluating submissions is included as Appendix A. The study design, entailing the use of anonymized student texts, was approved by the university’s Internal Review Board.

# 5.2. Sample selection

All writing samples for this study were written during the same test administration (May 13th, 2017). Thirty sample essays were selected randomly from those placing at Levels 1, 2, and 3 respectively. Only nine essays were available from Level 4 (limited by the small number of exceptional essays that qualified their authors to bypass the multilingual series completely), thus resulting in a collection of 99 essays. The average essay length was 459 words.

# 5.3. Coding

The 99 essays were uploaded into MAXQDA, then coded manually and independently by the researcher. The clearly defined and easily recognizable categories described in the following sections allowed for simplicity in coding, thus resulting in no need for a second coder.

# 5.3.1. Direct quotation

All copied material from the source texts placed inside of quotation marks by the student writer were marked as “direct quotes.” Excluded as direct quotes were article titles and phrases in quotation marks that did not actually appear in either of the original texts. The number of words, and the number of Minimal Terminal Units, or T-units (Hunt, 1965), contained within each quote were calculated. Quoted segments consisting of less than a one T-unit were marked as “phrasal” and then coded according to their phrasal structure: “verb phrase,” (defined as one or more inflected verbs plus any modifiers, objects or complements accompanying them), “noun phrase,” (defined as one or more nouns plus any modifiers accompanying them) or “adjective phrase” (defined as one or more adjectives plus any modifiers accompanying them). Examples of direct quotations, including all three phrase types, are included in Table 1.

# 5.3.2. Integral and non-integral attribution techniques

All attributions to source texts were coded as either Integral or Non-integral. Integral attribution phrases were categorized by syntactic structure, which fell into two major categories: Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb and Alternative. Passive constructions such as “… the driverless cars’ reliance on per-programming is also mentioned by Flora” (3-10) were counted as Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb, as were vague citation phrases such as “some people argue,” and “many claim that.” When a phrase contained multiple verbs such as “Flora highlights this issue by stating …” (4-4), it was counted as a single Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb citation. All Integral citation structures not containing a reporting verb were coded as Alternative. Examples of Nonintegral and Integral Attributions are presented in Table 1.

# 5.4. Statistical analysis

Coded data was exported from MAXQDA into Excel, where data for each individual essay were calculated in the following categories: Direct Quotes (frequency), Length of Direct Quotes (average in words), Phrasal Quotes (frequency), Non-Integral Citations (frequency), Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb (frequency), and Alternative Integral Citation (frequency). The data for each of these 6 categories was then imported into SPSS and tested for homogeneity of variance to determine which statistical analysis would apply in each case. Homogeneity of variance, the assumption that all comparison groups (the four placement levels) have the same variance, must be valid for the ANOVA test to accurately assess the significance of observed differences among groups. In categories for which homogeneity could be assumed (Length of Direct Quotes, Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb, Alternative Integral Citation), a one-way ANOVA was conducted, followed by post-hoc pairwise comparison (Tukey). In categories for which homogeneity of variance could NOT be assumed (Direct Quotes, Phrasal Quotes, Non-Integral Citations), the Kruskal-Wallis test was conducted instead.

Table 1 Examples of codes direct quotation and attribution.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Passage from Student Essay</td><td>Coding</td></tr><tr><td>A. As Justin Haskins once said, &quot;driverless car is another society-shifting invention that has the potential to become an everyday reality in the notsodistant future.&quot; (1-29)</td><td>1 Direct Quote: 21 words long, 1 T-Unit (a single independent clause, with an embedded subordinate clause). Integral Attribution: Author + Reporting Verb</td></tr><tr><td>B. According to Flora, the car&#x27;s computer &quot;stores massive amount of highly personal data&quot; (3-4).</td><td>1 Direct Quote: Verb Phrase, 7 words long Integral Attribution: Alternative</td></tr><tr><td>C. An alternative to this high price would be the creation of the &quot;Driverless Chauffeur,&quot; where a consumer simply &quot;opens an app on a computer or smartphone&quot; to call their car (Haskins). (3-7)</td><td>2 Direct Quotes: Noun Phrase, 2 words long Verb Phrase, 8 words long.</td></tr><tr><td>D. Although in the near future, the technology will be advanced and those lethal errors will be rectified, that future is far too near-- in 2020 expected by General Motors, and even in 2019 by Volkswagen- could these car manufacturers really guarantee that the technology is &quot;fail-safe&quot; (Flora, 2016)? (3-24)</td><td>Non-integral Attribution 1 Direct Quote: Adjective Phrase, 1 word long Non-integral Attribution</td></tr><tr><td>E. Haskins holds that driverless cars are easier to access so that people has less. needs to live in the cities, which saves them plenty of expenses (22-7) F. According to the article from Whit Flora, the loopholes of driverless cars</td><td>0 Direct Quotes Integral Attribution: Author + Reporting Verb</td></tr><tr><td>could be seen everywhere. (2-10) G. Online apps in our devices are going to exist to facilitate our transportation (Justin Haskins). (2-19)</td><td>0 Direct Quotes Integral Attribution: Alternative 0 Direct Quotes</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 6. Results

Significant differences among groups were observed in Frequency of Direct Quotations and Phrasal Quotes, with a trend toward increased usage of both in higher placing essays. Significant differences were also observed in Length of Direct Quotes, with quotes tending to be shorter in higher placing essays. Writers at all levels favored Integral over Non-integral attribution, though the use of Non-integral attribution increased significantly between Levels 1 and 4. Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb was more frequent than Alternative Integral attribution at all levels, and significantly higher frequency of Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb was observed at higher levels. Higher placing essays also tended to contain a wider variety of reporting verbs and more “writerly act” verbs to express the student’s own evaluation of the cited content.

# 6.1. Direct quotation

The frequency of direct quotation rose at each level from 1 through 4, as depicted in Table 2. A Kruskal-Wallis H test showed that direct quotation use at Level 1 $\mathbf { M } = 0 . 9 0$ , SD 1.213) was significantly less frequent than at Level 3 $\mathbf { M } = 3 . 1 0$ , SD 1.788) $ { \mathbf { p } } = . 0 0 0$ and at Level 4 $\mathbf { M } = 3 . 2 2$ , SD 1.202) $\mathsf { p } = . 0 0 4 .$ . Similarly, direct quotation use was significantly less frequent at Level 2 $\mathbf { M } = 1 . 5$ , SD 1.943), as compared to Level 3 $\mathbf { M } = 3 . 1 0$ , SD 1.788) $\mathsf { p } = . 0 0 3$ (All significance levels are adjusted by Bonferroni correction for multiple tests). Of note is that 17 of the 30 essays $( 5 7 \% )$ at Level 1 and 17 if the 30 essays $( 5 7 \% )$ at Level 2 contained no direct quotation use at all. In sharp contrast, only 3 out of the 30 essays $( 1 0 \% )$ at Level 3 and zero essays at Level 4 lacked the use of direct quotation

The data point to two distinct trends among novice examinees, the first being no use of direct quotation at all, and the second being the use of relatively long quotes. The complete absence of direct quotations in $5 7 \%$ of samples at both Levels 1 and 2 suggests that many examinees may have been advised against quoting, may not have known the mechanics of demarcating direct wording from sources, or may not have been aware of direct quotation as an option at all. Students exhibiting the second trend, in contrast, are clearly aware of a reader’s expectation for borrowed wording to be explicitly demarcated, and have learned the mechanics required to do so. These examinees’ use of relatively long quotes corresponds with Wette’s (2017a) description of novice writers’ over-dependency on source text language.

As may be observed in Table 3, average quote length dropped from Level 1 $\mathbf { M } = 2 2 . 6 7 9 )$ to Level 2 $\mathrm { \bf ~ M } = 2 0 . 7 5 5$ ) and again from Level 2 to Level 3 $M = 1 5 . 3 3 7 .$ ), but then rose again slightly at Level 4 $\mathbf { M } = 1 8 . 4 2 0 $ ). A One-Way ANOVA showed that quote length differed significantly among levels $p = . 0 2 5$ . Post hoc analyses (Tukey) indicated that the average quote length was significantly higher at level 1 $M = 2 2 . 6 7 9$ , $S D = 8 . 1 0 3 $ ) than at level 3 $M = 1 5 . 3 3 7 ,$ , $S D = 6 . 2 9 0 _ { . } ^ { \cdot }$ ), ${ \mathsf { p } } = . 0 2 6$ . The relatively high average for quote length at Level 4 may be traced to 1 out of the 9 essays containing an unusually long average quote length of 36.5 words.

# 6.1.1. Phrasal quotes

Just as Petric (2012) noted in her analysis of master’s theses, quotation use in the present study differed among the levels not only in frequency and length, but also in syntactic structure (See Table 3). A Kruskal-Wallis H test showed significant variation in use of phrasal quotes among levels $( \mathbf { p } = . 0 1 1 \cdot$ ). Pairwise comparison showed that phrasal quote use at Level 1 $\mathrm { M } = 0 . 0 8$ , $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 2 7 7 ,$ ) was significantly less frequent than at Level 3 $\left( \mathsf { M } = 1 . 3 3 , \mathsf { S D } = 1 . 3 3 0 \right) \mathsf { p } = . 0 0 6$ (adjusted by Bonferroni correction for multiple tests). In Petric’s 2012 study, $5 0 . 8 \%$ of direct quotes in highly-rated master’s theses were phrasal rather than containing complete sentences or entire clauses. Similarly, higher scoring essays in the present study were much more likely than lower scoring texts to include phrasal quotesdquotes containing fewer than a single t-unit. Roughly one third of quotes at Levels 3 and 4 consisted of phrases only, with verb phrases being the most common, followed by noun phrases and finally adjective phrases.

The examples below illustrate the use of longer quotes seen most frequently at Levels 1 and 2. In the first example, the quoted material, containing two complete sentences and three independent clauses, stands alone. Thus, the writer avoids the syntactic complexity of integrating the quoted material with her own prose by isolating the quote and choosing the nonintegral, parenthetical citation style. The second example illustrates a frequently observed quotation structure at all levels: that of a single t-unit, introduced by Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb.

Firstly, driverless cars cannot deal with the unexpected accidents on the road. “Developing fail-safe software for completely driverless cars would require rethinking how software is designed. The software in phones, laptops and other device is not designed to operate for extended periods without crashing or freezing- and those errors would be deadly in a car” (Flora) e (1 30)

Table 2 Average frequency of direct quotation per essay.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Level</td><td>N</td><td></td><td colspan="2">Frequency of Direct Quotes Per Essay</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Range</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>30</td><td>.90</td><td>1.213</td><td>0-4</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>30</td><td>1.5</td><td>1.943</td><td>0-7</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>30</td><td>3.10</td><td>1.788</td><td>0-7</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>9</td><td>3.22</td><td>1.202</td><td>2-5</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Average quote length and frequency of phrasal quotes per essay.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Level n</td><td>(Only essays containing direct quotation) (in number of words)</td><td colspan="3">Average Length of Quotes</td><td colspan="3">Average Frequency of Phrasal Quotes</td><td>Phrasal Quotes as a Percentage of Total Quotes at Each Level</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mean SD</td><td>Range</td><td></td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Range</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>13</td><td>22.679</td><td>8.103</td><td> 12.00040.333</td><td>.08</td><td>.277</td><td>0-1</td><td>4%</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>13</td><td>20.755</td><td>7.329</td><td>9.33339.333</td><td>.69</td><td>1.032</td><td>0-3</td><td>18%</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>27</td><td>15.337</td><td>6.290</td><td>1.00025.250</td><td>1.33</td><td>1.330</td><td>0-4</td><td>35%</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>9</td><td>18.420</td><td>7.922</td><td>6.80036.500</td><td>1.00</td><td>1.203</td><td>0-3</td><td>32%</td></tr></table></body></html>

As Justin Haskins once said, “driverless car is another society-shifting invention that has the potential to become an everyday reality in the not-so-distant future.” (1-29)

The use of lengthy, full sentence quotes may be interpreted as a developmental stage in which novice writers make “heavy/ excessive use of quotations” and “heavy use of sources to provide ideas” while demonstrating “little evidence of personal authorship or text management” (Wette, 2017a, p. 107). The writers avoid issues of plagiarism by placing the borrowed words in quotation marks, but most of the words in each of these examples have been copied. Though long quotes can sometimes be used effectively, the act of copying itself provides no evidence that the writer has thoroughly understood the borrowed text (Howard et al., 2010).

The insularity of the quoted material in the two examples above may be contrasted to the style of quote use often exhibited at levels 3 and 4 essays, which I would argue, does offer some evidence of close reading. Beyond requiring considerable linguistic skill, integration of phrasal quotes into one’s own prose demonstrates engagement with source texts and an emerging ability to repurposing of the cited material for the student writer’s own goals. The following example illustrates this more advanced use of quotations:

He has trouble believing car manufacturers can develop “fail-safe-software” that is efficient enough “to operate for extended periods without crashing or freezing,” which is critical to making these cars safe. Furthermore, he also insists on the fact that humans have a certain affection for our cars, and that they represent our “personalities and tastes.” (4e3)

An alternative to this high price would be the creation of the “Driverless Chauffeur,” where a consumer simply “opens an app on a computer or smartphone” to call their car (Haskins). (3e7)

The first example above contains three phrasal quotes: two noun phrases and one verb phrase. The essay writer’s own words, which serve to both contextualize and explain the author’s ideas, make up the bulk of the text. The second example above employs a nearly identical structure. In both cases, we see that the first quote, a noun phrase, is thoroughly contextualized, while the second quote, a verb phrase, appears inside of the following subordinate clause. This use of direct quotation, not addressed in Wette’s (2017a) developmental stages, does not entail the drowning out of the student writer’s voice. The quoted voice, rather, is subordinate to, and controlled by the quoting writer. The use of short phrasal quotes thus does not detract from to the writers’ authorial voice.

While the function and appropriateness of phrasal quotes such as those seen here may be debatable, it is clear that embedding phrasal quotes requires considerable skill in manipulating syntactic structures. The patterns of quotation use observed in this collection of essays lend support to Petric’s (2012) claim that interspersing chunks of a cited author’s words, in the form of clearly defined linguistic constituents (e.g. noun, verb, or adjective phrases), may represent a stage of development beyond patchwriting on the pathway toward mastery of intertextual academic writing.

# 6.2. Integral and non-integral attribution

Despite the clear preference for non-integral attribution in advanced and professional academic writing in most disciplines (Hyland, 1999; Swales, 2014), the essays at all levels in this sample contained many times more integral than nonintegral attribution.

# 6.2.1. Non-integral attribution

A Kruskal-Wallis H test showed significant variation in use of non-integral attribution among levels $\mathbf { \tau } ( \mathbf { p } = . 0 2 2$ ) (See Table 4). Pairwise comparison showed that non-integral attribution at Level 1 $\mathbf { M } = 0 . 1 0$ , $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 5 4 8 \mathrm { \Omega }$ was significantly less frequent than at Level 4 $\mathbf { M } = 0 . 7 8$ , $\mathrm { S D } = 0 . 9 7 2$ ) $\mathsf { p } = . 0 4 9$ (adjusted by Bonferroni correction for multiple tests). It should be noted, however, that $8 6 \%$ of non-integral attributions at Level 4 were redundant; they followed sentences already containing integral attributions. Thus, the use of non-integral attribution usually did not indicate reliance on this technique in most essays, and the increasing frequency of this structure at higher levels was not accompanied by a drop in integral attribution.

Table 4 Non-integral and integral attribution per essay.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Level</td><td rowspan="2">n</td><td colspan="3">Non-Integral Attribution</td><td colspan="3">Integral Attribution: Author Reporting Verb X</td><td colspan="3">Integral Attribution: Alternative</td></tr><tr><td>mean</td><td> SD</td><td>Range</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Range</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Range</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>30</td><td>.10</td><td>.548</td><td>0-3</td><td>2.17</td><td>1.555</td><td>0-6</td><td>.30</td><td>.535</td><td>0-2</td></tr><tr><td>?</td><td>30</td><td>.40</td><td>1.102</td><td>0-4</td><td>1.67</td><td>1.668</td><td>0-7</td><td>.67</td><td>.994</td><td>0-4</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>30</td><td>.63</td><td>1.217</td><td>0-4</td><td>3.23</td><td>2.048</td><td>0-8</td><td>.93</td><td>1.143</td><td>0-4</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>9</td><td>.78</td><td>.972</td><td>0-2</td><td>4.22</td><td>1.908</td><td>1-7</td><td>.44</td><td>.527</td><td>0-1</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 6.2.2. Integral citation

Integral citation phrases were assigned to one of two structural categories: Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb or Alternative. By far, the most common attribution phrase structure at all levels was the “Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb” pattern. Alternative integral citation was relatively infrequent at all levels, and no statistically significant differences among the 4 groups were observed (See Table 4).

A One-Way ANOVA showed significant difference in the frequency of Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb usage among the 4 groups $( \mathbf { p } = . 0 0 0 )$ . Post hoc comparisons using the Tukey HSD test indicated that Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb at Level 1 $M = 2 . 1 7 ,$ , $\mathrm { S D } = 1 . 5 5 5 \mathrm { \AA }$ ) was significantly less frequent than at Level 4 $\mathbf { M } = 4 . 2 2$ , $\mathrm { S D } = 2 . 0 4 8 $ ) $\mathsf { p } = . 0 1 3$ . The same structure at Level 2 $\mathrm { M } = 1 . 6 7 ,$ , $\mathrm { S D } = 1 . 6 6 8 \mathrm { \Omega }$ was significantly less frequent than at Level 3 ( $\mathbf { M } = 3 . 2 3$ , $\mathsf { S D } = 1 . 9 0 6 ^ { \cdot }$ $\mathsf { p } = . 0 0 4$ and Level 4 $\mathbf { M } = 3 . 5 6$ , $\mathrm { S D } = 2 . 0 0 7$ ) $\mathbf { p } = . 0 0 1$ .

Some Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb citations contained multiple reporting verbs, thus offering two layers of information. This technique points the reader toward the author’s intentions and actions, as may be seen in the examples below:

Flora highlights this issue by stating … (4-4)

Some people may oppose his idea by providing examples of software failure and privacy invasion. (3 22)

Both Flora and Haskins present such arguments, leaving the reader to ponder … (3 20)

The first two examples above follow the same pattern both structurally and rhetorically. Each begins with a reporting verb which helps provide context by indicating the importance and effect of the cited entity’s contribution to the discussion, perhaps also indicating their intent. The second reporting verb, in “ing” form, then refers to the actions taken to achieve the effect identified in the main clause. The third example uses the same grammatical structure for a slightly different effect; the first reporting verb expresses the author’s action, and the second indicates the effect of such action on the reader. This double reporting verb structure was observed only once at Level 1 and was completely absent from Level 2. By contrast, it appeared five times at Level 3, and once among the nine essays placing into Level 4. While still relatively infrequent at higher levels, its near complete absence at levels 1 and 2 suggests that writers may be increasingly likely to employ this structure as they advance in source-based writing skills.

Selection and use of reporting verbs. Because Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb was the most common attribution structure observed in the corpus, and the only structure with clearly increased presence in higher placing essays, a closer look at which verbs are selected and how they are used is warranted here. For simplicity, all verbs are listed in third person present tense, though they did not always appear in such form. Thus, exemplars of “is saying” or “said,” for example, have been recorded simply as “says.”

As may be observed in Table 5, the most frequent reporting verbs at both Level 1 and Level 2 were “says,” “states” and “mentions.” These three all-purpose reporting verbs, along with several others (e.g. “puts it,” “talks about,” “tell us,” “writes”), simply attribute without evaluation. These are classified by Thompson and Ye (1991) as “textual author acts.” Another set of verbs contributing to the variety especially at level 1 (e.g. “thinks,” “holds,” and “believes”), belong to Thompson and Ye’s (1991) category of “mental author acts,” as they are said to reflect the mental processes of the cited author, while indicating no evaluation or analysis on the part of the citing writer.

The verb “argues,” which tops the list at Level 3, is classified by Thompson and Ye (1991) as a “writerly act” verb. When used accurately, verbs in this category may indicate the student writer’s critical thought about the cited information and/or authors’ intentions in proposing that information. Other verbs in this category include “claims,” “describes” and “explains,” which appeared most frequently at Level 4. The variety of reporting verbs appearing at Level 4 is especially notable, given that only 9 essays were included in the sample. Similarly, the abundant variety of reporting verbs at Level 3 as compared to Level 1 and Level 2 is striking. Included in the variety of reporting verbs at Level 3 and Level 4 is a higher concentration of verbs indicating the student writer’s own analysis, evaluation, or interpretation of the cited author’s actions or assertions (e.g. “admits,” “accounts for,” “demonstrates,” “highlights,” “illustrates,” “implies,” “insists,” “opposes,” “questions”).

Interestingly, a substantial proportion of reporting verbs observed at Level 4 were complex, requiring entire phrases to be employed as a unit. For example, we may note the heavy presence of reporting phrases in use by writers who placed into Level

Table 5 Reporting verb frequency.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Level 1 (n = 30)</td><td colspan="2">Level 2 (n = 30)</td><td colspan="2">Level 3 (n = 30)</td><td colspan="2">Level 4 (n = 9)</td></tr><tr><td>Word Count</td><td colspan="2">12,730</td><td colspan="2">13,396</td><td colspan="2">14,405</td><td colspan="2">4886</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Verb</td><td>Freq.</td><td>Verb</td><td>Freq.</td><td>Verb argues</td><td>Freq.</td><td>Verb</td><td>Freq.</td></tr><tr><td>All frequencies are per 10,000 words</td><td>says states</td><td>22.00 4.71</td><td>mentions says</td><td>10.45 9.70</td><td>mentions states</td><td>9.72 9.02</td><td>states claims</td><td>24.56 8.18</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>mentions</td><td>3.14</td><td>states</td><td>4.48</td><td></td><td>9.02</td><td>argues</td><td>4.09</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>thinks</td><td>3.14</td><td>argues</td><td>2.24</td><td>says</td><td>6.94</td><td>describes</td><td>4.09</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>claims</td><td>2.36</td><td>thinks</td><td>2.24</td><td>indicates</td><td>4.15</td><td></td><td>4.09</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>raises (an issue)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>believes</td><td>1.57</td><td>explains</td><td>1.49</td><td> believes discusses</td><td>2.08</td><td>addresses</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>supports</td><td>1.57</td><td>concerns</td><td>1.49</td><td>gives</td><td>2.08</td><td>is still skeptical of.</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>brings</td><td>0.79</td><td>addresses</td><td>0.75</td><td>implies</td><td>2.08</td><td>brings</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>conveys</td><td>0.79</td><td>asserts</td><td>0.75</td><td>thinks</td><td>2.08</td><td>cites</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>defines</td><td>0.79</td><td> believes</td><td>0.75</td><td>highlights</td><td>2.08</td><td>demonstrates</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>denotes</td><td>0.79</td><td>describes</td><td>0.75</td><td>presents</td><td>1.39</td><td>doubts</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>disagrees</td><td>0.79</td><td>holds</td><td>0.75</td><td>suggests</td><td>1.39</td><td>fails</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>explains</td><td>0.79</td><td>makes me</td><td>0.75</td><td>accounts for</td><td>1.39</td><td>has strong concerns about.</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>gives</td><td>0.79</td><td>sees</td><td>0.75</td><td>admits</td><td>0.69</td><td> has trouble believing</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>holds</td><td>0.79</td><td>shows</td><td>0.75</td><td>cites</td><td>0.69</td><td>highlights</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>insists</td><td>0.79</td><td>suggests</td><td>0.75</td><td>claims</td><td>0.69</td><td>insists</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> proposes</td><td>0.79</td><td>worries</td><td>0.75</td><td>contends</td><td>0.69</td><td>lists</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>proves</td><td>0.79</td><td></td><td></td><td>demonstrates</td><td>0.69</td><td>notes</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>puts it</td><td>0.79</td><td></td><td></td><td>describes</td><td>0.69</td><td> paints a picture</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>shows</td><td>0.79</td><td></td><td></td><td> disagrees</td><td>0.69</td><td>responds</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>supposes</td><td>0.79</td><td></td><td></td><td>emphasizes</td><td>0.69</td><td>shows</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>talks about</td><td>0.79</td><td></td><td></td><td>explains</td><td>0.69</td><td> speaks to the benefits of.</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>tells us</td><td>0.79</td><td></td><td></td><td>holds</td><td>0.69</td><td>views</td><td>2.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>writes</td><td>0.79</td><td></td><td></td><td>illustrates</td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>leaves (the reader to ponder).</td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>opposes</td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>points out</td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>provides</td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>questions</td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>refers to</td><td></td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>reasons</td><td></td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>rings a bell</td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>shows</td><td></td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>throws out</td><td></td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>utilizes</td><td></td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>wakes me up</td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>0.69</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

4: “are still skeptical of,” “brings to our attention,” “has strong concerns about,” “has trouble believing” “insists on the fact that,” “paints a positive picture,” and “speaks to the benefits of.” We can observe a few of these in use in the examples below:

The primary concern of the driverless car is security, and Whitt Flora has raised a number of concerns linked to this matter in his article. (4e3)

Author Justin Haskins paints a positive picture of self-driving cars in his article Driverless Cars Could Allow People to Stay in the Suburbs, and Save Them Money, where he lists out the many ways in which driverless vehicles might improve people’s lives by increasing the leisure available for costumers of this technology. (4e9)

The fluent usage of the phrases “has strong concerns about” and “raises a number of concerns” at Level 4 may be contrasted with this attempted use of “concerns” as a verb at Level 2.

As Flora concerns in his work “driverless cars rely primarily on pre-programmed route data, so they do not obey things such as temporary traffic lights.” (2 26)

The increased usage of these phrasal reporting structures by the most advanced writers signals their lexical sophistication and awareness of academic register, which in turn may co-occur with overall linguistic and writing proficiency. Highly rated texts contained not only more frequent usage but also a wider variety of reporting verbs, in terms of both semantics and structure.

# 7. Discussion and conclusion

The aim of this study was to analyze direct quotation and attribution techniques as demonstrated on a writing placement exam by incoming undergraduates, identifying and comparing patterns at 4 different placement levels. The results illustrate the importance of making intertextuality visible (Pecorari, 2006). Though the exam instructions indicated that both source texts must be “appropriately introduced,” many students may not have understood what this expectation entailed, and their minimal use of explicit intertextuality likely contributed to lower exam scores. This suggests that it will be a significant advantage for multilingual students preparing for university to become familiar with the conventions of citation that make intertextuality visible, including attribution and the skillful incorporation of direct quotations. The results also point to the centrality of integral attribution, and of the Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb structure in particular, in creating a persuasive authorial stance.

A high frequency of both direct quotations and integral attributions using Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb in high placing essays stands in contrast with the observations made by Wette (2017b), Hyland (1999), and Swales (2014), which indicated minimal use of both techniques in expert academic writing. Yet the aforementioned studies were based on disciplinary writing, not the writing of students yet to enter the university as undergraduates. Essays in the present study were not evaluated as disciplinary writing, but as representations of reading, writing, and thinking skills presumed to be valuable in first-year university courses. The heavy reliance on the Author $^ +$ Reporting Verb attribution pattern observed in highly rated essays points to the usefulness of this author-focused technique in source-based argumentation, which requires students to differentiate among various voices, and thus define not only the contours of an issue, but also the positions of key players. In short, this structure facilitates and demonstrates synthesis. The results of the present study affirm the powerful rhetorical impact of integral citation using reporting verbs. The contrastingly infrequent use of all other citation patterns across the entire corpus suggests that use of alternative patterns contributed little to the proficiency of these entry level writers.

Some of the skills demonstrated in higher-placing essays have been recognized in previous studies as successful strategies at more advanced levels. The frequent usage of short, phrasal quotes corresponds to Petric’s (2012) observations of “legitimate textual borrowing” in highly rated master’s theses of non-native English speakers in the discipline of Gender Studies. Such evidence lends support to Pecorari’s (2010) suggestion that careful interspersion of a cited author’s words with the student writer’s own words represents a developmental stage beyond patchwriting, which appears to have signaled a more advanced proficiency to exam readers. This finding may further point to potential benefits of teaching this technique of intertextual writing directly to students.

The results of this study may suggest a need to expand the developmental trajectory of source-based writing (Wette, 2017a) to account for students who are just transitioning from secondary to university education. Such adjustment might recognize the techniques observed most frequently here in highly rated essays; reliance on these techniques may precede mastery of specific disciplinary expectations but nevertheless indicate proficiency in reading skills along with an emerging ability to insert oneself, through writing, into a complex argument. The citation techniques identified in this study allow for nuanced rhetorical possibilities that may be otherwise unavailable or difficult to achieve. As proposed by Liardet and Black (2019), explicit pedagogical attention to highly evaluative reporting verbs may be of particular benefit to students. And while some disciplinary conventions may eschew such techniques and push scholars to minimize their use with increasing specialization, this study suggests that such techniques may contribute to higher quality in student writing as they prepare for undergraduate studies.

The results of this study open questions about appropriate instruction around citation in the context of college preparation and early career undergraduate writing instruction. Future research may explore how writing-intensive courses for multilingual students currently serve students preparing for advanced studies across the disciplines. Researchers my observe the extent to which skills in citation are expected as prerequisites before college entry, or taught explicitly at the university level, and consider how course curricula at the program and/or individual classroom level may facilitate development of targeted citation techniques. Future discussion may explore the benefits or drawbacks of early training in discipline-specific citation practices, versus pedagogical alternatives that might promote stylistic flexibility in preparation for writing across disciplines. Ultimately, the findings of such investigation will contribute to a growing capacity to support students’ development of effective intertextual writing techniques as they begin their university education.

# Author statement

The sole author takes full responsibility for all aspects of this study from its conceptualization and design to the writing and editing of the final article.

Appendix A. Placement Exam Essay Rubric   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Level 1</td><td>Level 2</td><td>Level 3</td><td>Level 4</td></tr><tr><td>Writing</td><td>. Simple sentences domi- nate the essay : Compound and complex sentences may appear but may also be incom- plete or grammatically inaccurate</td><td>: The writer is able to write complete sentences of various complexity : The essay is composed of connected paragraphs in short essay form . Paragraphs sometimes have topic sentences and</td><td>: The essay is controlled by a thesis statement, though paragraphs may depart from this thesis. . The response contains longer paragraphs, usu- ally with topic sentences, internal cohesion, and</td><td>: The essay is lengthy and/ or complex : It is controlled by a thesis statement, clear (if formulaic) topic senten- ces, and overall esay- level cohesion</td></tr><tr><td>Use of Sources</td><td>paragraphs with factual information. : The writer uses personal and cultural knowledge to support points : Attempts at source inte- gration are grammati-</td><td>evenly developed . The writer may use per- sonal or cultural knowl- edge in addition to an attempt at integrating outside authority such as</td><td>. The writer makes use of information from the reading to support his or her opinion, though it may not always be inte-</td><td>effective in its own right . The writer is able to integrate one or both of the readings effectively to develop the thesis : The writer uses quotation</td></tr><tr><td>Vocab</td><td>. The writer demonstrates simplistic, repetitive vocabulary : Vocabulary specific to the topic is not used or is insufficient or incorrectly used</td><td>. The writer uses some content vocabulary from the reading, usually accurately .Word form and word choice are sometimes</td><td>. The writer uses content vocabulary from readings and some academic vo- cabulary effectively .Word form and word choice are mostly</td><td>: The writer demonstrates emerging academic vo- cabulary and thoughtful control of content vocabulary .Word form and word</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>. Many sentences are marked with one or more serious&#x27; grammatical errors . Grammar errors come from a variety of categories</td><td>. Minor grammar errors may still appear throughout the response . Sentences contain few major grammatical errors beyond verb issues</td><td>. Sentences contain some minor grammar errors . Major grammatical er- rors are uncommon, but when they do appear, they seem to come from just one or two gram-</td><td>. Paragraphs contain few minor grammatical errors .There are no major grammatical errors . Grammar may be unso- phisticated but is almost</td></tr></table></body></html>

1 “Serious” or “major” grammatical errors are defined as those that interfere with reader understanding. “Minor” errors may be noticeable and even patterned, but they do not interfere with understanding.

# References

Aull, L. (2015). First-year university writing: A corpus-based study with implications for pedagogy. Springer.   
Badenhorst, C. M. (2019). Literature reviews, citations and intertextuality in graduate student writing. Journal of Further and Higher Education, 9486, 1e13.   
Chandrasoma, R., Thompson, C., & Pennycook, A. (2004). Beyond plagiarism: Transgressive and nontransgressive intertextuality. Journal of Language, Identity and Education, 3(3), 171e193.   
Charles, M. (2006). Phraseological patterns in reporting clauses used in citation: A corpus-based study of theses in two disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 25(3), 310e331.   
Davis, M. (2013). The development of source use by international postgraduate students. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 12(2), 125e135.   
Davis, M., & Morley, J. (2015). Phrasal intertextuality: The responses of academics from different disciplines to students’ re-use of phrases. Journal of Second Language Writing, 28, 20e35.   
Flowerdew, J., & Li, Y. (2007). Language re-use among Chinese apprentice scientists writing for publication. Applied Linguistics, 28(3), 440e465.   
Gebril, A., & Plakans, L. (2013). Toward a transparent construct of reading-to-write tasks: The interface between discourse features and proficiency. Language Assessment Quarterly, 10(1), 9e27.   
Howard, R. M. (1992). Plagiarism and the postmodern professor. Journal of Teaching Writing, 11(2), 233e246.   
Howard, R. M., Serviss, T., & Rodigue, T. (2010). Writing from sources, writing from sentences. Writing & Pedagogy, 2, 177e192.   
Hunt, K. W. (1965). Grammatical structures written at three grade levels. NCTE Research. Report No. 3.   
Hyland, K. (1999). Academic attribution: Citation and the construction of disciplinary knowledge. Applied Linguistics, 20(3), 341e367.   
Hyland, T. A. (2009). Drawing a line in the sand: Identifying the borderzone between self and other in EL1 and EL2 citation practices. Assessing Writing, 14(1), 62e74.   
Jamieson, S. (2013). Reading and engaging sources: What students’ use of sources reveals about advanced reading skills. Across the Disciplines, 10(4), n4.   
Keck, C. (2006). The use of paraphrase in summary writing: A comparison of L1 and L2 writers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15(4), 261e278.   
Keck, C. (2014). Copying, paraphrasing, and academic writing development: A re-examination of L1 and L2 summarization practices. Journal of Second Language Writing, 25(1), 4e22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2014.05.005   
Liardet, C., & Black, S. (2016). According to  …’: Analysing learner development of referencing and evidence integration. English in Australia J, 31(2), 45.   
Liardet, C. L., & Black, S. (2019).  “So and so” says, states and argues: A corpus-assisted engagement analysis of reporting verbs. Journal of Second Language Writing, 44, 37e50.   
Li, Y., & Casanave, C. P. (2012). Two first-year students’ strategies for writing from sources: Patchwriting or plagiarism? Journal of Second Language Writing, 21(2), 165e180.   
Pecorari, D. (2003). Good and original: Plagiarism and patchwriting in academic second-language writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12(4), 317e345.   
Pecorari, D. (2006). Visible and occluded citation features in postgraduate second-language writing. English for Specific Purposes, 25(1), 4e29.   
Pecorari, D. (2010). Academic writing and plagiarism: A linguistic analysis. A&C Black.   
Pecorari, D., & Shaw, P. (2012). Types of student intertextuality and faculty attitudes. Journal of Second Language Writing, 21(2), 149e164.   
Petric, B. (2012). Legitimate textual borrowing: Direct quotation in L2 student writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 21(2), 102e117.   
Serviss, T., & Jamieson, S. (Eds.). (2018). Points of departure: Rethinking student source use and writing studies research methods. University Press of Colorado.   
Shi, L. (2004). Textual borrowing in second-language writing. Written Communication, 21(2), 171e200.   
Swales, J. M. (2014). Variation in citational practice in a corpus of student biology papers: From parenthetical plonking to intertextual storytelling. Written Communication, 31(1), 118e141.   
Thompson, G., & Ye, Y. (1991). Evaluation in the reporting verbs used in academic papers. Applied Linguistics, 12(4), 365e382.   
Weigle, S. C., & Parker, K. (2012). Source text borrowing in an integrated reading/writing assessment. Journal of Second Language Writing, 21(2), 118e133.   
Wette, R. (2010). Evaluating student learning in a university-level EAP unit on writing using sources. Journal of Second Language Writing, 19(3), 158e177.   
Wette, R. (2017a). L2 undergraduate students learning to write using sources (Vol. 99). Teaching Writing for Academic Purposes to Multilingual Students: Instructional Approaches.   
Wette, R. (2017b). Source text use by undergraduate post-novice L2 writers in disciplinary assignments: Progress and ongoing challenges. Journal of Second Language Writing, 37, 46e58.