# Students' attitudes towards accents in English-medium instruction: The role of cosmopolitan and motivation orientations

Charlie Robinson-Jonesa,b,\*, Joana Duarte a,b, Dymphi van der Hoeven a

a Research Group on Multilingualism & Literacy, NHL Stenden University of Applied Sciences, Leeuwarden, the Netherlands b Minorities & Mulilingualism, Faculty of Arts, University of Groningen, the Netherlands

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Handling Editor: Dr Hilary Nesi

Keywords:   
English-medium instruction   
Higher education   
Students' attitudes   
Accents   
Cosmopolitan orientation   
Integrative motivation   
Instrumental motivation

English-medium instruction (EMI) has become a key aspect of internationalisation agendas in higher education, which are also increasingly promoting cosmopolitanism and global citizenship. Within EMI programmes, however, lecturers' non-native English accents can pose challenges for students' content understanding and influence their evaluations of lecturers and education quality. Motivation, whether instrumental or integrative, can also be crucial for EMI and students' (language) learning. Despite this, limited attention has been given to how students' cosmopolitan and motivation orientations may shape their attitudes towards English accents used in EMI. This quantitative exploratory study, conducted at a university of applied sciences in the Netherlands, therefore aimed to gain insights into 1225 students' attitudes towards Dutch-English and standard English accents in EMI, and the potential predictors of these attitudes. The findings revealed that students had more positive attitudes towards standard English accents, but those with higher cosmopolitan orientations also had more positive attitudes towards Dutch-English accents. To further investigate these attitudes and understand changes in students' motivation and cosmopolitan orientations, future studies should employ longitudinal and mixed-methods research designs. The findings from such research, along with this study, can guide higher education institutions in adjusting their policies to create more meaningful and inclusive EMI experiences.

# 1. Introduction

As the intenationalisation of higher education (HE) continues to accelerate, research has increasingly focused on English-medium instruction (EM1) as a key language planning and policy isse (Dafouz & Smit, 2022; Graham et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2017; van der Hoeven & Duarte, 2022; Wilkinson & Gabriels, 2021). In this study, EMI refers to \*the us of the English language to teach academic subects (other than English itself) in countries or jurisdictions where the first language [L1] of the majority of the population is not English' (Macaro et al., 2018, p. 37). English-taught HE programmes have become a core component of universities internationalisation agendas worldwide. Many universities have also expanded their agendas to include global citizenship, inclusion, and civic engagement goals, which entail developing cosmopolitan mindsets and exploring diversity (Freire Oliveira Piccin & Finardi, 2019). In non-Anglophone contexts, such as Asia, the Nordic countries, and the Netherlands, EMI has become a welestablished practice (Wachter & Maiworm, 2014) and, as a result, has significantly increased in recent years e.g. Koninkljke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, 2017). Research has highlighted the potential advantages of EMI for students in terms of linguisic development and content learning, as well as students' generally poitive attitudes towards its implementation (Kim et al., 2014; Yuan et al., 2021) These positive atitudes may stem from, for example, the status of Englishas an academic lingua franca widely used across various disciplines (Richards & Pun, 2022).

One aspect that has also received attention in EMI research is the type of English accents present, which has been identified as a challnge that students often encounter (Dalton-Puffer et al., 1997; Hendris et al., 2016). Studies have found that lecturers pronunciation can hinder students' understanding of their speech, which can in tun affct content acquisition (Lehtonen & Lonnfors 2001). Moreover, students' evaluations of a lecturer's status and likeability can be influenced by their accent (Chan, 2016; Dalton-Puffer et al., 1997; Hendriks et al., 2016, 2021), with the native speaker ideology often being a strong influencing factor (Jenkins, 2005; van der Hoeven & Duarte, 2022). The increase of EMI in HE and the rising number of non-native English (NNE) lecturers teaching NNE students highlight the need for further research on students atitudes towards NE acents, in comparison to standard accents (e.g. British and American accents), and potential predictors of these attitudes (Hendriks et al., 2018). Besides negative attitudes towards lecturers' NNE accent, monolingual teaching and mindsets have also become dominant despite the linguistically diverse backgrounds of students and staff (Duarte & van der Ploeg, 2019) and the value of multilingual educational approaches (Curle et al., 2021; Duarte, 2022). These negative attitudes and the focus on monolingual education poorly reflect the cosmopolitan and inclusive nature of HE institutions.

Since HE institutions in non-Anglophone contexts tend to employ multilingual staff who are not necessaril L1 speakers of English but teach in EMI programmes, students are frequently exposed to a wide range of English accents. This exposure to linguistic and cultural diversity, and aes to Enlish as a lingua franca that arguably promotes, among others, global itienship (van Parijs, 2011), may foster student' cosmopolitan orientations towards language use in EMI and attitudes towards lecturers' and pers accents. Cosmopolitan orientation is defined in this study as the atitudinal and value orientations of individuals who immerse as part of the globalized world" (Leung et a., 2015, p. 79). Although students have been found to prefer standard English accents (e.. Sahan t al., 2022), those with more cosmopolitan mindsets may have more positive atitudes towards NNE accents and be more receptive to the complex sociolinguistic landscapes of HE, given that cosmopolitan individuals are more open to other cultures and connecting with people from outside their local communities (Leung et al., 2015; Skrbis et al., 2004). Such mindsets are vital in countries where the number of EMI programmes is increasing, and linguistic and cultural diverst is growing. Litle research has, however, investigated this specific aspect of EMI implementation and related language policy.

Students' language learning motivation orientations can also play a key role in EMI, whether instrumental i. the benefits of being proficient in and reasons for learning the language) or integative i. the desire, willingness, or abilit of a learner to converse with other language communities; Gardner, 2010). These motivations may reflect and/or be influenced by cosmopolitan orientations since students may be inspired to learn and study in English for practical uroses or to engage in meaningful exchanges with thers, leading to an open-minded and inclusive attitude towardsdifferet inguistc and cultual backgrounds, of which an individual's acent(s) is a marker. It should, however, be noted that language learning motivation and cosmopolitan mindsets are not necessarily explicit or incidental in EMI. These concepts may therefore not always be relevant to students choices to enrol in EMI programmes, depending on national and academic contexts (e.g. specific degree programmes may only be available in the national language or as an EMI programme). Nevertheles, it i beyond the scope of this study to investigate whether language leaning motivation and/or cosmopolitan mindsets are explit or incidental in the context of EMI and students choices to enrol in such programmes. Our study aims to explore whether these variables are related to students atitudes towards Dutch-English and standard English acents used in EI, whether they may be predicting factors, and whether they contribute to explaining variance in the data.

Moreover, it is important to acknowledge that \*the global trend towards intensified internationalization often gloses over, or renders invisible, the linguistic challenges and tensions that arise [..] in everyday lived experience as a university student[s]" (Fabricius & Preiser, 2015, p. 10) Therefore, it is necessary to gain insights into both home and international students pereptions as they are likely to have different attitudes, and cosmopolitan and motivation orientations. I sum, when developing effctive language planning and policy for EMI in HE, i is imperative that the taget population recives adequate attention, as is particularly the case in the Dutch context.

The Netherlands, a densely populated country with a fair percentage of the population with a migration background $( 2 6 . 1 \%$ Centraal Bureau voor de tatistiek, 2022), a history in trading, and the possibility that abilingual society in which Dutch and English play almost qually important roles will emerge, ha traditionally ben a multilingual country Edwards, 2016). I recent decades, the growing inlunce f Englishsa lingua franca has increased it importance Bartrm, 2010), which has ldtoDutch eople having one of the highest non-L1 proficiency levels in Europe (Education First, 2022; van der Hoeven & Duarte, 2022); this i particularly evident in HE. English-taught degre programmes have been offered by Dutch universities since the 1980s, and the Netherlands now offers more HE programmes in English per capita than any other European Union member state (de Jong, 2018; Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, 2017), with around a fifth of students being internationals (Universteiten van Nederland, 2020). In 2020, $3 0 \%$ of all bachelor's programmes and $7 6 \%$ of master's programmes were offered in English (Wilkinson & Gabriels, 2021).

Although there is a wide body of literature on EMI, including studies on the impact of introducing EMI on national or majority languages (Hultgren, Gregeren, et al., 2014; Hultgren, Jensen, et al., 2015), and attitudes of teachers and students towards the implementation of such programmes, particularly in Asia (e.g. Liu & Le Ha, 2021; Sung, 2020, 2022; Tai, 2022; Zhang & Pladevall-Ballester, 2021) and in primary and secondary education rather than HE (e.g. Barrios & Acosta-Manzano, 2020; Mira et al., 2021; San Isidro & Lasagabaster, 2020), therei a need for further reseach on HE that explores, among others, students attitudes and differences between fields of study, and home and international students, and potential predicting variables and contextual factors within and beyond EMI contexts (Bukve, 2018; Macaro et al., 2018). To the best of our knowledge, no studies have specifically examined students' cosmopolitan orientation in relation to the accents used in EMI, and only a few studies have explored students general attitudes in terms of integrative and instrumental motivation (e.g. Yuan et al., 2023).

Moreover, while there have been several studies on students' attitudes and motivations in the context of research universities e.g. Rose et al., 2019; Yuan et al., 2022), the situation at universities of applied sciences (UAS) has, as far as we are aware, received no attention. A need for studies on UAS, particularly in the Netherlands, is evident given that internationalisation, cosmpolitanisation, and the implementation of EMI programmes are often heavily invested in to provide added value to the qualit of HE, atract inter. national students who contribute to the Dutch knowledge economy", and reinforce the international position of the Netherlands as a knowledge society (Vereniging Hogescholen, 2018). Since UAS typically focus on connecting theoretical knowledge with practical skills though rel-life proect inked to th professional field (Bules & de Louw, 2022), they frquentl participate in uropean-wide research programmes and collaborate with small and medium-sized enterprises, academia, and the publi sector. This means that English often plays a key role in communication and research (Vereniging Hogescholen, 2018).

Against the backdrop of globalisation, the internationalisation and cosmopolitanisation of HE, and the implementation of EMI in non-Anglophone settings, this study therefore sets out to explore students' atitudes towards the use of Dutch-English and standard English accent in EMI and potential predictors of theseattitude, in the context of a UAS in the Netherlands. This study is guided by the following research questions:

1) What attitudes do students enrolled in EMI programmes at a UAS in the Netherlands have towards the use of (a) Dutch-English accents and (b) standard English accents in the context of EMI?   
2) To what extent do cosmopolitan orientation, motivation orientation, and student group (i.e ome or international student) predict attitudes towards Dutch-English and standard English accents in EMI?

# 2. English-medium instruction in higher education

2.1. Attitudes towards (non-)native accents in English-medium instruction and the role of language proficiency

In the context of EMI, research has highlighted the challenge of English accents for students, which can affect their content understanding and evaluations f lcturers (Dalton-Puffer et al., 1997; Hendriks e l., 2016; Lehtonen & Lonnfors, 2001). Studies in Dutch EMI contexts, for example, have found that Dutch students generally have negative views of lecturers' NNE accents (e.g. Hendriks et al, 2016), especially when they do not onform to native English speaker accent norms (de Figueiredo, 2011; Evans & Morrison, 2011). Accent trength has also been found to influence students evaluations of NNE lecturers accents. Although there has been limited research on this in teaching contexts, Hendriks et al.'s (2016) study, for instance, revealed that moderately Dutch-English-accented lecturers were evaluated as less competent and reliable than slightly Dutch-English-accented lecturers (see aso Hendriks et al., 2021). Similar findings were observed for Dutch and German listeners evaluating lecturers with moderate Dutch-English or German-English accents (Hendriks e l. 2018). The Dutch media have also reported on Dutch students' negative opinions of Dutch EMI lecturers English pronunciation (Boels & Dijkgraf, 2017).I other contexts, research has shown that stronger non-native accents tend to reeive more negative evaluations compared to weaker accents in terms of attitudes towards the speaker (e.g. Dragojevic et al., 2017; Hendriks et al., 2017; Hendriks et al., 2018; Roessel et al., 2017).

Possible explanations for these negative views have been proposed, including vicarious shame and inverse solidarit (Hendriks et al. 2018, 2021). Vicarious shame refers to the idea that \*listeners may judge speakers with the same language background as themselves particularly negatively when they have a clearly noticeable ccent in English, because they fee mbarrsse about hearing people like themselves (their compatriots) sound uneducated and unprofessonal, due to thir lack of proper English" (Hendriks & van Meurs, 2022, p. 3). Regarding inverse solidarity, isteners may distance themselves from speakers with whom they share an L1 if they feel their accent is too strong" (Hendriks & van Meurs, 2022, p. 3; see also van den Doel & Quene, 2013).

Moreover, Hendriks and van Meurs (2022) conducted a within-subjects experiment with 119 Dutch listeners who evaluated authentic fragments of English and Dutch lectures recorded by the same Dutch lecturer. The findings revealed no differences in comprehension between EMI and Dutch-taught lectures, though students expressed negative views on the comprehensibility and teaching qualit of EM lecturers. Thee atitudes may negatively impact the lectrers credbilit and carr, as wllas the reutation of the HE institution. Consequently, students may become les inclined to learn from lecturers who are perceived as having poor English proficiency (see also Jensen et al., 2013).

Overall, these studies highlight the continued prevalence f the native pronunciation norm in students perceptions, consistent with accentednes research in general that shows non-standard and non-native pronunciation can negatively impact comprehension and speaker evaluations (for overviews, see Fuertes et al., 2012; Giles & Watson, 2013; Mai & Hoffmann, 2014). It should, however, be noted that deit the quantitative correlation beteen accentedness and intlligiiity, a trong aent des nt nesarily imply ow intelligibilit (Munro, 2008; Munro & Derwing, 1995; Spzzini et al., 2018). Furthermore, Munro (208) has argued that \*there is no reason to believe that reducing' a speaker's accent will automatically lead to improved communication' (p. 213).

Other studies have, in contrast, found that students may not always expect native-like accents in their lecturers, provided the accents are intelligible (Baker & Hutner, 2019) or the lecturers are proficient and knowledgeable (Inbar-Lourie & Donitsa-Schmidt 2020; Kuteea, 2020). While research generall confirms the dominance of the native pronunciation norm among students, experts have argued that it is unnecessary for EMI lecturers to have native English accents since they often have lingustically diverse backgrounds and use English as a lingua franca (Hendriks & van Meurs, 2022; Seter & Jenkins, 205). Hendriks and van Meurs (2022) thus suggest raising students awareness of stereotypical reactions to NNE accents as a way to reduce negative evaluations of NNE-accented lecturers (see also Roessel et al., 2017).

Another important aspect to consider when implementing EMI is the English proficiency of both the lecturers and of the students which can also impact their ability to understand various English accents. Different settings and different degrees of (societal) multilingualism and (individual) plurilingualism cal for different approaches. In contexts where EMI is not yet widely implemented, such as Crotia, etrs he aoxprs cos aout ficiecy, sufficient techer trng, th el f Eglish f osective students, and that the lack of proficiency will lead to los of spontaneity and humaneness (Margic & Vodopija-Krstanovic, 2015). In cases of low student proficiency and/or where EMI is hastily implemented, either higher English proficiency upon university entry or support in the L1 may e necesary (Arkin & Osam, 2015). Heugh et l. 2017) further emphasise the importance of high L1 and second language (L2) proficiency for cognitive engagement and processing academic knowledge. In contrast, Danish lecturers teaching natural sciences in an I setting were found to prioritise content over language proficiency, considering i hestudents' resonsbility or an admission issue (Kling, 2015).

# 2.2. Cosmopolitan orientation

Research suggests that EMI programmes in HE can cultivate cosmopolitan orientations in students by expanding worldviews and offering academic and career advantages. Exposure to EMI programmes provides opportunitie for students to interact with diverse cultures and perspectives, fostering global awareness intercultural competence, and a cosmopolitan mindset. Moreover, studies indicate that EMI can improve students intercultural communication skills through incresed interaction with international peers and staff, resulting in enhanced cross-cultural understanding and communication abilities (Coleman, 2006). It is important to note, however, that simply encountering globalisation does not guaranteea cosmopolitan mindset or an appreciation for cultural diversty (Leung et al., 2015).

While this study highlights the positive impact of EMI on cosmopolitan orientations, other studies acknowledge challenges. Language arriers, the potential marginalisation f non-nish speakers or those wth low proficiency, and th ned foreffctive anguage support programmes are important considerations. It is crucial to ensure equitable acces to support mechanisms for students to fully benefit from EMI programmes (Dimova et al., 2015). Research thus foregrounds the importance of considering contextual factors in EMI. The nature f th institution, the linguistic and cultural diverst of the student body, and the quality of (language) instruction can significantly influence the impact of EMI on cosmopolitan orientations. To measure cosmopolitan orientation, Leung et al. (2015) developed the cosmopolitan orientation scale (cos), which encompasses the following three dimensions:

Dimension 1: cultural opennes - this rfers to cosmopolitan individuals being highly rceptive to other cultures and eager to learn through connecting to people and places beyond their local community.   
Dimension 2: global prosocialit - this rfers to the idea that cosmopolitan individuals are more likely to oppose ideologies of social dominance or inequality, and support basic human rights being applicable to all, and that local and foreign people are equally human.   
Dimension 3: respect for cultural diversity - cosmopolitan individuals identif, respect, and protect cultural differences, which are highlighted by processes such as globalisation, as it can facilitate differentiation of national cultures and affords active promotion or preservation of cultural differences.

Within the context of EMI, the concepts of globalisation and internationalisation are strong forces that can forge enhanced inte. gration and interconnectedness among people, and thus play a significant role in the growth of EMI programmes. Limited attention has, however, been paid to the role of cosmopolitanism in relation to globalisation and intenationalisation in general (Leung et al. 2015) and in I context, particlarly in terms of students attitudes toward acets used in EMI, which reflect linguistic and cultual diversity.

# 2.3. Motivation: instrumental and integrative orientations

Motivation in EMI in HE has received les attention than L2 motivation in education overall (Serna-Bermejo & Lasagabaster Herrarte, 2023). Most studies on student's motivation to enrol in EMI programmes categorise it as either an instrumental or integrative orientation, with orientation defined as an inclination, the underlying force directing the choice of the particular reason (Gardner, 2010, p. 16). Integrative orientation rfers to an individual's desire, willingnes, or ability to converse with other language communities, and instrumental orientation to the benefits (e.g. economic) of being proficient in and reasons for learning a language.

Research has revealed that students can shift from an instrumental orientation to an integrative orientation in relation to their motivation for enrolling in MI, although such orientations may not always be relevant in contexts where there are no choices between attending EMI programmes or those taught in the national language. Gao's (2008) longitudinal study found that mainland Chinese students motivation regarding English shifted from context-mediated instrumental reasons (e.g. leaning English for an exam) to more integrative reasons e.. incrase inteest i learning about dfferent cultues) ater transitioning to an EMI programme at a university in Hong Kong. This study thus highlights the possible transformative effct of EMI programmes on students motivation, expanding it beyond purely instrumental goals to encompasa broader integrative perspective. Moreover, Lei and Hu's (2014) used Gardner's (2004) Attitude/Motivation Test Battery (AMTB) to investgate Chinese EMI students' English learning and use and perceptions of EMI. The findings showed that ater one year of EMI courses, EMI students did not have more positive atitudes towards English learning and use compared to their non-EMI pers, which could be aributed to the short duration of enrolment in EMI and the lower quality of teaching in the EMI programme. Yuan et al.'s (2023) findings suggest, however, that improving students attitudes towards

English language learning can enhance their attitudes towards EMI and increase both integrative and instrumental motivation.

Furthermore, Hengsadeekul et al.'s (2014) study, for example, revealed that clasroom language anxiety negatively predicted students attitudes towards EMI, and that the academic programme in which they were enrolled also had an inluence. Sena-Bermejo and Lasagabaster Herrarte (2023) found that female students motivations were more related to the Ideal L2 Self (i. the vision the individual has of oneself as a proficient speaker in the L2"; Serna-Bermejo & Lasagabaster Herrarte, 2023, p. 238; se also L2 Motivational Self System, Dornyei, 2009) than those of male students, which may be due to female students demonstrating higher interest in language learning than males (se also Hengsadeekul et a., 2014; Macaro & Akincioglu, 2018). In contrast, male students expressed more Ought-to L2 Self reasons (Heras & Lasagabaster, 2015), which are related to \*attributes the student believes she or he ought-to possess o succeed, meet expectations, or avoid negative consequences (Sena-Bermejo & Lasagabaster Herrart, 2023 . 238). Other studies, however, have not found any gender differences (e.g. Lasagabaster, 2016).

In the context of the Universty of the Basque Country, Serna-Bermejo and Lasagabaster Herrte (2023) also explored local and Erasmus students motivations to enrol in EMI courses and potential nfluencing variables. Most students had Ideal L2 Self reasons, which were associated with personal preferences, envisioning the use of English in their future carers or studies. Erasmus students however, had more Ought-to Self reasons, likely due to their inability to speak Spanish or Basque, necesstating enrolment in EMI courses. It i also interesting to note that Rose et al. (2019) found no significant relationship between motivation (Ideal L2 self) and academic performance in an EMI course on usines taught at a universty in Japan. However, during interviews, students did link their performance and language learning motivation, possibly more related to instrumental rather than integrative reasons. Studies conducted in Turkey have also generall revealed instrumental orientations, with students mentioning that learning and studying in English would benefit her future careers (e.g. Kirkgoz, 2005). Nonetheless students also expressed an integrative motivation, driven by the desire to communicate and socialise with English-speaking individuals (Kirkgoz, 2005), which may reflect a strong cosmopolitan orientation aligned with the increasing internationalisation of HE.

Considering the possble interplay between cosmopolitan and motivation orientations and their influence on students' attitudes towards accents in EMI, we aim to explore what attitudes students attending a UAS in the Netherlands have towards the use of (a) Dutch-English accents and (b) standard English accents in the context of EMI, and whether the aforementioned factors constitute potential predictors. We measured cosmopolitan and motivation orientations using Leung et al.'s (2015) Cs (dimensions 1 and 3) and Garder's (2004) MTB, resectively. This study thus ffers an innovative pespective to the iterature as t focuses on aUAS and fls the gap in knowledge regarding the possible links between student' atitudes towards accents used in EMI in relation to their cosmopolitan and motivation orientations.

# 3. Methodology

# 3.1. Research design and context

To gain insights into students attitudes towards the use of Dutch-English and standard English accents in EMI and their potential predictors, this quantitativexploratory study employed an online questionnaire. This study was conducted within the context of NHL Stenden Universt of Applied Sciences in the north of the Netherlands, which offers higher professional education (Dutch: hoger beroepsonderwijs) through 14 associate degre, 68 bachelor's, and 8 master's programmes, of which 20 are English-taught, 67 Dutchtaught, and 3 Dutch- and English-taught (NHL Stenden Hogeschool, n.d.). In the academic year 2021/22, there were 2498 members of staff, and 24,738 students, of whom 21,924 were bachelor's students, 1878 associate degree students, and936 master's students.fal students, $1 2 \%$ were international, representing over 90 nationalities (NHL Stenden Hogeschool, 2022).

# 3.2. Instrument and procedure

For this study, we developed an online questionnaire consisting of six sections and 34 items in total. Section 1 (Cronbach's $\alpha = 0 . 7 2$ consisted of i items (se Table 2) that focused on attitudes towards Dutch-English accents. Respondents had to rate the items on a 6- point Likert scale ( ${ \bf \nabla } ^ { 1 = }$ strongly disagree, $2 =$ moderately disagree, $3 =$ slightly disagree, $4 =$ slightly agree, ${ 5 = }$ moderately agree, $6 =$ strongly agree). Section 2 (Cronbach's $\mathfrak { a } = 0 . 8 6$ ) consisted of six items (see Table 3) that focused on attitudes towards standard English accents, which were to be rated on the same 6-point Likert scale used in Section 1 of the questionnaire. Items in both sections were developed based on (data from) previous studies (Edwards, 2016; Jensen & Thogersen, 2011; van der Hoeven & Duarte, 2022).

Section 3 consisted of 10 items that aimed to measure students' cosmopolitan orientation, based on Leung et al.'s (2015) COs. This section consisted of items that loaded onto two factors from the COs, namely cultural openness five items; Cronbach's ${ \alpha } = 0 . 8 9$ , with factor loadings from 0.66 t 0.908; example item:  enjoy learning more about different cultures in the world) and repectfor cultl diversity (five items; Cronbach's $\alpha = 0 . 7 7$ , with factor loadings from 0.540 to 0.780; example item: I embrace cultural diversity"). These factors were chosen as they had been standardised in a previous study and can measure two theoreticall reated dimensions that underly individuals' cosmopolitan orientation with high internal consistency. Respondents had to rate the items on the same 6-point Likert scale used in Sections 1 and 2 of the questionnaire. It should be noted that Leung et al.s (2015) dimension of global prosociality (see Section 2.2) was not included in our questionnaire, since we did not onsider it relevant for this study. Examples items regarding global prosociality from the COs are I want to help the unfortunate ones even if they are from other countries" and "I would serve the

world community by helping human being".

To measure atitudes towards studying in English in terms of instrumental and integrative motivation, Section 4 consisted of five items adapted from Gardner's (2004) AMTB, three for integrative motivation (Cronbach's $\alpha = . 8 9$ , with factor loadings from 0.882 to 0.919; example item: "Studying in English can be important for students because it wil alow them to meet and converse with more and varied people') and two for instrumental motivation (Cronbach's $\alpha = 0 . 7 3$ , with factor loadings 0.838 and 0.925; example item: "Studying in English can be important for students because they will need it for their future career").

Section 5 of the questionnaire consisted of three questions desined to collect data on students language backgrounds, specifically (1) how many languages they have learnt, and their elfreported proficiency in (2) Dutch and (3) English based on a 5-point Likert scale ( ${ \bf \nabla } ^ { 1 } =$ not at all, $2 =$ not good, ${ \boldsymbol { 3 } } =$ sufficient, $4 = g o o d$ and $5 = \nu e r y g o o d )$ . Section 6, which consisted of five questions, collected general background information on the students, such as their age and gender.

Using Qualtrics (htps://www.qualrics.om/), the questionnaire was distributed via email to students following a programme in six main fields of study at the participating UAS between February and March 2021. International student respondents completed the questionnaire in English and home students in Dutch. Al students gave their informed consent to participate in this study and data were treated anonymously and confidentially.

# 3.3. Respondents and sampling strategy

Recruited using convenience sampling (Buchstaller & Khattab, 2014),1225 students attending the same UAS in the Netherlands participated in this study; we collected 2229 responses but 1004 were excluded due to incompleteness Of all students, 905 were home (i.e. Dutch) students $3 . 7 \%$ of the total student population at the UAS) and 320 were international students ( $_ { 1 . 3 \% }$ of the total student population, and $1 0 . 8 \%$ of the international student population). The average age of respondents was 24.65 ( $S D = 8 . 9 4 $ $\operatorname* { m i n } = 1 7$ , max $= 8 3 \mathrm { \cdot }$ . There were 487 $( 3 9 . 8 \% )$ respondents who identified as male and 738 $( 6 0 . 2 \% )$ as female.

All students who were invited to complete the questionnaire were enrolled in EMI bachelor's programmes in one of the following six main fields of study: (1) busines (e.g. commerce & international business), (2) social work and care, (3) Thorbecke Academy e.g. European studies and law), (4) ICT and creative technologies, (5) education (teacher training for primary and secondary education), and (6) hospitality, leisure, and tourism. An overview of respondents' background information by field of study and by student group (i.e ome or intenational i presented in Table 1. It should be noted that this sample is not representative f the broader populationof those studying at other UAS in the Netherlands, and those enrolle in other fields of study at the same UAS, which were not included due to lower student numbers or there being few or no English-taught programmes.

# 3.4. Data analysis

Quantitative questionnaire data were analysed in IBM sPS version 29 (htps://www.ibm.com/products/sps-statistics), before which reversed items were recoded. To answer RQ1, descriptive statisics were first calculated to determine the atitudes towards Dutch-English and standard English acents (i.e. means for each item displayed in Tables 2 and 3, and overal means based on these items) and overall cosmopolitan and motivation orientations (for each factor measured) of the two student groups (i.e. home and international). Inferential statistical tests were subsequently performed to check for differences between the student groups. To determine whether there were significant differences in attitudes between the student groups, a two-way mixed AnOVA was run. Welch's independent samples t-tests were also performed to investigate differences in cosmopolitan and motivation orientations between the student groups.

Table 1 Overview of respondents' background information by field of study and overall.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Business (n = 266)</td><td>Education (n = 275)</td><td>HLT (n = 285)</td><td>ICT (n = 200)</td><td>Thorbecke (n = 88)</td><td>SWC (n = 111)</td><td>Overall (N = 1225)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">Student group</td></tr><tr><td>Home</td><td>171</td><td>226</td><td>141</td><td>176</td><td>82</td><td>109</td><td>905</td></tr><tr><td> International</td><td>95</td><td>49</td><td>144</td><td>24</td><td>6</td><td>2</td><td>320</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">Age</td></tr><tr><td>Mean (SD)</td><td>22.70 (5.97)</td><td>30.45 (12.62)</td><td>21.63 (3.83)</td><td>22.95 (7.22)</td><td>21.35 (2.92)</td><td>28.35 (11.10)</td><td>24.65 (8.94)</td></tr><tr><td>Min-max</td><td>17-83</td><td>17-64</td><td>17-45</td><td>17-59</td><td>17-31</td><td>17-58</td><td>17-83</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">Gender</td></tr><tr><td>Male </td><td>116</td><td>81</td><td>77.</td><td>145</td><td>48</td><td>18</td><td>487</td></tr><tr><td>Female</td><td>150</td><td>194</td><td>208</td><td>55</td><td>40</td><td>93</td><td>738</td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">Average English proficiency (speaking and listening)</td></tr><tr><td>Home (M, SD)</td><td>4.00 (.82)</td><td>3.96 (.83)</td><td>4.23 (.69)</td><td>4.11 (.73)</td><td>4.12 (.79)</td><td>3.84 (.86)</td><td>4.04 (.80)</td></tr><tr><td>International (M,</td><td>4.66 (.45)</td><td>4.74 (.40)</td><td>4.70 (.48)</td><td>4.52 (.65)</td><td>4.75 (.27)</td><td>5.00 (.00)</td><td>4.69 (.47)</td></tr><tr><td>SD) Overall (M, SD)</td><td>4.24 (.78)</td><td>4.11 (.83)</td><td>4.47 (.64)</td><td>4.16 (.73)</td><td>4.16 (.78)</td><td>3.86 (.87)</td><td>4.21 (.78)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. HLT: Hoptalit, Leisure & Tourism. swc: Social Work & Care. Student group is ased on whether they completed the qestionnaire in Dutch (home) or English (international).

Table 2 Students' attitudes towards Dutch-English accents by student group ${ } ^ { \mathrm { T } = }$ strongly disagree, $6 =$ strongly agree).   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">Item</td><td colspan="4">Student group</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Home</td><td colspan="2">International</td></tr><tr><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>1. Dutch-English accents are a sign of bad English.a.</td><td>4.29</td><td>1.32</td><td>4.78</td><td>1.21</td></tr><tr><td>2. Dutch-English accents annoy me.a</td><td>3.99</td><td>1.52</td><td>4.45</td><td>1.49</td></tr><tr><td>3. Dutch-English accents reflect a multicultural identity.</td><td>3.75</td><td>1.32</td><td>4.24</td><td>1.18</td></tr><tr><td>4. Dutch English should be recognised as a new non-native speaker standard variety of English (comparable to e.g. African</td><td>2.10</td><td>1.34</td><td>2.35</td><td>1.28</td></tr><tr><td>American English). 5. Having a Dutch-English accent negatively affects a teacher&#x27;s credibility.a</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6. I feel distracted by others&#x27; Dutch-English accents during class hours.a</td><td>3.88 4.01</td><td>1.49 1.51</td><td>4.51 4.55</td><td>1.35 1.41</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. a Reverse-coded items.

Table 3 Students' attitudes towards standard English accents by student group ${ \mathrm { ~  ~ \cdot ~ } } { \mathrm { ~  ~ \cdot ~ } } { \mathrm { ~  ~ \cdot ~ } }$ strongly disagree, $6 =$ strongly agree).   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">Item</td><td colspan="4">Student group</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Home</td><td colspan="2">International</td></tr><tr><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>1. Having a standard English accent is a sign of good linguistic competence.</td><td>3.77</td><td>1.43</td><td>4.05</td><td>1.28</td></tr><tr><td>2. I love standard English accents (such as British or American English).</td><td>4.43</td><td>1.29</td><td>4.73</td><td>1.14</td></tr><tr><td>3. Standard English accents (such as British or American English) reflect a higher social status.</td><td>2.78</td><td>1.38</td><td>2.44</td><td>1.25</td></tr><tr><td>4. If I could, I would want to have a standard accent in English (such as British or American English).</td><td>4.38</td><td>1.48</td><td>4.55</td><td>1.44</td></tr><tr><td>5. I like hearing standard English being spoken (such as British or American English).</td><td>4.51</td><td>1.27</td><td>4.96</td><td>1.03</td></tr><tr><td>6. I like speaking standard English (such as British or American English).</td><td>4.03</td><td>1.42</td><td>4.90</td><td>1.04</td></tr></table></body></html>

To answer RQ2, multiple regressions were performed to establish which of the following variables predicted attitudes towards Dutch-English accents and standard English accents: cosmopolitan orientation, motivation orientation, self-reported English proficiency (average of speaking and listening), field of study, student group (i.e. home or international student), age, and gender. $\mathsf { A } p$ value of $\leq . 0 5$ was considered statistically significant in this study.

# 4. Results

4.1. Students' attitudes towards Dutch-English and standard English accents in English-medium instruction

The results regarding students' attitudes towards Dutch-English accents indicated that the highest mean for both home (4.29) and international (4.78) students was for item 1 (se Table 2). Both groups of students perceived that having a Dutch-English accent does not necerily mean that th paker has bad English, thus reflcting slightly postive ttitudes. or both groups of tdents, the owest mean was for item 4 (2.10 and 2.35, respectively), implying that students do not think Dutch English should be recognised as a new non-native standard variety of English, which reflects negative attitudes.

Regarding students' attitudes towards standard English accents, the highest mean for both groups of students was for item 5 (4.51 and 4.96, respectively; see Table 3), suggesting that the students like to hear standard English accents and thus reflecting positive attitudes. The lowest mean for both groups of students was for item 3 (2.78 and 2.44, respectively), which indicated that students do not perceive individuals with a standard English accent as having a higher social status.

A two-way mixed AnOVA was conducted to investigate the effect of student group i.e. home student or international student) on attitudes towards different accent types (i.. Dutch-English and standard English accents) use in MI, as wellas the interaction effect between these factors. Significant main effects of both accent type and student group were found, $F ( 1 , 1 2 2 3 ) = 1 8 . 2 4 $ $p < . 0 0 1$ , with a small effect size $( \eta _ { p } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 1 5 )$ , and $F ( 1 , 1 2 2 3 ) = 1 2 1 . 0 2 , p < . 0 0 1$ with a medium effect size $( \eta _ { p } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 9 0 )$ , respectively. Moreover, there was no significant interaction effect between accent type and student group, $F ( 1 , 1 2 2 3 ) = 3 . 4 3 , p = . 0 6 4 .$ The effect size was very small, $\eta _ { p } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 3$

Table 4 Descriptive statistics for attitudes towards Dutch-English and standard English accents by student group ${ \bf \nabla } \cdot { \bf 1 } =$ very negative, $6 = \nu e r y$ positive).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Student group</td><td>Dutch-English accents (M, SD)</td><td>Standard English accents (M, SD)</td></tr><tr><td>Home (n = 905)</td><td>3.67 (.87)</td><td>3.98 (1.08)</td></tr><tr><td> International (n = 320)</td><td>4.15 (.91)</td><td>4.27 (.88)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Pairwise comparisons between the estimated marginal means, using the Bonferroni correction, revealed that home students had significantly more negative attitudes towards Dutch-English accents than international students, $F ( 1 , 1 2 2 3 ) = 6 8 . 3 0$ $p < . 0 0 1$ $9 5 \%$ CI [-0.59, -0.37], as well as significantly more negative attitudes towards standard English accents, $F ( 1 , 1 2 2 3 ) = 1 8 . 1 1 , p < . 0 0 1$ $9 5 \%$ CI [-0.42, $- 0 . 1 5 ]$ . The effect sizes were small and very small, $\eta _ { p } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 5 4$ and $\eta _ { p } ^ { 2 } = 0 . { \bar { 0 1 5 } }$ , respectively. The descriptive statistics for attitudes towards Dutch-English and standard English accents by student group are displayed in Table 4.

Further pairwise comparisons between the estimated marginal means, which were calculated based on the items in Tables 2 and 3, indicated that the attitudes of all students towards Dutch-English accents $\mathbf { \mathcal { M } } = 3 . 9 1$ $S E = 0 . 0 3$ ) were significantly lower than towards standard English accents $( M = 4 . 1 3$ $S E = 0 . 0 3 4 \mathrm { \AA }$ $F ( 1 , 1 2 2 3 ) = 1 8 . 2 4 $ $p < . 0 0 1$ $9 5 \%$ CI [-0.32, $- 0 . 1 2 ]$

# 4.2. Predictors of students' attitudes towards accents in English-medium instruction

Multiple regressions were performed to determine which of the following variables predicted students' attitudes towards DutchEnglish and standard English accents: cosmopolitan orientation, motivation orientation, self-reported English proficiency (average of speaking and listening), field of study, student group (i.e. home or intenational student), age, and gender. It i first, however, necessary to have an insight into home and international students cosmopolitan and motivation orientations, which were as follows.

Cosmopolitan orientation: Welch's independent samples tests revealed that, on average, home students had a lower cosmopolitan orientation in terms of openness to other cultures (COs Factor 1; $M = 4 . 7 2$ $S D = 1 . 0 6 \mathrm { \Omega }$ and respect for cultural diversity (COS Factor 2; $M = 4 . 7 6$ $S D = 0 . 8 3 \mathrm { \Omega }$ than international students (Factor $1 \colon M = 5 . 5 2$ $S D = 0 . 5 8$ ; Factor 2 $\therefore M = 5 . 2 7$ $S D = 0 . 6 0 \mathrm { \Omega }$ These differences were significant, $t ( 1 0 1 5 . 7 8 ) = - 1 6 . 7 2 , p < . 0 0 1$ $9 5 \%$ CI [-0.90, $- 0 . 7 1 ]$ , and $t ( 7 6 5 . 8 7 ) = - 1 1 . 8 1 , p < . 0 0 1$ $9 5 \%$ CI [-0.60, $- 0 . 4 3 ]$ , respectively. The effect sizes were large, $d = 0 . 9 6$ and $d = 0 . 7 7$ , respectively. Motivation orientation: Welch's independent samples t-tests revealed that, on average, home students had lower integrative motivation $( M = 4 . 3 5$ $S D = 1 . 1 4 _ { . }$ ) but higher instrumental motivation $( M = 4 . 0 8$ $S D = 1 . 2 1 { \AA }$ ) than international students (Integrative: $M = 5 . 3 8$ $S D = 0 . 5 4$ ; Instrumental: $M = 3 . 6 8$ $S D = 1 . 3 0 $ . These differences were significant, $t ( 1 1 2 7 . 9 2 ) = - 2 1 . 1 1 , p <$ .001, $9 5 \%$ CI [-1.12, -0.93], and $t ( 5 2 7 . 4 0 ) = 4 . 8 6$ $p < . 0 0 1$ $9 5 \%$ CI [0.24, 0.57], respectively. The effect sizes were large, $d = 1 . 0 2$ and $d = 1 . 2 4$ , respectively.

A significant regression equation was found for students' attitudes towards Dutch-English accents $( R ^ { 2 } = 0 . 1 1 4 , F ( 9 , 1 2 1 5 ) = 1 7 . 3 9 ,$ $p < . 0 0 1 )$ , which explained $1 1 . 4 \%$ of the variance in attitudes. The full model for attitudes towards Dutch-English accents, which contained all variables, revealed that intrumental motivation, COS Factor 2 (respect for cultural diversty), self-reported English proficiency, field of study, and student group (home or international) were signficant predictor of students' attitudes, whereas COS Factor 1 (cultural openness), itegrative motivation, age, and gender were not (see Table 5). The positive ssociations between COS Factor 2,student group, and atitudes towards Dutch-English accents indicated that atitudes towards Dutch-English accents became more positive as respect for cultural diversity increased (0.116 points for each unit of SD increase in COS Factor 2) and if a student belonged to the international group (increase of 0.523 points). In contrast, there were negative associations between instrumental motivation, self-rorted English proficiency, fild of tudy, and attitudes towards Dutch-English accets. Thee reuls suggest that as instrumental motivation and proficiency increased, and when students were not erolled in a busines programme (eference group), the attitudes were more negative. Students' attitudes decreased by 0.085 points for each unit of SD increas on the instrumental motivation scale, by 0.195 for proficiency, and by 0.058 for field of study.

Regarding students' attitudes towards standard English accents, a significant regression equation was also found $\textstyle \mathbf { R } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 1 9 3$ , F(9, $1 2 1 5 ) = 3 2 . 2 2$ A $p < . 0 0 1 \ r _ { \cdot }$ , which explained $1 9 . 3 \%$ of the variance in attitudes. The full model, which contained all variables, revealed that Cos Factor 1 (cultural openness), integrative and instrumental motivation, self-reported English proficiency, age, and gender were significant predictors, whereas cos Factor 2 (respect for cultural diversity) field of study, and student group were not (see Table 6). There were positive associations between cos Factor 1, integrative and instrumental motivation, slf-reported English proficiency, gender, and attitudes towards standard English accents. As Cs Factor 1, integrative motivation, intrmental motivation, and self-reported English proficiency increased, atitudes became more positive, with increases of 0.093, 0.223, 0.101, and 0.139 points, respectively. Moreover, identifying as female implied more positive attitudes, with an incrse of 0.197 points ferece group $=$ males). In contras, the negative association between age and attitudes towards standard English accents suggests that as age increased, the more negative the attitudes (decrease of .009 points).

Table 5 Multiple regressions - students' attitudes towards Dutch-English accents.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Full model</td><td>B</td><td>Std. error</td><td>t</td><td>Sig.</td></tr><tr><td>(Constant)</td><td>4.000</td><td>.211</td><td>18.97</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr><tr><td>COS Factor 1: cultural openness</td><td>.011</td><td>.033</td><td>.33</td><td>.740</td></tr><tr><td>COS Factor 2: respect for cultural diversity</td><td>.116</td><td>.039</td><td>2.95</td><td>.003</td></tr><tr><td> Integrative motivation</td><td>.010</td><td>.031</td><td>.33</td><td>.739</td></tr><tr><td> Instrumental motivation</td><td>.085</td><td>.024</td><td>3.47</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr><tr><td>Self-reported English proficiency</td><td>.195</td><td>.036</td><td>5.36</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr><tr><td>Field of study</td><td>.058</td><td>.013</td><td>4.37</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr><tr><td>Student group</td><td>.523</td><td>.070</td><td>7.44</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr><tr><td>Age</td><td>.000</td><td>.003</td><td>.050</td><td>.960</td></tr><tr><td>Gender</td><td>-.095</td><td>.051</td><td>1.87</td><td>.062</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 Multiple regressions - students' attitudes towards standard English accents.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Full model</td><td>B</td><td>Std. error</td><td>t</td><td>Sig.</td></tr><tr><td>(Constant)</td><td>1.734</td><td>.231</td><td>7.52</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr><tr><td>COS Factor 1: cultural openness</td><td>.093</td><td>.036</td><td>2.61</td><td>.009</td></tr><tr><td>COS Factor 2: respect for cultural diversity</td><td>.041</td><td>.043</td><td>.97</td><td>.339</td></tr><tr><td> Integrative motivation</td><td>.223</td><td>.034</td><td>6.52</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr><tr><td> Instrumental motivation</td><td>.101</td><td>.027</td><td>3.77</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr><tr><td>Self-reported English proficiency.</td><td>.139</td><td>.040</td><td>3.50</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr><tr><td>Field of study</td><td>.016</td><td>.015</td><td>1.12</td><td>.264</td></tr><tr><td>Student group</td><td>.087</td><td>.077</td><td>1.13</td><td>.258</td></tr><tr><td>Age</td><td>.009</td><td>.003</td><td>2.93</td><td>.003</td></tr><tr><td>Gender</td><td>.197</td><td>.056</td><td>3.53</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 5. Discussion

This study aimed to explore students attitudes towards the use of Dutch-English and standard English accents in EMI and identify potential predictors of these attitudes. We specificall focused on affctive variables, namely students' cosmopolitan and motivation orientations, as wellas student group (i.e. home or international student). To answer our research questions, we administered an online questionnaire to 1225 students enrolle in EMI programmes a a UAS in the Netherlands. In thefollowing sub-sections, the main results for each research question are discussed. When interpreting these findings, it should be noted that in the case of the international students, completing the questionnaire in a language other than their L1 (i. English) may have resulted in them reporting more intensemotions on the rating scales compared to the Dutch students who completed the questionnaire in their 1 this difference in language used could therefore introduce bias in the results (see De Langhe et al., 2011, for anchor contraction effect).

5.1. Students' atitudes towards Dutch-English and standard English accents in English-medium instruction

Our first research question explored students' atitudes towards the use of Dutch-English and standard English accents in EMI. Both home and international students did not seem to consider Dutch-English accents as a sign of bad English but had more positive at. titudes towards hearing standard English accents. However, these positive atitudes did not necessarily imply associating speakers with standard accents as having a higher social status. These results confirm previous research indicating the presence of native speaker ideologies in EMI (Jenkins, 2005; van der Hoeven & Duarte, 2022), which, as found in our results, can manifest as negative attitudes towards lecturers NNE accents, and, in other research, as a preference for monolingual teaching and learning approaches (Duarte & van der Ploeg, 2019). Such atitudes have negative implications for both lecturers and students and contradict the goals of diversity, inclusion, and global citizenship in HE institutions (Freire Oliveira Piccin & Finardi, 2019).

While previous research has highlighted the advantages of EMI for students and their overall positive atitudes towards its implementation (Kim et al., 2014; Yuan et al., 2021), students atitudes towards and encounters with lecturers' accents within EMI can pose considerable challenges for students in terms of comprehension and content acquisition (Dalton-Puffer e l., 1997; Hendriks et al., 2016). Additionally, students may also evaluate lecturers performance considering their accents. Yet, there has been limited focus on differences in attitudes towards NNE accents within EMI, between home and intenational students. Our results address this gap and thus make an important contribution to future EMI policies by revealing that home students had significantly more negative attitudes towards Dutch-English accents than international students. The fact that the difference between home and international students was large suggests that home students attitudes towards NE accents may be a critical ssue to addres when implementing EMI programmes, not only in the Netherlands but aso in other national contexts. It should, however, be noted that accent strength can play a role in attitudes towards and evaluations of accents (e.g. Dragojevic e al., 2017; Hendriks et al., 2018). Since accent strength was not covered in this study, it is not possible to interpret our findings considering what acent strengths respondents had in mind when completing the questionnaire. Tackling feelings of vicarious shame in home students (i..judging lecturers with a similar language background more harshly due to fear of them sounding unprofessonal; Hendriks et al., 2018; Hendriks et al., 2021) and relating these explicitly to lecturers' accents would nevertheless be a useful policy to develop within EMI contexts. Moreover, future EMI policies should encourage reflection among home students regarding their eelings of inverse solidarity towards Dutch-English accents, exploring why students istance themselves from speakers with their L1 if they percive their accent as too marked (Hen. driks & van Meurs, 2022; van den Doel & Quene, 2013), and what they consider a weak or strong accent.

# 5.2. Predictors of students' attitudes towards accents in English-medium instruction

Our second research question aimed to identify key predictors of students attitudes towards accents in EMI. We mainly focused on affective variables, namely motivation and cosmopolitan orientations of students, as well as student group (i.e. home vs. intenational student). We also included the following aditional variables: slf-reported English proficiency, field of study, age, and gender. With overall a efft iz theruls showdtht home stdnts hd  owr comopolitn rietio, indcating es opnes to other cultures and respect for cultural diversity, compared to international students. Home students also had lower integrative motivation but higher instrumental motivation for attending EMI programmes than international students, suggesting they chose English-taught programmes for practical reasons.

As students' motivation orientations can play a key role in EMI (Gardner, 2010; Rose et al., 2019; Yuan et al., 2023), under the assumption that there i a choice between atending a programme taught in English or the national language, and our resuls show that they are likely stongly interwoven with students' cosmopolitan orientations, it i mperative that MI police explore with students - and home students in particular - what their motivations to enrol in EMI programmes are and whether these motivations foster meaningful echanges and an inclusive atitude towards linguistc and cultural diversty, including different accents. Developing high cosmopolitan orientations implies being able to interact with diverse cultures and perspectives, thus fostering global awarenes, intercultural competence, and a cosmopolitan mindset and should therefore be promoted in all students attending EMI. As such, EMI policies should thus address home students motivation and cosmopolitan orientations as, in this study, there were notable differences between home and international students that cannot be automatically compensated for by the presence of an international student body.

Furthermore, attitudes towards Dutch-English accents were more positive among respondents with a high cosmopolitan orienta tion, among international students, and among those who already had positive atitudes towards Dutch-English acents. In turn, attitudes towards Dutch-English accents were negatively associated with students increased instrumental motivation and slf-reported English proficiency, and enrolment in a non-business programme. verall, these results align with previous rearch on acentednes, indicating a general preference for standard and native-like pronunciation (Fuertes et al., 2012; Giles & Watson, 2013; Mai & Hoff mann, 2014). However, the findings once again not only highlight differences between home and international students, but also among students with higher or lower respect for cultural diversty and self-reported English proficiency. Furthermore, motivation orientation and field of study seemed to play a role in explaining the variance in attitudes towards Dutch-English accents.

Our results further suggest that businesstudies, which have experienced a significant growth in EMI programmes and are more language-dependent (Wachter & Maiworm, 2014), and thus more challenging from a (foreign) language perspective, may imply slightly different accent attitudes i students. The higher growth and linguistc demands of busines studies, along with the greater diversity in both students and stff and their English accents, could explain these indings. This emphasise the need for HE institutions to develop tailored EMI policie for diffrent fields f study, as previously suggested by Hengsadeekul et al. (2014), in addition to developing different EMI policies for home and international students.

Institutions should also explicitly discuss motivations for attending EMI programmes, expanding beyond instrumental reasons to include the desire for meaningful intercultural encounters and the development of cosmopolitan orientations in students. Longitudinal research suggests that attending EMI may cause students to shift from an instrumental to more integrative orientations (Gao, 2008). However, this may not occur implicitly and may depend on factors such as the number of international students and staff in the respective field of study, the quality of English teaching (Lei & Hu, 2014), and the extent to which the educational programme has implemented targeted interventions that facilitat reflection on the diferent types of motivation and cosmopolitan orientations.

In contexts where there is no choice between attending an EMI programme or one in a national language, the results of our study may still be relevant. For instance, icreasing students' awareness of the different types of NNE accents they may encounter during their academic, personal, or professional lives may help reduce bia or negativeatitudes towards such accents. In turn, this may also contribute to developing cosmopolitan mindsets where students become more open to linguistic and cultural diverst, as wellas foster cross-cultural communication skills and global citizenship (e.g. van Parijs, 2011).

Regarding students' attitudes towards standard English accents, the key positive predictors we found were integrative and instrumental motivation and self-reported English proficiency. Additionall, identifying as female implied having more positive attitudes, while attitudes became more negative as age increased. These results rinforce the need for EMI programmes to explore students motivations to enrol in an English-taught programmes more explicitly, with the aim of expanding from instrumental towards more integrative motivations. Moreover, our results provide a further exploration of the gender differences found in EMI by Heng. sadeekul t al. (2014), Macaro and Akincioglu (2018), and Serna-Bermejo and Lasagabaster Herrarte (2023) in whose studies female students demonstrated higher interest in language learning than males and held more positive atitudes towards EMI and English language learning. Our resuls showed that female students are also considerably more positive towards standard English accents than Dutch-English accents, as well as compared to male students. Females positive atitudes towards EMI and language learning may therefore e specifically directd towards standard-like varietie of English, rather than towards NNE aents and inguistic diversity in general. Addressing gender differences i atitudes towards accents could therefore also be an important consideration for future EMI policies.

# 6. Conclusion

The findings of this study suggest that while students generally preferred standard English accents (Sahan et al., 202), those with higher cosmopolitan orientations also held more positive atitudes towards Dutch-English accents (Leung et al., 2015; Skrbis et al. 2004). Based on these results, the main implication is that EMI policies should be tailored to the following groups: home and international students; genders; students from different fields of study, but especially those not studying business; and younger and older students (e.g. bachelor's and master's students). Additionall, mapping students' cosmopolitan and motivation orientations throughout their studies (in line with Gao, 2008) and adjusting policies accordingly may make students' EMI experiences more meaningful and more aligned with recent HE goals that aim to foster inclusion, civic engagement, and global citizenship (Freire

# Oliveira Piccin & Finardi, 2019).

Despite the potential contributions of this study to EMI reearch, its limitations must also be acknowledged when interpreting the findings. I should first be noted that this study was conducted at only one UAS in the Netherlands, with bachelor's students only, and used convenience sampling, limiting the generalisabilit f the findings to students atending other (Dutch) UAS or those in other nonAnglophone contexts. There was also an imbalance within our sample, with, for instance, some fields of study being more represented than others. Furthermore, the cross-ctional deig of this study dos not acount for possible changes in students attitudes over time, Which may be influenced by their EMI experience (as found in Gao, 2008), English proficiency development, and changes in motivation and cosmopolitan orientations, among other factors. Moreover, the formulation of the items designed to measure attitudes towards Dutch-English and standard English accents differed; thus, future studies should use standardise items that re formulated in a similar way to confirm our results. Lastly, response bias was also a potential issue for the following reasons: (1) students with particularly positive or negative perceptions of accents used in EMI may have been more willing to participate in this study; and (2) the international students completed the questionnaire in English(i.e a language that isnot their 1), which may have resulted in them reporting more intense emotions on the rating scales used compared to Dutch students who completed the questionnaire in their L1.

In light of the findings and limitations of this study, further research should employ longitudinal and mixed-methods designs (e.g. including classoom observations) to track changes in atitudes towards accents in EMI, and motivation and cosmopolitan orientations, also considering the potential effct f transitioning from a bachelor's to a master's programme. Moreover, mapping furthr differences between fields of study, and comparing differences between UAS and research universties across various countries may inform the development of future EMI polices. Considering aditional variables such as English language learning experience, exposure todifferent accents and acent strengths among staff and students in EMI programmes, and whether students have lived or spent an extended period of time in an Anglophone country may also offer valuable insights for future EMI research on attitudes towards accents. Further studies should also explore whether language learning through EMI programmes and the development of cosmopolitan mindsets are intentional or incidental, considering the options available to students in terms of attending an EMI programme or a programme taught in the national language.

Due to the rising number of NNE lecturers and students in EMI, our study makes a useful contribution to the growing body of research on EMI (Dafouz & Smit, 202; Graham et a. 2021; Kim et al., 2017; van der Hoeven & Duarte, 2022; Wilkinson & Gabriels 2021) since it (a) focused on the role of affective variables in students' attitudes towards accents, namely cosmopolitan and moti. vations orientations, (b) was conducted at a UAS, which are generally under-researched in EMI studies, and (c) had a considerably large sample of home and international students from various fields of study. Our study thus addresses a gap in EMI research, particularly regarding the possible roles of cosmopolitan and motivation orientations, in relation to globalisation and international. isation (Leung et al., 2015), in home and intenational students atitdes towards different accents in EMI, which reflect the growing linguistic and cultural diversity in HE.

# Author statements

Charlie Robinson-Jones: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Validation, Formal Analysis, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing. Joana Duarte: Validation, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition. Dymphi van der Hoeven: Con. ceptualisation, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing, Project administration.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

# References

Arkn, . 015)..ig   t a .  .), medi inction in Eope ighe ction: ngis in oe (l. 3 p. 177-200. De Gter Mouton. hp://do.og/10.1515/9781614515272-010   
Baker, W.  Her J. 2019).  a nt the langg lce: mparn migal pme in rope and Asi. nmatio Jounl f Apled Linguistics, 29(1), 78-94. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijal.12246   
Barrios,      it f Development, 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2020.1759610   
Barm    i. /0.500 9781350091139   
Boels, J, f,  017.  e ls    he   c st sh er t  ( u. https://www.tubantia.nl/home/docenten-ut-hebbenengels-maar-net-under-the-knee\~va4c23235/ https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139013734   
Bukve, . 018. s tie n ish m tio e-  at  ivst. dc Jf gishes 172, 215-242. https://doi.org/10.35360/njes.439   
ues .   02  to  ioist  hiti acii  d hrsit f applied ciences. Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education. htps://doi.org/10.1080/03057925.2022.2108376   
Cel Br  .        . Retrieved   2, /relt-e-t-nerland   
Chan .6-i  h      , 50(2), 285-313. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.218   
Colman, J  (2006. ngish- tchg in ro higher in.  hg 391) 1-14 htp/./0.1017/0614480600320X   
Crle .,  Jai,  emr, J n th  201) is  hgeio -sh  P 1 Li revie. .Galla .,   gr -hi /is.g/g//0 view_FINAL.pdf   
Duz  t,  202.  miih e i tiv  of gsh o 1) 294. https://doi.org/10.1075/jemi.21018.daf   
Dan-Pfr  c  t  1997.    2 i in ri d e, 61 115-/./10.111 1467-971X.00052   
de ire 011is-a c th    it. o, 4132/i.g 10.1080/09500782.2011.574702   
de ong   t t.e publications/english-as-medium-of-instruction-in-higher-education-in-a-cross-r   
De Langhe    nd  r, J01). e  i   nt m h.  f rking Research, 48(2), 366-380. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.48.2.366   
Dimoa   05. s tn  g d e r ge, &C. Jse (.), Eish-m nin n  r o: gis   (. 3 . 317-324). Gtr o. h/.10.1517 781614515272-016   
yei   e, . o  i   . mr. https://doi.org/10.21832/9781847691293-003   
Dragjeic      i Monographs, 84(3), 385-405. https://doi.org/10.1080/03637751.2017.1322213   
urte, J. 02Th io f in ic io- he tive of  lg st.  n in Higher Education, 12(2), 367-389. https://doi.org/10.1515/cercles-2022-2058   
Duart, J., van der o,  019). lingl lectrer  gish me instction in the thrlan: The ky to plrinal arce  higer education? European Journal of Higher Education, 9(3), 268-284. https://doi.org/10.1080/21568235.2019.1602476   
Education First. (2022). EF English proficiency index (2022 edition). Retrieved April 10, 2023, from htts://ww.ef.com/wwen/epi/.   
a 6. n ho,  i .e    d. ia. https://doi.org/10.1075/veaw.g56   
vans  riso 01 he stt erie f s- hgr io in g o  an io 5, 147-162.t/oi.g 10.1080/09500782.2011.553287   
ar experience (pp. 1-11). Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137397478   
Freri  d, gh th ino (,7389. https://doi.org/10.21810/sfuer.v12i3.1015   
Fuere, r,    t,   s o t e f  as o  tio. European Journal of Social Psychology, 42(1), 120-133. https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.862   
Gao, . 2. hiig matil  m man h st n a gish md i iin n og g  n iqr. Studies in Higher Education, 33(5), 599-614. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075070802373107   
Garder, R C. (2004).tind/ivation est Bttey: ntmational A Rch Proect htp://ublish uwo.c/\~r//eglishamtb.df   
Gardner, R. C. (2010). Motivation and second language acquisition: The socio-educational model. Peter Lang.   
Giles, H., & Watson, B. M. (2013). The social mening of language, dialect and accent Inational perpectives on speech styles. Peter Lang.   
Gaa  l . 2021).  is s the m  isha a me ties o  t i .  9 rtie 102508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2021.102508   
Hdriks   022 f   iit 108 111/. rg/10.1016/j.system.2022.102849   
H   1  h     c . Applied Linguistics, 27(1), 44-66. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijal.12101   
Heriks   t, .   f  h h  e an perceptions of comprehensibility. Dutch Journal of Applied Linguistics, 5, 1-17. https://doi.org/10.1075/dujal.5.1.01hen   
Hedris, , er,   Rer,  018alin  r iv is h a d a f ffeent dere f ch-d n n-c ih of r in higher io.  of sh for  e, 34, 85. hp/i.org? 10.1016/j.jeap.2018.03.001 and non-native English students. Language Teaching Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168820983145   
Hegal,   o,1itioion    ish s in Educational Research, 66(Jan), 35-44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2014.02.001   
Heras,  ter015.     tie f      191) 08./. 10.1177/1362168814541736   
Hegh,    017i   th  f d g sic  talin niverty. nh .e   .), E m o h -iic   p. 259-279) (Multilingual Education; Vol. 21). Springer, Springer Nature. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-51976-0_14   
Hlgree  014sh id   cti.  . /.g/05/p.5   
Hugen, J . a, . 015.ish-md tio n o hgr io: heh  the th   a,  gen, C. ensen (Ed.) Vl 3 Engishm ntrctio in o higher etio nish in ro (Vol. 3 p. 116). e Guter Moon. hp./doi.org/ 10.1515/9781614515272-002   
Inbar-r i Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 23, 301-313. https:/doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2019.1652558   
Jekins, . 005. ming a ntil c ish tio he olf tcr ie d t.  Qrl, 9(, 5-543. https://doi.org/10.2307/3588493   
J r ,   r  01t n gek English Studies, 12(1), 87-112. https://doi.org/10.35360/njes.277   
J  .1   h t  e Lenguas para Fines Especificos, (22), 13-33. https://www.redalyc.org/articulo.oa?id=287023888002   
Km,E. G., w ., & Kim, J. (2017). Kn gner tdents tions of Egish-medm ntrction (EM an  us in  a. Jl f Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 38(2), 130-145. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2016.1177061   
Kim, J., Taa, ., & Choi, . (2014) Emeg re of Eish-med ctio in ko periesf r nd national stuts. ge and Intercultural Communication, 14(4), 441-459. https://doi.org/10.1080/14708477.2014.946038   
Kirkgoz,  5.i    t   1 1./ www.ills.org/index.nhn/ills/article/view/10/11 .ug+, u . Jensen (.), Esh-md tio in o hgei: is in e (l. 3 . 201-2.  Gter o. h/o.g/10.1515/ 9781614515272-011   
onkljk. 017         is? Laguge chce wth pic in Dch higer ctio. Rieed March19, 2023, from p/stakn/202-09/20170711-erkng-albeleidNederlands-en-of-Engels-web.pdf   
ta, i th f s ih,  d il i.o Education and Bilingualism, 23(3), 287-300. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2019.1637395   
sgastr 016oh mi e  ish i   i 13(3), 315-332. https://doi.org/10.1080/14790718.2015.1105806   
tonen  r . 201).hh glish sin  in, .ft (.), er i the new millenium. Helsinki University Language Centre Publications.   
Lei J.,  014 ish- nti eti i inh   sh m Aled Linguistics in Language Teaching, 52(2), 99-126. https:/doi.org/10.1515/iral-2014-0005   
Leng, AK-, h  & Tam, K. 015). Beng eiromentll reonsible opolitn oriention prects po-viontal bhaviors. Jo of Environmental Psychology, 43, 79-94. https://doi.org/10.1016/jjenvp.2015.05.011   
L    , i Review of Applied Linguistics, 44(2), 180-207. https://doi.org/10.1075/aral.20091.liu   
ao 01k t    d t   p   t ye as variables. Jounal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 39(3), 256-270. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2017.1367398   
Macro , rle ., P , A, J  d . (2018.  stmatic revie f Eish med intin  higer ion. g chg 51, 36-76. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444817000350   
Mai,  0 s i i e   e  41) 37-158. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jcps.2013.09.004   
Margi, B., & Voopija-Krstanovic, . (2015.2. Irocing EMI a a Crotian universt: a we bridge the gap etween global emerging trends and local challng. a  e . e (.) osh tio n n ighr tio ish n , . 4364) Gruyter Mouton. https://doi.org/10.1515/9781614515272-004   
Mira ., a    i -a  s  21) to  s t i medm intrctin in gineing Studie. p Jodl of Enneing tio, 46), 1043-1057. ps:/oi./10.1080/030437972021.1987392 Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/sibil.36.10mun   
u J ng  199. t it, a nit i th  f a. n 51) 73-97. https:/doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1995.tb00963.x   
NHL Stenden Hogeschool. (n.d.). Vind jouw opleiding [Find your programme].   
NHL Stenden gecho0l. (202). Jarverag NHL Stenden Hgcho0l 2021 [HL Stnden Universit f Aplied ciences Annual Rrt 2021]. htps:/ jaarverslag2021.nhlstenden.com/   
Richs,   . 202  in s nti , 2 27-37. /./01093/a01   
Roeel, J, chl, mm  t. (01 eg  gt on the ealtio of a kr: i mhn bhd otive lter  tie a j    , 813//1271747904   
oe   1i     , skills, and motivation. Studies in Higher Education, 45(11), 2149-2161. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2019.1590690   
han, y, is- tni   h   chg Research, 0(0). https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688211072632   
an  er Journal, 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1080/09571736.2020.1724185 Journal of Foreign Language Teaching and Learning, (40), 235-252. https://doi.org/10.30827/portalin.vi40.27025   
Sette, J., & Jenkins, J. (2005). State-of-the-art reiew articl. Lnguage Teaching, 38(1), 1-17 https/do.org/10.1017/s026144480500251X   
krbis, , dl, . d . 200.  in st l   ry. Tr, cty, 26) 115-136. https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276404047418   
Spe    . ,     le. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118784235.eelt0707   
ug .is  r t t  a nt ia Hong Kong. Language Culture and Currculum, 33(3), 258-273. https://doi.org/10.1080/07908318.2019.1695814   
ug .. 2.ih     i at in o    nge Planning, 23(3), 275-295. https://doi.org/10.1080/14664208.2021.1986299   
Tai,   th ishti   ti ysem, 113, Article 102959. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2022.102959   
nirt.     n    eh 1, 2023, from https://www.universiteitenvannederland.nl/f_c_internationale_studenten.html.   
an den Dl, , & Quee,  (203). The eomatie stdds of oean is. meg or eusive? gish rld- de, 31) 7798.htps:/oi.org. 10.1075/eww.34.1.04van   
an der He  are, J (2. m-ae mtie aalyisf ish-md nti the hrld he laag gl debate. Journal of English-Medium Instruction, 2(1), 50-78. https://doi.org/10.1075/jemi.21028.van   
an Parijs . 01. nsi jusice for ope d th wd. fd irit r. hp/i.rg0.1093/f/978099208876.001.00   
Veengi 018)ti  e o  .  i h19 23 /w. vereniginghogescholen.nl/kennisbank/thema-s-en-subthema-s/artikelen/internationalisation-at-universities-of-applied-sciences.   
acher, ., & Mawo, . 2014) gish-aht prme in on highertio The ste f pla in 2014. Lemmens Mdemb hp//ww. lemmens.de/dateien/medien/buecher-ebooks/aca/2014_english_taught.pdf   
Wikinson,  brils, (2021). lshizatiof ch highr io   icie d rti.  Wkno, arel d.), Englishization of higher education in Europe (pp. 237-258). Amsterdam University Press https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv21ptzkn.14   
Yuan   W  0      ish i s mixed methods study. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development. hps:/doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2023.2176506   
Yun   1).i  h n t  ii rien or foe? Language Teaching Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688211047179   
Yun  g  i, .i ikeria s tin n sh- nti  he . Language and Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/09500782.2022.2119862   
a  e 2) 200-216. https:/doi.org/10.1080/07908318.2021.1979576

C. Robinson-Jones et al.

Chare ti i a r s t is an a y an  p wk rcr t it    i i.  i n ty lg global citizenship education. ORCID iD: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6829-424X