# Writing in multi-party computer conferences and single authored assignments: Exploring the role of writer as thinker

Ann Hewings-, Caroline Coffin1

Centre for Language and Communications, Faculty of Education and Language Studies, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA, UK

# Abstract

The increasing use of computers to enable or replace face-to-face tutorial discussion groups in higher education is creating a new form of academic writing. This small-scale study of 43 students and three tutors identifies ways in which students present their opinions in a forum which allows greater time for reflection, but also creates a permanent record. The notion of collaborative learning in computer conferencing militates against taking a strong, possibly controversial, stance. Opinions are therefore hedged, or located in the peer discourse community rather than the individual. Through a corpus analysis of the use of the pronouns $I$ , we and $i t$ we identify ways in which student writers are representing themselves and their views in both computer conferences and in single-authored essays. A powerful authorial voice was often associated not with the individual $I .$ , but with the collective we. In their single-authored essays, students drew upon the consensual voice developed in the conference discussion to support their personal points of view. In both genres, students made use of impersonal $i t$ -clauses, but frequently preceded them by personal frames such as I think, thereby resisting the impersonal, but powerful, voice of much academic discourse. This paper contributes to our developing understanding of evolving student writing practices in disciplinary settings.

$©$ 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Computer conferencing; Pronouns; Disciplinary writing; Anticipatory it; Identity; English for academic purposes

# 1. Introduction

In this paper, we examine the use in written texts of I, we and impersonal $i t$ constructions (e.g. It is interesting to observe thaty) that can be indicative of a student’s role as thinker— engaging with the debates in their subject area. Previous studies of student academic writing (Coffin & Mayor, 2004; Harwood, 2003; Hewings & Coffin, 2002; Hyland 2002; Tang & John, 1999) have found that $I$ and we pronouns and impersonal $i t$ -clauses occur in places in discourse where writers give their views; that is, identify themselves with the opinions expressed or seek to attribute them less personally. This research investigates the writer as thinker in two contrasting media and genres—computer mediated discussions and traditional essays—in an applied discipline.

Studies to date on interaction in computer mediated student discussion sites have frequently drawn on research paradigms associated with educational technology and psychology (Joiner & Jones, 2003; Light, Nesbitt, Light, & Burns, 2000; Schellens & Valcke, 2006; Tolmie & Boyle, 2000). However, this paper brings a linguistic focus, highlighting the role of language in the construction of shared knowledge (Mercer, 1995; Wells, 1999). We analyse how students portray themselves as ‘thinkers’ in the relatively new pedagogical space of dialogic computer mediated discussions compared with traditional single-authored essays.

The data for this paper comes from an exploratory study of essays and writing in computer conferences on a master’s level course at the Open University (UK). The students and tutors were based in the United Kingdom and mainland Europe, and contributed to discussions at times convenient to them. Before outlining our methodology, data and findings, we review relevant research in applied linguistics on the rhetorical significance of the writer, particularly the ‘writer as thinker’ as signalled through the use of I, we and impersonal $i t$ -clauses.

# 2. The linguistic construction of the writer

There has been growing interest in the rhetorical role of the author in academic writing and what this can indicate about disciplinary discourses, genres and writer identity (Cadman, 1997; Cherry, 1998; Gragson & Selzer, 1990; Harwood, 2005; Hyland, 2000; Ivanicˇ , 1994; Ivanicˇ & Weldon, 1998; Lillis, 2001; Myers, 1989a). There is overall agreement that how writers choose to represent themselves in discourse is significant, reflecting the positioning of the writer vis-a\` -vis the reader, the discipline and the content. The choices open to writers, however, vary depending on the particular genre they are writing, which also reflects the type of readership envisaged and their relationship with that readership.

A number of researchers (Chang & Swales, 1999; Hyland, 2001; Kuo, 1999; Myers, 1989b) have examined pronouns, among other features, in published academic writing. Choice of pronouns in writing conveys information about the writer to the reader and about the writer’s relationship with the reader and to the propositional content of their writing. Myers (1989b), for example, draws on politeness theory (Brown & Levinson, 1987) to explain pronoun and other choices in scientific writing particularly with regard to the hedging of claims. Studies which have concentrated on pronoun use in student writing have often focused on speakers of English as a second language (L2). Tang and John (1999), for example, looked at the genre of the academic essay in the context of a Singaporean undergraduate student group. They constructed a typology of possible identities indicated through pronoun choices which they organised in terms of a cline of authorial presence. The least powerful authorial presence was associated with a lack of personal pronouns, or where pronouns were used only to signpost the discussion (‘‘Let us now look at some examplesy’’). The most powerful authorial presence was described as $^ { \circ } I$ as originator’ (e.g., $^ { 6 6 } M y$ idea rested on the assumption that at each of these stagesy’’). Tang and John’s discussion focused on the frequency with which different roles were occupied. They illustrated that the less powerful authorial roles were taken up more frequently by their students indicating a reluctance to assume authority within a discourse community in which they felt themselves to be novices—‘‘students feel insecure about the validity of their claims, seeing themselves to be at one of the lowest rungs of the academic ladder’’ (Tang & John, 1999, p. S34).

Another study (Hyland, 2002) compared pronoun use by L2 students from Hong Kong and professional academics writing across a number of disciplines, in order to examine ‘‘the degree of authoritativeness writers are prepared to invest in their texts to personally get behind statements’’ (2002, p. 1093). Hyland’s results for his undergraduate student project reports show similarities with those of Tang and John, particularly in the reluctance of students to take an authoritative stance. He attributes this in part to the influences of the students’ second language cultural backgrounds, claiming that ‘‘L2 writers from other cultures may be reluctant to promote an individual self’’ (Hyland, 2002, p. 1111).

A study which has examined the use of personal pronouns in native English speaker postgraduate texts is that by Harwood (2003) who compared research articles (RAs) and master’s dissertations in Business and Management, and Computing Science. The most striking finding for Harwood was the variation between the two dissertation corpora. In a genre where making claims and taking authorial responsibility is part of the rhetorical expectation, he found only 22 uses of $I$ and we in Business and Management dissertations (74,117 words) compared to 604 in Computing Science dissertations (61,855 words). Computing students used $I$ and we mostly to take the reader through the procedures that they followed in carrying out their research and to elaborate the argument surrounding their programming decisions. Business and Management students also made claims and argued, but they subdued or eradicated markings of interpersonal stance preferring instead to use passives and phrases such as ‘‘it is fair to say thaty’’

The rhetorical significance of the replacement of personal pronouns by $i t$ -clauses was the focus of work by Hewings and Hewings (2001, 2002). They examined the use of ‘anticipatory $i t$ -clauses’: clauses in which the subject is placed at the end of the clause and $i t$ occupies the normal subject position (e.g., ‘‘It is important to clarify the terms used.’’). They excluded from their analysis clauses where $i t$ functions as a pronoun, in cleft sentences and as dummy $i t$ (e.g. ‘ ${ \cdot } I t$ ’s raining.’’), but included it seems and it appears. They were interested in the roles of anticipatory $i t$ -clauses in helping to organize, interpret and evaluate propositional content. They argue that such clauses function in academic writing to ‘‘both express opinions and to comment on and evaluate propositions in a way that allows the writer to remain in the background’’ (2002, p. 368).

A further pronoun study of student writing (Coffin & Mayor, 2004) useful in considering the role of the writer drew on Thompson & Thetela’s (1995) notion of the ‘reader-in-thetext’ and Halliday’s (1994) personal pronoun framework. Coffin and Mayor categorised what they referred to as ‘authorial voice or dialogue with the audience,’ as evidenced by the extent of explicit writer or reader reference. They discussed four broad categories (writer reference, reader reference, joint reference to writer/reader-in-the text, and collective reference to writer and reader, plus others, in the world beyond-the-text) which dealt with establishing who or what the reader/writer referents signified. Their data was essays written by international students as part of an academic English language test taken in order to enter higher education. They found a significant difference from the results reported for different genres in the earlier studies discussed. In particular, there was a high level of collective reference often signalling an assumed alignment of the readers’ and writers’ points of view. This, they argued, was creating an assumed common sense and unproblematic standpoint invoking consensual knowledge.

The broad classification used by Coffin and Mayor (2004) has similarities with work on professional, not student, academic writing (Harwood, 2005; Hyland, 2001) and nonacademic spoken discourse (Ward, 2004). All three focus on the inclusivity or exclusivity of pronoun choices. Harwood, for example, noted that inclusive pronouns could be used to indicate a gap in knowledge that the research community is likely to accept and then an exclusive pronoun signals that the writer will fill that gap. He illustrates this with an example from writing in business and management:

We do not seem to have [a] theory of how users initially comprehend the capabilities of a technology.   
The features-based theory of sensemaking triggers (FBST) I present here attempts to fill this gap. (Harwood, 2005, pp. 352-353)

Ward (2004), concentrated specifically on the use of we in constructing identities in discourse between trades union representatives and their members. Contrary to expectations, he found that we was associated with a discourse of exclusion by union representatives; we was linked with active roles for the union officials who had undertaken negotiations but the membership were excluded from this process, a fact which was underlined by the use of the exclusive we, meaning the union officials but not the workers. The significance of Ward’s work lies in the way the use of pronouns can be seen as suggestive of the interactional relations being constructed; it is indicative of language choices that contribute to delimiting discoursal roles.

# 3. Methodology

The context for the research was one of three distance-learning modules contributing to a Master’s in Education degree in Applied Linguistics. The teaching was a combination of print-based and audio-visual materials together with six tutorials conducted via asynchronous computer conferences which lasted between two and four weeks each. The software used was the commercially available First-Class asynchronous system. These tutorial conferences enabled geographically dispersed students, most of whom were practising teachers, to participate in written exchanges, at a time of their choosing. Groups comprised 10–18 students (mainly British people based in the UK and continental Europe, Germans, Greeks and Italians), plus a tutor who facilitated reflection on, and discussion of, aspects of the course content, often in relation to forthcoming written assignments. For example, the first task of a series set by one tutor was:

Choose one factor which you think influences second language learning (based on your own experience of learning a language or observations of students learning a language). Give reasons for why you think the factor is important and examples from your own experience.

Table 1 Corpus details   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Confs 1</td><td>112 862 words</td></tr><tr><td>Confs 2</td><td>23 984 words</td></tr><tr><td>Total conferences</td><td>136 846 words</td></tr><tr><td>Essays 1</td><td>65 234 words</td></tr><tr><td>Essays 2</td><td>44 483 words</td></tr><tr><td>Total essays</td><td>109 717 words</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>246 563 words</td></tr></table></body></html>

The electronic discussions were leading up to an essay on factors affecting second language acquisition.

The data was collected from three computer conference groups comprising 43 students and three male tutors during two periods of conferencing (six sessions of computer conferencing in total). We collected interactions from the first, and most active, computer conference of the module (Confs 1), from the fourth (Confs 2) and from the essay assignments which related to the discussions in the two conferences (Essays 1 and Essays 2,2 58 essays in total). Following Hyland (2002) and Harwood (2003), we based our initial investigation on an analysis of computer generated concordance lines (using Barlow’s MonoConc Pro Barlow (2002)) of four corpora (Table 1). Students and tutors were also surveyed via questionnaire and telephone survey on their experiences related to computer conferencing. At that time, however, we had not identified pronoun use as of particular interest. Our understanding of student choices would have been enhanced by focused questions on pronoun usage.

We looked at the personal pronouns I and we, and at $i t$ where it was used to represent an impersonal agent. A three-stage analysis was undertaken. First, raw frequency information was obtained for the three words in all the corpora (Table 2). To provide a way of comparing frequency of usage, occurrences per 1000 words were calculated.

The large number of occurrences of $I$ meant that in order to make the analysis manageable we needed to sample our data rather than classify all examples. We decided to use only the sub-corpora containing the first, and larger, of the two tutorial conferences (Confs 1) and the first essays (Essays 1). Confs 1 was systematically sampled using the ‘Every nth hit’ facility in Monoconc Pro to produce a sub-corpus of 1.000 concordance lines, in addition to the total 510 occurrences in Essays 1. We and $i t$ were analysed in two separate amalgamated corpora (Essays All) and (Confs All). All concordance lines were manually checked and repetitions of earlier messages deleted.3 This was necessary to avoid overcounting as conference messages were frequently responses to earlier messages and contained all or part of that earlier message. The final numbers of concordance lines analysed in each corpus are shown in Table 3.

Table 2 Frequency of $I$ , we and $i t$ in the sub-corpora   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Essays 1</td><td colspan="2">Confs 1</td><td colspan="2">Essays 2</td><td colspan="2">Confs 2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Raw freq</td><td>Per 1000 words</td><td>Raw freq</td><td>Per 1000 words</td><td>Raw freq</td><td>Per 1000 words</td><td>Raw freq</td><td>Per 1000 words</td></tr><tr><td>I (+&#x27;ll etc)</td><td>510</td><td>7.8</td><td>2739</td><td>24.2</td><td>198</td><td>4.4</td><td>475</td><td>19.8</td></tr><tr><td>we</td><td>137</td><td>2.1</td><td>479</td><td>4.2</td><td>137</td><td>3.1</td><td>169</td><td>7.1</td></tr><tr><td>it</td><td>435</td><td>6.7</td><td>1046</td><td>9.3</td><td>327</td><td>7.4</td><td>220</td><td>9.2</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Final numbers of concordances lines analysed for each pronoun after duplicate lines deleted   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Essays 1</td><td>Confs 1</td><td>Essays All</td><td>Confs All</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>493</td><td>827</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>we</td><td></td><td></td><td>270</td><td>458</td></tr><tr><td>it</td><td></td><td></td><td>753</td><td>942</td></tr></table></body></html>

Initial work concentrated on a sub-classification of we in order to clarify whether we was being used to foreground the writer, to include or exclude the reader, or to create an air of impersonality. Building on work by Coffin and Mayor (2004), Harwood (2005), and Ward (2004), we developed a simple classification of we indicating who is included or excluded:

1. writer only: we refers to the writer or writers only   
2. generic we: where the reference could be paraphrased as ‘people’ or ‘humankind’   
3. writer plus reader: we includes the writer and the reader   
4. writer plus others: we includes the writer and others beyond the readership of the text.

Categorisation was based in the first instance upon the evidence of the concordance lines, but wider context was available, via a context window, for consultation when necessary. Further sub-categorisation took place when investigating how we was functioning rhetorically and this is dealt with in Section 4 Findings and discussions.

The pronoun $I$ was not ambiguous in the same way as we. We therefore moved on to a simple rhetorical classification, isolating those occurrences where $I$ clearly indicated writer as thinker, the person taking responsibility for an opinion on the academic topic under discussion. In the majority of the cases, $I$ was associated with verbs of mental perception, as in:

Aptitude is, I believe, a factor to be consideredy (Confs 1)4

We disregarded instances of $I$ where it was used to fulfil other functions such as signalling organisation in the essays:

These are also the factors that I will focus on in the following papery (Essays 1)

$I t$ is common in all the corpora, primarily as a backward referent. For this study we were interested only in anticipatory $i t$ -clauses. We have called this ‘impersonal $i t ^ { * }$ because it frequently functions to make less personal the agency in a sentence by allowing the writer to be less visible than would be the case if we or $I$ were used. Initial analysis therefore concentrated on separating impersonal $i t$ from other uses of $i t$ .

In the next section we examine the frequency of the three words in the categories outlined and discuss what they indicate about the student writers as thinkers in the contrasting contexts of computer conferences and essays.

# 4. Findings and discussion

# 4.1. We

The initial categorisation of we detailed in Section 3 was applied to all the conference and essay data (Table 4).

# 4.1.1. Writer only

There are fewest uses of we in the exclusive ‘writer only’ category in both conferences and essays. The form is used by only six students, which is not surprising as all the texts are single authored. Of the 16 occurrences in the essays only 3 are associated with signposting through the discourse (e.g., ‘‘So far we have shown thaty’’ [Essays All]). The majority contain verbs denoting mental processes and convey the writer’s personal opinion (e.g. ‘‘We believe that it would be simplistic to concludey’’ [Essays All]). Examination of the wider context showed that in these essays students moved between the use of $I$ and we to denote the writer only. This use of exclusive we may reflect, for these writers, a lack of certainty over disciplinary expectations given that we is generally less frequent in soft disciplines than hard disciplines (Harwood, 2003, 2005; Hyland, 2002). Without follow-up interviews to discuss the specific texts with their writers it is not possible to explore this finding further.

# 4.1.2. Generic we

Occurrences of ‘generic we’ refer to universal traits or beliefs and typically co-occur with present tense verbs. They do not foreground the writer or the reader. Rather they are inclusive but vague as the referent is all people (e.g., ‘‘I don’t really think we ever reach a stage when we stop learning.’’ [Confs All]).

Table 4 Categorisation of occurrences of we pronoun showing comparative figures for all conferences and all essays   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>1. Writer only</td><td>2. Generic we</td><td>3. Writer plus reader</td><td>4. Writer plus other(s)</td></tr><tr><td>Confs All</td><td>2 (0.4%)</td><td>19 (4.1%)</td><td>306 (66.8%)</td><td>123 (26.8%)</td></tr><tr><td>Essays All</td><td>16 (5.9%)</td><td>30 (11.1%)</td><td>190 (69.9%)</td><td>36 (13.2%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Hyland (2002) chose to omit the generic we and all uses of we that were inclusive (our category 3) because of his focus on the visibility of the individual authors. For our purposes, the use of a generic or inclusive pronoun was a significant choice as it is one of an array which allows the writer to be more or less identified with the views being put forward and to claim different types of authority for a point of view. Generic we can be used to imply that something is common sense, universally accepted and unproblematic, or to set up that position in order to critique it.

# 4.1.3. Writer plus reader

The category which includes the most occurrences of we in both the computer conference and essay sub-corpora, and is the most obviously inclusive of those actually reading the texts, is ‘writer plus reader.’ Of interest in terms of writer as thinker is the frequent specification of the readership as a group to which the writer claims membership. This group may be specified using the pattern we+as+noun (e.g., ‘‘I agree that small groups are easier to teach and we as teachers are able to give more individual attention to each learner.’’ [Confs All]). We as teachers/educators/employees is a pattern that is used in both essays and conferences. In the conferences, a personal opinion is often stated and then supported by reference to the common experience of all members of the tutorial group. A common identity and experience is thereby invoked which is difficult to challenge. The position of the tutor as reader here is not clear. The writer may or may not have had the tutor also in mind; using we may be a means of sidestepping the normal tutor–student hierarchy and including the tutor as a peer.

The readership implied by we in the essays corpus was more ambiguous. We referred to the writer plus generalised others—not relating to a specific person or group of known people (e.g., ‘‘As educators we need to recognise the importance ofy’’ [Essays All]). It differed from ‘generic we’ in that it did not refer to people or humankind in general. The non-specific readership implied was often teachers or researchers, which may or may not have been intended to co-opt the tutor (e.g., ‘‘Theory should form a foundation upon which we build our methods and teachingy’’ [Essays All]). We in this sub-category often co-occurs with modals such as need or should, or material or mental processes such as do, walk and think.

Within the essays, we encompassing the reader and the writer is also often used in conjunction with a verb denoting a mental or material process. In, for example,

In conclusion, we have seeny (Essays All)

seen is a metaphorical rendering of I have shown you, but by making the pronoun inclusive the writer assumes a level of complicity on the part of the reader and an acceptance that the points made so far have indeed been seen and accepted by them both. It is also a device for steering the reader through the argument of the text, which seems also to be its function in:

ybut a further dimension arises if we consider van Lier’s notion (2001) thaty (Essays All)

Here, the premise of the if-clause is to be examined and the reader is presumed to be examining it at the same time, as if alongside the writer.

The significance of this category lies not in its inclusiveness or exclusiveness in relation to the reader, but its use of the wider community, usually of teachers, to apparently validate what is being said. At one and the same time the writer is putting forward a view but indicating that it belongs to, is enacted by, or is needed in some way by the teaching or other community being invoked. For example, the claim that ‘As educators we need to recognise x’ could have been expressed with educators as subject (‘Educators need to recognise x’), but instead the writer is declaring membership of the group of educators and speaking as one of them—thereby claiming a greater degree of authority and making the proposition harder to challenge.

# 4.1.4. Writer plus other(s)

The final category, ‘writer plus other(s)’, is the most explicit in excluding the readership, often through including specific others beyond the readership of the text in the referent we (e.g., ‘‘ywe both share a Slavonic background.’’ [Confs All]). We is mainly used to refer to events in the lives of the student writers and is associated with either introductions—part of the first tutorial for all groups—or with providing anecdotal evidence to illustrate or support points being made, as in

I asked the group of younger learners for their views about the texts, how we could make them more relevant, worthwhile etc. Answer: you tell us the answers. I asked the older learners and we discussed the issue for an houry (Confs All)

These arguments rehearsed during the tutorial conference were later incorporated into the student’s essay and introduced as anecdotal evidence by the words ‘‘In my teaching situationy’’ (Essays All). We here generally co-occurs with verbs in the past tense and alongside $I$ also used to recount past events in the student’s experience.

What we can draw from the findings in relation to the categorisation of we pronouns is that the inherent lack of clarity around who is being referred to is exploited, whether consciously or unconsciously, in a number of ways in the computer conferences and essays examined. In category 1, a personal pronoun which encompasses more than one person is used to denote the individual writer. Although uncommon, it is mostly associated with co-opting the reader into sharing the viewpoint being put across by the writer. This function is most clearly visible in category 3 ‘writer plus reader.’ In the context of computer conferences the writer can make we maximally inclusive encompassing both fellow students and the tutor. This category is associated in essays with guiding the reader through the text and assuming the reader’s agreement with conclusions reached or opinions put forward on the basis of evidence presented. This is arguably a stronger rhetorical position than the writer foregrounding his/her own individual position (see discussion of $I$ below), but it is taking less personal responsibility for the view expressed.

Within category 3 the writer often names the readership that he/she is assuming, e.g., ‘‘we as teachers/educators,’’ etc. In the conference discussion, this draws specifically on the shared professional backgrounds of the students, a rhetorical move that would not be open to student writers on a non-vocationally oriented programme. In the essays, this use of we can be more ambiguous, referring to groups beyond the single reader of the essay. The appeal to teachers and others as a group is often combined with supporting a point of view. These inclusive uses of we often indicated where the general experience of others was being used to back up what might be called anecdotal evidence, often a legitimate use of experience in a practice-based course (Scott, 2000; Stierer, 2000). It is this blurring of what is acceptable evidence or warrant for the arguments being put forward that makes inclusive we particularly rhetorically salient within the contexts of the texts examined. We move now to look at the more individually ‘writer responsible’ role implicit in the use of $I .$ .

# 4.2. I as thinker

An alternative to making we the responsible agent when putting forward an opinion or point of view is to use the first person singular pronoun $I _ { \ l }$ . Studies by Harwood (2003), Hyland (2002), and Tang and John (1999) all propose clines of authorial presence or visibility. We have concentrated our analysis on the most visible end of such clines, on usages glossed as $^ { \circ } I$ as thinker’ (Table 5).

Verb collocates at one or two words to the right of the pronoun in our study are listed in Table 6. ‘I as thinker’ was frequently used in conjunction with verbs denoting mental or verbal processes. This is in contrast to Hyland’s findings that ‘‘very few student reports contained personal pronouns associated with explicit cognitive verbs such as think, believe and assume’’ (2002, p. 1103). The example below is typical of a pattern in which the writer introduces a personal opinion with a clause containing a mental process (I believe) which serves to highlight that the reason given is based on the knowledge and interpretation of the situation by the writer. In Halliday’s terms it is an interpersonal metaphor expressing modality (1994, p. 354), indicating a level of uncertainty about the proposition. In

Table 5 $I$ pronouns associated with the function of giving opinion (I as thinker)   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>No. of occurrences of I classified</td><td>No. of occurrences of I as thinker</td></tr><tr><td>Confs</td><td>827</td><td>181 (21.9%)</td></tr><tr><td>Essays All</td><td>493</td><td>127 (25.8%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 Lexical verb collocates one and two places to the right of I   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Confs All (%)</td><td>Essays All (%)</td><td>I as thinker Confs All (%)</td><td>I as thinker Essays All (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Think 61 (7.4)</td><td>Feel 34 (6.9)</td><td>Think 41 (22.7)</td><td>Feel 27 (21.3)</td></tr><tr><td>Find/found 47 (5.7)</td><td>Find/found 27 (5.5)</td><td>Agree 22 (12.2)</td><td>Believe 24 (18.9)</td></tr><tr><td>Agree 24 (2.9)</td><td>Believe 26 (5.3)</td><td>Find/found 17 (9.4)</td><td>Think 17 (13.4)</td></tr><tr><td>Know 21 (2.5)</td><td>Think 21 (4.3)</td><td>Feel 12 (6.6)</td><td>Agree 6 (4.7)</td></tr><tr><td>Feel 18 (2.2)</td><td>Like 13 (2.6)</td><td>Believe 11 (6.1)</td><td>Say 4 (3.1)</td></tr><tr><td>Like 18 (2.2)</td><td>Chosen 8 (1.6)</td><td>Like 8 (4.4)</td><td>Argue 4 (3.1) Like 4 (3.1)</td></tr><tr><td>Total no. of occurrences</td><td>Total no. of occurrences</td><td>Total no. of occurrences</td><td>Total no of. occurrences</td></tr><tr><td>827</td><td>493</td><td>181</td><td>127</td></tr><tr><td>(100%)</td><td>(100%)</td><td>(100%)</td><td>(100%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Hyland’s terms, it is acting as a ‘hedge’ ‘‘by alerting readers to the writer’s perspective towards the propositional information and to the readers themselves’’ (Hyland, 1998, p. 5).

The students in this class progressed dramatically in their reading to understand. I believe that this was because they were able to engage closely with the characters and themesy (Essays 1)

Similarly, the inclusion of $I$ feel in ‘‘In conclusion, then, I feel that these are very complex issuesy’’ (Essays All 1) advances the opinion in a more tentative way. Similar uses have been found in professional academic writing where personal attribution acknowledges that others may have valid but opposing views (Myers, 1989b) and in mitigating critical comments by teachers when commenting on the work of their students (Hyland & Hyland, 2001).

Using $I$ is a highly visible strategy which commits the writer but, together with the choice of verb, conveys explicitly that the opinion is subjective. Rather than asserting something is the case, the addition of I believe, think, etc. stresses the personal nature of the opinion and leaves open the possibility that others may have different views. Within the computer conference context this is particularly significant in allowing peers to disagree or take up different positions, without being face-threatening to others or damaging the collaborative character. This is illustrated in the extract below which shows a student challenging an opinion put forward by the tutor (PB) which had also been endorsed by another student (LP):

I want to challenge this opinion, which has also previously been heard by LP. PB himself talks about cases of boys who are better than girls but I want to question it on the whole. I do agree that girls, at least in Greece, study more than boys. I believe that this has to do with social conventions and the fact that girls are more motivated to study as they want to leave their homes more than boys and studying is the safest way for that y (Confs All)

Within conference discussions, $^ { \circ } I$ as thinker’ was often used alongside $I$ introducing an anecdote. The next example comes from a very long conference posting in which the student picks up the issue of age of acquisition in language learning. She states her view (‘‘I thinky,’’ ‘‘I still believe’’) about the impact of an early start to learning languages and justifies it with anecdotal experience (‘‘I have been teachingy’’):

$I$ think age of acquisition is an interesting factor to consider in relation to successful language acquisitionyUntil one or two years ago $I$ held the view thatyI still believe this to be true, but only ify Let me give some examples. $I$ have been teaching a small groupy (Confs 1)

Interestingly, even when using her own experience, she acknowledges a little later in her posting that a reader might not be in full agreement with her, having had different experiences, and she tries to deal with the possible counter arguments: ‘‘Of course I do know some teenagers who started earlyybuty’’ These personal reflections on theory were encouraged by the type of tasks set for the students to carry out in the conference. They were therefore at liberty to use examples from their past to help in evaluating the theoretical notions under discussion. $I$ as thinker is consequently often in close proximity to other uses of $I$ such as giving personal details or anecdotes relevant to the topic under discussion. This use of $I$ as thinker alongside more anecdotal uses is also found in the essays and seems to have been influenced by the conference discussions. Some students treated the evidence of their peers as sources similar to published works (cf. Lea, 2001). In essays, students appeared to be comfortable stating their own finding if they had support from the experiences and opinions of another member of the group. Judging by the tutor comments on these essays, evidence from peers, as practising professionals, was not penalised.

Generally, we can say that the student writers examined here do make themselves and their views visible through the use of $I .$ In discussions in computer conferences there is freedom to juxtapose opinion and anecdotal evidence assuming a readership of peers. Student writers appear to respond to this by relating their views to published academic writing and using their experience as support. The use of I believe and I think convey the message that ‘this is my opinion and I have an equal right to express it as we are all students together, but I acknowledge that you may think differently.’ In essays, however, the same pronoun and verb combinations addressed to the more powerful tutor-assessor have a different rhetorical effect. The writer as thinker is still highly visible, but assertions appear more tentative and there is greater diffidence.

# 4.3. Impersonal it

Diffidence in making claims and stating opinions is also evident through the use of impersonal it-clauses. Hewings and Hewings (2002) identify three rhetorical motivations for the choice of $i t$ -clauses. First, they can be used as hedging devices (e.g., ‘‘It has been asserted that motivation affects perseverance.’’ [Essays All]), with the it-clause distancing the writer from the content expressed in the following clause (Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, & Svartvik, 1985; Thompson, 1994). Second, inclusion of adjectival complementation in the $i t$ -clause allows the writer to encode evaluation of the subsequent clause (Hunston & Sinclair, 2000) (e.g., ‘‘It was interesting to learn that...’’ [Confs All]). Third, use of an $i t$ -clause rather than a personal pronoun (e.g., ‘‘In the light of these findings, it is frustrating that none of the researches actually indicatey’’ [Essays All]) allows the presentation of opinions as more distanced, objective and less open to negotiation (Martin, Matthiessen, & Painter,1997).

We adapted Hewings and Hewings methods to isolate $i t$ -clauses with an interpersonal function; that is, where they carried (a) a rhetorical function related to the discussions in the computer conferences and the essays, and (b) where they helped to interpret and evaluate the propositional content of the main clause without necessarily drawing attention to the writer and holder of these views.

The use of this rhetorical option is common in the data examined here, as shown in Table 7. The number of occurrences of impersonal $i t$ -clauses is compared to all uses of $i t$ in the corpora examined.

Table 7 It pronouns   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Total occurrences</td><td>Occurrences of impersonal it</td></tr><tr><td>Confs All</td><td>942</td><td>211 (22.4%)</td></tr><tr><td>Essays All</td><td>753</td><td>373 (49.5%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

A higher proportion out of all uses of $i t$ were impersonal $i t$ constructions in the Essays than in the Conferences where discussions between peers were more personalised. The use of impersonal $i t$ as opposed to $I$ or we as the agent meant that views put forward sounded more authoritative and less subjective, as in:

It is not surprising that Lightbown and Spada (2001) reporty (Essays)

This could have been phrased as ‘I am not surprised that...’ but the use of the $i t$ -clause makes it less personal and perhaps less likely to be challenged. This has similarities with uses of we in category three to co-opt others into the same view of things. The next example has a different rhetorical function, emphatically asserting the views of the writer:

In such a classroom, it is essential to provide the learners with opportunities to explorey (Essays All)

Here the student writer is seen to take up the most visible writer-as-thinker position by strongly stating an opinion. That the opinion is their own, despite the $i t$ -clause, is not in doubt given the convention in academic writing that unless attributed elsewhere, opinions are assumed to be those of the writer.

Although $i t$ -clauses generally introduce the reader’s opinion or evaluation, in both the essays and the computer conferences there were examples of it-clauses being introduced by more personal framing clauses, commonly $I +$ believe, think, etc. (e.g., $^ { \circ } I$ feel that it is not really academically sound toy’’ [Confs All]) or phrases such as in my opinion (e.g., ‘‘In my opinion it can therefore be mentioned that all researchy’’ [Essays All]) or specific personal reference in the $i t$ -clause (e.g., $^ { 6 6 } I t$ seems to me that in a non-intensive learning environment...’’ [Confs All]). There were 19 occurrences (approximately $5 . 1 \%$ of the total) in the Essays corpus and 36 (approximately $1 7 . 1 \%$ ) in the Conferences corpus.

The initial I clause or my phrase frames the impersonal construction in a personal light, which increases the visibility of the writer but simultaneously decreases their authoritativeness. It is almost as if the student writer is reluctant completely to assume the independent impersonal voice of academic texts, preferring instead to maintain a level of solidarity with student peers. This may position the students along a continuum of resistance to academic identity which has previously been identified in classrooms and tutorial settings at secondary and tertiary levels (e.g., Benwell & Stokoe, 2005). This is not to say that they were detached from academic endeavour, but rather that they did not yet feel able to assume the voice associated with the professional academic, at least not with their peers in conference interaction.

Using I/my/me with it-clauses in essays may have been in response to the jointly constructed nature of the opinions in the conference. In order to personally own a point of view that has similarities with the conference discussions, students may combine a personal and an impersonal voice even in circumstances where it would have seemed appropriate in a single authored essay to leave out the personal referent. In the example below, the student has interwoven her own voice with that of her tutor (PB):

I noticed that in Tutorial 1 (E841 pjb 353 February) motivation was brought up as an important factor by various participants of the tutorial, as a significant factor in affecting second language acquisition. So I feel it is very important to understand why a learner has lack of motivation as it can negatively affect learning. As PB states ‘‘Motivation is something that learners have when they come to us, but also something that we can work to maintain and enhance.’’(PB.E841 pjb353 Tutorial1, 9 February) (Essays All)

# 5. Conclusion

An analysis of the uses of $I _ { i }$ , we and $i t$ in conveying opinion has refined and added to our understanding of how student writers represent themselves and their views in two different written media. In particular, it has shown that there is not a straightforward dichotomy between the language used by students and that used by experts. Differing levels of responsibility for propositions were indicated by pronoun choices and with reference to the readership of the texts. $I$ is the pronoun associated by Harwood (2003), Hyland (2002) and Tang and John (1999) with powerful authorial presence or high writer visibility, but findings from this study suggest that students who are already experienced practitioners write and construct themselves differently from, say, the Hong Kong and Singaporean undergraduate writers studied by Hyland, and Tang and John. Rather, the students studied seem to share some of the features of professional academic writers observed by Hyland and Hyland (2001) and Myers (1989b). In the computer conferences, $^ { \circ } I$ as thinker’ was less face threatening to peers as it acknowledged the personal nature of the proposition and therefore the fact that it is more open to argument. This helped to maintain the constructive, non-adversarial tenor of collaborative conferencing. In the essays and conference data, the use of $I$ plus a mental process verb usually served to hedge propositions, confining the assertion to the opinion of a novice in the discipline.

The use of we could in some circumstances be seen as adopting a stronger voice in making claims and stating opinions. We could serve to either co-opt the reader into the unfolding argument or to strengthen a claim by linking it to a wider group such as teachers, which also gave greater authority to what was in effect anecdotal evidence. Privileging anecdotal evidence may, in the contexts examined in this study, be linked to the experience of collaborative learning brought about by the conferencing activities. In this applied discipline such recourse to the experience of teachers appeared to be academically acceptable as many of the discussions and assignments involved students in reflecting in the light of their past experiences on theory and practice. Discussion in the computer conferences allowed experiences to be shared and thus to enhance the feeling that ‘we as teachers’ did have a particular standpoint from which to argue as a profession. A collective voice emerged in the conference discussions and was adapted for use in the single-authored essays allowing more weight to be attached to the claims made. Where greater circumspection was needed the modality associated with using $I$ followed by verbs such as think or believe was available for use by writers.

In addition to drawing on a collective body to add strength to expressions of opinion, student writers also consciously or unconsciously exploited the ambiguity of the referent in we. This feature of English, whereby the exact scope of the pronoun may not be clear, rendered the inclusiveness or exclusiveness of the we pronoun difficult to pin down. In the conference discussions students frequently used we to refer to the readership, but it was often unclear whether the writer was including the tutor as a member of the readership. This was useful as it seemed to allow a collective view to be assumed by the writer, but without the necessity of acknowledging the hierarchical relationship or power imbalance between the tutor and the students. The tutor could, if necessary, be seen as a bystander; having posted an activity he now waited in the wings as the students discussed it. (for wider discussion of the tutor’s role in this research see Painter, Coffin & Hewings, 2003; Hewings & Coffin, 2006). Within the essays, we with a general referent, such as teachers, was used to widen the authority for the claim being made and was vague in terms of inclusiveness of the actual reader.

Finally, we noted that students have impersonal options available to them, one of which is the use of impersonal $i t$ -clauses. These constructions were particularly common in the Essays corpus. While impersonal $i t$ -clauses do not signal writer visibility, they can indicate a powerful authorial presence, with writers not needing to mitigate their claims by signals of their personal involvement. Thus, where $i t$ is the agent in the sentence the views expressed may sound more authoritative. However, $i t$ -clauses were also often combined with $I$ or another personal phrase. We suggested that the intrusion of $I$ into otherwise impersonal constructions in essays may have signalled an awareness of the jointly constructed conference texts that formed one of the source texts for the single-authored essays. Within the computer conference discussion the combination of $i t$ -clauses and $I$ may be indicative of a resistance to, or reluctance to take on, the impersonal voice of academia.

We can conclude from this discussion that students adopt different roles vis-a\` -vis their readership in the different media. In part, this is an acknowledgement of the conventions surrounding assessed essays as opposed to the more collaborative and interactive nature of computer conferences. The discussions using computer conferencing, however, did appear to influence the subsequent single-authored work through the creation of a validation mechanism. Student experiences, which were legitimate subjects for the conference, were amalgamated with the experiences of the student-author and used to strengthen the reflections put forward in essays. Individuals’ claims, (I believe), were often supported by reference to the shared experience of the group. An inclusive ‘we the teachers’ voice was used alongside citations of published work. Knowledge that such new academic writing practices are emerging and evolving is important in understanding the impact of new pedagogic practices on students’ constructions of themselves as writers of academic texts and of the disciplinary arguments and conventions acceptable. We can no longer rely on apprenticeship or enculturation into academic and disciplinary practices via students reading only texts sanctioned by the professional disciplinary community. Peer arguments and reflections made permanent by computer technology are a new source of ideas and possible models for writing, and methods for evaluating their worth without jeopardising the benefits of collaborative learning through conferencing will need to be developed.

# Acknowledgements

This research was supported by a grant from the Open University (UK) Learning and Teaching Innovation Committee.

# References

Barlow, M. (2002). MonoConc Pro 2.0. Houston, TX: Athelstan Publications. Retrieved from www.athel.com. / SBenwell, B., & Stokoe, E. H. (2005). University students resisting academic identity. In K. Richards, & P. Seedhouse (Eds.), Applying conversation analysis (pp. 124–139). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Cadman, K. (1997). Thesis writing: A question of identity? English for Specific Purposes, 16(1), 3–14.   
Chang, Y-Y., & Swales, J. (1999). Informal elements in English academic writing: Threats or opportunities for advanced non-native speakers. In C. N. Candlin, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: Texts, process and practices (pp. 145–167). London: Addison Wesley Longman.   
Coffin, C., & Mayor, B. (2004). Texturing writer and reader reference in novice academic writing. In D. Banks (Ed.), Text and texture: Systemic functional viewpoints on the nature and structure of text (pp. 264–293). Paris: L’Harmattan.   
Cherry, R. D. (1998). Ethos versus persona: Self-representation in written discourse. Written Communication, 15, 384–410.   
Gragson, G., & Selzer, J. (1990). Fictionalizing the readers of scholarly articles in biology. Written Communication, 7(1), 25–58.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar (2nd ed.). London: Arnold.   
Harwood, N. (2003). Person markers and interpersonal metadiscourse in academic writing: A multidisciplinary corpus-based study of student and expert texts. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Kent at Canterbury, UK.   
Harwood, N. (2005). ‘We do not seem to have a theory. The theory I present here attempts to fill this gap’: Inclusive and exclusive pronouns in academic writing. Applied Linguistics, 26(3), 343–375.   
Hewings, A., & Coffin, C. (2006). Formative interaction in electronic written exchanges: Fostering feedback dialogues. In F. Hyland, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Feedback in second language writing: Contexts and issues (pp. 225–245). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Hewings, A., & Hewings, M. (2001). Anticipatory ‘it’ in academic writing: an indicator of disciplinary difference and developing disciplinary knowledge. In M. Hewings (Ed.), Academic writing in context: Implications and application (pp. 199–214). Birmingham: University of Birmingham Press [Republished in 2006 by Continuum.].   
Hewings, M., & Hewings, A. (2002). It is interesting to note thaty: A comparative study of anticipatory ‘it’ in student and published writing. English for Specific Purposes, 21, 367–383.   
Hunston, S., & Sinclair, J. (2000). A local grammar of evaluation. In S. Hunston, & G. Thompson (Eds.), Evaluation in text (pp. 74–101). Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Hyland, F., & Hyland, K. (2001). Sugaring the pill: Praise and criticism in written feedback. Journal of Second Language Writing, 10, 185–212.   
Hyland, K. (1998). Hedging in scientific research articles. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interaction in academic writing. Harlow, UK: Pearson.   
Hyland, K. (2001). Bringing in the reader: Addressee features in academic articles. Written Communication, 18(4), 549–574.   
Hyland, K. (2002). Authority and invisibility: Pronouns of authorial identity in academic writing. Journal of Pragmatics, 34, 1091–1112.   
Ivanicˇ , R. (1994). I is for interpersonal: Discoursal construction of writer identities and the teaching of writing. Linguistics and Education, 6, 3–15.   
Ivanicˇ , R., & Weldon, S. (1998). Researching the writer–reader relationship. In C. N. Candlin, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: Texts, process and practices (pp. 168–192). Harlow, UK: Longman.   
Joiner, R., & Jones, S. (2003). The effects of communication medium on argumentation and the development of critical thinking. International Journal of Educational Research, 39, 861–871.   
Kuo, C-H. (1999). The use of personal pronouns: Role relationships in scientific journal articles. English for Specific Purposes, 18(2), 121–138.   
Lea, M. R. (2001). Computer conferencing and assessment: New ways of writing in higher education. Studies in Higher Education, 26(2), 163–181.   
Light, V., Nesbitt, E., Light, P., & Burns, J. R. (2000). Let’s you and me have a little discussion: Computer mediated communication in support of campus-based university courses. Studies in Higher Education, 25(1), 85–96.   
Lillis, T. M. (2001). Student writing: Access, regulation, desire. London: Routledge.   
Martin, J. R., Matthiessen, C. M. I. M., & Painter, C. (1997). Working with functional grammar. London: Arnold.   
Mercer, N. (1995). The guided construction of knowledge: Talk amongst teachers and learners. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.   
Myers, G. (1989a). Writing biology: Texts in the social construction of scientific knowledge. Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin Press.   
Myers, G. (1989b). The pragmatics of politeness in scientific articles. Applied Linguistics, 10, 1–34.   
Painter, C., Coffin, C., & Hewings, A. (2003). Impacts of directed tutorial activities in computer conferencing: A case study. Distance Education, 24(2), 159–174.   
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language. London: Longman.   
Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2006). Fostering knowledge construction in university students through asynchronous discussion groups. Computers & Education, 46(4), 349–370.   
Scott, M. (2000). Writing in postgraduate teacher training: A question of identity. In M. R. Lea, & B. Stierer (Eds.), Student writing in higher education (pp. 112–124). Buckingham: The Society for Research into Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Stierer, B. (2000). Schoolteachers as students: Academic literacy and the construction of professional knowledge within master’s courses in education. In M. R. Lea, & B. Stierer (Eds.), Student writing in higher education (pp. 179–195). Buckingham: The Society for Research into Higher Education and Open University Press.   
Tang, R., & John, S. (1999). The ‘I’ in identity: Exploring writer identity in student academic writing through the first person pronoun. English for Specific Purposes, 18(Suppl.), S23–S39.   
Thompson, G., & Thetela, P. (1995). The sound of one hand clapping: The management of interaction in written discourse. Text, 1(15), 103–127.   
Thompson, G. (1994). Collins COBUILD English guides 5: Reporting. London: HarperCollins.   
Tolmie, A., & Boyle, J. (2000). Factors influencing the success of computer mediated communication (CMC) environments in university teaching: a review and case study. Computers and Education, 34, 119–140.   
Ward, M. (2004). We have the power—or do we: Pronouns of power in a union context. In L. Young, & C. Harrison (Eds.), Systemic functional linguistics and critical discourse analysis (pp. 280–295). London: Continuum.   
Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: Towards a sociocultural practice and theory of education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ann Hewings is Senior Lecturer in Language and Communication at the Open University. Her broad research area is disciplinary academic literacy particularly at tertiary level and in electronic environments. She is currently researching argumentation in computer conference discussions in the field of Health and Social Care.

Caroline Coffin is Senior Lecturer in Language and Communication at the Open University. Her area of expertise is functional linguistics with much of her research focusing on the insights afforded by linguistic theory and methods into educational dialogue, disciplinary knowledge construction and argumentation.