# Self-regulation and student engagement with feedback: The case of Chinese EFL student writers

Li (Francoise) Yanga, Lawrence Jun Zhangb,\*

a School of Foreign Languages, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, China b Faculty of Education and Social Work, University of Auckland, New Zealand

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords: Feedback engagement Self-regulation EFL student Writers Teacher feedback

Despite the role of feedback in facilitating self-regulation, learners' under-engagement with feedback in second language (L2) writing has been little researched. The multifaceted nature of feedback makes it challenging for L2 writers to engage with, and benefit from, teacher feedback. From the perspective of self-regulated learning, this qualitative case study examined how skilled and less-skilled self-regulators engaged with teacher written feedback in a Chinese EFL context. Data from multiple sources, including student texts, teacher on-script feedback, error logs, reflective journal entries, and interviews, revealed that the relationship between feedback and subsequent outcomes is mediated by students' engagement with the feedback process. It was found that skilled and less-skilled self-regulators displayed different degrees of engagement across cognitive, behavioural and affective dimensions. The findings may be attributed partly to students' awareness of, and ability to interpret, feedback, agency of translating feedback into action, and willingness to scrutinise feedback and respond with appropriate strategies to use it. We conclude by highlighting the interaction among cognitive, behavioural, and affective engagement and offering some important pedagogical implications.

# Funding

This research has not received any funding.

# 1. Introduction

For more than two decades, the potentia of feedback to facilitate L2 writing development has been advocated in a growing body of research (Bitchener & Storch, 2016; Lee, 2020; Yang et al., 202; Zha0 & Zhang, 2022; Zhang, 2022) From a learning-centred point of view of fedack, whe fedback is framed as a proces Crless  Boud, 2018), lenrs are rardd as agets wh eek, proces, and act on feedack information to enhance their learning strategies and the quality of their work (Winstone et al., 2022). While it is important to focus on the actions of feedback provision, effects of feedback are determined ultimately by students and the use they make of the feedback. This implies that there is a need for more in-depth studies into the efect of L2 student writers' individual diferences in engaging with feedback on their writing (Crosthwaite et al., 2022). Reent attempts to maximise the pedagogical mpact of implementing feedback (Zhang, 2020;Zhang & Cheng, 2020, 2021 ) explored which, and how, individual factors have a moderating effect on the progress learners make when processing the feedback provided to them. These studies suggest that internal cognitive, motivatiol, and affcti fatrs, and thr interactions, may account for indidual diffece in the efft f fedback on eners. Consequently, it has beome important for rearcher nd practitioners to understand how stdents indvidual difference affect their engagement with, and uptake of, feedback for learning in the authentic classroom.

As scholars have already found out, in the fedback proces, students make sense of information about their work to enhance their learning (Hattie & Timperle, 2007), depending on their ability to self-regulate their cognitive, behavioural, and afective reactions (Yu & Liu, 2021). Based on an integration of slf-regulated learning and student engagement theoretical frameworks, Wolters and Taylor (2012) suggested that self-regulated learners intended to increse their engagement in academic performance. A self-regulated learning perspective on feedback engagement may broaden our understanding of what makes students more efective learners. Recent studis ha amed hic role f ler sf-nn th fak re, Ctat l., 2022  u, 2022). However, it remains unclear how learners with different levels of self-regulation use feedback for learning. Since developing self-regulated learners could be considered as a key goal f second/foreign language (L2) teaching and leaning (Bai & Wang, 2021; Oxford, 2017; Teng & Zhang, 2020; Zhang et al, 2019; Zhang & Hyland, 2022; Zha0 & Zhang, 2022), further empirical investigation is needed to tap into the mediating effets of stdents self-reulation on their engagment withfdack to identfy the onditions for better use of feedback.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Feedback engagement as a multidimensional construct

Fredricks et al. (2004) describe engagement as a multidimensional construct involving aspects of students emotions, behaviours and cognitions. For example, cognitive engagement is operationalised in terms of appropriate effort exerted to complete a task; a student i emotionally engagd with positive and negative affective reactions during the tak; student's behavioural engagement with a task is operationalised in terms of actual participation during the task. To capture how actively involved the students are in the feedback process requires assessment of these three interrelated facets.

Elis (2010) proposed a tripartite framework to interpret L2 students' response to feedback from cognitive, behavioural, and af. fective dimensions which are interrelated and in a constant flux (Mercer, 2019). Drawing on Elis (2010) framework, Han and Hyland (2015)clarified the operation of sub-constructs for each dimension. Specificall, cognitive engagement rfers to noticing and understanding writing erors, which involves metacognitie and cognitive operations employed by learners to process eedack; behavioural engagement includes observable revision strategies and learning strategies; ffective engagement is observed through students emotional reactions and attitudes toward written feedback (Han & Hyland, 2015). Emotional reactions, which can be positive and negative, are expected to activate and deactivate academic engagement (Pekrun, 2006). Understandably, atitudes toward fedback influence how learners judge and value the worth of feedback (Zheng et al., 2020).

The multifaceted framework of engagement has enabled critical investigations into individual differences and contextual factors that have a moderating effct on how learners proces feedback. For example, Han and Hyland (2015) explored four Chinese college students engagement with teachr wrt corrective feback and rorted that students were active in the feback proces through deciding how and what they learn from teacher feedback. More reent studies (Cheng & Liu, 2022; Zheng & Yu, 2018) found con. sistencies and inconsistencies of the high proficiency and low proficiency students' engagement due to complex and nonlinear relationships across cognitive, behavioural and affective perspectives. These indings suggesthat students had different levels of engagement with feedback associated with individual diferences in language roficiency (Cheng & Liu, 2022; Hyland & Hyland, 2006; Xu et al., 2022; Zheng & Yu, 2018), student feedack literacy (Han & Xu, 2019), motivation (Hyland, 2011; Pitt & Norton, 2017), student beliefs (Pearson, 2022), agency (Han, 2019), emotions (Han & Hyland, 2019), and the context of teacher-student relationships (Zheng et al., 2020) inceDony (2005) intiated a disussion f students self-rgulatry capacity as an individal derce factr, there has been research interest in the nature of selfregulation in L2 writing (e.g., Jackson & Park, 2020; Teng & Zhang, 2020. However, there has been littl systematic reearch on how individual differences in self-reulation would affec student engagement with feedback.

Winstone, Nash, Parker, and Rowntre (2017) outlined a framework of barriers that limit leaners effective use feedback. They reported that awareness, cognisance, agency', and volition' might be barriers to student engagement withfdback information. Awareness was identified as understanding what the feedback means and what purpose i serves. Cognisance represents students knowledge of which strategies they should use, how to use them, and how to implement fedback. Agency relates to writers sense of empowerment to translate feedback into action (Winstone & Carles, 2019). Finally, volition is about the willingness to scrutinise feedback and implement strategies to use it. Winstone et al.'s (2017) framework attempts to identify not only possible barrers to students' meaningful engagement with feedack but also the processes creating those barrers for them. Our study, therefore, investigated lerners' strategic use of teacher feedback in self-regulated writing as a way of understanding their (dis)engagement with feedback.

# 2.2. Self-regulated learning for writing and feedback

Because of the crucial role that self-reulation plays in the writing proces Hawe & Dixon, 2014), there is a growing interest in it in relation to foreign/second language learning (Chen et l., 2022; Jackson & Park, 2020). Writing researchers have found positive links between the use of self-regulated learning (SRL) strategies and writing performance (Bai et al., 2020). Zimmerman and Risemberg (1997, p. 73) claimed that high levels of self-regulation are important to skilled writing, because \*writing activities are usually self-planned, selfinitiated, and self-sustained". Therefore, much research has been undertaken to compare whether and how less-skilld writers iffer frm skilld witers i using  traties such as meta-stratie (kiet al, 2018) and tilising resoures (Hu & Gao, 2017). These studies confirmed that selfregulated learners are distinguished by their systematic use of metacognitive, motivational, and behavioural strategies.

Self-regulated learners are expected to be responsive to feedback regarding the effectiveness of their learning. When the process oriented aproach is adopted in writing, the role played by feedback is especially important. As Kroll (2001) posited, the process approach engages student writers with their writing assgnments through multiple drafts wherein they receive external feedback and revise evolving texts. Its cyclical nature resembles that of elf-regulatory learning development. The core problem lie in how to use feedback efectively to empower students to be self-regulated writers. There is a need for subsequent investgations into how students use feedback effectively to develop into self-regulated writers and for improving their writing skills.

Feedback practices targeting the development of larners' self-regulation may help them progressin self-regulation (Andrade & Evans, 2013). Research on self-reulatory development has demonstrated feedback to be a catalyst for al self-regulated activities for the attainment of personal goals through moderating learners' performance processes (Zimmerman & Kitsantas, 2007). To elicit the power of feedback for learning, teachers need to cue students' attention to the learning task, task processing strategies, and self-regulation strategies (Hattie & Gan, 2011). Hattie and Timperley's (2007 feedback model rlates to three key questions and four major dimensions of learning and learners. The three questions are "Where am I going?" How am I going?" and \*Where to next?" This is a very important way of ooking at fedback, because the efectivenes of feedback depends on whether it is operated at the task performance level, the process level, the regulatory or metacognitive level, and/or the self or personal level. From the learner dimension, Han and Xu's (2019) study revealed that written corrective feedback enhanced students' self-regulated learning when learners had high levels of feedback literacy. They argued that feedback-literate learners were cognitively and social-affectively capable to effectively engage with teacher feedback. However, in their study feedback did not target self-regulated learning and consequently students did not employ self-regulated learning strategies. Although self-regulation is integrated as a student-internal factor into the overarching construct of student fedback literacy (Carless & Boud, 2018; Yu & Liu, 2021), scarce empirical research has been conducted into how students self-regulation influences their engagement with feedback in L2 writing. Therefore. there is a need for further iestgtions into how self-rulationmediaes the fedback proces to shed ight on the interl component of student feedback literacy from the perspective of self-regulated learning.

# 3. Methods

# 3.1. Research questions

This study aims to fill the research gap identified above and answer the research question: How do skilled and les skilld self regulators engage with teacher written feedback cognitively, behaviourall, and affectively? By addressing the question, the study intends to illuminate the similaritie and differences between skilld and lesskilled self-regulators use of feedback to erich our knowledge of the feedback process from a learner-centred feedback paradigm.

# 3.2. Context and participants

The study was conducted at an English department of a medium-ranked universty in the south of China. English major un. dergraduates at this department are required to enrol in a writing course during their third academic semester of a 4-year programme. The writing course, taught in English, was to develop students understanding, knowledge, and skills in narrative, expository and argumentative writing in English. Students met once a week for 90 min over 16 weeks. The process-genre instruction was used (Huang & Zhang, 2020, 2022; Rahimi & Zhang, 202 ; Zhang, 2016), in which the students were provided with explicit intruction in the genre and they also experienced the cycle of the recursive writing process through multiple drafts.

The participants were six junior English major student, aged between 18 and 21, from this writing clas. They were native Chinese speakers who had learned English as a foreign language for an average of 10 years. The participants were selected for inclusion following purposive sampling procedures (Yin, 2018). One of the key criteria used in our study was students' response scores on the Writing Strategies for Self-regulated Learning Questionnaire (wssRiQ). wssRLQ, developed by Teng and Zhang (2016),elicits participants' perceived use of writing strategies for SRL in EFL learning environments at low, average, or high proficiency levels. Additionall, we also obtained data on instructors recommendations based on their knowledge about the students' self-regulation. Two experienced instructors, who had taught these students the past two semesters, evaluated and ranked the students self-regulated learning experience. Based on the students scores and teachers' evaluation, six candidate, thre of whom were female high self-regulated writers and the other three female low self-regulated writers, were invited to participate in the study with thir consent. The average global writing band score in the International English Language Testing System (IELTS) -Academic Test of the two groups was different: the core was 6.0 for the skilled elf-regulators and 5.5 for the les-skilled elf-regulators. The profil of the participants is presented in Table 1.

The instructor of this writing course spoke Mandarin Chinese as his 1. He had a master's degree in Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (TEsOL) and had taught English writing for around 14 years.

# 3.3. Data collection

Multiple data sources, including student texs, teacher on-script feedback, error logs reflective journal entries, student stimulated recalls and interviews, were collected as data. In this study, participants completed threeassigned argumentative writing tasks. Data were collcted over 12 weeks from three fedback-revision cycles for these writing tasks, each with three rounds (see Table 2)

As a first step, the participants submitted the first draft to the teacher with a form to request feedback on the content and organisation of the text, with five options of explicitness, ranging from direct correction to indirect delivery of locating errors. Subsequently, the teacher individualised his feedback in response to the students' needs on each text. Photocopies of the student participants' texts with the teacher's feedback were collected.

On receiving the teacher's feedback on the first draft (see Appendix A), students revised their texts accordingly, recording errors changes, and achieements from th firt draft to the sond raft in anerror log. In adtion t wre feedack the teacher rovided oral/verbal feedback in clss and organised a writing conference, when requested by students, o complete the firs round of feedback activity. Stimulated recall interview (in Chinese) was used, within $2 4 \ \mathrm { h }$ of revising the draft, to record participants' responses to the feedback. tudents were prompted to recallther hinking processe, intentions, and strategic responses whil they were engaging with teacher feedback. The interviews lasted approximately 15-25 min. To stimulate recall, written materials produced by the participants, such as writing texts, teacher's written feedback, and error logs, were consulted.

The second round of feedback started after students submitted their second drafts with a form indicating their preference for five feedback explicitness options in terms of lingustic aspects, including vocabulary, language use and mechanics. The instructor offered individualised feedback on the second draft (ee Appendix A) and collected photocopies of the participants second drats with the teacher's feedback. Students recorded the proces in error logs, as in the first round of feedback. No scores were recorded on the first two drafts. Again, the stimulated recall elicited students responses to the teacher's feedback for revision on their second draft.

For the third round of feedback, the teacher reviewed the final drats, and gave the participants an analytic and holistc evaluation by referring to the scoring criteria. At the end of each writing task, areflective journal, with prompts for completion, was sent to students for them to record a judgement of their writig outcomes and writing proceses. The reflective journal documented changes between drafts, writing activities, and attributions.

Moreover, before the study started, semi-structured interview was conducted to explore participants prior experience of drafting the text, dealing with feedack, and revising the text as well as their beliefs about writing, teacher fedback and language learning. Finally, the same semi-structured interview, lasting $2 0 { - } 3 0 \mathrm { m i n }$ , to elicit participants' experience of the feedback loop during the three writing tasks, was carried out at the end of the study. The participants' L1 was used as the medium of allinterviews to facilitate expression of their complete thoughts. All the interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim.

# 3.4. Data analysis

# 3.4.1. Analysis of artefacts

Data sources in this study include 45 student texts, goal lists, fedback forms, error logs, and reflective journals. Analysis of the student texts and teacher feedback, which were handwritten focused on changes from the first draft to the second draft to the final draft. Analys of students revision of their esay draft, in reponse to the eback, notd the tye and extent f stdents' sucessul revisions following teacher feedback provided an indication of their behavioural engagement. Responses to teacher markings (e., brief comments) and teacher corrections (e.g., of grammatical errors), and students' self-orrctions were included as instances of revision. Five areas were examined in the drafts: Content, organisation, vocabulary, grammar, and mechanics were coded using the criteria as proposed in Ene and Upton (2014). Analysis of teacher feedback was based on scoring criteria described in Jacobs et al. (1981) that analysed an essay analyticly from similar subcomponents. Gol lists feedack forms, error logs and reflective journals, used in conjunction with student texs, provided evidence of how participants applied the teacher's comments diffrently in revising drafts.

An evaluation system of 05 (see Appendix B), used by Song et al. (2017) was used to determine the extent of revision reflected in the qualit of the writing. Percentages and mean averages were calculated and compare for each occurrence of teacher feedback and each subagoy f uptake we skilled ad es-silld elf-rulaors. Introdeeliabilit, wth an Engish writing techer as the second coder, using Cohen's kappa coefficient to measure inter-coder agreement for coding type and extent of revision $( r = 0 . 8 7 , p <$ .01), suggested satisfactory reliability of the scoring system.

Table 1 Profile of participants.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Groups</td><td>Pseudonyms (age)</td><td>Years of EFL studies</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Skilled self-regulators.</td><td>Hong (20)</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td> Jiao (19)</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Xin (20)</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Less-skilled self-regulators</td><td>Meng (20)</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Qing (19)</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Sha (20)</td><td>9</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Feedback loop for each of three writing assignments.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Week</td><td>Feedback loop</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">1</td><td>: Setting writing goals</td></tr><tr><td>. Writing the first draft.</td></tr><tr><td>. Requesting individualised feedback</td></tr><tr><td>: Receiving feedback on content and organisation</td></tr><tr><td>: Keeping an error log</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">2</td><td>. Revising the first draft</td></tr><tr><td>. Requesting individualised feedback</td></tr><tr><td>: Receiving feedback on vocabulary and language use</td></tr><tr><td>: Keeping an error log</td></tr><tr><td>. Revising the second draft</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">3</td><td>. Receiving an analytic and holistic evaluation</td></tr><tr><td>: Writing a reflective journal</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.4.2. Analysis of stimulated recalls and interviews

Verbatim transcription was used to transform audio data into a written transcript. Most of the transcriptions were done immediately afer the interview so that participants could check and make any amendments neessary to the copy of the transcripts. The next step was to translate the verbatim record of the transcribed data from Chinese into English. We conducted a flexible semantic translation when iteral translation afected the meaning of an utterance. Then we invited a translation teacher and participants to evaluate the accuracy of the translation.

Data were reviewed using thematic analysis and the constant comparative method of analysis, in which the data were systemat. ically analysed through a two-stage proces of first and second cycle coding for data condensation (Miles e al., 2020). In the firs cycle coding, provisional coding established four predetermined codes (i.., cogntive, metacognitive, behavioural operations, and affective demonstrations), developed from previous research findings (Han & Hyland, 2015). Then, taking an inductive approach and using Nvivo coding, we created descriptive coding and subcodes using a word or a short phrase to represent the basic topic of the data segments (Saldana, 2021). Subcodes were participants' specific operations in the four dimensions. For example, \*using dictionaries" was a subcode f behavioural engagement'. At the conclusion of the first cycle coding, there were 122codes. Based on the first cycle of coding, axial coding included horizontal and vertical analyses of the data to investgate similaritie and diferences. For example, "using dictionaries to improve the range of words" and \*using dictionaries to improve acuracy" were categorised as using dictionaries to improve quality of drafts, whereas using dictionaries to expand vocabulary and \*using dictionaries to increase vocabulary knowledge" belonged to "using dictionaries to learn vocabulary". Subsequently, the codes were reorganised and clustered under 21 thematic categories.

Student participants comments about each revision were identified and then coded for either high or low depth of processing based on criteria modified from the coding schemes developed by Leow and Mercer (2015) and Kim and Bowle (2019) (see Appendix C). The transcripts of the stimulated recalls by one skilled and one les-skilled self-regulator were coded by another rater. The raters demonstrated $1 0 0 \%$ agreement on the coding for the depth of processing..

# 4. Findings

Analysis of the data shows that the skilled and les-skilled self-regulators engaged differentl withfeedback in cognitive, behavioural and affective aspects. We present the findings in the following sections.

# 4.1. Cognitive engagement

The stimulated recall indicated that the metacognitive operations of participants from self-regulated and les self-regulated groups processed teacher fback differentl when planning, elf-ealuatin, and refleting on ther writing in resonse to tacher feedback. The skilled sef-regulators (Hong, Jao, and Xin) used feedback to develop a careful plan of what to revise and how to revise the writing, having scrutinsed the fedback to decide what should be the focus for the revision of the content, strategies, and/or procedures. Jao, for example, explained how she planned her focus for revision and then outlined the revision steps, saying:

First, reviewed problems in content development and planed what supporting detils should be improved and added. I wrote them up. And then I attended to language problems. (Jiao, Stimulated recall/SR1)

Hong and Xin also described such a conceptualising phase in which they created a mental representation of the revision task and set macro-plans for revision. They explained how they first read through the draft, with the teacher's feedback, to categorise writing problems, and identify a revising focus. They then rereadthe draft, line by line, to del with local issues and reviewed the text again to plan for global revision and using planning strategies appropriately.

In contrast, participants from the les self-regulated group (Meng, Qing, and Sha) showed a lower level of awarenes of planning strategies. They tended to follow the teacher's remarks to find the correct form without establishing a revision focus, nor relevant strategies before starting to revise the text. For instance, on receving the first draft of Writing Task One, Sha made a quick decision to rewrite the whole essay without flly understanding the main problems and how to solve them and, instead, "decided to rewrite it because it is full of red ink."

While the skilled self-regulators comprehensively evaluated their drats in terms of progress and problems and identified trategies to improve future writing, the les-skilled self-regulators responded to their writing and revising outcomes superficially.For example when Jiao had finished editing her draft she used several strategies to evaluate her original draft and her revised draft. She compared her drafts with writing exemplars to help her \*detect problems in the draft summarise difficulties, and diagnose possile causes of problems in English writing'. Xin,after revising, compared the original and revised drafts and evaluated the improvement in the content, organisation, language use, and vocabulary. She recalled:

The revised draft is beter in idea development sticking closely to the iven topic than the irs draft, and its information accuracy has been improved as well. Some ambiguous or unclear expressions had been improved. (Xin, SR1)

In contrast, self-evaluations made by les-skilled slf-regulators were more likely to be general. Having compared the original and :vised drafts, the less-skilled self-regulators expressed some general feelings such as:

It was eaier to rie the eon ft th wting th firt rft.. I'mt sre wht ake the sond rft iffeen frhe first one But there are fewer words in the second draft. Maybe the second draft is more relevant to the topic. (Sha, SR1)

In her err log, Sha evaluated her progres, rather vaguely, as more organised . more advanced vocabulary" and was unable to report what strategies could be used to work on the weakness.

Participants in the self-regulated group engaged in more in-depth and ongoing self-reflction than the les self-regulated group. They described a common practice f eflecting on the writing proces to detect problems that had been overlooked, diagnose possible causes, and then initiate spefic writing strateies to improve future writing and learning. Whenrevising the first draft of Writing Task Two, Xin found she had included \*information irrelevant to the topic and that the content lacked clarity, both of which she aributed to the negative influence of her native language". In her reflective journal entry, Xin described adjusting her pre-writing strategy in this way: \*Before writing, I did some brainstorming and listed some main points, from which I selected those relevant and peruasive to support my thesis." Her comments were reflective and she appeared to have internalised the points learned through revising. In the second stimulated recall, Jiao reflected on her approach to improving the range of vocabulary:

It's really time-consuming to find a proper word. When I get the synonyms of a word, I need to examine their usage, which is annoying But that's learning. To save time, now I don't just use synonyms, and I find phrases that have a simlar meaning can be used, to. (Jiao, SR2)

Jiao took advantage of external feedback and, by relaing it to her own review of her work, formulated a strategy to improve future writing and learning.

In contrast, th  sef-rla tdts w e willi  efct criticll on the ridras adth wting o. elf reflection by the les self-regulated group on the writing and the revising process was mainly task-based. Of the group, Meng reflected on her writing and writing proces the st, with her refections being so uperficial that the ontributed ttle t her understanding of good English writing. Although she could detect problems in her drat, she seldom considered possble causes. When responding to the teacher's feedback on the relevance of including details about the topic, she attributed her lack of attention to detail to misunder standing the writing prompt; she appeared unable to relate the teacher's feedback on her problems in the writing proces. Although Sha and Qing reflected on their current witing problems andtried to identif cause in their writing proces and use f strate, they were unable to apply this to their revisions. It apeared that the les-skilled self-regulators wanted to adressthe immediate problem while the skilld selfregulators, stimulated by the fedback, identified potential solutions to the problems in their writing process to enhance their overall understanding of L2 writing.

To identify cognitive operations of processing teacher feedback and gain an overview of students' cognitive engagement acros all writing assgnments, the first level of analysis was an assessment of high and low depth of processing (DOP) of different types of feedback. Table 3 and Table 4 show the frequency data comparing diffrent types of feedack from the teacher. These data indicate that the self-regulated group processed $9 3 . 2 8 \%$ $( n = 1 1 1$ ) of indirect feedback with high DOP and $6 . 7 2 \%$ $( n = 8$ with low DOP, whereas the less self-regulated group processed $7 0 . 1 3 \%$ $( n = 1 0 8 )$ ) of indirect feedback with high DOP and $2 9 . 8 7 \%$ $n = 4 6$ with low DOP; that is, killed self-regulators demonstrated higher DOP when responding to indirec feedback than those who were lesskilled. Stimulated recall interviews show that slf-regulated students, with indirect feedback, tended to \*compare and analyse possble revisions before choosing the right one" (Xin, SR3). Meng, alesself-regulated student, reported "not understanding why the change was suggested by the teacher", and then promptly moved on without further consulting the feedback.

Table 3 Cross-tabulation of type of feedback and depth of processing (DOP) for the self-regulated group.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2" colspan="2">Feedback type</td><td colspan="2">Hong</td><td colspan="2"> Jiao</td><td colspan="2">Xin</td><td colspan="2">Group</td></tr><tr><td>Low</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">Indirect feedback</td><td>Content n (%)</td><td>1 (2.04)</td><td>23 (46.94)</td><td>1 (4.00)</td><td>11 (44.00)</td><td>2 (4.44)</td><td>18 (40.00)</td><td>4 (3.36)</td><td>52 (43.70)</td></tr><tr><td>Organisation n (%)</td><td>1 (2.04)</td><td>10 (20.41)</td><td>0</td><td>2 (8.00)</td><td>1 (2.22)</td><td>6 (13.34)</td><td>2 (1.68)</td><td>18 (15.13)</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary n (%)</td><td>1 (2.04)</td><td>12 (24.49)</td><td>0</td><td>10 (40.00)</td><td>0</td><td>9 (20.00)</td><td>1 (0.84)</td><td>31 (26.05)</td></tr><tr><td>Language use n (%)</td><td>0</td><td>1 (2.04)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>9 (20.00)</td><td>0</td><td>9 (8.40)</td></tr><tr><td>Mechanics n (%)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1 (4.00)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1 (0.84)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>3 (6.12)</td><td>46 (93.88)</td><td>2 (8.00)</td><td>23 (92.00)</td><td>3 (6.67)</td><td>42 (93.33)</td><td>8 (6.72)</td><td>111 (93.28)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">Direct feedback</td><td>Content n (%)</td><td>2 (11.11)</td><td>1 (5.56)</td><td>1 (6.20)</td><td>0</td><td>2 (11.80)</td><td>2 (11.80)</td><td>5 (9.80)</td><td>3 (5.88)</td></tr><tr><td>Organisation n (%)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary n (%)</td><td>1 (5.56)</td><td>6 (33.32)</td><td>3 (18.80)</td><td>3 (18.80)</td><td>2 (11.80)</td><td>7 (41.10)</td><td>6 (11.76)</td><td>16 (31.37)</td></tr><tr><td>Language use n (%)</td><td>4 (22.22)</td><td>3 (16.67)</td><td>2 (12.50)</td><td>7 (43.70)</td><td>1 (5.90)</td><td>3 (17.60)</td><td>7 (13.73)</td><td>13 (25.49)</td></tr><tr><td>Mechanics n (%)</td><td>1 (5.56)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1 (1.96)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>8 (44.44)</td><td>10 (55.56)</td><td>6 (37.50)</td><td>10 (62.50)</td><td>5 (29.41)</td><td>12 (70.59)</td><td>19 (37.25)</td><td>32 (62.75)</td></tr></table></body></html>

When dealing with direct fedback, skilled self-regulators reported more applications of high DOP to process the corrected errors. As shown in Tables 3 and 4, the self-regulated group processed $6 2 . 7 5 \%$ $\scriptstyle n = 3 2$ ) of corrected errors with high DOP and $3 7 . 2 5 \%$ $n = 1 9$ with low DOP while the less self-regulated group processed $3 5 . 4 8 \%$ $( n = 2 2$ ) of corrected errors with high DOP and $6 4 . 5 2 \%$ $( n = 4 0 )$ with low DOP. Excerpts from error los of the self-regulated students indicate that they were willing to make a cognitive efort to clarify the confusion caused by the direct feedback before they recorded it. When asked whether she understood the corrctions initiated by the teacher, Sha answered no and explained:

I think have to is the ame as must. Why must I used its citizens food choice' to vary vocabulary, but the teacher suggested ensure a heth d fo it ciiens. Wll i is giy right  n  gh Ay,  t hs reion se the teacher is the teacher. (Sha, SR4)

Sha appeared to expend little cognitive effort to understand the teacher's corrections but took them as she trusted in the teacher's authority in language use.

Achieving a successful solution after identifying problems did not occur for all students. The selfregulated group consistently carried out cognitive operations by deecting witing isue in the draft diagnosing possile causes of problems in the drat, generating writing skils or strategies, and applying them when drafting a new essay. During this proces, they acted strategically by making comparisons with teacher feedback to detect similarities and differences, analysing texts with reader awarenes, and grouping the same types of errors. For example, when responding to the teacher's feedback on developing ideas in the second writing task, Jiao analysed the issue critically from the perspective of a reader:

He thought that this paragraph entails more than one sub-point. Actually, there is just one. But the topic sentence is so long that my central idea ecomes lose. And supporting details are not logiclly connected. In the reader's position, it may have two sub-points. So, I transformed the complexed topic into a shorter sentence and used a linking deice to transit to the supporting sentences. At the end of the paragraph, I wrote a summary sentence. In this way, I think it's easier for the teacher to follow my ideas. (Jiao, SR3)

This remark and the subsequent account of her teacher's eforts t heighten students' awarenes of audience expectations indicate that she read from the reader's perspective to understand why her teacher offred such feedback. Jiao used deductive reasoning to formulate an appropriate approach on her own, which she applied to her new writings Similar solutions were reported in the comments by Hong and Xin.

Once student identified the problems in the essays, rather than execute a correction spontaneously, they till needed to discern the most pertinent information in the teacher's comments, find the causes of the problems, and decide on the type of revision to use and how o apply it. On revising the first draft of Writing Task One, Meng correctly interpreted the teacher' feedback: \*He asked me to explain my point with more information. And supporting detail should be relevant and logical.' Despite applying the teacher's suggestion that she give supporting details, she decided just to rewrite it. She aid: \*It's easier to rewrite. The rewrite strategy did not incrse the qualit of her eay, as she did not dianose the naure of the problems in the original text firt, an important step in the revision process.

After solving the problems at the task level, both groups went beyond the immediate feedback to infer or abstract general rules underlying the ssues. The skilld self-regulators applied their updated writing knowledge to a similar situation. When reading feedback related to meaning, coherence and rhetorical structures, Xin, for example, reverted to thinking about her writing problems with these aspects and logially worked out strategy for expression. She recalled, Now when I was revising my draft, I always asked myself, 'Is there logic between sentences?' 'Are these supporting details relevant to the thesis?'

Table 4 Cross-tabulation of type of feedback and depth of processing (DOP) for the less self-regulated group.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2" colspan="2">Feedback type</td><td colspan="2">Meng</td><td colspan="2">Qing</td><td colspan="2">Sha</td><td colspan="2">Group</td></tr><tr><td>Low</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">Indirect feedback</td><td>Content n (%)</td><td>4 (6.70)</td><td>15 (25.00)</td><td>6 (15.40)</td><td>15 (38.50)</td><td>4 (7.30)</td><td>11 (20.00)</td><td>14 (9.09)</td><td>41 (26.62)</td></tr><tr><td>Organisation n (%)</td><td>2 (3.30)</td><td>4 (6.70)</td><td>3 (7.60)</td><td>2 (5.10)</td><td>0</td><td>15 (27.30)</td><td>5 (3.25)</td><td>21 (13.64)</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary n (%)</td><td>15 (25.00)</td><td>7 (11.60)</td><td>4 (10.20)</td><td>6 (15.40)</td><td>3 (5.50)</td><td>11 (20.00)</td><td>22 (14.29)</td><td>24 (15.58)</td></tr><tr><td>Language use n (%)</td><td>3 (5.00)</td><td>10 (16.67)</td><td>0</td><td>1 (2.60)</td><td>1 (1.80)</td><td>10 (18.10)</td><td>4 (2.60)</td><td>21 (13.64)</td></tr><tr><td>Mechanics n (%)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1 (2.60)</td><td>1 (2.60)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1 (0.65)</td><td>1 (0.65)</td></tr><tr><td>Total n (%)</td><td>24 (40.00)</td><td>36 (60.00)</td><td>14 (35.9)</td><td>25 (64.10)</td><td>8 (14.55)</td><td>47 (85.45)</td><td>46 (29.87)</td><td>108 (70.13)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">Direct feedback</td><td>Content n (%)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>3 (15.80)</td><td>1 (5.30)</td><td>0</td><td>1 (5.60)</td><td>3 (4.84)</td><td>2 (3.23)</td></tr><tr><td>Organisation n (%)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1 (5.60)</td><td>1 (5.60)</td><td>1 (1.61)</td><td>1 (1.61)</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary n (%)</td><td>7 (28.00)</td><td>5 (20.00)</td><td>5 (26.30)</td><td>7 (36.80)</td><td>4 (22.20)</td><td>0</td><td>16 (25.81)</td><td>12 (19.35)</td></tr><tr><td>Language use n (%)</td><td>9 (36.00)</td><td>3 (12.00)</td><td>3 (15.80)</td><td>0</td><td>6 (33.20)</td><td>4 (22.20)</td><td>18 (29.03)</td><td>7 (11.29)</td></tr><tr><td>Mechanics n (%)</td><td>1 (4.00)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1 (5.60)</td><td>0</td><td>2 (3.23)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total n (%)</td><td>17 (68.00)</td><td>8 (32.00)</td><td>11 (37.93)</td><td>8 (27.59)</td><td>12 (66.67)</td><td>6 (33.33)</td><td>40 (64.52)</td><td>22 (35.48)</td></tr></table></body></html>

In contrast, les-skilled self-regulators were less ikely to apply updated writing strategies and knowledge. Afer revising the first draf of Writing Task Two, Qing sensed there i a difference between writing a Chinese and English conclusion, explaining, Chinese conclusion tends to empathise with readers using emotional expressons while nglish conclusion call for a restatement of opinions or measurements to be taken'. Surprisingly, although it seems Qing understood what an appropriate conclusion was in English, her concluding paragraph in the first and second drafts of Writing Task Three was, once again, problematic.

# 4.2. Behavioural engagement

By comparing the draft from two rounds of revision in three writing tasks, we can see that it is possible to evaluate to extent to which students incorporated teacher feedback to revise the essys. The mean score for each feedback target area is presented in Table 5. The aessment of ix students uptake f teacher fdback obtained reealed that the elf-regulated group was more sucessful in addressing the concens rised in the fedback than the les self-regulated group. The mean score for the extent of revision (ER) in the self-regulated group was 4.03, which suggests that, even though aspects of the writing were stil inadequat, students in this group had addressed concerns raised in the feedback. In comparison, the mean score for ER for the les self-regulated group was 2.83, implying that they addressed the concerns raise in the feedback electively so that overall qualit of the writing, although marginally beter, istll cmpe. he res gs that the skilled ef-lr  th tchr eak oreffctivey than the less-skilled self-regulators.

Further differences between the two groups are evident from analysing students' performance in each feedback target area in Table 5. The selfregulated group had higher scores than the les self-regulated group in responding to feedback on content, organ. sation, vocabulary, and language use. This was especially evident in the much higher gains from feedack for organisation and vocabulary for the self-regulated group than the les self-regulated group. The changes in the drafts based on teacher fdback, between the two groups, also vary in these target areas. For the elfregulated group, the greatest changes were vident in vocabulary, ollowed by organisation, content, and language respectively. For the leself-regulated group, the greatest change was in vocabulary, followed by content, language use and organisation respectively. Whereas the self-regulated group focused on vocabulary in the writing when responding to teacher feedback, they were also concerned with issues of organisation, the lesselfregulated group gave the least attention to the organisation of the text. Overal, in comparison with the les skill elf-reulated group, there was evidence of more careful processing of the information in writing among skilled self-regulators to achieve the desired outcome.

The interviews elicited evidence of how students applied revision strategies and regulated larning strategies. The self-regulated group described more strategies used to handle teacher feedback than the les self-regulated group. The strategies mentioned only by the self-regulated group were referring back to previous compositions, using a placeholder trategy and checking the self-evaluating strategies list.

Other revising strategies described by both groups, but not employed in the same way, included rereading writing prompts, using dictionaries to source language, and rewriting. The comparison of participants' recalls shows that the skilled self-regulators reread writing prompts more frequently than es-killed self-reulators. Whenever slf-reulated participants revised thr frstdrafts, they first reread writing prompts for further understanding and clarification before making amendments to content development or textual organisation. In contrast, the es-skilled self-reulators devoted lite atention to writing prompts. For example, Meng confessed, in the stimulated recallinterview, that she did not reread the writing prompt but rlied on the teacher's comments to resolve the problems i content. Although the teacher's feedack reminded her to clarify her understanding of the task before revising, she did not appear to remember to reread the writing prompt to improve her revisions.

While the response to the feedback strategy favoured by both groups was to use dictionaries as language resources, the way it was used was different. The thre skilled self-regulated participants described using a dictionary to improve vocabulary and language use. At first, they selected any word, or a synonym provided by online Chinese-English dictionaries or translation software, without considering whether it was appropriate; later they diffrentiated the words by checking how they wereused in an online dictionary. They reported that they studied the words further,comparing their usages, and reading sample sentences before choosing a word or expression. When the esself-regulated group aessed online materialsor dictionaries, they relied heavily on Chinese-English dictionaries and the Baidu translation software for choosing the selected word. At times, they hesitated when choosing English words provided by the dictionary, expressing doubt about the eliability of these online dictionaries. Meng complained, I don't know what's the problem with answer for' here (In addition, individuals are supposed to answer for themselves'). I checked the dictionary and found its Chinese equivalent makes sense." Meng did not read English definitions and sample sentences but followed the Chinese translation, which, at times, led to misuses of these words.

Table 5 Comparison of the mean scores for the extent of revision between groups.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Feedback target area</td><td colspan="8">Mean score for the extent of revision</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Xin</td><td>Hong</td><td> Jiao</td><td>Self-regulated group</td><td>Meng</td><td>Sha</td><td>Qing</td><td>Less self-regulated group</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>3.53</td><td>3.83</td><td>4.00</td><td>3.79</td><td>2.42</td><td>3.05</td><td>2.45</td><td>2.64</td></tr><tr><td> Organisation</td><td>3.75</td><td>4.00</td><td>4.50</td><td>4.08</td><td>2.33</td><td>2.67</td><td>2.40</td><td>2.47</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>4.67</td><td>4.08</td><td>4.60</td><td>4.45</td><td>2.50</td><td>3.08</td><td>3.10</td><td>2.89</td></tr><tr><td> Language use</td><td>3.80</td><td>3.50</td><td></td><td>3.65</td><td>3.50</td><td>3.36</td><td>1.00</td><td>2.62</td></tr><tr><td> Mechanics</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>5.00</td><td>5.00</td><td>-</td><td>5.00</td><td>5.00</td><td>5.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>3.85</td><td>3.92</td><td>4.32</td><td>4.03</td><td>2.69</td><td>3.09</td><td>2.70</td><td>2.83</td></tr></table></body></html>

A remarkable difference in behavioural engagement between skilled and les-skilled self-regulators concerned self-regulating strategies to improve future writing or learning. All the self-regulated writers made a conscious effort to plan strategies to adjust subsequent writing and learning. In their interview responses, they described analysing their esay in light of previous language learning, current language learning, and acquisition of the writing skill required for their future writing development. For example, Jiao's comments revealed the motives for her pre-revision plans, confiding that the notes she took prior t revising made "a particular word and sentence it together to bring out an important argument. For example, Jiao identified what was impeding her learning of English and English writing, and which aspects of writing needed further atention. Xin and Hong exhibited similar behaviours: Xin considered the logical rlationship between the thesis statement and supporting details before writing; Hong acknowledged that pre draft global and local planning was necessary to achieve coherence in her writig. These self-regulated learners could be considered as 'learning oriented'.

Although teacher feedback also encouraged the lesskilled self-regulators to confirm, elaborate, enrich, replace, tune, or restructure prior tactics and strategies of writing, there was no evidence that they were self-regulating their learning trategies. For example, while Meng expressed the need to memorise words ater each stimulated recall she did not use any specific ways or plans to expand her vocabulary. As Qing found staying focused on the topic challenging, the teacher, during the writing conference, suggested drafting an outline before writig. In the intrview, she realised how important a ood plan was to avoid driting off-topic, but I was unable to work out an efficient outline as the instructor suggested."

# 4.3. Affective engagement

The data revealed that all participants' positive feedback activated their positive emotions; likewise, they experienced positie emotions when they detected a gap betweentheir writig and writing criteria. Feelings of pride in successful revisions and evidence of writing progress gave them hope for success, thus suggesting they generally enjoyed the revising pocess. They felt positive about teacher feedback and acknowledged that teacher feeback helped them to identify their writing problems, improve language expression, enrich writing knowledge, and motivate them to write. However, only the skilled self-regulators reported joy in new learning through revising and applying what they had previously learned. Hong implied she felt encouraged, especially by feedback confirming her application of writing skils and strategies used in the revision proces, and she appeared to have pride in her work because she perceived it as meaningful:

.. aplying what I have learned in writing is the most efective writing skil and leaning strategy. In reving this draft, I applied some expressions and sentence patterns that I had leaned from an intensive English course. I felt delighted and satisfied with it ... (Hong, SR4)

Jiao also attested to the learning benefits that could be accrued from the revision process:

.. the teacher pointed out a weakness or place to be improved. As long as we work on them, we can improve or avoid similar mistakes next time. So, I simply wanted to make my drafts better through revising. Whil revising I dlso read some writing samples of a similar topic, which will boost my confidence in writing similar topics. (Jiao, Interview 2)

The revision process increased Jiaos self-eficacy which stimulated her to apply herself to the learning process and to persist with learning challenges making her proud of her work and the outcomes of her efforts.

The less-skilled self-regulators, faced with direct feedback, tended to show a kind of acceptance and relief. The direct feedback Meng received caused positive deactivating emotions, as she recalled, I did not need to think hard about how to revise. Ifelt relaxed from revision pressure". Sha and Qing reported similar emotions saying they thought it was beyond their writing abilit to revise to the teacher's satisfaction.

The revising process also led to negative activation of emotions for all partcipants triggered by different sources. All three elf regulated participants reported their feelings f shame' when they received extensive feedback. The skilled self-regulators experi. enced anxiety in dealing with their difficulties, revision and writing qualit, the shame of extensive errors, and frustration with some writing strategies. For Hong, substantial positive and negative teacher commentary made her fel happy and satisfied, and that \*the more feedack I got, the better I would be able to do what the teacher requested. Theself-regulators encouraged themselve to \*work harder and study independently' because they saw learning as a process.

The less self-regulated group were more concerned with writing problems at the task level. They were anxious about extensive errors, revising difficulties, reviseddraft, and the writing quality. While Qing complained that she ried hard to revise but felt unable to mee the teacher's requirements", her revisions were maily at the surfae level. Less-killed self-regulators felt overwhelmed when confused about how to proceed with revisions feeling frustrated with limited progress ater trying their best to revise negatively impacted their writigslf-fficacy. Meng recalled, "Sometimes, I till don't know what word he wants me to put here. It makes me upset."

The less-silled elf-regulators usually ascried difficulties in writing and revising to personal failure and an inability to solve the problem. All three complained that it was overwhelming for them to revise to the teacher's satisfaction. Qing recalled, Now my writing ability is not good enough to revise as the teacher expected'. Meng and Sha also attribute their difficulties, or failues, in revising to limited writig competency compared with their pers. The skilled self-reulators, however, saw difficultie as a cognitive incongruity, implying an unsolved problem. While they also experienced frustration when not finding asolution to a writing problem, they expressed enjoyment, or delight, when questions were solved, and they usually felt confident to address them.

The difference in affective engagement between the two groups is also apparent in their motivational response, for example, their wilingness or intention to complete a revision task or to learn new information through revision. The skilld self-regulators all demonstrated that they were strongly motivated to improve their drafts and English writing ability. Xin wanted to develop the "imperfect places' in her writing, saying, "Since the teacher has pointed out where to be improved, I was determined to improve it'. Working hard on teacher feedback, Hong said, furthered her understanding of the rhetorical requirements of argumentative writig and helped her with future writing. A similar motivated response by Jiao is evident in her comment that her wish to find out what the teacher wanted stemmed more from her \*desire to improve writing competency than to earn a particular grade". The selfregulated group all regarded revision as a process of learning, not just revising drafts.

The skilled self-regulators had, in common, a constant commitment to learning new information, whil the les-skilled selfreg. ulators demonstrated a desire to complete revision tasks. The latter's motivation in revising their drafts was to detect errors, as suggested in teacher feback, and to corrct them. Although Meng tried hard to understand the teacher's intention and occasionally explored causes underlying her writing problems, she seldom reviewed her writing or her learning of strategies. She preferred correctie feedback because she "did not have to do much when revising". Even though Meng stated that she needed to increase her vocabulary size, she did not pursue her intention in her writing. Qing and Sha had similar ractions: while they valued the revising and writing process with fedback, their intention to reulat 2 leaning was limited. It appeared that the lesself-reulated group relied heavily on teacher input for revision.

# 5. Discussion

In exploring EFL writers responses to teacher feedback from cognitive, behavioural, and afective aspects, we found that the relationship between feedback and subsequent outcomes is mediated by students' agentic use of the feedback and engagement with the feedback process (Winstone, Nash, Rowntree, & Parker, 2017). While these findings confirm prior reearch that feedback can facilitate knowledge building and self-reulation (Hatte & Timperle, 2007), student engagement with feedback is oten inconsistent and varied across individuals (Cheng & Liu, 2022; Yu & Liu, 2021; Hyland & Hyland, 2006; Zhang & Hyland, 2022) In ths study, slf-regulated writers differed from their les-self-regulated peers in that they are more learning-oriented and engage proactively with feedback.

Skilled and lesskilled self-regulators dffered in their awareness f, and ability to interpret feedack. As discussed ealier, awareness is defined by Winstone et al. (2017) as an understanding of the meaning and purpose of feedback. Likewise, Qi and Lapkin (2001) claim that awarenessat the level of noticing dffers, cognitively, from that at the level of understanding. Such a dichotomy, however, does not fully explain students awareness feedback. In the current study, skilled self-regulators were also better than less-silled self-regulators in language proficiency and writing ability. Low language proficiency levels, as well as limited metalinguistic and writing knowledge, appeared to account for es-silled self-regulators incorrect interpretation of the teacher's comments and proces feedback, particularly in relation to linguistic eror (T. F. Zhang, 2021). While both groups of students erception of the purpose of feedback evolved from being not only for evaluation but also to support future writing and learning. Skilled self-regulators described more nuanced perceptions of the purpose and nature of feedback beyond facilitatig text improvement. For EFL/L2 writers, language proficiency is the strongest factor mitigating the eficacy of teacher fdback (see a meta-analysis by Lim & Renandya, 2020). In this study, students with lower L2 proficiency tended to adopt a form-focused revision approach while the students with higher L2 proficiency focused on both linguistic and discourse levels (T. T. Zhang, 2021). As a result, they were better than their les-skilld pees i attending to high-level issues in their revision, detecting writig problems, and diagnosing causes of problems beyond the level of the task. This finding aligns with previous studies, for example, Cheng and Liu (2022) and Zheng and Yu (2018).

As observed by Winstone et al. (2017), not knowing how to implement feedback i a possible explanation for students poor use of feedback. Similarly, Winstone and Carles (2019) asserted that students need to be aware of behaviours and have a repertoire of strategies for acting on fedack. Morover, a limted onception of revision may restrict students knowledge about valuation criteria and ability to detect and diagnose problems and constrain effctive revisions (Cheng & Liu, 2022). In the current study, students cognisance of writing, and revision strategies differed in depth and appropriatenes. Skilled self-regulators, in this study, had more writing strategies at their disposal when producing and revising their text than their les-skilled peers, and were better at applying appropriat strategies. Previous research has reported that the degree to which they apply writing strategies influences EFL/L2 students' writing performance (Bai t a., 2020). For example, whil giving equal attention to some high-level issues in their revision attempts, the limited competence of les-skilled self-regulators in addressing these issues may have contributed to their slower development ofproblem-solving ability than the skilld selfregulators Lack of cognisance may have been a barrier to their writer's agency as identified in previous research (De Larios et al., 2002).

Agency represents the writer's sense of empowerment to translate feedback into action (Winstone & Carless, 2019). Winstone et al. (2017) warned that knowing what needs to be developed is quite diffrent from knowing how to achieve that development (p. 2035) It is closely tied to metacognitive awareness and strategies through which students exercise conscious control over their revising process. While with metacognitive knowledge students can make decisions and take actions appropriately (Zhang, 2016; Zhang & Zhang, 2018; Zhang, 2022), metacognitive deficits may discourage students from proactively using ther fdackeffectively. Students frequently report difficulty in transferring feedback to future work (Gleaves et al., 2008), which may lead to behavioural dis-engagement. In the current study, skille ef-regulators were more able to transfer eedack across writing assignments and more flexible in regulating the writing and learning process by referring to feedback,than les-skilled self-regulators. This confirms that less-silled self-regulators focus more on the immediat transfer of feedback for the sake of direct applicability and effct while ignoring the longer-term potential of feedback for developing writing competence (Price et al., 2011).

Finall, volition represents learners willingnessto scrutinise fedback nd respond with appropriate strategies to use it (Winstone, et a., 2017). In our stdy, the l-skilled self-reulators were nt as roactieas skilled self-reulators in the utilisation f fdback; neither were they as receptive of the feedback provided to them. Although the former had the competence to self-regulate, they may not have willingly used feedback if they felt uncommitted. Thus, the findings f the current study add to the literature on emotional reactions to feedback (Han & Hyland, 2019) and suggest that emotional maturit, coupled with students pre-conception of the role feedback in the writing proces, ifluences thir processing of fedback. Reserchers have alo reported that students motivation and learning goals impact the extent to which they are ready to put feedack into action (Hyland, 2011; Zimmerman, 2000). Inthis study, the less-killed self-lators cking inrinic mtivation, did nt aar t be willing to nact proctiely the rision prses, nd consequently, the teacher's feedback acted moreas external motivation. This resonates with previous findings that student's intrinsic motivation played an active role in engagement, particularly when checking the qualit of such engagement (e.g., Wang & Lee 2021). When faced with difficulty, les-skilled self-regulators' lack of volition might have derived from their inadequate awareness of the utility of teacher feedback as wellas their lack of volition to review their writing and revise it accordingly.

The findings also show the interaction among the three dimensions of learner engagement, supporting Ellis (2010) argument that it is insufficient to understand leaner engagement from only one dimension. Rather than working in isolation, the thre imensions typically interact with one another to lead to the revision and learning outcomes, as claimed by other researchers (Cheng & Liu, 2022; Yu et al., 2020. The three dimensions of engagement jointl ifluence how students proces feedback, the extent to which they notice gaps in their knowledge, the aspects of language they pay attention to, and, consequently, how they exploit the learning opportunities provided in writing. Similarl, Han and Xu (2019) clamed that leaners cognitive and socio-affective readinessis required for deep engagement. Winstone and Carless(2019) argued that mindful engagement involves reflection and interpretation, as well as the application of feedback to develop understanding and adjust lening behaviours. Silled self-regulators in this study were more likly to engage in a learning-directed style of metacognitive operations. They were more productive when reflcting on their writing, learning, and engagement in self-regulating activities. Lesskilled self-regulators, in contrast, accepted the teacher feedback. appearing to prfer xna relation t elf-rulation. n tms of ehavioral rations, when skille elf-latrs engag with teacher feedback in support of learning, they were ready to adjust their learning straegies informed by feedback, and to improve their future learning.

Skilled self-regulators seemed to hold strong hopes for future writing with enhanced inrinsic motivation and they saw themselves as responsible for their own learning. As Winstone and Carless (2019) argue, these higher levels of engagement require commitment and willingness to invest time and effort. The findings suggest that les-skilled self-regulators in our study were more likely to feel deactivated by both positive and negative feedack than skilled elfregulators. As posited by Truscott (1996), this may be ssociated with their previous unsuceful cognitive and behavioural engagement. killed self-regulators reported that revisions, stimulated by the discovery of new connections, ideas, or arguments, are intrinsically more interesting. Their engagement i likely to be associated with improvements in the substance rather than the form of the text. Finally, as posited by Ivanic et al. (2000, teachers' feedback responses have to be interpreted, constructed, and intenalised by the students if they re to have a significant influence on subsequent student learning. In this study, silled self-regulators were beter at converting negative emotions into activating emotions, possibly because of their awarenessof the purpose of feedback as atool to facilitat leaning and improvement (e.g., Dawson et l., 2019). The skille sef-lators pperd willing to sctinse feack, utiise it and t oit to deoing ther skill (instone t al., 017). When they became aware of the learning benefits accrued from engaging with feedback, they were proactive in behavioural engagement. As is well documented, self-regulated learning is characterised by the readinessof the students to investeffort in ana lysing and incorporating the feedback in their work (Zimmerman, 2000).

# 6. Conclusion

This qualitative study was set up to examine Chinese students' self-regulation and engagement with feedback i learning to write in EFL in the Chinese context. We therefore examined similarites and differences between two groups of EFL learners and wanted to see how self-regulated and lesself-regulated EFL writers engaged with fedback from a multifaceted perspective. We found that there were both consistencies and inconsistencies across the dimensions of engagement of cognition, behaviour, and affect. The findings show that these aspects are also interactive in that individuals may engage simultaneously in more than one way and that the construct of engagement assumes the interaction of the individual with the context (Finn & Rock, 1997). Being qualitative and thus interpretive in nature, the study should be understood in this way and the findings should be interpreted with the pecific research context in mind, and caution i in order with any attempt to generalise the findings across contexts. The imbalance in sampling with only female participants may constrain the generalisation of the findings. We are not sure if the same indings would emerge when male students are involved as participants. Additionally, we need to note that the stimulated recalls were not sufficiently sensitive in capturing lower-level processing. To address this shortcoming, fture studies could use more than one measure to assess processing, such as combination of stimulated recalls with eye-tracking.

In spite of these limitations, our study has several implications for EFL/L2 writing feedback practice. First, given the inding that students' decision-making regarding their uptake of fedback was related to the interaction among cognitive, behavioural, and affective engagement, we suggest that the provision of feedback certainly be attuned to students' developmental levels and selfregulation competence. Writing teachers might need to initilly identify barriers to students' engagement at the cognitive, behavioural, or affective levels, so that they understand that some factors would potentiall prevent students from using feedback effectiely. For example, incorporating explicit instruction in using revisin strategies in writing clases may be helpful for those who are not cognisant of appropriate trategies and opportunitie for making use of feedback For students who know about these strategies and opportunties but do not know how to use them efectively, writing teachers need to provide support to transform their knowledge into action. In addition, to prevent student from being demotivated by the absence f any immediate benefit, writing teachers can also encourage their students to focus on their overalltrajectory of improvement that might be a result of teacher feedback.

Second, as the findings suggest that les self-regulated writers have challenges in using feedback for learning, writing teachers might need to devlop students feedback litracy by considering students to be at the entre of the fedback proces and guide them to appreciate that feedback has a meaning-making function more than just err orrction (Yu et al., 2020). As Carless and Boud (2018) have claimed, asessment-literate students are capable of appreciating feedback, making judgements, managing affects, and taking actions. Therefore, teachers should encourage students to address more than immediate problems identified in the feedback by evaluating the writing process and learning strategies for benefitting student learning and long-term development towards higher levels of EFL writing proficiency.

# Author statement

We declare that the study reported in this manuscript has not been published nor under concurrent consideration with any other publisher or journal. Li (Francoise) Yang and Lawrence Jun Zhang conceptualised the study, with Yang having collcted and analysed the data, written the irt draft and Zhang revised the manuscript for sumission as the corresponding uthor. The contribution t this manuscript is equally shared.

# Declaration of competing interest

There are no financial and non-financial competing interests in relation to the manuscript.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2023.101226.

# References

Andrade, M. S., & Evans, . . (2013). Pricies ad prctices for reonse in sond ngag wtig Ding ef-atd er. utedge.   
Bai,    , , In Educational Evaluation, 65, 1-11.   
Bai B.  .1)       t , Article 102404.   
Bitchener, J., & Storch, N. (2016). Written corrective feedback for L2 development. Multilingual Matters.   
Cares,  d 018Tf  c   f fk  go 438) 1315-1325.   
Che J,   J Pr, J 22id  ris  th t  mdin nd Learning, 17(1), 191-211. https://doi.org/10.1515/iral-2021-0078.   
heg         0 i 102880. on L2 wCF. Journal of Second Language Writing, 58, Article 100934.   
, P  ,  019  it  s Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 44(1), 25-36.   
ear  a in L2 writing (pp. 11-47). Kluwer Academic Publishers.   
Dornyei, .2005). The psychology of the language leamer: Individual difeences in second language acqustin. Lawrence Erlbaum Associaes.   
Ellis, . (2010. e framework for instigating l d wen corrctive eack e in ond nage Aqustion 322) 35-349.   
Ene, E., & Upton, T. A. (2014). Learner uptake of teacher electronic feedback in ESL composition. System, 46, 80-95.   
Finn, J. D., & Rock, D. A.(1997). Academic success among students at risk for schoo failure. Journdl of Applied Psychology, 82(2), 221.   
Frck, d  P 00    te ,  ti    1) 59-109.   
e constrained compliance? Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 33(3), 219-231.   
Han .2019. i ie k  l titi te  ad n 0 88303.   
Han15.i   g 30, 31-44.   
Han, Y., & Hyland, F. (2019). Academic emotions in writen corrective feeback situations. Joundl of English for Acadeic Purpose, 38, 1-13.   
Hn, 01    h ion 2 (2), 181-196.   
Hattie, .  Gan, . (2011). Intction bad o feack. In R Mayer, & P.Axaner Ed.), Hndoo f rech on lng d intctin $2 ^ { \mathrm { n d } }$ ed., pp. 249-271). Routledge.   
Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research, 77(1), 81-112.   
Hawe, E M., & Dixon, H R. (2014) Building students' ealuative and prodctive expertis in the writig classoom. Asssin Writing, 19, 66-79.

13, Article 1036831. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1036831 Hyland, 01Th f f g   i i language (pp. 159-179). John Benjamins. Hyland, K., & Hyland, F. (2006). Feedback on second language students' writing. Language Teaching, 39(2), 83-101. Ivanic, R, Clak  r  (20 ht   ud o makf thi? The m covetdns y ors w om. M Lea, & B. Stierer (Eds.), Student writing in higher education: New contexts. Open University Press. Jacson,  P . 0   t m w  t  r ti. f nge Writing, 49. Jab,   e, e  81   n. m 01   i  rl, 53 (4), 913-938. Kroll, B. (2001). Considerations for teaching an ESL/EFL writing course. Teaching English as a second or foreig language, 3, 219-232. Le  (20fi tiek  n   ng 49 Article 100734. Leow, R P., & Merer, J D. (2015). th of procesing in L2 ling: Thry, arch, and pdggy. Joual of Spnsh Lngug eching 21) 982. Lim, S. C., & Renandya, W. A. (2020). Efficacy of written corrective feedback in writing instruction: A meta-analysis. TESL-EJ, 24(3). Liu, . Yu, S. 2022. Roncetualizing th impact of feedack in second language writing: A multidmensionalpersective. Assig Writng, 53. Mercer, . (2019. Lar egmt in the e   G d.), ond nookf ngish ange tchig (. 643660. pger. Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2020). Qualitative data analysis A methods sourcebook (4th ed.). Sage. Oxford, R. L. (2017). Teaching and researching language learning strategies: Self-regulation in context (2nd ed.). Routledge. Peson .2 g f    w    f h- wesn. Assessing Writing, 52. Pekru  6 a r f at in rie, a io r i ati ti Psychology Review, 18(4), 315-341. Pit, E 01 th  k   k te .on Higher Education, 42(4), 499-516. Price, M., Handey, K, & Milla, J. (2011). Feedack: Focusing attention on engagement. Studies in Higer Education, 36(8), 879896. Qi, D. . a, . 200). pring the le f icin n a thta on  wing s. l f Sod n wn 104), 277-303. Ra     g Quarterly, 38(5), 487-503. https:/doi.org/10.1080/10573569.2021.1982431 Saldana, J. (2021). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (4th ed.). Sage. Ski    01  2 wi st  n i Th J 102(2), 292-309. Song, G., Hoon, L. H., & Alvin, L. P.(2017). Students response to feedack: An exploratory study. RELC Journal, 48(3), 357-372. ,     , 10 (3), 674-701. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12339. .r   /    t trtin make a difference? Journal of Second Language Writing, 48(100701), 1-16. https:/doi.org/10.1016/jjslw.2019.100701. Truscott, J. (1996). The case against grammar correction in L2 writing classes [Review]. Language Learning, 46(2), 327-369. ang, L  . 021. c  n     trsn 50 10571 101. instone     202. f- fsic as  tak iterat. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 47(2), 213-230. Winstone, N. E,  Carles, D. (2019). Dening effctve fedback proceses in higher ecation: A leaningfocused approach. Routledge. Winstone  sh,  kr,  & R, . 2017. rig  a t wth fk  stmtc rev d a tnof recipience processes. Educational Psychologist, 52(1), 17-37. itne  r,17 e     t k  c. Studies in Higher Education, 42(11), 2026-2041. lers,  r . 012 f  ti n tt   ok of  nn  . 35-651) Springer. u    t  e writing perfomance. Inmation Rie f Apple Linguistc in Lguag eching Onlin, first, 1-25. ps://doi.org/10.1515/a-2021-0078 n   - writing strategies and writing performance. Frontiers in Psychology, 13, 1027266. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1027266. Yin, R. K. (2018). Case study research and applications: Design and methods (6th ed.). Sage. Yu, ., Ji  20  k  win a h e scale study. Assessing Writing, 44(100451), 1-12. Yu, . Liu, .(2021). Improing tudent fedack literacy in acdmic writing: An evidee-basd framework. Asin Writing 48(100525, 112. Zang J.016)   ti     d  .)   c beliefs and practices in East Asian contexts (pp. 150-166). Phnom Penh: IDP Education. 0    392 hang  . 202w i . nko p    313).ew York, NY: Routledge. https:/doi.org/10.4324/9781003106609-27. hang, L J  Chg,  2020 yttic ree f dead of er feack r i h ooking back d ookin d. ) Journal of Xi'an. Intenational Studies University, 28(1), 48-56. https://doi.org/10.16362/j.cnki.cn61-1457/h.2020.01.010. an, 1)t f  i rti  s . Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 54(101043), 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.101043. hng J  01       e487/./0. 1016/j.system.2019.06.002. g LJ  n .018io Ty  tic  L.) T f s  e. ag 21 ff  s  ti en  t a ci  lmn. System, 99(102493), 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2021.102493 hang,  01)ak k   the  f  s t   mi n witng improvement. Sustainability, 13(6275), 1-25. https://doi.org/10.3390/su132111616 Zhang, Z., & Hyland, K. (2022). Fostering student engagement with feedback: An integrated approach. Asssig Writig, 51, Article 100586.

hao w   r e International. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99991-9. Writing, 37, 13-24.   
heg    t in Higher Education, 1-21. https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2020.1806225 13-39). Academic Press.   
e  007. r   f  k   .  n p 51-69). New York, NY: Kluwer.   
ean  J erg,  1997).  fwi ie ti  l , 1), 73-101.

Dr Laenc un hn i rof f Lisicsin-dcion and scite ean for the cy of cion n ciork, rst f Akn, ew Zealad is   ad 0s ubliio an  mi, ahr o, d 2 r-in . e is an Jonal f App sic d  , ng tr.   e  th0ttionl itio UA) n 2016h the award f "50 at $5 0 ^ { \circ }$ acknowledging $\scriptstyle 5 0$ Outstanding ars" in the fld f  around he word and a offill instlled as wy elect mmber f the Board f rectors of the Association in 2017. In the Stanford University Rankings 2022, he was listed in the top $2 \%$ of Scientists in the World in the disciplinary areas of Linguistics/Applied Liui  i @ http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1025-1746