# A corpus-based study of vocabulary in conference presentations

Thi Ngoc Yen Dang

chool of Education, University of Leeds, Hillry Place, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdo.

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Vocabulary   
Conference presentation   
Lexical coverage   
Listening comprehension Academic spoken word list

Understanding conference presentations is an important but challenging task for EAP learners in their academic careers. Given the importance of vocabulary knowledge for comprehension, this study examines (a) the lexical demands of conference presentations, (b) the coverage of the Academic Spoken Word List (AswL) (Dang, Coxhead, & Webb, 2017) in these presentations, and (c) the extent to which this list can help EAP learners deal with the lexical demands of these conferences. A 565,758-word corpus was created from conference presentations of 20 academic subject areas. Analysis revealed that together with proper nouns and marginal words, the most frequent 3,o00 word families of general English covered $9 6 . 8 4 \%$ and the most frequent 5,000 word families covered $9 8 . 2 2 \%$ of conference presentations. The AswL itself covered $8 7 . 5 2 \%$ of the academic conference presentation corpus and more than $8 7 \%$ of its sub-corpora. If learners' prior knowledge of general vocabulary is taken into account, learning the AsWL word families may help users to achieve potential coverage from nearly $9 5 \%$ to $9 7 \%$ of conference presentations. Implications on how to transfer the findings to teaching will also be discussed.

# 1. Introduction

Research excellnce is a key criterion in evaluating university performance internationally. Therefore, many higher education institutions encourage their research students and scholars to attend and exchange knowledge at intenational conferences (Forey & Feng, 2016; Morel, 2015). These conferences are great oportunitie for them to be updated with the current development in their fields and broaden their professional network (Feak, 2013). However, as English is usually chosen as the means of communication in most conferences, understanding conference presentations may be challenging for a number of attendees whose L1 is not English (Morell, 2015; Perez-Llantada, Plo, & Ferguson, 2011), especially those who have learned English in an idealized, perhaps written, form and have thus not been exposed to the characteristics of rapid colloquial speech (Flowerdew, 1994, p. 10). This may then make it difficult to get the most out of a conference.

Although various factors contribute to listening comprehension (Goh, 2013), vocabulary knowledge is an important factor (van Zeeland & Schmitt, 2013; Wallace, 2020). To support research students and scholars whose L1 is not English in comprehending conference presentations, i is therefore important to determine (a) the lexical demands of onference presentations and (b) the extent to which existing word is can help usersto deal with these demands. Despite this need, vocabulary in conference presentations i an underexplored area of both ESP research and vocabulary research. ESP research on conference presentations has mainly focused on the rhetorical structure (Rowley-Jolivet & Carter-Thomas, 2005; Shalom, 1993), the use of spoken, writen, and visual modes (Forey & Feng, 2016; Morel, 2015), discourse markers (Fernandez-Polo, 2014), and humor (Reershemius, 2012). Meanwhile, research on academic vocabulary has mainly examined the lexical demands of written texts. The few studies investigating spoken discourse have focused on vocabulary in university lectures (Dang & Webb, 2014; Thompson, 2006), seminars (Dang & Webb, 2014), labs (Coxhead Dang, & Mukai, 2017), and tutorials (Coxhead et al., 2017). Lttle has been done to explore the lexical demands of conference presentations. imilarly, most word lists have been developed to enhance comprehension of academic written English (e.g., Coxhead, 2000; Gardner & Davies, 2014; Paquot, 2010). Only the Academic Spoken Word List (Dang, Coxhead, & Web, 2017) has focused on vocabulary in academic spoken discourse. Yet this ist was developed to support comprehension of lectures, seminars, labs, and tutorials. The extent to which it can support comprehension of non-class academic speech events such as conference presentations is unclear.

The current study examines (a) the lexical demands of conference presentations and (b) the percentage of words in conference presentations that list users with different vocabulary levels may recognize with the support of the Academic Spoken Word List. The study provides a clearer idea about the lexcal challenge faced by rearch students and scholars whose 1 is not English when trying to understand conference presentations in English and the value of the Academic Spoken Word List as an instrument to help them deal with this challenge.

# 1.1. The number of words needed for comprehension of academic spoken English

Vocabulary researchers (e.g., Schmitt, Jiang, & Grabe, 2011) have proved that the larger percentage of known words in a text, the better comprehension is. The percentage of known words in a text is called lexical coverage (Nation & Waring, 1997). Whil other factors may inluence comprehension, lexical coverage is probably the most important factor (Laufer & Sim, 1985). For this reason, a common approach towards identifying the number of words needed for comprehension of text is to estimate the vocabulary size necessary to achieve certain lexical coverage points (Nation & Webb, 2011). There is no lexical coverage threshold for listening comprehension, but higher coverage i likely to result in bettr comprehension (Schmitt e a., 2011). van Zeeland and Schmitt 2013 p. 474) found that $9 0 \%$ $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage is likely to lead to 'relatively high', 'relatively high and stable' and 'very high' listening comprehension rates, respectively. As $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ result in higher levels of comprehension, they are usually adopted as the lexical coverage cut-of points to indicate comprehension of texts (van Zeeland & Schmit, 2013; Webb & Rodgers, 2009a, 2009b)

Previous research on the lexical demands of academic speech has found that a vocabulary size of 4,000 word families and 8,000 word families was needed to achieve $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage of lectures and seminars, respectively (Dang & Webb, 2014). In contrast, knowledge of 3,o00 word families may allow learners to achieve $9 5 \%$ coverage of labs and tutorials while knowledge of 7,o00 word families and 4,o00 word families may enable them to reach $9 8 \%$ coverage of labs and tutorials, respectively (Coxhead et al., 2017). A word family (e., preent) consists of a ase form (e, present) it inflected forms (e, presents, preented, preenting), and closely related derived forms (e.g, presentable, presentably, presentation, presentations, presentational, presenter, presenters, unpresentable). As the lexical demands of academic speech vary according to the type of speech event, indings of research on other academic speech events may not necessrily reflect the nature of vocabulary in conference presentations. Given the importance of conference presentations, research on the lexical demands of this kind of speech events is warranted.

# 1.2. Coverage of academic word lists in academic spoken English

According to Nation (2013), academic vocabulary iscommonly defined as the words that occur frequently in a wide range of academi cilins.  is ffe frmhnl vulry, whch er  lex tems th occur frquey n a spf ciline or topic. As academic words cover a reasonable proportion of academic texts, knowledge of these words would help to improve comprehension significantly (Coxhead, 200). However, research has shown that mastering academic vocabulary is challenging for many L2 learners, even advanced level leaners (Perez-Llantada et al., 2011; Vidal, 2003, 2011). Most f academic words are lexical items supporting the presentation of disciplin-specific context rather than being closely related to specific disciplines (Perez-Llantada et a. 2011; Vidal, 2003, 2011). Therefore, unlike technical words, academic words are not likely to be leaned as part of 2 learners specialization. Moreover, a number of academic words occur frequently in general conversation, but their technical meanings are different from their meanings in general conversation (Coxhead, 2020; Dang, 2018; Gardner & Davies, 2014; Nation, 2016), which may make these words less salient to learners.

Given the importance and challenge of learning academic vocabulary, a number of word ists have been developed to help L2 learners to improve their comprehension of academic written English such as Coxhead's (200) Academic Word List and Gardner and Davies (2014) Academic Vocabulary Lis. However, research has indicated that learning items from academic written word ists may not be sufficient to understand academic spoken English. For example, Coxhead's (2000) Academic Word List consistently covered around $1 0 \%$ of the words in academic written English (see Coxhead, 2011, 2016 for detailed reviews). Yet this list only accounted for $4 . 4 1 \%$ of the words in lectures and seminars (Dang & Webb, 2014), $3 . 5 6 \%$ of the words in tutorials (Coxhead & Dang, 2019), $2 . 5 2 \%$ of the words in lab sessions (Coxhead & Dang, 2019), and $2 . 4 \%$ of the words in student presentations (Hincks, 2003).

In recognition of this gap, Dang et al. (2017) developed an Academic Spoken Word List (AswL) of 1,741 word families to help learners deal with vocabulary in university lectures, seminars, labs, and tutorials. The AsWL words appear frequently in a 13-million word corpus of academic lectures, seminars, labs, and tutorials from 24 subject areas e.g., mathematics, chemistry, computer science, medicine, arts, political studies, business, and law). The AswL provided $9 0 . 1 3 \%$ coverage of the academic spoken corpus from which it was developed and similar coverage of an independent academic spoken corpus against which it was validated. This is meaningful because coverage of $9 0 \%$ is likely to help L2 learners to achieve relatively high' comprehension of spoken texts (van Zeeland & Schmitt, 2013, p. 474). Detailed information about these corpora is available at https://osf.io/tp687/.

Although the AsWL was fairly long (1,741 word families), it does not mean that learners need to learn all AswL words. One innovative feature of the AsWL is its adaptability to the users' current knowledge of general vocabulary. Previous academic word lists considered learners to have a similar knowledge of general vocabulary when starting learning academic vocabulary. For example, Coxhead's (2000) Academic Word List was developed with the assumption that learners already knew the most frequent 2,000 word families of general vocabulary and therefore excluded these word families from this list. However, research has shown that learners vocabulary knowledge varies when they start earning academic vocabulary (Akbarian, 2010; Dang, 2020). Some already know the most frequent 2,000 or even 3,000 word families whil others have insufficient knowledge of the most frequent 1,000 or 2,000 word families. To benefit learners with different knowledge of general vocabulary, the AswL has four levels (see Table 1.

Levels 1, 2, and 3 of the ASWL are word families that are common in academic spoken English but are also among the most frequent 3,000 word familie of general English represented by Nation's (2012) 1st, 2nd, and 3rd 1,00 BNc/C0CA word levels (see ection2.2 below for further explanation of the BNc/cocA lis). Level 4 of the ASWL are word families that are common in academic spoken English but are not among the most frequent 3,0o word families of general English. The technicality of the list increases from Level1 to Level 4. Depending on their general vocabulary knowledge, learners may only need to focus on certain levels of the AswL. For example, if they already know the most frequent 2,000 words of general Englis, they are probably able to recognize the AsWL words at Level 1 and 2. Therefore, they can skip these levels and focus on 455 items from Levels 3 and 4 of the AswL. This number of ASWL word families is smaller than the number of Coxhead's (2000) Academic Word List (570 word families).

Sequencing vocabulary learning in this way would ensure that the learning and teaching time is spent effectively. Depending on their current vocabulary knowledge, learning the AswL may allow list users to recognize $9 2 \% { - } 9 6 \%$ of the words in lectures, seminars, labs, and tutorials. For this reason, Dang etal. (2017) suggest that the ASWL is a useful instrument for L2 leaners in EAP programs to deal with the vocabulary in university lectures seminars, labs, and tutorials. The AswL and its levels can be downloaded for free from the Open Science Framework at htts://osf.io/gwk45/or the IRIS digital repository at http://www.iris-database.org.

As the AsWL is fairly recent, only Coxhead and Dang (2019) have examined the coverage of the list i specific kinds of speech events. They found that the list covered $9 2 . 3 5 \%$ of the words in tutorials and $9 0 . 5 8 \%$ of the words in labs. These coverage figures are fairly consistent with the figure reported by Dang et al. (2017) (about $9 0 \%$ , which supports their claim that the AswL is a valuable tool to enhance comprehension of academic speech including labs and tutorials. This is could probably support comprehension of conference presentation as well, and this study would test this hypothesis.

# 1.3. Research questions

The literature review has revealed that no studies have investigated the lexical demands of conference presentations, nor have any studies explored the extent to which the Academic Spoken Word List (ASWL) can help users to meet these lexical demands and improve their comprehension of conference presentations. To addres these gaps, the current study aims to answer three research questions:

1. What vocabulary size is needed to achieve $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage of conference presentations?   
2. What is the coverage of the AswL in conference presentations?   
3. With knowledge of the AwL, how much coverage of conference presentations may be achieved by list users with different levels of general vocabulary?

# 2. Methodology

# 2.1. Corpus

The conference presentation corpus in this study was created from the transcripts of 104 conference and colloquia presentations organized in various countries. Each presentation includes speakers' presentation and a Q& A session between the speakers and the audiences. This means most of the language in the corpus is from the presenters, but small proportion i from the audiences in the Q & A sessions. These transcripts were collected from six corpora: the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MIcAsE), the Limerick-Belfast Corpus of Academic Spoken English (LIBEL), the John Swales Conference Corpus (JSCc), the English as a Lingua Franca in Academic Setting (ELFA) corpus, the Hong Kong Corpus of Spoken English (HKcsE), and the Vienna-Oxford International Corpus of English (c) Therfore, it is expected that the conference presentation corpus eflets the divere contexts of conferences that research students and scholars are likely to be exposed to.

As a whole the corpus consists of 565,758 words. To the best f my knowledge, this is the largest corpus of conference presentations that has ever been created. The corpus has two sub-corpora: hard science subjects (156,006 words) and soft science subjects (409,752 words) (see Table 2). The hard/soft division was chosen tostructure the sub-corpora in the present study because previous research (e. 8., Biglan, 1973a; 1973b) examined academic disciplines from diffrent angles and suggested that the hard/soft division is the strongest dimension that diffrentiates academic disciplines in higher education. Hard sciences (e.g., chemistry, medicine) tend to have a single paradigm - a body of theory which is subscribed by all members of the field'\* whil soft sciences (e.g., economics, philosophy) tend to lack this paradigm (Biglan, 1973a, p. 201). In fact, this division has been used to structure the British Academic Spoken English corpus as wellas Dang et al's (2017) Academic Spoken Corpus. Due to the chllenge of cllcting poken data, the corpus includes more transcripts from soft science subjects than hard science subjects, which affects the balance of the corpus. Therefore, findings of this study are exploratory.

Table 1 Four levels of Dang et al.'s (2017) Academic Spoken Word List.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>ASWL level</td><td>BNC/COCA word level</td><td>Number of items</td><td>Examples</td></tr><tr><td>Level 1</td><td>1st 1,000</td><td>830</td><td>think, sorry, indeed, afraid</td></tr><tr><td>Level 2</td><td>2nd 1,000</td><td>456</td><td>discuss, identify, slide, somewhat</td></tr><tr><td>Level 3</td><td> 3rd 1,000</td><td>380</td><td>method, impact, fundamental, chart.</td></tr><tr><td>Level 4</td><td>Outside the most frequent 3,o00 words</td><td>75</td><td>optimize, align, horizontal, dynamic</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>1,741</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# 2.2. Analysis

Heatley et al.'s (2002) RANGE program was used for the analysis. This program can identify which words in a list appear in the text. To determine the vocabulary size needed to achieve $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage of academic conference presentations, Nation's (2012) 25 lists of word familie from the 1st to the 25th 1,000 words in the British National Corpus (BNC) and the Corpus of Contemporary American English (CoOCA) were used with RANGE to represent the 1,00-word level at which the words in the text occurred. The 25 BNC/COCA lists were developed from the BNC and COCA, the two largest corpora to date which represent a wide range of spoken and written genres (e.g., fiction, newspapers, academic texts, news broadcasts, movie, telephone conversations). Items at the 1st 1, 000-word level are the most frequent. Items at the 2nd 1,000-word level are more frequent than those at the 3rd 1,000 word levels, but les frequent than those a the 1st1,00 word level. The further a certain frequency level moves from the 1,000 word lel, the less frequent the word families at that level are.

Apart from the 25 BNc/cOCA lists, Nation's (2012) list of proper nouns and list of marginal words were also used in the analysis Earlier studies examining the lexical demands of spoken texts (.g., Webb & Rodgers, 2009a; 2009b) considered that proper nouns (e. g., Martin, London) and marginal words (.g., hmm, oh) could support comprehension, but the learning burden of these words i liht because learners may recognize them from context. Therefore, they counted the coverage provided by these words as part of th overal coverage. This approach was taken in the present study.

Once the program and the word lists for the analysis had been determined, the text files of the transcripts were cleaned up. Following previous studies (e.g., Webb & Rodgers, 209a, 2009b), speakers names (e.g., SU-m, S1) and nonverbal actions (e.g., laugh, writing on board) were removed. Proper nouns and marginal words that appeared in the corpus but were not isted in Nation's (2012) lists of proper nouns (e.g., Stockhom, Linux) and marginal words (e.g., mhmm, whoohoo) were then added to the relevant lis. After that, the conference presentation corpus was run through RANGE with the 25 BNC/COCA word lists, the list of proper nouns, and the list of marginal words serving as the baseword lists. Similarly, to calculate the percentage of the AWL word familie in the conference presentation corpus, the corpus was analyzed with RANGE with the ASWL acting as the baseword list.Following Dang et al's (2017) approach, the potential coverage achieved by learners with different prior knowledge of general vocabulary from learning the ASWL was the sum of the coverage of (a) the BNC/cOCA 1,000 word levels that ae relevant to learners current vocabulary levels, (b) the ASWL words that are beyond their current vocabulary levels, (c) proper nouns, and (d) marginal words.

# 3. Results

This section presents the results in the order of the research questions. The first research question concerns the vocabulary size needed to achieve $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage of conference presentations. Table 3 presents the lexical profile of the conference presentations corpus.

The second column of the table shows that the most frequent 3,000 BNc/cOCA word families provided $9 6 . 8 4 \%$ coverage of conference presentations while the most frequent 5,o00 word families provided $9 8 . 2 2 \%$ coverage. The next two columns of the table demonstrate the lexical profile of the hard and soft sub-corpora. Both required 3,o00 word families to reach $9 5 \%$ coverage. These word families covered $9 6 . 4 5 \%$ of the words in the hard science sub-corpus and $9 6 . 9 9 \%$ of the words in the soft science sub-corpus, respectively. To reach $9 8 \%$ coverage, hard sciences required a larger vocabulary size (6,o0o word families) than soft sciences (5,000 word families).

The second research question asks about the coverage of the AsWL in conference presentations. This list covered $8 7 . 5 2 \%$ of the conference presentation corpus, which is consistent with its coverage in each of the two disciplinary sub-corpora: $8 7 . 9 9 \%$ (hard sciences) and $8 7 . 3 4 \%$ (soft sciences). All AsWL word families occurred in the conference presentations. Appendix 1 lists the 50 most frequent lexical items in each AswL level that occur in both sub-corpora.? However, several word families are common in the conference presentations, but are not AsWL words. Appendix 2 lists the lexical words which are among the most frequent items in the conference presentation corpus but are not included in the AsWL.

Table 2 Components of the conference corpus (565,758 words).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Hard science subjects</td><td>Number of words</td><td> Number of presentations</td><td>Soft science subjects</td><td>Number of words.</td><td> Number of presentations</td></tr><tr><td> Information Science</td><td>42,864</td><td>12</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>159,910</td><td>27</td></tr><tr><td> technology</td><td>27,612</td><td>4</td><td>Gender studies</td><td>73,247</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>Statistics</td><td>27,612</td><td>4</td><td>Cultural Studies</td><td>52,670</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Natural resources</td><td>17,075</td><td>1</td><td>Education</td><td>46,808</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Physics</td><td>14,851</td><td>1</td><td>Economics</td><td>17,767</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Chemistry</td><td>10,109</td><td>1</td><td>Management</td><td>15,856</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Medicine</td><td>8,382</td><td>3</td><td> Philosophy</td><td>11,393</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Maths</td><td rowspan="5">7,501</td><td rowspan="5">1</td><td>Communication</td><td>9,507</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Public Policy</td><td>7,475</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Regional Studies</td><td>5,782</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Political Study</td><td>4,772</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td> Sociology</td><td>4,565</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>156,006</td><td>27</td><td>Total</td><td>409,752</td><td>77</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Lexical profile of conference presentations.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>BNC/COCA word families (plus proper nouns &amp; marginal words)</td><td>Whole corpus</td><td>Hard science</td><td>Soft science</td></tr><tr><td>3,000</td><td>96.84a</td><td>96.45 a</td><td>96.99 a</td></tr><tr><td>5,000</td><td>98.22b</td><td>97.96</td><td>98.31 b</td></tr><tr><td>6,000</td><td>98.49</td><td>98.25 b</td><td>98.57</td></tr><tr><td>8,000</td><td>98.83</td><td>98.67</td><td>98.89</td></tr><tr><td>10,000</td><td>98.98</td><td>98.87</td><td>99.02</td></tr></table></body></html>

a The $9 5 \%$ coverage is reached. b The $9 8 \%$ coverage is reached.

The third research question examines the potential coverage that list users having different levels of general vocabulary may achieve if they learn the AswL. Table 4 presents the potential coverage achieved by users with the support of the ASWL.

The frst row of the table shows the potential coverage by users who have not mastered the most frequent 1,oo0 BNc/cOCA word families. Given ther current vocabulary knowledge, they are unlikelyto know the Aw. If these users learn the most frequent 2,000 BNC/COCA word families, they may be able to achieve $9 2 . 3 6 \%$ coverage. However, if they learn all 1,741 ASwL word families instead, they will need to learn 259 fewer words families, but can achieve higher coverage of conference presentations (nearly $9 5 \%$ ). From a cost-effectiveness perspective, learning the AswL would seem more useful for these users.

The second row of the table demonstrates the potential coverage achieved by users who have mastered the most frequent 1,000 BNC/cOcA word familie.Considering their current vocabulary knowledge, these learners could tudy 1,000 word familie from the 2nd 1,o00 BNC/COCA word level and achieve about $9 2 \%$ coverage, which may lead to 'relatively high but unstable comprehension rates. However, if they learn the AsWL instead, they can skip Level 1 of the ASWL and focus on learning 911 AsWL word families that are outside the most frequent 1,0oo BNc/cocA word families. Such knowledge may allow them to gain potential coverage of approximately $9 5 \%$ , which could lead to 'relatively high and stable' comprehension. Therefore, compared to learning the word families from the 2nd 1,oo0 BNc/cOCA word level, learning the AsWL words that are outside their current vocabulary knowledge means that learners would need to learn 89 fewer word families but are likely to achieve a higher level of comprehension.

The third row of the table shows that users having mastered the most frequent 2,oo Bnc/coCA word families may need to learn only 455 AsWL word families outside their current vocabulary level because they can skip Levels 1 and 2of the ASWL. However, they may then be able to recognize more than $9 5 \%$ of the total words in the conference presentation corpus. The potential coverage gained by users with knowledge of the most frequent 3,oo BNc/cOCA word families i presented in the last row of Table 4. These users may skip Levels 1, 2 and 3 of the ASWL and only need to learn 75 word familie from the AswL Level 4. This may then allow them to achieve potential coverage of nearly $9 7 \%$ . On the whole, learning 75 to 1,741 AswL word families may help learners to achieve potential coverage from nearly $9 5 \%$ to $9 7 \%$ of conference presentations. In contrast, if they decide to focus on general vocabulary instead, learners would need to learn 3,o00 word families from the BNC/cOCA lists to achieve a similar amount of coverage.

Table 4 Potential coverage achieved by users with support of the ASWL $( \% )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Current vocabulary levels (word families)</td><td>Number of AswL word families beyond users&#x27; current vocabulary level</td><td>Potential coverage (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Fewer than 1000</td><td>1,741</td><td>94.56</td></tr><tr><td>1,000</td><td>911</td><td>94.88</td></tr><tr><td>2,000</td><td>455</td><td>95.56</td></tr><tr><td>3,000</td><td>75</td><td>96.98</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4. Discussion

4.1. What are the lexical demands of academic conference presentations?

Together with proper nouns and marginal words, a vocabulary size of 3,000 word families of general English provides $9 5 \%$ coverage and a vocabulary size of 5,oo0 word families provides $9 8 \%$ coverage of academic conference presentations. The present study also found that both hard science subjects and soft science subjects require a vocabulary size of 3,oo0 word familie plus proper nouns and marginal words to reach $9 5 \%$ coverage. This vocabulary size is consistent with the size required to reach $9 5 \%$ coverage of the whole corpus. However, to achieve $9 8 \%$ coverage, a larger vocabulary size is likely to be needed for hard science subjects (6,o00 word families) than for soft science subjects (5,oo word families). This indicates that perhaps conference presentations in hard science subjects are lexically more demanding than those in soft science subjects. Due to the lack of balance of the sub-corpora, this finding should not be eneralizd. Yt i is in ine with those from arier studies which showed that rer vocabulary sis are nedd  reach $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage of lectures and seminars in hard science disciplines (Life and Medical Sciences and Physical Sciences) than in soft science disciplines (Arts and Humanities Social Sciences) (Dang & Webb, 2014), and that lectures, seminars, labs, and tutorials in hard sciences contain a larger number of low frequency words than those in soft sciences (Dang, 2018). This sugests that from the lexical coverage perspective, understanding spoken academic discourse in hard sciences is likely to be more challenging than in soft sciences.

This study indicates that perhaps conference presentations are as challenging as las and tutorials, but are less challenging than lectures and seminars in terms of lexical coverage. The number of word families in general English needed to reach $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage of conference presentations (3,o00 and 5,000) was fairly similar to those needed to reach $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage of labs (3,000 and 7,000) and tutorials (3,000 and 4,000) (Coxhead et al., 2017), but smaller than those needed to achieve $9 5 \%$ and $9 8 \%$ coverage of lectures and seminars (4,000 and 8,000) (Dang & Webb, 2014).

The similarity in the lexical demand of conference presentations and those of labs and tutorials might be the result of the dialogic nature of tee discourse types. Diloue, which includes the languag of all participants of he converstion, is les lexilly dense and therefore has alighter vocabulary oad than monologue (Lynch, 2012). An esential component of aconference presentation i the Q & A sessin, in which preenters interact with the audienceto iscuss ssues relatd to the content of their prentations (owley-Jolivet & Carter-Thomas, 2005). The purpose of Q & A sessions is similar t the purpose of las and tutorials, in which students discuss with their tutors and course mates the content and problems related to the lectures (Dang et al., 2017).

The fact that conference presentations had lighter lexical demands than academic lectures may be due to the nature of these discourse types. Conference presenters are given less time and space to present the content than academic lecturers, and people attending a conference presentation session usually have some background knowledge on the topic presented in that session (Rowley-Jolivet & Carter-Thomas, 2005). Therefore, instead of reviewing pecialized concepts and theories in detail, conference presenters often briefly mention the terminology and focus more on sharing the key findings and highlighting the contributions of their studies (Rowley-Jolivet & Carter-Thomas, 2005). This may lead to the lower percentage of low frequency words in academic conference presentations compared to that in academic lectures, which explains why conference presentations have lighter lexical demands than academic lectures.

4.2. Is the AswL a useful tool to improve comprehension of academic conference presentations?

The AswL itself covered more than $8 7 \%$ of the words in the academic conference presentation corpus as well as its two disciplinary sub-corpora. This coverage figure is lower than the coverage of the AsWL in academic lecture, seminars, tutorials, and labs reported by Dang et al. (2017) (around $9 0 \%$ . The difference in coverage may be because of the nature of the AswL. This list was originally developed to enhance comprehension of class events (lectures, seminars, tutorials, and labs) rather than non-clas events such as conference presentations. Nevertheles, the findings of the current study indicate that the AswL is stil a useful resource for EAP programs to support comprehension of conference presentations for two reasons.

First, the AswL can benefit learners irrespective of their ocabulary levels. It i a shortcut for those with insufficient knowledge of the most frequent 3,000 BNc/cOCA word families to achieve adequate comprehension of conference presentations. If leaners with insufficient knowledge f the most frequent 1,000 word families of general vocabulary lean the most frequent 2,000 Bc/coA word families, they could potentially recognize about $9 2 \%$ of the running words in conference presentations, which may result in 'relatively high but unstable comprehension. However, if these leaners lern 1,741 word families from the ASWL, they would need to study 259 fewer word families, but may be able to achieve nearly $9 5 \%$ coverage, which is likely to lead to 'relatively high and stable' comprehension.

Likewise, learners having mastered the most frequent 1,000 word families of general vocabulary may need to learn only 911 ASWL word families that are beyond their current vocabulary level. Yet this may allow them to reach approximately $9 5 \%$ coverage of conference presentations. In contrast, learning 1,000 word families from the 2nd 1,000 BNc/cOCA word level only helps them to achieve around $9 2 \%$ coverage. Similarly, instead of learning 1,000 word families from the 3rd 1000 BNc/cOCA word level, learning 455 AsWL word familie outside their current vocabulary knowledge may stil enable students with the vocabulary knowledge of the most frequent 2,o00 word families to recognize more than $9 5 \%$ of the running words in conference presentations. These findings are meaningful given that research has reported that reasonable proportion of L2 learners have low language proficiency in their second languages (e.g., Akbarian, 2010; Cheng, 2016).

As for learners with sufficient knowledge of the most frequent 3,o0 word families, given their current vocabulary knowledge, they may be able to recognize $9 5 \%$ of the running words of conference presentations. However, this does not mean that the AswL is not useful for them. The greater the coverage, the better comprehension i Schmit et al., 2011). Learning only 75 word families from the ASWL that are beyond their current vocabulary knowledge (e.g., triangle, arbitrary, optimize, inverse) may allow these learners to approach closer to the $9 8 \%$ coverage, which indicates 'very high' listening comprehension.

A second reason why the AswL is a useful resource is that it can potentially have wide applications. The list is useful for EAP programs which consist of learners from both hard sciences and soft sciences. It consistently covered more than $8 7 \%$ of the hard and soft subject sub-corpora. Moreover, EAP learners only need to lern items from a ingle list but may be able to deal with dfferent kinds of speech events which are important for their subsequent academic study and career (lectures, seminars, las, and conference presentations).

The findings of the present study should be interpreted with caution. First, the corpus of conference presentations was unbalanced due to the challge f collectin okn data, ecially onfere prttio. Sond, while lexical ovrage is a key factr, ther factors may influence the comprehension of academic conference presentations such as background knowledge, listening strategies (Bonk, 2000; Wallace 2020), speakers' accents (Goh, 2000), speech rate, degree of concentration, visual aids, and interaction (Flowerdew & Miller, 1992; Forey & Feng, 2016). Third, this study only examines vocabulary in conference presentations from the perspective of single words. Future research which is based on a more balanced corpus and examines both single word and multiword units may provide further insights into the nature of vocabulary in conference presentations. Fourth, the present study highlights the value of the AsWL for EAP learners based on corpus analyses. Research investigating the implementation of the list in the real classroom would be useful. Fifth, this study only examined the vocabulary needed for comprehending conference presentations. Studies examining the vocabulary needed for delivering conference presentations effectively would be valuable.

# 5. Pedagogical implications

This section provides some suggestions on how EAP teachers can make use of the AsWL to help their learners deal with the lexical demands of conference presentations. To begin with, teachers should estimate the challenge of understanding conference presentations for their learners so that they can provide relevant support. They could use Webb et al.'s (2017) Updated Vocabulary Levels Test (UVLT) to measure leaners' knowledge of the most frequent 5,00 word families. The online and PDF versions of the test s well as the answer key are available on Stuart Webb's website: https://www.edu.uwo.ca/faculty-profiles/stuart-webb.html. The present study found that while the lexical demands of conference presentations may vary across isciplines and context, the most frequent 3, 000 word families are necessary for adequate comprehension of conference presentations. Therefore, if the UVLT cores show that learners have mastered at least the most frequent 3,000 word familie, they are likely to comprehend conference presentations. In this case, teachers could dvise learners to learn the 75 word families from Level 4 of the AWL so that they could reach a higher level of listening comprehension. I the UVL scores show that the learners are yet to master the most frequent 3,00 word families, it means that they are likely to have great difficulty in comprehending conference presentations. In this case, depending on learners' current vocabulary level, teachers can use Dang et al.'s (2017) model s a guide to set the learning goals for their leaners. As the model has been discussed in detail in ther publications (e., Dang, 2020; Dang et a., 2017), this section only decribes i briefly. According to this model, if learners want t focus n items that occur frequently in academic spoken English, they can learn words from the ASWL level that are relevant to their current knowledge of general vocabulary. Such knowledge would enable them to recognize a large proportion of words in conference presentations as well as other kinds of academic spoken English (e., lectures, seminars, labs, and tutorials). However, if learners want to broaden their general vocabulary repertoire firt, they can focus n the words in the subsequent BNC/cOCA word level and later they can focus on the AswL level that isrelevant to their knowledge of general vocabulary at that stage. In addition to the Asw words, teachers could also focus leaners atention to th items isted in Appendix 2, which are frequent in the conference presentation corpus but are not in the AswL.3

Once the learning goals have been set teachers could design materials and activities to help learners meet and use the AsWL word families repeatedy by following Nation's (2007) Four Strands: meaning-focused input, meaning-focused output, luency development and language-focused leaning. Each learner can use some search engines (e.g., Google, Youtube) to find a conference presentation in their specific area. For example, alearner majoring in Applied Linguistics/TEs0L may watch Nesi and Alsop's (2015) presentation, Variation and commonality in EFL and English L1 engineering lectures from around the world' at the BALEAP 2015 conference viathis link https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVMrYs88cl. To have some idea of the lexical profile of the presentation, they can use the Vocabulary Profiler function of Lextutor https://www.lextutor.ca/vp/to analyze the transcript of the presentation. As shown in Appendix 3, knowledge of the most frequent 3,o00 word families is needed to reach $9 5 \%$ coverage of this presentation, which is in line with the findings of the present study. After watching this presentation, the lener can serch for readings rlated to the content of the presentation (e.g., the features of academic lectures in different contexts). Based on his/her understanding of the content of the presentation and the redings, s/he can then write reflection and orally pren it to his/h clasmates. Thee linked skill actvities would create good conditions for leaners t reencounter and use the ASWL word families in a meaningful way (Webb & Nation, 2017).

Apart from these meaning-focused activities, teachers can organize some language-focused learning activities in which they explicitly draw leaners attention to the linguistc features f the AsWL words. For example, teachers can use the wordlist function in Antconc with the AWL as the baseword list t identif the AWL word families that occurred in the script of aconference presentation and design activities for learners to notice and learn the AswL word families. To illstrate some possibl language-focused activities that teachers can do, let us take Nesi and Alsop's (2015) presentation and the word know, model, and differentiate, which re in the top 50 most frequent lexical items in each AswL level, as examples.

For the AswL level 1-3 words, which are also common in general conversation, teachers can elicit from the students their knowledge of the meaning and use of these words (e.g., know, model). Then, they can provide students with aset of concordance lines of these words in the conference presentation transcript (ee Appendix 4 for know and Appendix 5 for model) and ask them to identify the typical pattens and meaning of these words in the conference presentation. During this proes, teachers can facilitate follow-up discussion to help learners realize that apart from using I/we/you/she/know(s) as a way to present new information as in written English, you know is more likely to be used as a discourse marker to engage the isteners, and that while in general English, model can be used as a noun to refer to a fashion model, in the examined conference presentation, this word is used with a slightly different meaning and can also be used as a verb.

For the AswL Level 4 words (e.g., differentiate), which are uncommon in general conversation, teachers could refer back to the texts surrounding these words (see Appendix 6) and ask the learner to gues the meaning from the context. If learners are not able todo so, teachers can directly teach the words. Together these language-focused learning activities would help learners to broaden their knowledge of the AsWL words such as technical meanings, collocations, spoken-written forms, and parts of speech.

Apart from seting vocabulary leaning goals and organizing activities to achieve them, it is important for teachers to raise learners awareness of the value of the AsWL in supporting thir comprehension of conference resentations. This could be done by referring to the findings of the current study and the information in Tables 3 and 4 so that learners are aware of the lexical demands of conference presentations and how the AswL can help them to meet this demand.

# 6. Conclusion

The present study is the first to investigate the lexical demands of conference presentations. Based on the analysis of vocabulary in the largest corpus of conference presentations ever created, it found that to reach $9 5 \%$ coverage, learners need a vocabulary size of the most frequent 3,o00 word families. The AswL itself provided more than $8 7 \%$ coverage. Learning from 75 to 1,741 ASWL word families that are beyond their current vocabulary levels may allow users with different levels of general vocabulary to reach coverage from nearly $9 5 \%$ to $9 7 \%$ of conference presentations. The coverage of the AsWL in the two disciplinary sub-corpora is very consistent, which indicates that the list would be a useful resource for both hard science and soft science students. Together the findings sugget that the ASWL is a useful instrument for EAP programs for research students and scholars with diferent prior vocabulary knowledge and from both hard sciences and soft sciences.

# Author statement

Thi Ngoc Yen Dang: conceptualisation, methodology, investigation, formal analysis, datacuration, writing (original draft, review, and editing), visualization.

# Acknowledgements

My thanks to Cambridge Universty Press and the researchers in the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English project, the John Swales Conference Corpus project the English as a Lingua Franca in Academic Seting corpus project, and the Vienna-Oxford International Corpus of English project for allowing me to use their materials to create the academic conference presentation corpus.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101144.

# References

Akvananl 1. (u1vJ. 1ne relaunsnp velween vocavuary siz anu uepun ur Lr/EAr eaners. ysenl, o3), y1-401.   
iga 3h ut er rit t  a  t.  Ad , 573, 204-213.   
Biglan, A. (1973b). The characteristics of subject matter in different academic areas. Jounal of Applied Psychology, 57(3), 195-203.   
Bonk, W. (200). Second language lexical knowledge and listening comprehension. Intemational Journal of Listning, 14, 14-31.   
Cheng, A. (2016). EAP at the tertiary level in China. In The routledge handbook of Englis for academic purposes (p. 97-108). Routledge.   
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. Tesol Quarterly, 34(2), 213-238.   
Coxhead, A. (2011). The acdemic word list 10 year on: Research and teaching implications. Tesol Quarterly, 45(2), 355-362.   
Coxhead, A. (2016). Reflecting on Coxhead (2000), 'a new academic word list. Tesol Quarterly, 50(1), 181-185.   
Coxhead, A. (2020). Academic vocabulary. In S. Webb (Ed.), The Routledge handbook of vocabulary studie (p. 97-110). Routledge.   
oead,  g .019 nrt is ad a ra  d is.  ld, . ., ied English: New Directions in ESP and EAP Research and Practice (pp. 120-134). Routledge.   
Coed i 017 -   til axoo Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 30, 66-78.   
Dang, T. N. Y. (2018). The nature of vocabulary in academic speech of hard and oft sciences. English for Specific Purposes, 51, 6983.   
Dang, T. N. Y. (2020). High-frequency words in academic spoken English: Corpora and learners. ELT Jounal, 74(2), 146-155.   
Dang, T. N. Y., Coxhead, A., & Webb, S. (2017). The academic spoken word list. Language Learning, 67(4), 959-997.   
Dang, T. N. Y., & Webb, S. (2014). The lexical profile of academic spoken English. English for Specific Purposes, 33, 66-76.   
Feak, C. (2013). ESP and speaking. In . Palridge, & . taeld (Eds.), The hndook of Egishfor spic uoes (p. 35-54). Wile-lackwell.   
Fernandez-Polo, F. J. (2014). The role of I mean in conference presentations by ELF speakers. English for Specic Purposes, 34, 58-67.   
Flowerdew, J. (1994). Academic listening: Research perspectives. Cambridge University Press.   
Flowerdew, ., & Millr, L (192). tudet peeptions, problems and staie in scond langage lctue comprehension. REL Jonal, 32), 6080.   
Forey, G., eng, . 2016). Ino meg and adee gment i adi petios:  mtimod ore alyis peretive. In The routledge handbook of English for academic purposes (pp. 416-430). Routledge.   
Gardner, D., & Davies, M. (2014). A new academic vocabulary list. Applied Linguistics, 35(3), 305-327.   
Goh, C. C. M. (2000). A cognitive perspective on language learners listening comprehension problems. System, 28(1), 55-75.   
Goh, C. C. M. (2013). ESP an istenng. In B. Palridge, & S.Starield (Eds.), The handbook of English for secific purposes (p. 35-54). Blackwell.   
Hey,    d 00 fo t s o   . f // nation/nation.aspx.   
Hks 0tt     .)    5 international congressof phonetics sciences. http://www.speech.kth.se/ctt/publications/papers03/icphs03_1545.pdf   
Laufer, ,   D. (1985. g d pth dh d or Eishr  s.  s 185, 405-411.   
Lynch, T. (2012). Academic listening in the 21st centur y: Reviewing a decade of reearch. Jounl of English for Academic Puposes, 10, 79-80.   
orell, . 2015. tinl r ar ti imdl analsis tne efti. gish or i e, 37, 137-150.   
Nation, I. S. P. (2007). The four strands. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 1(1), 1-12.   
atin . ..02). he wd f is. rie fro ht/.///l-io-/a-lsprograms.   
Nation, I. S. P. (2013). Learning vocabulary in another language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.   
Nation, I. S. P. (2016). Making and using word lists for language learning and testing. John Benjamins.   
tin, I .   1997y i  , ad is. t,  .),  ton d pedagogy (pp. 6-19). Cambridge University Press.   
Nation, I. S. P., & Webb, S. (2011). Researching and analyzing vocabulary. Heinle, Cengage Learning.   
Nei   15.        /. watch?v=DVMrYs88lcI.   
Paquot, M. (2010). Academic vocabulary in learner writing: From extraction to analysis. Continuum.   
Pere-, P  .011      w yu ne t of r h regarding research dissemination in English. English for Specific Purposes, 30, 18-30.   
Reh     c, 44, 863-875.   
Rowy-olive,  r . 205).  ri  io ctio x, m  nctio io Applied Linguistics, 15(1), 45-70.   
Schmitt N., Jiang, X, & Grabe, W. (2011). The perntage of words known in a text and reding comprehension. The Modem Language Jounal, 95, 2643.   
ham, 3 n    i Purposes, 12, 37-50.   
Thmpson,. 206.s tie  t s  e h s  .  l d .)  s disciplines (pp. 253-270). Peter Lang.   
Vidal, K. (2003). Academic listening: A source of vocabulary acquisition? Applied Linguistics, 24(1), 56-89.   
Vidal, K. (201.  comparison of the effct of reding and listening on incidental vocabulary acquisition. Lnguag Leaning, 61(1), 219-258.   
ale doi.org/10.1111/lang.1 2424.   
Webb, S., & Nation, I. S. P. (2017). How vocabulary is learned. Oxford University Press.   
Webb, S., & Rodgers, M. (2009a). The lexical coverage of movies. Applied Linguistics, 30(3), 407-427.   
Webb, S., & Rodgers, M. (2009b). Vocabulary demands of television programs. Language Learning, 59(2), 335-366.   
Web, .,  a 017T  e t  a  ft o u Applied Linguistics, 168(1), 34-70. 34(4), 457-479.