Book review

# Clarity and Coherence in Academic Writing: Using language as a resource, David Nunan, Julie Choi. Routledge, New York and London (2023). 224 pp \$US 35.27, fUK 21.59, ISBN: 9781032013824

Writers of English for academic purposes (EAP) need to understand the organizational structure of their writing, clearly signpost connections, and generall e responsible for its coherence and clarit (Clyne, 1987; Hyland, 2009). oherence is frequently discussed but proves to be a challenging concept when providing feedback on students' writing (Basturkmen & Randow, 2014; Struthers et al., 2013). This diffiulty may be aributed to the fact that coherece is not redily obsevable onthe wrten page truthrse al., 2013). Motivated by Clive James's asertion that writing clearly is the hardest thing of al, David Nunan and Julie Choi wrote Clarity and Coherence in Academic Writing--an insightful guide to mastering the complexities and practicalities of coherent academic prose.

Employing a systemic functional linguistic (SFL) approach, the authors harnes anecdotes, narraties, and testimonies from peers and pupils to explain the concepts of academic clarity and coherence. Rather than summarizing the writing formulas derived from discourse analysis, they outline a spectrum of purely inguisic but also cognitie, socio-cultural, and affective problems that readers may grapple with while writig, teching, or asesing Adtionally, they provide insights into he construction f academic discourse, cogent strategies to navigate the writing process, and techniques for introspective scrutiny.

The manuscript delineates five pivotal themes. Paramount among these is the assertion that explicit language knowledge is fundamental to improving clarity. When writing, assessing, and refining a piece of writing, explicit language knowledge allows teachers and students to make decisions that are not based solely on intuition. The knowledge allows teachers to provide detailed feedback insted f general comments like this is not clear r \*this is porly witten'. unan compares two drafs using a think-aloud approach to demonstrate the role of grammatical knowledge in helping authors surpas mere intuitive processes during revision. Nunan and Choi suggest six books and an online eaching Knowledge Test to facilitate a beter comprehension of grammar for readers. They employ authentic example to explain the concepts of thematization, coherence, cohesion, and signposting. Understanding these concepts and learning to use these resources may help solve the biggest writing paradox: presenting the nonlinear world in print.

In addition to language and structure, one's target audience and purpose for writing are fundamental to determining linguistic preferences. Therefore, by drawing upon the FL notions of field, tenor, and mode, the second theme, audience and purpose', il lustrates how writers can tailor their writing to match their readership. In an academic conversation with one of Choi's former students, the authors dissect her challenges in identifing an apropriate public tracing this journey from classrom assignments to the dissertation and its subsequent publication. Their observations highlight that supervisor or mentors act as meditators helping with the identification of intended readership and writing purposes..

The third theme delves into the distinction between product- and process-oriented approaches to writing. Product-oriented writing adheres to established templates, guidelines, and conventions. Within this approach, the concepts of genre and register are defined and discussed, helping writers understand the necesity of conforming t the conventions of the genre. However, this method is scrutinized for its perceived mechanical nature and an apparent deficit in originality, ofen vering towards mere replicatio or mimicr of model texts. Conversely, a processoriented approach envisions writing as a recursive exploration process, alowing a structure to arise organicall. They draw insights from Choi's doctoral thesis experience, wherein she navigated learning, discarding, and recalibrating rules in accordance with her research.

The fourth theme underscores the importance of soliciting and integrating meaningful feedback into draft for publicdissemina tion. Formative fedback elevates writing quality and imbues students with a sense of value, shaping their short- and long-term engagement with academic literacy practice (Seror, 2008). Nunan and Choi draw from the narratives of their students and themselves to explore aspects of feedback, including its meaningfulness different types, appropriate responses, and optimal timing. However, certan faces of this theme leae room for further elaboration. In the \*When should feedack be provided" section in Chapter 7, the authors only examine immediate feedback within oral and computer-mediated contexts. The pivotal query of the precise timing, particularly in written contexts like students' theses, assignments, or in a publication framework, remains largely unanswered.

The last theme shift focus from writing to writers. Nunan and Choi challenge the notion of objectivity in academic writing, employing three ilustrtive vignettes to demystify the elusive concepts of voice and identity. They elucidate how seasoned writers reveal themselves and encourage writers to cultivate a distinctive authorial voice. The concept 'voice is explored from various viewpoints and with a comprehensive level of detail, encompassng more than just the use of first and third-person pronouns. The authors advise novice writers against "apprenticing yourself to accomplished authors you admire" (p. 120),thinking this would be a shortcut to writing success They claim that one will never develop one's own voice while blindlyfollowing the voices f others.

This book criticlly interrogates several prevailing beliefs within the domain of academic writing practice and research. These insights help readers reevaluate their comprehension of academic writing and their self-perception as academic writers. Contrary to the belief that the onus of cultivating students writing proficiency rests solely on language educators, the authors propound that every instructor, regardlessof specialization, inherently plays the role of a language teacher. You can't think and communicate without language, and you have to think and communicate about something" (p. 5). Instead of presupposing native speakers possess an inherent advantage in academic writig, Nunan and Choi posit that academic writing is no one's native tongue. It i worth noting that throughout the book, emphasis is placed on the importance of accessibility in academic writing.

Authentic stories, "Making Connections, and "Questions and Answers" are three notable strengths of this book. Rather than applying traditional discourse analysis centered on written products, this writing guide lerages genuine narratie from students, novice writer, and peers to unpack concepts and demonstrate ways to enhance one's writing. Hence, this book does not demand much discipline-specific knowledge, unlike some academic writing books that employ lengthy examples that are only ccessible to insiders. Our past experiences as PhD students and our current rles as novice writers and writing instructors have shown that the book's thoughtful selection of various voices and authentic journeys resonates deeply with our own socialization processand that of many peers.

The \*Making Connections'" boxes ffer exercises that help readers link the content to their own contexts, be they students, in. structors, or writer. Recognizing the challenges in teaching SFL concepts and their integration into writing courses, these exercises serve as engaging resources for educators. To increase the book's carity, young graduates reviewed earlier drats, pinpointing unclear sections. Their questions, with the authors' responses, enrich each chaptersend, showcasing the authors' awarenes of their audience. Although not explicitly a how-to guide, the "Questions and Answers" segment provides practical writing advice.

The foreword states that the book primarily targets graduate and undergraduate students and teachers of both EAP and non-EAP writing courses. Nonetheles, to fully comprehend this book, readers should have some knowledge f SFL. This includes topics like coherence and cohesion (Hallday & Mathiese, 2004), grammatical metaphor (Halliday & Mathiessen, 2004), and register (Martin & Rose, 2014). Admittedly, the book does not delve deeply into all these areas. For instance, Chapter 2, "Signposting and Summa rizing" provides only a cursory look at the sandwich structure, a concept wellestablished in SFL. After reading this section, readers might finish the section without grasping the structure's significance or its application. A more in-depth discusion and practical examples would have ben beneficial. An oversimplification problem exists when other concepts and topics are introduced, such as nominalization, creation of voice and response to feedback. Hyland (2008) highlighted that research articles and disertations are the pinnacle f academic writig. However, this book liits it scope primarily to academic assinments and dissertations. Broadening the genres discussed could be a significant enrichment in the future.

While there might be overlaps with books on SFL, this one delves into essential concepts vital to academic writing. The authors' s emphasis lies on the context in which academic writing occurs, and they have elaborated the concepts with pedagogical care, making them accessible and practical for novice teachers. This book encompasses an array of topics relevant to the writing process. This pragmatic guide can help recent graduates and emerging writers reflect on their writing process and identit as writers while assisting instructors in understanding and addressing their students' challenges.

# References

asm  . 14       tie writing task. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 16, 14-22.   
Clyne, M. (1987). Cultural diferences in the organization of academic texts. Journal of Pragmatics, 11, 211-247.   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Mahiessen, C. M. I. M. (2004). An inroduction to functionadl grammar (3rd ed.). London: Edward Arnold.   
Hyland, K (2008). Aadmic custers: Text patrnng in published and potgraate wriig. ntionl Jounal f Apid Lingustic, 18(1, 4162.   
Hyland, K. (2oo9). Academic discourse. London: Continuum.   
Martin, J. R., & Rose, D. (2014). Working with discourse: Meaning beyond the clause. Peking: Peking University Press.   
S    e Canada: University of British Columbia.   
Stthrs , a, .., ia, . 2013.sin o  chds wting  f a cekist siing 18, 187-201.