# The genre of syllabus in higher education

Elena Afros\*, Catherine F. Schryer

Department of English Language and Literature, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1

# Abstract

This article examines the genre of syllabus in higher education. In particular, it focuses on the intertextuality and interdiscursivity of paper-based and web-mediated syllabi and the ways they are used to promote links between various academic classroom and research e genres and discourse communities. The corpus consists of ten syllabi with different interactivity levels. To avoid discrepancy in content, only syllabi for introductory linguistics courses offered at several US universities have been selected. The study shows that the syllabus is not only a document, but also a site of intertextuality and interdiscursivity. It is also demonstrated that the syllabus is utilized by instructors both to manifest their membership in multiple discourse communities and to socialize students into (some of) them. Finally, it is suggested that even though the digital medium increases interactivity of the syllabus, web-mediated and paper-based syllabi can still be treated as instantiations of the same genre.

$^ { © }$ 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Syllabus; Academic writing; Genre; Interactivity; Higher education

# 1. Scope

Two major current developments in higher education e student centeredness and integration of technology into learning and teaching e have focused attention on the syllabus (see Collins, 1997; Creed, 1997; Grunert, 1997; Rankin, 2000). Generally conceived as ‘‘a document by which faculty members define learning outcomes for students and the methods by which those outcomes will be realized’’ (Habanek, 2005, p. 62), the syllabus has acquired significance as a tool that promotes links between classroom and research genres. Enhancement of these connections by means of the Internet has given rise to a new species e the web-mediated syllabus, which, according to researchers of digital documents (e.g. Askehave & Nielsen, 2005), should differ profoundly from its predecessor e the paper-based syllabus. In the present article, we test this hypothesis against syllabi with different levels of interactivity by comparing their structural and discursive features and assessing the impact of medium on their intertextuality and interdiscursivity. First, we provide a brief outline of the current research on the syllabus in the learner-centered environment and the potential benefits of digital medium for syllabus designers. Then, we undertake a detailed comparison between paper-based and web-mediated syllabi to locate the distinctions that can be attributed to the medium. The pedagogical implications of the present study and suggestions for future research conclude the paper.

# 2. Overview of current research

The syllabus is one of the most recognizable instantiations of academic genres. Together with other classroom genres, it ‘‘constitute[s] typified and situated topoi within which students and teacher recognize and enact their situated practices, relations, and subjectivities’’ (Bawarshi, 2003, pp. 118e119). In fact, Bawarshi (2003) considers the syllabus ‘‘the master classroom genre’’ which can ‘‘transform the physical setting of the classroom into the discursive and ideological site of action in which students, teacher, and their work will assume certain significance and value’’ (p. 119).

As a genre, the syllabus offers instructors a constellation of rhetorical strategies to describe the course, its goals and objectives, its structure and its correlation with other courses within the program, classroom and institutional policies as well as general logistical and procedural information (Grunert, 1997). It mediates the interaction both between students and instructors and between instructors and their colleagues. Therefore, the syllabus has to be balanced so that it can appeal to students, motivate and structure their learning, while, at the same time, can convince (senior) colleagues and external evaluators of the instructor’s professionalism and the course quality. As Slattery and Carlson (2005) point out, for faculty, the syllabus is not only a class management tool, but also evidence of successful teaching experiences. Collins (1997) notes that the syllabus also facilitates the socialization of both students and instructors into the academic discourse community. Grounded in the conventions of the discipline and institution, it familiarizes students with new discursive sites and affords instructors opportunities to reconfirm their professional identity (Collins, 1997).

At first glance, the genre of the syllabus provides essential linguistic tools to effectively address both audiences. Power and authority, for example, can be conveyed by means of such grammatical devices as personal pronouns, modal verbs, nominalizations, semantic roles, and negation patterns. Baecker (1998), however, claims that some linguistic means, such as the personal pronoun we, are ambiguous: they ‘‘blur the distinction between power and solidarity and, in fact, allow power to be expressed as solidarity’’ (p. 58). Her examination of the usage of personal pronouns in fifteen syllabi demonstrates that many instructors use ‘‘false or coercive wes’’ in an attempt to show solidarity with the students (Baecker, 1998, p. 60). Baecker (1998) concludes that negotiation of power in the classroom cannot be effective if the instructors pretend to share authority and mask their role by misusing personal pronouns or avoiding them at all. Instead, she calls for the explicit expression of power in the syllabus.

As mentioned above, the syllabus not only mediates the complex social interactions within a classroom, but it also addresses a discourse community of fellow instructors and experts in the field. Participation in multiple discourse communities increases interdisciplinary interaction and paves the way for mutual enrichment not only in terms of new analytical perspectives, but also in terms of linguistic, rhetorical, and social strategies. From this dialogue ensue the most salient characteristic features of the academic genres in general, and the syllabus in particular e intertextuality and interdiscursivity.

Intertextuality is defined by Bazerman (2004, p. 86) as the explicit and implicit relations that a text or utterance has to prior, contemporary and potential future texts. In the case of the syllabus, the relevant discourses range from the class lecture and tutorial, textbook and assignment instructions to scholarly publications and research projects carried out by instructors; from the policy on late homework established in a particular course to the institutional regulations on academic misconduct; and from informally compiled recommendations on how to prepare for the exam in a course to pedagogical treatises on the cognitive underpinnings of learning/teaching. Thus, the syllabus brings to the fore interdependences between the classroom, research, and institutional genres. These interconnections Hyland (2004) characterizes as both intertextual and interdiscursive. ‘‘Interdiscursivity,’’ Hyland (2004) explains, ‘‘concerns the use of elements in a text which carry institutional and social meanings from other discourses’’ (p. 107). Like textbooks, syllabi are interdiscursive for they reflect conventions, values, and practices of neighboring discourses and communities (Hyland, 2004, p. 108).

Intertextual and interdiscursive presentation of the course content allows students (and instructors) to activate relevant schemata and optimize learning and teaching. What is more, intertextuality and interdiscursivity foster initiation of novices into a new world of cultural and social competence (Hyland, 2004, p. 106) as well as reconfirm the instructors’ membership in this world.

This world, Cummings, Bonk, and Jacobs (2002) suggest, should not be confined to an isolated classroom; rather, it should be expanded by means of Web based interaction tools. The digital medium, according to Askehave and Nielsen (2005), allows the syllabus to function in both ‘‘the reading mode,’’ when ‘‘the reader zooms in on the text and uses the web document as if it was ‘printed’ text’’ and ‘‘the navigating mode,’’ when ‘‘the navigator zooms out of the text and uses the web document as a medium (exploiting its navigation possibilities)’’ (p. 128). Cummings et al. (2002) urge the instructors to seize the opportunities provided by ‘‘the navigating mode’’ for directing students to external websites and providing access to experts in the field inside and outside their home institutions. For syllabus designers, Rankin (2000) adds, the benefits of digital medium include not only links to related content-based sites on the Web, but also an easy access to administrative information, that is, links to calendar, schedule of classes, the dean’s office, and the registrar’s office, as well as to such institutional policies as academic integrity; disability support link; study aid (tutorial) links; and finally, links to department and institution homepages. This information, Rankin (2000) indicates, can be easily and regularly updated to accommodate changes and students’ progress in the course. As also noted by Creed (1997), e-mail links facilitate out-of-class discussions of course material or private communication between instructors and students.

Creed (1997), however, warns that a thorough understanding of cognitive development and a pedagogy that is driven by this understanding should underpin the use of new technology. An experiment conducted by Grigorovici, Nam, and Russill (2003) reveals that students’ first impressions of the course and the instructor are more positive if the syllabus has three or less linearly sequenced hyperlinks and a few or none navigational options than if the syllabus is highly interactive.

# 3. Instantiations of the genre of syllabus

# 3.1. Corpus and method

The current study examined ten syllabi available on the World Wide Web (see Appendix). To avoid discrepancy in content between various instantiations of the genre of syllabus, only syllabi for the introductory linguistics course offered on campus at several US universities have been selected. The syllabi were initially classified into three categories according to their level of interactivity: (1) paper type (a website with no links; low interactivity): University of Chicago, Willamette University, and University of California, Santa Cruz; (2) quasi-paper type (a website with links to different sections of the same document and/or a few external (predominantly university) websites; medium interactivity): University of Delaware, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Wright State University; and (3) online type (a website with internal and external links including links to lecture slides, readings, and instructors’ web pages as well as internal (university) and external websites; high interactivity): Stanford University, University of Pennsylvania, San Diego State University, and University of California, Los Angeles.1 Then the three groups were compared with regard to their structural and discursive features as well as their intertextuality and interdiscursivity.

Table 1 summarizes the structural features found in the three types of the syllabus. In Table 1, syllabus subsections labels are taken from Grunert (1997), but since the examined syllabi differ in terms of subsection titles (see below), their presence or absence is marked according to the subsection content rather than heading. A check mark indicates that a subsection is included in at least one of the syllabi.

To account for the findings, the present study adopted a synthetic analytical framework that includes elements from corpus linguistics, pragmatics, discourse analysis, metadiscourse, and genre theory. This multifaceted approach combines linguistic, rhetorical, and social perspectives. Like many recent investigations (e.g. Hyland, 2002, 2005a, 2005b; Swales, 2004), this study construes genre as socially situated and thus connected with and dependent on neighboring genres.

# 3.2. Structural features

To promote students’ learning and development, Grunert (1997, p. 24) recommends including the following seventeen components in a syllabus: title page, table of contents, instructor information, letter to the students, purpose of the course, course description, course and unit objectives, resources, readings, course calendar, course requirements, evaluation, grading procedures, instructions on how to use the syllabus and on how to study for the course, content information, and learning tools. None of the examined syllabi, however, contained all seventeen components proposed by Grunert (1997). Table 1 shows that whereas most subsections (14) were found in the present corpus, three e letter to the students, grading procedures, and how to use the syllabus e were omitted by all types of the syllabus.

Table 1 Structural features of the syllabi.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Paper type syllabi (University of Chicago, Willamette University, and University of California, Santa Cruz)</td><td>Quasi-paper type syllabi (University of Delaware, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Wright State University)</td><td>Online type syllabi (Stanford University, University of Pennsylvania,. San Diego State University, and University of California, Los Angeles)</td></tr><tr><td> Title page</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Table of contents Instructor information</td><td></td><td></td><td>V</td></tr><tr><td>Letter to the students</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Purpose of the course Course description</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Course and unit objectives</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Resources Readings</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Course calendar</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Course requirements Evaluation</td><td></td><td></td><td>&gt;</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>V</td></tr><tr><td>Grading procedures</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>How to use the syllabus</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>How to study for this course.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Content information</td><td></td><td>&gt;</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Learning tools</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Syllabi differed in the grouping of subsections and their labeling: for instance, a course calendar, which, Grunert (1997, p. 45) suggests, should specify topics or activities planned for each class meeting, assignment due dates, and special occasions or events, included only discussion topics in the UCSC syllabus, while the information about homework was found in the Requirements section; the UD syllabus, on the other hand, specified lecture topics, readings, and homework due dates for every class meeting. The same subsection was referred to as ‘‘Weekly Syllabus’’ in the SDSU syllabus and as ‘‘Course Schedule’’ in the Penn syllabus. The discrepancy between the amount of information instructors conveyed about themselves in the Instructor Information subsection was also noteworthy: while all syllabi stated the name, office location and telephone number, office hours, and e-mail address of instructor(s), some notified students about the preferred method of communication (e.g. e-mail at the UD) and others provided personal web pages of instructors (e.g. UChicago) or a brief summary of academic career and research interests (e.g. UD), and even the photographs of instructors and teaching assistants (Stanford University).

Notwithstanding the diversity sketched above, all the syllabi included the following sections: course title; term in which the course was offered; instructor information; course description ranging from 4 sentences (UChicago) to 4 paragraphs (labeled ‘‘Overview’’ at the UD); course requirements which might include a brief list of assignments and tests and their due dates (e.g. Stanford University) or an extended description of submission procedures, test types (e.g. true-false, multiple choice, etc.), and late penalties (e.g. Penn); readings (both required and optional); and evaluation which might communicate only the breakdown of final grades (e.g. WSU) as well as explanations of the rationale of every assignment and recommended approach (e.g. individual or co-operative learning) (e.g. Stanford University). Although distribution of content varied across these sections, their recursion implied that these components were considered obligatory structural elements of the syllabus.

Apart from the fact that the paper type syllabi tended to be shorter than the quasi-paper and online ones, no significant structural differences that can be ascribed to interactivity level could be discerned (see Table 1). Paltridge (1995) indicates that ‘‘pragmatic conditions’’ in conjunction with ‘‘the interaction and co-occurrence of a number of aspects of discourse structure’’ determine the genre of a text (p. 403). The dominant factor, he argues, is the text’s use, not its form. The absence of schedule (e.g. UChicago) or the presence of an extended section on how to study for the course (e.g. UCLA) did not therefore deny membership of these texts in the genre of syllabus because, first of all, both texts were explicitly referred to as syllabi by their authors and, second, both texts communicated the expectations of the course to the students by including the obligatory structural units. Consequently, all these texts functioned as syllabi.

# 3.3. Discursive features

Significantly, syllabi of all interactivity levels shared a number of discursive features. For instance, most syllabi were marked for the nuanced employment of modal verbs:

Reactions can be about one point or many points in the text.. You may raise questions about some point the author has made which you do not fully understand; you may choose to question the assumptions or conclusions the author reaches.. The reaction paper should NOT simply summarize what the writer has written. (Willamette State University)

Students who have a disability which may necessitate an academic accommodation or the use of auxiliary aids and services in a class must initiate the request with the Disability Resource Center (DRC). The DRC will evaluate the request with required documentation. (Stanford University)

As can be seen, the Willamette University syllabus utilized can to express permission in a more general and impersonal sense, but switched to a less common and more formal may particularly associated with permission given by the speaker and, finally, concluded with a peremptory obligation should (not) which generally implies the speaker’s authority (Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, & Svartvik, 1985, pp. 219e231). Similarly, the Stanford University syllabus construed the propositions as possible (may), compulsory (must), and future predictive (will) by means of modal verbs. This varied use of modal verbs communicated how much space was left for negotiation: whereas the guidelines for the questions to be discussed in the reaction paper in the Willamette University syllabus were formulated in terms of possibility/permission, the overall scope of the paper was constructed as obligatory encompassing more than a summary of the original text. Likewise, the recommendations for students with disabilities in the Stanford University syllabus unambiguously distinguished between the students’ possibilities and obligations. As in institutional writing, where possibility/permission/ability modals were most common, the syllabi in the present corpus relied on the permission meaning of may to state rules and requirements for students and the possibility meaning of may to inform students of required actions (Biber, 2006, p. 100). The use of obligation modals must and should in the present corpus also agreed with Biber’s (2006) description of their usage for specifying the obligations of students in institutional writing and textbooks (pp. 101e102).

Another recurring grammatical feature of syllabi was the imperative mood:

Come to class prepared. Read the assigned reading. Be prepared to discuss it. (SDSU)

Please notify the professor of any broken links. (Penn)

As the University of Pennsylvania syllabus illustrates, in stating rules and expectations there were occasional concessions to politeness, but a tendency to be concise and precise prevailed. Moreover, the imperative was frequently strengthened by negation or a negative adverb:

Don’t expect to gain much from very general pleas. (UD)

Never leave homeworks in the mailbox of a TA or instructor without explicit prior approval to do so. (Stanford University)

The relatively dense use of stance features, which usually express directive rather than epistemic or attitude meanings, was also characteristic of syllabi in Biber’s (2006) corpus.

In addition, the examined syllabi frequently employed personal pronouns $- I$ , we, and you e and corresponding possessive pronouns e my, our, and your:

I anticipate revising these [course readings] a fair amount next time I teach the course, including changing the grammar. (UCLA)

In this quarter, we introduce basic notions of language competence and the notion of a scientific approach to the questions of language, its biological basis, and its realization in human minds/brains. (UChicago)

Note that homework is a significant part of your grade. (Stanford University)

Bawarshi (2003, p. 122) attributes this discursive feature to the contractual nature of the syllabus (see also Biber, 2006; Parkes & Harris, 2002). Following Baecker’s (1998) discussion on distribution of $I .$ , we, and you across different subsections, Bawarshi (2003, p. 123) explains that tension arises because, on the one hand, instructors have to make the course requirements and penalties for inappropriate behavior explicit, whereas on the other, instructors have to create a learning centered environment. ‘‘This balance is difficult,’’ he asserts, therefore ‘‘many teachers will awkwardly fluctuate between ‘you’ and ‘we’ in order to maintain it’’ (Bawarshi, 2003, p. 122).

In the present corpus, some syllabi shifted from you to students and instructors (and TAs) to we (sometimes even within the same paragraph):

Please be sure to write your name on your homework and to staple multiple pages. Also, make sure you leave large margins so that we can write comments.

We encourage students to work in small groups . on homework assignments. (Stanford University)

If you have questions about the course or feel that you need extra help, your first port of call should be the instructor or the TA. We want to help! (UD)

The contractual nature of the syllabus alone cannot probably account for these inconsistencies in (pro)nominal reference; more likely, the motivational goal of the syllabus, that is, the instructors’ desire to encourage students to perceive themselves as active participants rather than passive recipients in the learning process (Slattery & Carlson, 2005, p. 160), overpowers the need ‘‘to be up-front and clear’’ about instructors’ power (Baecker, 1998, p. 61).

Amplifying the authority of the instructor linguistically seems redundant and pedagogically harmful, especially in light of the fact that students ‘‘are well aware of who will be doing the work and who will be doing the grading’’ (Baecker, 1998, p. 61). As noted by Hyland (2005a) and Thompson (2007), interactional metadiscourse resources, one of which is personal pronouns, are used in classroom genres to soften this authority and establish greater rapport as well as to reduce the threat of the assessment task. Therefore, by filling the semantic role of patient with the inanimate noun phrase homework(s) rather than students (or you), the Stanford University and the UChicago instructors did not mask their authority:

Homeworks submitted late without prior approval will be penalized. (Stanford University)

.because we will generally discuss the solutions in class, late homeworks cannot be accepted. (UChicago)

Instead, they established the rules of the game without launching an attack on the audience, which was well informed about the power of the writer. This impersonal stance strategy, Biber (2006, p. 129) observes, is also representative of institutional university writing.

In addition, instructors might also be affected by other genres of academic discourse, where personal pronouns, modal verbs, and imperative mood constitute one of the engagement strategies (Hyland, 2005b, p. 182). Hyland (2002) demonstrates that directives (modal verbs and imperative mood) widely used in syllabi also serve an engagement purpose in textbooks, research articles, and student reports. Like research genres, syllabi contained hedges:

Roughly, we will be covering one chapter per week, subject to refinement. (UChicago)

When possible, the corrected assignment will be returned a day or two later in the recitation section. (Penn)

Rather than claiming authority, these devices left space for negotiation. As a socialization mechanism, the syllabus should not only guide through the content, but also model the linguistic and rhetorical behavior expected by the discourse community (Parkes & Harris, 2002, p. 58).

Among the key linguistic features of discoursal expertise is terminology (Swales, 1990). All selected syllabi were interspersed with the technical terms pertaining to linguistics, (adult) education, and institutional policies. Even though Introduction to Linguistics is traditionally (one of) the first course(s) preparing students for the systematic study of language, and, thus, it generally requires no background in linguistics (and has no prerequisites), most instructors utilized such terms as phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, competence, and language acquisition and processing in their syllabi. By providing both these concepts and their definitions or explanations instructors not only manifested their membership in the discourse community of linguists, but also initiated socialization of their students into this community:

In this course, we start with phonetics, which gives a way to consistently represent and classify the sounds of the world’s languages. (UCSC)

We concentrate on aspects of form and meaning: syntax (the study of word and phrase formation) and semantics (the study of meaning and its composition). (UChicago)

As pointed out by Swales (1990), specific lexis is an essential characteristic of a discourse community and acquiring the jargon can constitute the first step towards acceptance into the community.

In addition, the examined syllabi revealed that their designers also participated in the discourse community of university teachers. This membership was signaled not only by such lexemes as enrollment, assignment, quiz, credit, major, and minor, as well as true-false, multiple choice, matching and fill-in questions, but also by drawing on Bloom’s Taxonomy of the Cognitive Domain in formulating learning objectives:

Specific course objectives are as follows:

- To help students gain an appreciation of the complexity of language.   
- To assist students in applying the knowledge they gain about language and the analytic skills they develop to their own major field of study. (Willamette University)

Course Objectives: This course will help you understand the nature, structure, and use of language.. You will be equipped with the basic tools for the analysis of language structure and will be prepared for future studies in language theory and for the use of basic linguistic concepts. (WSU)

By promoting cooperative (Stanford University) and active (UCLA) learning, arranging for free tutoring (UD), and providing study guides (e.g. Penn, UCLA) instructors facilitated students’ learning and carried out their pedagogical mandate. Advising students that the course satisfied a requirement for a degree or a program (e.g. Penn, UD), mentioning departmental activities such as an experimental subject pool (e.g. Stanford University), and citing or referring to the policy of the center for students with disabilities (e.g. Stanford University) or regulations on academic integrity (e.g. UCSC) underscored the instructors’ engagement with their institutional community. This connection was further reinforced by university e-mail addresses, links to the home department (e.g. WSU), and personal web pages belonging to the university domain (e.g. UCLA). Most examined syllabi made the intertextuality and interdiscursivity apparent to students: they invoked the connection between the material covered in class and corresponding readings, lecture notes, video, guest lectures, and homework assignments by grouping the information by date and topic (e.g. MIT, Stanford University) or only by topic (e.g. WSU) or date (e.g. SDSU). All these landmarks highlighted the syllabus’ relatedness to other texts produced by pedagogical, linguistic, and institutional discourse communities, in other words, its intertextuality and interdiscursivity.

# 3.4. Intertextuality, interdiscursivity, and medium

Importantly, all types of the syllabus e paper, quasi-paper, and online e linked together various aspects of course content and other relevant information. For instance, in the UChicago syllabus the list of required, optional, and useful readings was accompanied by information about the availability of the texts in the library and bookstores without mentioning the respective websites. Another paper type syllabus, the UCSC, referred students to the university policy on academic integrity to emphasize ‘‘no tolerance for faking the funk’’ in the course; for further information, the relevant URL was provided. The quasi-paper type syllabus of WSU enhanced the connection between the topics presented in class and the assigned textbook sections by providing a hyperlink and the URL of the textbook. The fact that the Willamette University (paper type) syllabus had a separate section for video materials which specified the time and place of viewing, whereas the UD (quasi-paper type) syllabus listed the video to be shown (presumably in class) on the schedule did not imply that the former was less informative or less intertextual than the latter; rather, this difference reflected the flexibility and plasticity of the genre of syllabus.

It is true that electronic hypertext, as Landow (2006, p. 4) observes, makes the entire field of interconnections obvious and easy to navigate. What is more, ‘‘[h]ypermedia as a medium conveys the strong impression that its links signify coherent, purposeful, and above all useful relationships’’ and ‘‘when applied to educational uses,. linking materials encourages habits of relational thinking in the reader’’ (Landow, 2006, p. 153). It would be, however, misleading to equate intertextuality with hyperlinks. As has been shown, connectedness between various sections of the syllabus as well as its embeddedness within the larger structures (e.g. program, department, institution) were successfully conveyed by means of linear presentation. Color and links, used with discretion, as Parkes and Harris (2002) remark, were helpful organizational devices, but they alone did not guarantee an effective syllabus.

What, on the other hand, makes electronic hypertext so attractive to syllabus designers is that the essential information is ‘‘but one . link away’’ (Landow, 2006, p. 153). A hyperlink, for example, can spare students a time consuming trip to the library (not to mention the disappointment that the desired text has already been borrowed by someone else). An online version of the required reading or homework assignment is easily and cheaply reproducible. The issues associated with intellectual property (Bauman, 1999; Grunert, 1997) can be averted if syllabi require an authorization to view the copyrighted material (e.g. Penn). Instructors, on the other hand, can opt for dissemination of their own materials and allow for free access to homework assignments (e.g. WSU), lecture summaries (e.g. Stanford University), answer keys (e.g. SDSU), and to the course reader (e.g. UCLA). An online syllabus is not intended to be printed out and therefore should not be adjusted to the standard page size (compare, for instance, the Penn and the UCSC syllabi) or devoid of images (compare, for example, the syllabus of the Willamette University and the syllabi of UCLA and UD).2 The digital medium, in other words, equips instructors with more tools to individualize their course and syllabus.

# 4. Conclusions and implications

To sum up, the present study has shown that the syllabus is not only ‘‘a document by which faculty members define learning outcomes for students and the methods by which those outcomes will be realized’’ (Habanek, 2005, p. 62), but also a site of intertextuality and interdiscursivity. The syllabus reveals that the social creation of knowledge taking place in the course draws on lectures, textbooks, and other in-class and out-of-class learning/teaching activities as much as on the ongoing discussion in the academic field, adult education, university policies, and many other texts and communities. Instructors utilize the syllabus not only to manifest their membership in multiple discourse communities, but also to socialize students into (at least, some of) them.

Close examination of syllabi with different levels of interactivity has demonstrated that web-mediated and paperbased syllabi share structural and discursive features and thus can be treated as instantiations of the same genre. All syllabi are designed to be read primarily ‘‘in the navigating mode’’ (Askehave & Nielsen, 2005), regardless of whether ‘‘out of the text’’ means using hyperlinks to arrive at a different web document or reaching for a designated handout, textbook/course reader chapter, or an article in a scholarly journal in non-virtual space.

Electronic hypertext offers instructors more organizational possibilities. However, some researchers (e.g. Grigorovici et al., 2003) warn against an overwhelming number of hyperlinks, since high interactivity appears to correlate with a less positive initial impression of the course and instructor. These findings cannot be straightforwardly translated into the formula for the effective syllabus design; however, they suggest that adding the links as the course progresses, that is, when the students can grasp the connection between the starting point and the linked document can foster scaffolding and, maybe, a more positive attitude to the instructor and the course.

Thompson (2007) has pointed out that the faculty can dissipate the syllabus negativity in their oral presentations of the course. The syllabus, after all, is only one of the class management tools and reception of the course and the instructor does not hinge on this document alone. Instead, as this paper has attempted to show, the syllabus connects and is connected to other in-class and out-of-class practices and thus cannot be studied in isolation. Therefore, future research should investigate the syllabus in its context, that is, in its interaction with other instructional genres such as textbooks, lectures, tutorials, office hour discussions, student assignments, discussion board postings, and many others. Use of corpora such as T2K-SWAL (e.g. Biber, 2006), class observations (e.g. Thompson, 2007), and experiments involving students (e.g. Grigorovici et al., 2003) can shed more light on communication in higher education. Due to the current proliferation of the course management systems such as WebCT inquiry into the genre of syllabus can be extended to include WebCT-mediated syllabi.

# Appendix.

Buckley, G. (2006, Spring term). Linguistics 001: Introduction to linguistics. Retrieved November 20, 2006, from University of Pennsylvania, Department of Linguistics: http://www.ling.upenn.edu/courses/Spring_2006/ling001/ syllabus.html   
DeGraff, M., & Zoll, C. (n.d.). Introduction to linguistics. Retrieved November 20, 2006, from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Linguistics and Philosophy: http://web.mit.edu/linguistics/www/degraff/ 24.900.html   
Dost, A. (2006, Summer session I). Linguistics 20: Introduction to linguistics. Retrieved November 20, 2006, from University of California, Santa Cruz: http://summer.ucsc.edu/syllabus/ling020-01.pdf#search $=$ %22intro% 20to%20linguistics%20syllabus%22   
Eckert, P., & Sag, I. A. (2006, September-December). Linguistics 1: Introduction to linguistics. Retrieved November 20, 2006, from Stanford University, Department of Linguistics: http://www.stanford.edu/class/linguist1/ Gawron, J. M. (2006, January-May). Linguistics 101: Introduction to linguistics. Retrieved November 20, 2006, from San Diego State University, Department of Linguistics and Oriental Languages: http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/ wgawron/intro/syllabus.htm   
Gregory, W., & Fujiwara, M. (2005, Spring term). IDS 155-01 Introduction to linguistics. Retrieved November 20, 2006, from Willamette University: http://www.willamette.edu/cla/ids/ids155/syllabus/syllabus.html Hayes, B. (2006, Winter term). Linguistics 20: Introduction to linguistics. Retrieved November 20, 2006, from University of California, Los Angeles, Department of Linguistics: http://www.linguistics.ucla.edu/people/hayes/ 20/index.htm#Syllabus   
Phillips, C. (1999, Fall term). Introduction to linguistics. Retrieved November 20, 2006, from University of Delaware, Linguistics Department: http://www.ling.udel.edu/colin/courses/ling101_f99/syllabus.html   
Limouze, H. (2002, Spring term). ENG 478: Introduction to linguistics. Retrieved November 20, 2006, from Wright State University, English Department: http://www.wright.edu/cola/Dept/eng/limouze/02s478.htm Merchant, J. (2002, Fall term). Introduction to linguistics e 1. Retrieved November 20, 2006, from The University of Chicago, Department of Linguistics: http://home.uchicago.edu/ $\sim$ merchant/classes/ling201. syllabus.pdf#search¼%22intro%20to%20linguistics%20syllabus%22

# References

Askehave, I., & Nielsen, A. E. (2005). Digital genres: a challenge to traditional genre theory. Information Technology & People, 18, 120e141.   
Baecker, D. L. (1998). Uncovering the rhetoric of the syllabus. College Teaching, 46(2), 58e62.   
Bauman, M. L. (1999). The evolution of internet genres. Computers and Composition, 16, 269e282.   
Bawarshi, A. (2003). Genre and the invention of the writer: Reconsidering the place of invention in composition. Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.   
Bazerman, C. (2004). Intertextuality: how texts rely on other texts. In C. Bazerman, & P. Prior (Eds.), What writing does and how it does it: An introduction to analyzing texts and textual practices (pp. 83e96). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.   
Biber, D. (2006). University language: A corpus-based study of spoken and written registers. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.   
Collins, T. (1997). For openers . an inclusive course syllabus. In W. E. Campbell, & K. A. Smith (Eds.), New paradigms for college teaching (pp. 79e102). Edina, MN: Interaction Book Company.   
Creed, T. (1997). Extending the classroom walls electronically. In W. E. Campbell, & K. A. Smith (Eds.), New paradigms for college teaching (pp. 149e184). Edina, MN: Interaction Book Company.   
Cummings, J. A., Bonk, C. J., & Jacobs, R. F. (2002). Twenty-first century course syllabi: options for online communication and interactivity. The Internet and Higher Education, 5, 1e19.   
Grigorovici, D., Nam, S., & Russill, C. (2003). The effects of online syllabus interactivity on students’ perception of the course and instructor. The Internet and Higher Education, 6, 41e52.   
Grunert, J. (1997). The course syllabus: A learning-centered approach. Bolton, MA: Anker Publishing Company, Inc.   
Habanek, D. V. (2005). An examination of the integrity of the syllabus. College Teaching, 53(2), 62e64.   
Hyland, K. (2002). Directives: argument and engagement in academic writing. Applied Linguistics, 23, 215e239.   
Hyland, K. (2004). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press. Hyland, K. (2005a). Metadiscourse: Exploring interaction in writing. London; New York: Continuum.   
Hyland, K. (2005b). Stance and engagement: a model of interaction in academic discourse. Discourse Studies, 7(2), 173e192.   
Landow, G. P. (2006). Hypertext 3.0: Critical theory and new media in an era of globalization. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.   
Paltridge, B. (1995). Working with genre: a pragmatic perspective. Journal of Pragmatics, 24, 393e406.   
Parkes, J., & Harris, M. B. (2002). The purposes of a syllabus. College Teaching, 50(2), 55e61.   
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language. Harlow, Great Britain: Longman.   
Rankin, W. (2000). A survey of course web sites and online syllabi. Educational Technology, 40(2), 38e42.   
Slattery, J. M., & Carlson, J. F. (2005). Preparing an effective syllabus: current best practices. College Teaching, 53(4), 159e164.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Exploration and applications. Cambridge: University Press.   
Thompson, B. (2007). The syllabus as a communication document: constructing and presenting the syllabus. Communication Education, 56(1), 54e71.

Elena Afros holds a PhD in Linguistics. She teaches at the University of Waterloo, Canada.

Catherine Schryer, an Associate Professor in the Department of English Language and Literature at the University of Waterloo, specializes in research projects that combine social and textual analyses. She has published in Written Communication, the Journal of Business and Technical Communication, Technostyle, Discourse & Communication, and Communication Monographs. She is the principal investigator in several SSHRC grants exploring communication in health care settings.