# Academic "click bait': A diachronic investigation into the use of rhetorical part in pragmatics research article titles\*

Xinren Chena, Hao Liub,

a Deparment of Applied Foreig Studie/choo ofFreign Studies/China Research Center for Language Sategies, Nanjing Universt, 163 xianin   
Avenue, Nanjing, 210023, China   
b School of Foreign Studies, Hefei University of Technology, 485 Danxia Road, Hefei, 230601, China

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Handling Editor: Dr. Hilary Nesi

Keywords:   
Rhetorical part   
Compound title   
Pragmatics   
Research article   
Diachronic perspective

This study reports on a diachronic investigation into the under-explored practice of using a rhetorical part - an unconventional, informationally non-compulsory part involving the use of rhetorical device(s) - in compound titles of published pragmatics research articles (RAs). By analyzing 2263 compound RA titles drawn from two high-profile international journals in pragmatics published during three periods of time (i.e., 1993-2002, 2003-2012, 2013-2022), we show that (a) the overall distribution of compound RA titles involving a rhetorical part has shown a statistically significant increase across the periods concerned, and that (b) rhetorical devices used in the rhetorical part mainly include quotations, rhetorical questions, metaphors, parodies, alliterations, and repetition, with quotations being the only type whose occurrence frequency has been steadily increasing across the three periods studied. The increasing use of a rhetorical part is attributed to the competitive context of international academic publication and the inherent characteristic of the pragmatics discipline. Hopefully, this study could provide new evidence for the transition to post-academic writing style as well as the documented rhetorical marketization of the academic genres, and inform academic title writing in practice.

# 1. Introduction

Described as the \*face" of papers (Lebrun, 2011, p. 103), academic itles constitute readers' first point of encounter with research articles (RAs). Despite their miniature form, they are ignificant as they indicate the content of RAs and attract potential readers (Soler, 2007), thus contributing to authors \*reputation and professonal advancement (Hyland & Zou, 2022, p. 1). Their importance to RAs has rapidly increased in recent decades, owing to the surging number of journals and hence of RAs. The tsunami of papers has made title canning a common practice for readers to \*notice, and perhaps subsequently read and cite, new research" (Hyland & Zou, 2022: 10). Thus, writing effective RA titles constitutes a crucial task (Soler, 2007).

Despite their prominence, RA titles have not been fully explored in contras to other sections (e.g. Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion) of academic RA genres (Swales, 1990). Only in recent decades has the small yet key front aspect become a focus of attention. Whereas many scholars (e.g., Ball, 2009; Hudson, 2016; Jamali & Nikzad, 2011) have conducted diverse \*macroscopic) analyses (Soler, 2007,p. 92), examining the structures of RA titles atthe surface level for predominantly scientometrical purpoes es attention has been directed to their \*microscopic" aspects such as the use of punctuation and rhetoric. Since Dillon (1981a: 879) proposes the use of colon in RA titles as "a primary correlate of scholarship, compound RA tites that involve at least two parts separated by a punctuation mark have gained plenty of scholarly attention (e.g., Cameron & Robertson, 1997; Gastel & Day, 2017; Haggan, 2004; Milojevic, 2017. Neertheles, ittl if any work has explored the us of what we propose to call a\*rhtorical part" (to be elaborated in Section 3) in compound RA tites, as illustrated in example (1) (all italics are ours) retrieved from Journal of Pragmatics:

(1) "You're a nuisance!": "Patch-up" jocular abuse in Chinese fiction

In academic writing, it i usually recommended that authors keep their titles succinct and formal, and avoid sensationalism see e g, Buxton & Meadows, 1977; Gastel & Day, 2017; Grant, 2013; Gustavil, 2012; Hays, 2010). In this light, the rhetorical part \*You're a nuisance" sems \*problematic" in seral ways. irst it appears superfluous in that the remaining tite would till sound complete if it were deleted. Second, it is a colloquial expresson. Third, it sounds sensational because it contains an abuse. Nevertheless, \*prolematic" as i i, it i nether irrelevant nor futile. When considering it in relation with the other part of the compound tite, one may realize that as a representative quotation from the data, it i actually an instantiation of the reearch object, i., patched-up jocular abuse, of the current study.

Overall, using a rhetorical part in compound RA titles suggests a noteworthy contradiction between what writing norms state and What academic titles actually show. Considering the lack of attention to the discrepancy, we may wonder whether such unconventional practices are contingent on individuals choice. However, there are reasons to think therwise. Firs, as researchers of pragmatics, our initial observation suggests a remarkably incresing proliferation of a rhetorical part in pragmatics articles over recent years. Second other researchers (e.g., Haggans, 2004; Hudson, 2016; Hyland & Zou, 2022) have also evidenced noticeable use of sensational quotations and other eye-catching openings in RA titles.

To verify our observation and related research, we propose a diachronic study of the use of a rhetorical part in compound RA titles, against a database f 263 compound title f RAs published across three derent periods (ie., 1993-2002, 2003-2012, 2013-2022) in two prestigious pragmatics journals (ie., Jounadl of Pragmatics and Pragmatics). After reviewing reated litrature on compound RA titles in Section 2, we delimit the type of rhetorical part in Section 3 and introduce the data and methods in Section 4. In Section 5, we shall ind out whether there is a growing tendency to use compound title with a rhetorical part in published pragmatics RAs across the time periods concerned. We shalldiscuss the possible causes for the results in Section 6 and conclude the study in Section 7.

# 2. Literature review

Actual practice of using a compound construction in scientific tites have been broadlystudied i recent years (see e.g., Haggan, 2004; Hartley, 2007; Hyland & Zo0u, 2022; Jacques & Sebire, 2010; Soler, 2007, 2011; Swales & Feak, 2004). This body of research has largely started with the seminal work of Dillon (1981a: 884), who observed the frequent \*titular colonicity" in scientific outputs, arguing that the colon emerges as \*the primary correlate of scholarship". Also, subsequent work using diachronic data has confirmed a rising trend in the use of compound scientific tles see e.g., Busch-Lauer, 2000; Cameron & Robertson, 1997; Dilon, 1981b, 1982b; Lewison & Hartley, 2005; Whissell, 2004; Ziebland & Pope, 1995).

Later research has revealed a more frequent use of compound titles in arts than in science journals, despite the discovery of regular and frequent use of compound constructions, in contrast with other structure (e.., full-sentence tites), in some hard sciences (e., medical science in Goodman et al., 2001; computer science in Laurence, 2001). Such a contrast has been found to exist in a range of disciplines. For example, Haggans (2004) reports that the perentage of science papers using compound tites is only a litle more than one-fifth, whereas the figure i trebled in the case of literature papers. Similarly, Hartley (2007) concludes from a meta-analysis that the use f colons is more frequent in the field of arts and humanities than in natural sciences. Also, Hyland and Zou (2022) report that papers in soft cience (i.., ecation, applied linguisics nd history) preer compounds whes those in had scines (mathematics biochemistry, engineering) do not.

Some studies seek to identify the effct of using compound titles on citation rates. On the one hand, some researchers, using multidisciplinary (e.g., Buter & van Raan, 2011) or discipline-specific data (e.g., medical science in Jacques & Sebire, 2010; psy chology in Townsend, 1983) find that using compound titles may be more likely to atract itations. On the basis of a meta-analysis, Hartley (2007) shows that the use of colons in RA titles has no effect upon their subsequent citation rates. Despite their divergent findings, none of them focuses on the effect of using rhetorical parts under study.

Another line of research has centred on the internal components of compound scientific titles. For example, Swales and Feak (2004) discover four types of interrelationships between the two (or more) parts of a compound title: Topic-Method, General-Specific, Major-Minor, and Problem-Solution. Sole (2007, 2011) examines the distribution of these catgories in scientifi tites colected from English and Spanish review papers and research papers and finds that the general-specific prevails.

also addressed some features and functions pertaining to the rhetorical part i compound constructions. Haggan (2004) argues that the inclusion of forms such as a quotation or question in compound RA title attracts readers and ads to their appreciation of the RA. Hartley (2007: 559) runs an experiment by comparing readers responses to compound titles with \*arctors' (e.g., \*The eyes have it. The psychology of face perception") with responses to those without them and full-entence titles (e.g. \*The psychology of face perception). He finds that the former are judged significantly more interesting than the atter. In adition, Hyland and Zou (2022: 8) note that the part preceding the colon of a compound title can be of two kinds, ither descriptive" but inadequately informative, or "detailed by indicating the approach of main findings of the study. They find that the descriptive kind is far more commonly used, accounting for over three-quarters of titles sampled. However, these researchers only mention a few eye-catching forms such as a quotation and a question. In addition, they offer no explanation about what exactly distinguishes the attractor from other title forms.

Also underexplored is whether the use of the attractors in title writing has underone any diachronic change. In recent decades, the competition between research to be published, noticed and cited has been increasing (Hyland & Zou, 2022). More and more academics strive to publish their papers in internationally high-profile journals (UNesco, 2017). Thus, it i reasonable to speculate that researchers are incline to use more and more attractive titles over time.

In view of the above-mentioned research gaps, we seek to explore the practice by introducing the term \*rhetorical part' to capture all attention-grabbing devices in compound title writing. Specifically, we address whether the inclusion of the rhetorical part in compound titles has become an emerging trend or not. fso, we also seek to explore why the rhetorical part is more and more favored

# 3. Defining the "rhetorical part' explored in this study

So far, the type of rhetorical part under study has been mentioned without an explanation as to what exactly it looks like. This section delimits the unconventional component of compound RA titles as recurrently observed in pragmatics journals. It has the following identifiable features:

# 3.1. Using some rhetorical device(s)

A rhetorical part in a compound RA title commonly includes the use of one (or more) type(s) of rhetorical device. For example, the rhetorical part in both Tite (1) and (2) contains a quotation, whereas we find that Titles (3), (4) and (5) use a rhetorical question, a metaphor and a parody respectively.

(2) Peter is a dumb nut": Status updates and reactions to them as acts of positioning' in Facebook (3) Prominent messages in Education and Applied Linguistic abstracts: How do authors appeal to their prospective readers? (4) Where does the money go? An analysis of the container metaphor in economics: The market and the economy (5) I complain, therefore I am: On indirect complaints in Polish.

# 3.2. Informationally non-compulsory

In the course of title scanning, readers get informed of the major contents of an RA to eventually decide on whether to read recommend, or cite the research. Thus, an RA tite is practicallysupposed to be characterized by synoptic informativity (Gesuat, 2008). But an author often has both the need to convey as much information as possible in an Rtle and the need to make itas terse as possile (Buton & Meadows, 1977) beause long title can be more difficult todigest and may reduce theatraction factor (Hudson, 2016, p. 878).

However, including a rhetorical part in a compound RA title explicitly goes against the norm emphasizing informativity and economy (Soler, 2011). Take Title (2) for example. The rhetorical part Peter is a dumb nut here i informationall optional in that knowledge about the subject of the RA can be retieved from the second part even if the rhetorical part i deleted. As the rhetorical part explicitly make litl if any direct contribution  iforing thereader f what the is aout, i shuld hae be mitted if one is to keep his RA title brief and to the point.

# 3.3. Not indicative of RA content

In the context of academic publication, RA tites have to be "appropriately descriptive of the article's content to be detected by information retrieval systems" (Hyland & Zou, 2022, p. 3). When it comes to compound tites, each component is expected to be self-evident and explici in describing the subject pinpointing the issue at hand, or offering details about the methodology or the main findings. Consider Title (6):

(6) \*Framing in interactive academic talk: A conversation-analytic perspective

The first part of Title(6) specifies the subject of the RA, while the follow-up nominal group details the aproach adopted to study the subject.

However, a rhetorical part is dfferent because it does not clearly expressay of the above aspect of an RA if looked at alone. Take Title (1) for example. The information conveyed by \*You're a nusance!" is to general for readers to accurately pinpoint any aspect of the research reported in the RA.

# 3.4. Multi-functional

While informationally optional and not indicative of the RA content, the rhetorical part of a compound RA title often has various functions, as discussed below.

# 3.4.1. Grabbing attention

The use of a rhetorical part in compound titles can serve as a kind of academic \*click bait, as it may pique readers curiosity about the ensuing RA (Loewenstein, 1994). The rhetorical device(s) used in the rhetorical part make the title suficiently appealing to grab attention. Reconsider Title (1). If looked at alone, the quotation "You're a nuisance!" conveys sensationalist information. The provoking abusive expression as well as the personal pronoun \*you" whose reference is unclear can make readers aware of some apparent gaps in their knowledge (e.g., who are \*you"? Am I targete? Why are \*you" alleged to be "a nuisance"? etc.). In addition, f the other part ("Patch-up jocular abuse in Chinese fiction') which describes the topic of the RA is considered, knowledge gaps are till there. Even if readers realize that the quotation instantiates the object of the study, they may till wonder why the apparently abusive expression is said to be jocular and in what sense it is patch-up'. The gaps may thus tempt readers to click on the title linked to the main text for a subsequent reading so as to clear up the confusion.

In addition to making the tites catchy and amusing, the rhetorical part is sometimes aimed at readers' aesthetic sensibilities because readers afe reding theaticle can se thath rhetorical par incrases their apreciation of the RA For example, the parody " complain, therefore m f. think, the am, i.e, coto e sum in te (5) cmes clr n th scond pag f the when one realizes that it deals with the unusual Polish culture of complaining" (Kurtyka, 2019, p. 35). The author of the RA wants to show his readers the deliberateness of complaining inthe Polish communication style and it constructie efect on interpersonal relationships. Once this is realized, readers can appreciate the wordplay and witty conciseness revealed in the rhetorical part.

# 3.4.2. Illustrating the object of study

The rhetoricl part, ecially one that s relized via the use f quottion, fen serves to illustrate the rearch objet of the RA. In Titles (1) and (2), for example, You're a nusance!" and "Peter s a dumb nut instantiat the rearch objects of their RAs .., "atch up" jocular abuse and Facebook status updates and reactions to them, as described in the other part of the title. Compound titles including an object-illstrating rhetorical part resemble what Hyland and Zou (2022) say about the descriptive types of compound RA titles that clarify the topic following a quotation or an eye-catching opening.

# 3.4.3. Hinting at the issue or suggesting the major findings/arguments

Sometimes, a rhetorical part may hint at the issue that the current RA sees to tackle. In Title (3), the rhetorical part (How do uthors appeal to their prospective readers?") may hint that the RA is about the ways in which authors apeal to their prospective readers.

Occasionall, the writer may adopt a rhetorical part to suggest the major findings or arguments of the RA, especially unexpected. counter-intuitive, or non-mainstream ones. Fronting main results/arguments in the rhetorical part presented in compound tites somehow challenges title norms (cf. e.g., McGowan & Tugwell, 2005) but entices readers further reading/exploration of the RA. As Hyland and Zou (2022: 10) put it th fronted findings/arguments implied through the rhetorical part achieve thir impact y "creating a dissonance in the reader's expectations, presenting what is new, or what might be thought tobe the bottom line of the paper, in the thematic given' position'. Readers could thus be encouraged to stop titlescanning to focus on this one and the ensuing RA. Take Title (5) for example. The rhetorical part  complin, therfore I m) which is adapted from  think, therfore I am" reers implicitl to the role of indirect complaints unique to the Polish context instead of other cultures, which constitutes one of the major arguments of the RA. Such a counter-intuitive argument implied in the RA title may entice readers to read the RA in order to find out about how the result was obtained.

# 3.5. Flexibly located in compound titles

Although it isoften found at the initial position of a compound tite, a rhetorical part may sometimes appear at other positions, as shown in Title (7).

(7) Contrast and pragmatics in figurative language: Anything understatement can do, irony can do better

Thus, we can say that the rhetorical part is not only distinct from but also includes the so-called \*general, attention-grabbing opening' form delineated by Hyland and Zou (202: 8): the former is flexible in its position, whereas the lattr only appears at the beginning of a compound title (i.e., before the punctuation mark).

Next, we shall introduce the data and methods used to explore how the form of rhetorical part has en used over time in compound RA titles.

# 4. Methodology

This section presents the research questions, followed by details of how the data were collected. Finall, the methods of data analysis are introduced.

# 4.1. Research questions

To find out whether there is any diachronic variation in terms of authors use of a rhetorical part in their compound pragmatics RA titles across different periods of time, we will address the following questions:

i) How are compound RA titles including a rhetorical part distributed across ifferent time periods in pragmatics journals? Is there any significant difference across different time periods?   
ii) What rhetorical devices do the authors of the pragmatics RAs employ in the rhetorical part of the compound RA titles? Is there any significant difference across different time periods?

# 4.2. The data

Our data were collcted from the discipline of pragmatics. We focused on this specific discipline for the following two reasons. For one thing, pragmatics is the discipline in which the authors of this study work as teachers and researchers,sothat our knowledge of the field may contribute to the analysi of the rhetorical part used. The inclusion of insiders perspective i important because it may shed light on how members of the disciplinary community understand what is likely tobe effective and familiar to colleagues' (Hyland & Zou, 2022, p. 10). For another, although the rhetorical part of compound titles is not unique to pragmatics RAs--they also appear in RAs published in joumals of other disciplines? - we have informally observed that a rhetorical part seems more and more frequently adopted in compound R tites published in pragmatics journals. Thus, we wish to verify whether this s reall the trend in the field in the first place so that we may turn to other fields for comparative research in the future.

To secure the baseline data for our research, we adopted Soler's (2011) 7 pieces of tertia comparationis (see Appendix) in terms of communicative purpose, international nature, representativeness, the editorial process fllowed, the editorial policy followed, audience, and chonological coverage for journal elction.Two authoritative journals ie Pragmatic and Jounal of Pragmatics, were ultimately selected for this study. Both journals are ssCI-indexed, internationall prestigious refereed journals and are available online. This corresponds to the representativeness criterion of data collction (Nwogu, 1997). Specificall, Pragmatics, a quarterly publication of the Intenational Pragmatics Association, represents the linguistic pragmatics field and publishes papers on the inter disciplinary science of language use. Jounal of Pragmatics is the oldest journal in pragmatics and one of the oldest in linguisics as a field" (Terkourafi & Haugh, 2019, p. 1) It has also provided a forum for bringing together innovative pragmatic scholarship which employs \*atested data from a wide range of languages/cultures to develop theories of how speakers produce and interpret language in different contexts. It is thus assumed that the two journals selected probably adress similar sies and types of authorship and readership in the field of pragmatics, as partly indicated by their claims. It i also worth noting that, in terms of title-writing conventions, while Pragmatics offrs a note on the word limit and rules of capitalization, Journal of Pragmatics requires concise and informative RA titles without any abbreviations or formulae. But the same thing turns out to be that neither of them has made any explicit specification of types or structures of submitted RA tite. herefore, we assumed that the use or non-use of a rhetorical part is practically contingent upon the authors' own choice rather than a requirement of the journals.

Then, we collected compound tites from the two journals For the purpose of a diachronic investigation, we collected the data during three contiguous time periods, i., 1993-2002, 2003-2012, and 2013-2022, as they are the most recent three decades until the year we did the rerch (i.., 2023). Indeed, 10-year interals are often adopted in diachronic studies to trace the shifs in patterns or conventions occurring over time in academic writing ., Gillrts & Van de Velde, 2010; Ple et al., 2019, or t generate  view of how specific forms and functions of scientific tles emerge, evolve, and/or even vanish (e.g., Dillon, 1982b; Yao & Jiang, 2010.

Specifically, we first excluded tites of book reviews, discussion notes corrigendum, editorials, and epilogues, obtaining a total of 4026 RA titles for further procesing. We then singled out the compound titles (recognizablefrom the division into two or more parts by punctuation marks) and got 2382 tokens ( $5 9 \%$ of the total, i.e., 2382/4026). As shown in Table 1, in both journals, the proportion of compound titles exceeds that of non-compound ones (401/659, i.e., $6 1 \%$ in Pragmatics and 1981/3,367, i.e., $5 9 \%$ in Journal of Pragmatics), and it has increased over time (from 106/183, i.e., $5 8 \%$ to 155/247, i.e., $6 3 \%$ in Pragmatics and from 289/607, i.e., $4 8 \text{‰}$ $6 7 \%$ in Journal of Pragmatics). The extensive use of compound titles provides much room for the use of rhetorical parts.

For the purpose f a genre-specific discussion, we only drew compound tite from RAs that display the MRD format (i.e. including sections of Introduction, Methods, Results, and Discussion) (Soler, 2007, 2011). As a result, 119 compound tites f citical enquiries and theoretical speculations were deleted.

We compiled a final database consisting of 2263 compound RA titles (see Table 2). It should also be noted that we indiscriminately included titles of RAs by native and non-native English authors because both were found to have used rhetorical parts in compound titles on the one hand and the two journals publish papers regardlessof the authors' language or nationality background on the other.

Table 1 Distribution of RA titles in the two journals over the three time periods.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">No. of RA titles</td><td colspan="3">No. of IMRD RA titles</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Compound</td><td> Non-compound</td><td>Total</td><td>Compound</td><td>Non-compound</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Pragmatics</td></tr><tr><td>1993-2002</td><td>106</td><td>77</td><td>183</td><td>91</td><td>63</td><td>154</td></tr><tr><td>2003-2012</td><td>140</td><td>89</td><td>229</td><td>138</td><td>82</td><td>220</td></tr><tr><td>2013-2022</td><td>155</td><td>92</td><td>247</td><td>151</td><td>87</td><td>238</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>401</td><td>258</td><td>659</td><td>380</td><td>232</td><td>612</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Journal of Pragmatics</td></tr><tr><td> 1993-2002</td><td>289</td><td>318</td><td>607</td><td>249</td><td>185</td><td>434.</td></tr><tr><td>2003-2012</td><td>664</td><td>531</td><td>1195</td><td>640</td><td>441</td><td>1081</td></tr><tr><td>2013-2022</td><td>1028</td><td>537</td><td>1565</td><td>994</td><td>489</td><td>1483</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1981</td><td>1386</td><td>3367</td><td>1883</td><td>1115</td><td>2998</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.3. Data analysis

According to the identification critria of a rhetorical part proposed in Section 3, we examined allthe 2263 compound RA titles to identify and then code those including a rhetorical part. In addition, to further reveal the microscopic features of the rhetorical part the rhetorical device(s) used were then identified, categorized and counted. The other component(s) of the same compound itle as well as the full text of RAs were also referred to in identification and analysis when necessary. The proces of identification is exemplified as follows. Consider Titles (1) and (2).

(8) The shift from lexical to subjective readings of Spanish prometer 'to promise' and amenazar to threaten'. $^ { * } \mathsf { A }$ corpus-based account. (9) She is a very good child but she doesn't speak": The invisibility of children's bilingualism and teacher ideology

"A corpus-based account" and \*She is very good child but she doesn't speak" i Titles (8) and (9) were both taken to be: (a) non-self contained: they do not essentially reveal the ful picture of the subject of the RAs if looked at alone, and (b) functional: they supplement the second part of the compound tites, though in different ways. However, we identified the latter insted of the former as a rhetorical part for the reason that "A corpus-based account' in (7) does not contain any rhetorical device; more importantl, its cancellation would sacrifice information about the approach of the study. In contrast, by referring to the fll text of the RA, it was observed that She is a very good child ut she doesnt peak' i 9 i a quotation, dran from the field notes, that embodie th teacher ideology in the second part of the compound title. Readers could stil grasp the subject and nature of the RA even if the quotation is deleted.

The two authors as coders completed all the processes of identification and coding separately, obtaining a high rate of inter-rater reliability (Cohen's kappa $= 0 . 7 9 3$ $\begin{array} { r } { \mathbf { p } < 0 . 0 0 1 . } \end{array}$ . All the discrepancies were re-examined and discussed by the two coders to reach an agreement. The agreed-upon results were finally taken for analyses.

To examine whether a noticeable diachronic change could be identified in the use of a rhetorical part in compound RA titles in pragmatics journals, we calculated the percentage of compound RA titles involving a rhetorical part in each period of time before condcting a sttisil tt to ases th differece, if any. Bie, we a h viations, if any, in the irition f ahetrical part realized through different rhetorical devices across the time periods concerned.

# 5. Results of the study

This section reports the istribution of compound RA tites involving a rhetorical part aross the three periods of time concerned. Then, it illustrates the rhetorical device(s) used in the identified rhetorical part in terms of types and distribution.

5.1. Distribution of compound RA titles including a rhetorical part across the three periods of time

After scrutinizing the data, we find that altogether 632 out of 2263 $2 7 . 9 2 \%$ compound RA titles in the database collected from the two pragmatcs journals (i.e. Pragmatics and Jounal of Pragmatics) during the period of 1993-2022 involve the use of a rhtorical part. Table 3 presents the istributions of compound RA tites involving a rhetorical part in the two journals across the three time periods. A steady increase in the usage frequency of compound RA titles involving a rhetorical part can be observed over the three time periods in the two journals. A Chi-Square test reveals significant diachronic differences ( $\AA ^ { - 2 } = 4 3 . 8 7 4$ $\mathbf { P } = 0 . 0 0 0$ . In other words, significantly more and more tokens of a rhetorical part have been adopted within compound RA tites in the two pragmatics journals over time.

Table 2 Basic information of the database.   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Journal</td><td>Time range</td><td>Range of volumes/issues</td><td>No. of compound RA titles</td></tr><tr><td>Pragmatics</td><td>1993-2022</td><td>3(1)-32(4)</td><td>380</td></tr><tr><td> Journal of Pragmatics</td><td>1993-2022</td><td>19(1)-202</td><td>1883</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>2263</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Distribution of compound RA titles involving a rhetorical part across three different periods.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">Time periods</td><td>x?</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1993-2002</td><td>2003-2012</td><td>2013-2022</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>No. of compound titles.</td><td>340</td><td>778</td><td>1145</td><td>43.874</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>No. of compound titles involving a rhetorical part</td><td>52</td><td>201</td><td>379</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Percentage</td><td>15.29%</td><td>25.84%</td><td>33.10%</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

The finding partly echoes Hyland and Zou's (2022: 8) claim that authors studying human sciences ofen take advantage of pop culture references or quotations to \*enliven their title. However, the finding seems to contradict Berkenkotter and Huckin's (1995) report about a trend of using more informative RA titles in academic journals over time. The contradiction may be only superficial, though, beause using arhetorical part does not necesarily produce les informatie compound tite. Afe all, when compared with a full-sentence title, a compound tite involving a rhetorical part could be no lessinformative in terms of the RA content.

5.2. Types and distribution of rhetorical devices used in the rhetorical part across the three periods of time

Our data shows that authors may employ various types of rhetorical devices in the rhetorical part of their compound RA titles, a shown in Table 4.

From Table 4 we may seethat 6 main types of rhetorical devices are adopted in the rhetorical part of the compound titles in our database, namely quotation, rhetorical question, metaphor, parody, repetition, and alliteration. Most of them go against conventionalized academic geres featured by turgid jargon and nominalization (Mills, 1958), as they are usually populist, light-hearted, and plain, or even include abusive and sensationalist expressions.

Although the number of occurrences of each rhetorical device (excet lliteration) has experienced an incremental increase across the three periods concerned, the increase reaches neither statistical significance $( \mathbf { P } > 0 . 0 5 )$ ) nor large effect size (Cramer's $\mathrm { V } < 0 . 1 $ . The result might suggest that the authors have not turned to favor any of the rhetorical devices -rather, they have continued to employ the various rhetorical devices wherever appropriate.

Quotation $( 5 1 . 4 2 \% )$ is the most common rhetorical device used, constituting the only type whose frequency of occurrence has been on the steady increase across al the three periods of time studied. The quotation type ually involves a representative quotation from the data to make a lively instantiation of the research object (cf. Titles [1], [2], and [10)].

Rhetorical question $( 2 9 . 4 3 \% )$ is the second most common device whose frequency of occurrence increases in the first two periods (from $2 6 . 9 2 \%$ to $3 2 . 3 4 \%$ ) and then sharply decreases during 2013-2022 (from $3 2 . 3 4 \%$ to $2 9 . 4 3 \%$ . As illustrated by Title (11), questions posed in this type address the issue(s), finding(s), or argument(s) of the $\mathrm { R A } ^ { 6 }$ ; they are fundamentally rhetorical because they will unexceptionally be answered by the authors themselves in the main text:

"It is high time that I answered the question I raised in the title, Has he apologized or not? My answer is both Yes, he has' and No he hasn't" (Murata, 2010: 513).

Metaphor is also adopted in rhetorical parts, albeit at a lower frequency (i.e., $1 0 . 0 2 \%$ . Metaphors included can be either conventional (e.g., MONEY IS WATER in \*Where does the money go?" in Title [4]) or rather unusual (e.g., "Singing gender\* in Tite [12]).A full understanding of them would requir establishing some kind of context through reading the RA or at leas referring to the main part that follows.

The occurrence frequencies of the remaining three types of devices, i.e., parody $( 4 . 2 7 \% )$ , repetition $( 3 . 1 6 \% )$ , and alliteration $( 0 . 7 9 \% )$ , while much lower and thus indicative of some contingency, present different patterns over time. Specificll, parody and repetition decrease in the first two periods (i.e., from $9 . 6 2 \%$ to $3 . 4 8 \%$ , and from $3 . 8 5 \%$ to $2 . 9 9 \%$ , and then increase in the third (i.e., from $3 . 4 8 \%$ $3 . 9 6 \%$ and from $2 . 9 9 \%$ $3 . 1 7 \% )$ ; in contrast, the use of alliteration has been dropping over the three periods (i.e., from $1 . 9 2 \%$ through $1 . 4 9 \% - 0 . 2 6 \% )$ 7:

It should also be noted that the last three types of devices are conceivably forms of deliberate play on words. Parody is usually realized through apposite adaptation from classic works (Ambiguities we live by adapted from the book titl \*Metaphor we live by in Title [13]) r ayings (g., complain, thrfore I m" adaptd from  think, the I m in itle [5]). lso, reettion and allterations, as two devices of phonetically-ased rhetoric make repeated use of the same word r word pattern e.g., "ometimes fro in your throat is just  frog in your throat in Tite [14) or of the same onsonant at the beinning of each strese syllable (., \*Reelto reat in itle [15]).

Table 4 Types of rhetorical devices used in the rhetorical part and their distribution across the three time periods.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Types of rhetorical devices</td><td rowspan="2">Illustrations</td><td colspan="3">Frequency (Percentage)</td><td rowspan="2">?</td><td rowspan="2">p</td><td rowspan="2">Cramer&#x27;s v</td></tr><tr><td>1993-2002</td><td>2003-2012</td><td>2013-2022</td></tr><tr><td>Quotation</td><td>(10) If he speaks Italian it&#x27;s better&quot;: Metapragmatics in court</td><td>25</td><td>102</td><td>198</td><td>0.830</td><td>.372</td><td>.024</td></tr><tr><td>Rhetorical</td><td>(11) Has he apologized or not? A cross-cultural</td><td>(48.08%) 14</td><td>(50.75%) 65</td><td>(52.24%) 107</td><td>1.238</td><td>.539</td><td>.044</td></tr><tr><td>question</td><td>misunderstanding between the UK and Japan on the occasion of the 5Oth anniversary of VJ Day in Britain</td><td>(26.92%)</td><td>(32.34%)</td><td>(28.23%)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Metaphor</td><td>(12) Singing gender: Contested discourses of womanhood in</td><td>5 (9.62%)</td><td>18 (8.96%)</td><td>46</td><td>1.466</td><td>.480</td><td>.048</td></tr><tr><td>Parody</td><td>Tuscan-Italian verbal art (13) Ambiguities we live by: towards a pragmatics of polysemy</td><td>5 (9.62%)</td><td>7 (3.48%)</td><td>(12.14%) 15 (3.96%)</td><td>4.028</td><td>.133</td><td>.080</td></tr><tr><td>Repetition</td><td>(14) Sometimes a frog in your throat is just a frog in your throat. Gutturals as (sometimes) laughter-implicative</td><td>2 (3.85%)</td><td>6 (2.99%)</td><td>12 (3.17%)</td><td>.100</td><td>.951</td><td>.013</td></tr><tr><td>Alliteration</td><td>(15) Reel to real: Desi teens&#x27; linguistic engagements with</td><td>1 (1.92%)</td><td>3 (1.49%)</td><td>1 (0.26%)</td><td>3.451</td><td>.178</td><td>.074</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Bollywood</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>-</td><td>52 (100%)</td><td>201 (100%)</td><td>379 (100%)</td><td></td><td>-</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# 6. Discussion

In the above section, we found that the overall distribution of compound titles involving a rhetorical part in published pragmatics RA has shown a statistically significant increase acros the periods concerned. Rhetorical devices including quotations, rhetorical questions, metaphor, parod,alliteration, and repetition are employd in the rhetorical part identifie, with quotation being the only type whose number of occurrences increses over time. Whils not excluding other reasons, we are inclined to ascribe the trendy use of a rhetorical part in compound tites to the changing environment of international academic publication and the uniqueness of the pragmatics discipline.

For one thing, the increasing pressure of intenational academic publication entices the use of compound RA titles with a rhetorical part more and more frequently. In today's scientific community, global submissions continue to rise (Hanauer et al., 2019). According to Thomson-Reuters (2012), for example, the submssion volume handled by the ScholarOne Manuscripts online sumission and review system experienced a surge up to $2 1 5 \%$ from 2005 to 2010. Since submissions do not always turn into published RAs, the increase in submission number has led to a decrease in theaccetance rate: The verall acetance rate in 2005 and 2010 differed by almost $4 \%$ - $4 0 . 6 3 \%$ vs. $3 7 . 0 7 \%$ . For this reason, authors need to make an all-out effort to promote the recognition of their research outputs. The inclusion of an attention-grabing rhetorical part in their compound titles may make their RAs stand out and atract both editors and reviewers to gain more opportunities for peer reviews and publications. In addition, the increasing pressure faced by scientific journals may also have encouraged reviewers, editors, and even publishers to favor the use of compound titles with a rhetorical part. Since the hyper-production of scholarly publication is estimated to double every 12 years (Stix, 1994), together with the actively promoted concepts of journal evaluation practices and impact factors, scientific journals, including their editorial boards reviewers, and even publishers, are eager to be included in particular journal indexes (Zheng & Gao, 2018). In this light, prompting readers to notice, read, and cite can be considered one of the important motivations for journals when publishing RAs. Otherwise, journals willhave minimal chances of getting their RAs cited and hence the low potential for high-impact factors and commercial avenues. This i especiall true in the \*article-based publishing" age when-latorms have changed the reading patterns of academics. Nowadays, many publishers have prioritized \*the quicker delivery and easier internet searching of individual papers (Hyland & Zou, 2022, p. 1) to allow fastr publication and citation, in ther words, papers are ublished online discretely, \*wthout waitin for an isue to be compiled' (ibid.). As a result, readers can now find RAs through online keyword-generated search results from a wide range of journals within just a cick; they do not have to visit the library termly to search the contents of new books, journals, and/or proceedings (Bazerman, 1988). The search and reading paterns have made tites \*the highway billboard' of published RAs (Belcher, 2021, p. 282). long this line, securing end-users through an attractive presentation of RAs necessrily constitute a major motivation for journals to prefer a rhetorical part involved in compound RA tites. Afer all, while the main part of compound titles often presents enough information for the RA to be retrieved from keyword searches,a titllating and curiosit-arousing rhetorical part may make the RA stand out i the lis of keyword-generated results. Thus seen, the increasing use of rhetorical part may constitut hard evidence for what is clled"academic advertisig (Haggan, 2004, p. 312) and corroborate the "marketization" of academic genres (e.g. Fairclough, 1993, p. 142). From a generic perspective, the scholars who employ a rhetorical part in compoundtitles are achieving genre mixing as they are in effect expressing their \*private intention' (Bhatia, 1997, p. 187) of promotion whichis commonly found in marketing genres within the academic sub-genre of RA titles.

For another, the uniqueness of the pragmatics discipline also matters in the trendy use of compound tites with a rhetorical part Indeed, the efect of disciline-pecific characteristics in titing practices has been frequentl reported in previous empiricl studes e. g, Haggan, 2004; Hartle, 2007; Soler, 2007). According to Hyland & Zou, 2022 p. 10), titing choices are "disciplinary practices as much as individual decisions'" In our study, the effect may have taken place in the following two ways. One relates to the targeted audience of the published pragmatic work. Pragmaticresearch, despite its primary focus on language use, might be more diverse and interdisciplinary than the STEM disciplines in hard sciences. Along this line, it may "appeal to wider, more heterogeneous audiences" (Hyland & Zou, 2022, p. 10). Consequently, authors of pragmatics RAs can hardly presuppose the same degree of disciplinary knowledge, rearch backround and as f expertise for all readers. It is therfore expected that ther title are formulatd with es technical terms and in more colloquial language styles. This attempt is in line with the more open and accessible styl of \*postacademic" writing (Badley, 2017, p. 1), which advocates using plainer and simpler language instead of academic jargon and prose in academic writing to address a broader range of readers. Moreover, the data-driven feature of the pragmatics discipline also seems relevant, as evidenced by the most frequent use of quotation in the rhetorical part. As Culpeper and Gillings (2019: 13) point out, in the last two decades (i.e., 199-2018) pragmatics \*remains overwhelmingly focused on data" insted of theories and methodologies.We can thus assume that the dominating data-focused research would fundamentally enable the authors to design a rhetorical part via quoting from real cases of language use. Methodologicall, it has be reported that pragmatic research has increased its use of more interactive, more dialogic data" (Culpeper and Gillings (2019): 14), spoken and real data (compared with constructed, ictional, or written data), as well as digital media data which are characterized by creativity, complexity, and peculiarity. Owing to such data preferences, authors of pragmatics RAs enjoy ample opportunities to formulate an arresting and queer rhetorical part by adopting instances of language use under investigation. The increasing use of a rhetorical part (especiall those including quotations) over time in pragmatics RAs is thus justifiable.

# 7. Conclusion

In this study, we investigated a database of 2263 compound RA titles drawn from Pragmatics and Jounal of Pragmatics. We found that (a) the frequency of occurrence of compound RA titles collcted that involve a rhetorical part significantly increases across the three time periods studied (i.e., 1993-2002, 2003-2012, and 2013-2022), and (b) rhetorical devices including quotations, rhetorical questions, metaphor, parody, alliteration, and repetition are mployed in the rhetorical part identified, with quotation being the only type whose number of occurrences increases acros the time periods concerned. It is suggested that the increasing use of a rhetorical part can be atributed to the changing environment of international academic publication and the uniquenes of the pragmatics discipline.

The findings above may have the following implications. First, the definition of a rhetorical part in compound RA titles proposed and its internal features summarized can bridge the knowledge gap about the internal properties of compound tite. Second, the increased use of a rhetorical part t fulfil the functions of attracting and promoting may constitute hard evidence for what iscalld "academic advertising" (Haggan, 2004, p. 312), and within a larger picture, the increasing marketization of academic genre (Bhatia, 1997; Fairclough, 1993). Third, the use of a rhetorical part in compound RAs titles may indicate a more open and accessble style of "post-academic" writing (Badey, 2017, p. 1), as they are represented in plainer, simpler, and more elf-expressve languages (at least when compared with its counterparts in the same title) to address a broader range of readers.

Practically, we contend that practitioners need to become aware of the dual function (i.e, to inform and to attract) of RA titles in scientific communication. For emerging scholars, besides investing considerable time and effort into learning the writing norms which are explicitly stated in guidebooks, they need to keep an eye on emerging community-related values and conventions. eside, we ope our study of compound titles involving a rhetorical part proves useful to teachers and practitioners of English for academic purposes (EAP) who \*instruct novices with their efforts to publish' (Hyland & Zou, 2022, p. 2).

The study may suffer several limitations. First, our choice of the discipline of pragmatics and the inclusion of only two English. mediated journals in this discipline made us inadequately confident to make a broad generalization on the use of a rhetorical part in compound titles within and beyond the discipline and the language concerned in this study, though similar phenomena have already been deteced in both hard sciences and other areas of social sciences and humanitie cf Haggan, 2004). In order to more accurately and comprehensively describe the picture of how authors use a rhetorical part i scientific te, a larger and more inclusive database covering a wider range and a greater number of titles from a broad range of disciplines, journals, languages/cultures, and (sub-)genres shall be needed. Besides, systematic comparisons are also expected to be conducted between sub-disciplines of linguistics, including pragmatics. Moreover, we did not adressthe motivations for using rhetorical part from the authors' own perspective; nor did we consider the implicit rule, if any, regarding titl-writing held by the gatekeepers (e.g., reviewers, editors-in-chief) of the journals, because they were not accessble to the authors of the present research. Future inquiries are expected to combine both \*etic" and "emic" perspectives to probe into the title writing practices in general and using a rhetorical part i compound titles in particular.

# CRediT author statement

Xinren Chen: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Resource, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Project administration. Hao Liu: Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing.

# Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix. Tertia Comparationis for Journal Selection (adapted from Soler, 2011, p. 126)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Prototypical features concerned</td><td>Illustrations</td></tr><tr><td>Communicative purpose</td><td>The journals selected aim at publishing articles that make aclear contribution to the debate in the field of pragmatics. Interestingly,</td></tr><tr><td>International nature</td><td>they also promote interdisciplinary contributions. The journals selected are international.</td></tr><tr><td>Representativity</td><td>The journals selected are representative samples of discourse-community populations in the two writing cultures analyzed.</td></tr><tr><td>Editorial process followed</td><td>The journal selected follow the same editorial process which is initiated upon submission of manuscripts for consideration of publication. Manuscripts are reviewed by at least one member of the editorial board for general suitability and strength of advance. If the manuscripts cover the scope of the journal, a full review by leading scientists active in the relevant field, follows. Their</td></tr><tr><td>Editorial policy followed</td><td>decision i communicated by an editorial board member familiar with the topic as soon as all referees&#x27; reports are compiled. This strict peer review process evaluates not only the scientific studies performed but also the writing strategies used. When submitting a manuscript, authors must affrm that the material has been neither published nor submitted for publication</td></tr><tr><td>Audience</td><td>elsewhere.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>The jounals selected addressa peer reader with expertise in specific fields of tudy related to the discipline of pragmatics selected for the present research.</td></tr><tr><td>Chronological coverage</td><td>The journals selected include RAs published during the same 30-year span, that is,from 1991 to 2020.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Badley, F. (2017). Post-academic writing: Human writing for human readers. Qualitative Inquiry, 1-12.   
Scientometrics, 79(3), 667-679.   
Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.   
Belcher, W. (2021). Writing your journal article in 12 weeks (2nd ed.). Los Angeles: Sage.   
Berkenkoter, C. & Huckin, T. (1995. Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication. Hillsale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate Publishers.   
Bhatia, V. (1997). Genre-mixing in academic introductions. English for Specific Purposes, 16, 181-197.   
usch-ar,   i o ish an  n ie d si.   n   .77-94) Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
uter,  1  t Journal of Informetrics, 5, 608-617.   
Buton,A s  (1977h io ho  f i of h p h ime adi. of o 31) 46-52.   
Cameron, H, & Robertson, A. (1997). The colon in medicine: Nothing to do with the intestinal tract. BMJ, 315, 1657-1658.   
Culpeper, J., & Gillings, M. (2019). Pragmatics: Data trends. Journal of Pragmatics, 145, 4-14.   
Dillon, J. (1981a). The emergence of the colon: An empirical correlate of scholarship. American Psychologist, 36, 879-884.   
Dillon, J. (1981b). Functions of the colon: An empirical test of scholarly character. Educational Research Quarterly, 5, 71-75.   
Dillon, J. (1982b). In pursuit of the colon: A century of scholarly progress: 1880-1980. Jounal of Higher Education, 53(1), 93-99.   
Fairclough, N. (1993). Critical discourse analysis and the marketization of publi discourse: The universie. Discourse & Society, 42), 13-168   
Gastel, B., & Day, R. (2017). How to write and publish a scientific paper (8th ed.). Cambridge: CUP.   
he i language Learning (pp. 125-157). Trieste: EUT.   
Gillerts , & ad d,  (2010 tionl mre i h aice atrts. Jo of Eish for Adc e, 9(2), 128139. Goodman, R, Thacer, ., & igel, . (2001). A decriptive study of articl tites in pr-reviwed medical jourl. Science dor, 24(3), 75-78.   
Grant, M. (2013). Editorial: What makes a go0d title? Health Information and Libraries Journal, 30, 259-260.   
Gustavil, B. (2012). How to write and illustrate a scientific paper. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Haggan, M. (2004). Rch paper tites i ltture, linguistic and scince: Dimensions of atraction. Jonal f Pamatic, 36(2), 293-317.   
Hauer   d,019 t sit     e and Mexican researchers. Written Communication, 36(1), 136-154.   
Hare,        568 Hays, J. (2010). Eight recommendations for writing titles of scientific manuscripts. Public Health Nursing, 27(2), 101-103.   
Hon . 016. n s t  of p th in 2014 , i  ic, 109,719 Hyland, K., & Zou, H. (2022). Titles in research articles. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 56, Article 101094.   
aques, T, ire, . 010h ct f ae i o tion ht: An sof  an s d . ho ts, 1, . Jamali, H, & Nikzad, M. (2011). Artice title type and its relation with the number of downloads and citaions. Scienometrc, 88, 653661.   
Kurtyka, A. (2019). I complain, therefore I am: On indirect complaints in Polish. Journal of Pragmatics, 153, 34-45.   
Laece 2001).criti  f r i  er  ti  i, 3, 187194 Leru J. 01).  e  f yr pr.   .) ic wi 2.  wie'  (. 11513). r ciic Publishing.   
Lewison, G., & Hartley, J. (2005). What's in atitle? Numbers of words and the presence of colons. Scientometrics, 63(2), 341-356.   
Loewenstein, G. (1994). The psychology of curiosity: A review and reinterpretation. Psychological Bulltin, 116(1), 75-98.   
McGowan, J., & Tugwel, P. (2005). Infomative tites decribed article content. Jounal of the Canadn Heth Libraries Ascitio, 26, 83-84.   
Mijeic 17   .i Analysis, 2, 2.   
Muraa, K. 2010. Hash apo   cosrl mudsang bwen the K nd Jan n th sion f the 0h ry of J day in Britain. Pragmatics, 8(4), 501-513.   
Nwogu, K. (1997). The medical research paper: Structure and function. English for Specific Purposes, 16(2), 119-138.   
Poole,    -l, . (2019. t ste athe cotionof   sci wtin onc s sud-circt Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 42, Article 100784.   
Soler, V. (2007). Writing titles in science: An exploratory study. English for Specific Purposes, 26(1), 90-102.   
Soler, V. 011. omie d tie ions on sic ies i wtn ish and h. ish or ific Pes, 30, 124137.   
Stix, G. (1994). The spread of write. Trends on scientific communication. Scientific American, 271, 106-111.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J., & Feak, . (2004). Aademic writin for gadate studens: senl ts and sill (nd ed.). An Arbor: University of Michigan Pres.   
Terkourafi, M., & Haugh, M. (2019). Editorial: "Quo Vadis, pragmatics?". Journal of Pragmatics, 145, 1-3.   
Townsend, M. (1983). Titular colonicity and scholarship. New Zealand Journal of Psychology, 12, 41-43.   
UNEsco. (2017). Science report: Towards 2030. https://en.unesco.org/unesco_science_report/.   
Wis, . 4 of   the  n   i i  4 807-813.   
Yao, K., & Jiang, Y. (2010). A diachronic research on tites of applied linguistics academic papers. Foreign Language Research, 3, 36-39.   
Zheng, Y., & Gao, A. (2018). Global academic publishing: Plie, perspectives and pedagogies. Joundl of Scholarly Publising, 49(4), 482-487.   
Ziland, ., pe . (1995.Th se f co  tie fBritish med   apr 1970  199.s of Ibl Rh, 7-9.