# Using English as a lingua franca for (mis-)managing conflict in an international university context: An example from a course in engineering

Annelie Knapp \*

University of Siegen, FB 3, Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 2, 57068 Siegen, Germany

# A R T I C L E I N F O

# A B S T R A C T

Article history: Received 19 February 2010 Received in revised form 25 July 2010 Accepted 12 August 2010

Keywords:   
ELF   
Instructional discourse   
International university   
Face   
Conflict   
Intercultural communication

This paper focuses on problems of learning and teaching via English as a lingua franca at a German university. An analysis of audio data from a course in engineering will give evidence of how university courses may be severely affected by intercultural and linguistic problems.

It will be argued that – although participants from a variety of cultural backgrounds may be reasonably effective in communicating about subject matter in English – problems will arise when a larger variety of communicative functions is involved in instructional discourse, for example negotiating forms of cooperation and resolving conflicts. It is hypothesized that this situation may be detrimental for the implementation of innovative and learner-centered types of teaching arrangements in the international university.

Against this background, suggestions will be made for reducing such problems by utilizing adequate training materials for university teachers and students who need to operate in ELF settings. These materials include activities for raising awareness of culturerelated differences in the perception of teachers’ and learners’ roles in a university context, as well as a dictionary of phrases, which is organized in pragmatic categories and offers support for realizing relevant communicative functions in university teaching contexts.

The paper also addresses some methodological issues, such as the need for interrelated sets of empirical data and problems of identifying ELF characteristics and specifics of intercultural communication in the pragmatic domain.

$\circledcirc$ 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

As a result of the continuing process of internationalization of university studies, an increasing number of students and teaching staff at universities communicate with each other by using a language that is not their mother tongue. Since English is unchallenged as a lingua franca in academic contexts, English-medium instruction has gained momentum in universities of many non-English-speaking countries (Wächter and Maiworm, 2008). There are many opportunities as well as challenges associated with this situation that invite and even require detailed and thorough research. Thus, already established lines of research on Academic English in written texts have recently been supplemented by a small, but steadily growing body of empirical research into the use of English as a lingua franca (ELF) in oral academic discourse (e.g. Bjo¨rkman, 2008, 2009; Haastrup, 2008; House and Lévy-To¨dter, 2008; Limberg and Geluykens, 2008; Mauranen, 2006; Mauranen and Ranta, 2008). The main focus of such research has been on specific linguistic features of lingua franca communication in the academic domain as well as on comprehensibility and on speakers’ strategies for achieving mutual understanding.

This article takes a broader perspective by placing the use of ELF for learning and teaching at universities into its educational context and at the same time considering the cultural diversity of speakers in academic encounters where English is used as a lingua franca. More specifically, it will be taken into account that ELF communication in university courses has to be successful in characteristic ways and that it takes place in a particular institutional context, which in turn is shaped by culture-specific norms and expectations and in which students and lecturers perform in institutionally and contextually defined roles. Furthermore, it will be taken into account that the communicative functions that are realized in university courses are not restricted to the transmission of knowledge, but are also determined by the communicative requirements of organizing teaching-learning activities and related problems.

# 2. University courses as genres

In most parts of the Western world, instructional discourse in the academic field has taken a variety of formats which deviate to a greater or lesser degree from the classic lecture with its relatively clearly defined institutional roles of participants as presenters and as recipients of knowledge. In line with more modern educational approaches, overt active participation of students and more or less self-directed ways of acquiring knowledge and competences have gained the floor (e.g., Brockbank and McGill, 2007; Poikela and Nummenmaa, 2006; Schneider et al., 2009; Wildt, 2007). This has consequences for the internal communicative structure of interactions that serve the main purpose of teaching and learning. Even the classic ‘‘lecture’’ is often no longer a pure monologue, but is rather characterized by some interactive, dialogic elements. Other formats, like student group work or project work – although normally related to or integrated into a course framework – are seldom directly controlled by a lecturer1 and require, explicitly or implicitly, an internal organization as well as a negotiation of the roles of group members, together with their rights and obligations. Since – in spite of the largely autonomous work within the groups – it is the lecturers who are ultimately responsible for creating favorable conditions for the successful acquisition of competences, skills and knowledge during group work and since they are the ones who have to certify this for each individual student, several communicative activities – autonomous student group work and communication in the context of a seminar or lecture which is lecturer-guided – are often closely interrelated.

Although the various formats of instructional discourse as it is taking place at universities differ from each other in several ways, they also share enough characteristics to be regarded as one genre: instructional discourse at universities (Mauranen, 2006). In order to take adequate account of the internal variation within this genre, it seems useful to distinguish between different sub-genres of instructional discourse at universities, like lectures, seminars, student work groups, and others. Apart from classic academic language functions that are indispensable for communicating about subject matter, such as classifying, comparing, describing, explaining, hypothesizing, evaluating (Dalton-Puffer, 2007:129) or substantiation, elucidation, exemplification, objection (Wiesmann, 1999; Redder, 2008:148), an additional set of pragmatic functions has to be accomplished for the communicative management of instructional discourse in its diverse manifestations. For the lecturer this means, among other things: the spatial and temporal organization of discourse, the definition of roles within the discourse, the negotiation of rules of cooperation, and the resolving of conflicts arising from intentional or unintentional deviations from negotiated procedures. There is a similar set of requirements for students in independent group work. This implies – with a greater likelihood for some sub-genres of instructional discourse than for others – that there may be phases of discourse embedded into instructional discourse which are not instructional in nature, but rather aim at organizing work or at resolving conflicts within groups. Although these phases bear a certain resemblance to organizing or conflict-resolving communicative activities outside the university, they are still shaped by their institutional context. The communicative demands that are placed on participants in instructional discourse at universities are particularly high due to the fact that communication in this context has to be successful in a number of clearly defined ways. Students have to acquire a predefined amount of knowledge, skills and competences, and – on a formal level – they have to gain credits and to pass their exams. In addition, one can assume that students and lecturers are also interested in establishing and maintaining positive interpersonal relationships within the group.

As we shall see in the following analysis of data, all these requirements and the necessity for realizing a corresponding ensemble of pragmatic functions bear a high potential of intercultural misunderstanding. In a multilingual and multicultural setting, successful instructional discourse, which may also include phases of non-instructional discourse as described above, requires an elaborate pragmatic competence in ELF on the part of all participants. The strategy of ‘‘let it pass’’, which has been discussed as a feature of more informal ELF encounters (Firth, 1996), cannot usually be regarded as a feasible option in instructional discourse at universities – just as in many other institutional and professional contexts, where complete and detailed comprehension on the semantic as well as the pragmatic level may be crucial, and where quite a lot is at stake, be it contracts or credit points.

# 3. Pragmatics of ELF – where language and culture meet

Three major theoretical concepts are relevant for this paper – ELF, intercultural communication and pragmatics – and at least a brief discussion of how they relate to each other seems useful before presenting the data and their analysis.

Whereas intercultural communication is not necessarily restricted to ELF communication, ELF communication is intercultural communication at the same time, and the challenges and problems associated with intercultural communication, as discussed in the literature, also pertain to ELF communication. The research histories of ELF and intercultural communication have gone different paths, though. Whereas research into ELF has had its main focus on phonology, morphosyntactic phenomena (and – to some extent – lexis), research into intercultural communication has had a strong bias towards pragmatic issues right from the start. Research on pragmatics in intercultural communication (e.g. Blum-Kulka et al., 1989; Gass and Neu, 1996; Günthner, 1993, 2007, 2008; Spencer-Oatey, 2000; Spencer-Oatey et al., 2000; Sugitani, 1997; Wierzbicka, 1985) has been mainly concerned with cultural differences in the structure of speech events, like the sequential organization of speech acts, with culture-specific differences in the functions of speech acts within the broader framework of communication (e.g. complimenting as starting moves, function of small talk, etc.) and culturespecific preferences for realizing speech acts in conversation (e.g. directness vs. indirectness, politeness). The small number of pragmatic studies of ELF so far have focused upon particular functional moves in ELF discourse with the goal of negotiation of meaning, supporting comprehension, establishing common communicative ground with the help of the shared linguistic resources of ELF (e.g. Cogo, 2009; House, 2002, 2009; Mauranen, 2006, 2009; Pitzl, 2005).

Starting from these premises, what do mean when we talk about ‘‘pragmatics in ELF’’? And how and where do characteristics of ELF and of intercultural communication meet? Two different types of questions should be distinguished here:

(1) How do participants in ELF interactions realize the communicative functions they want to express in the first place? How (and when), for example, do they realize a request or an apology? Do they manage to realize these functions in an unambiguous way (in case ambiguity is not intended)? How do they achieve comprehension on the pragmatic level? What kinds of pragmatic misunderstandings arise in ELF communication? Is, for example, what is intended as an apology perceived as such by the interlocutor?   
(2) What kinds of verbal actions and pragmatic strategies do speakers employ for handling the specific challenges of EFL communication? How do they try to prevent misunderstanding or non-understanding that arises from using English as a lingua franca? What kinds of verbal actions and pragmatic strategies do speakers employ or to overcome their own limitations in communicating in English, to repair misunderstandings, to ensure common ground and to negotiate meaning (e.g. explicitness, clarification, and preempting strategies; see Cogo, 2009)? In other words: can we identify pragmatic functions/ speech acts (like clarification requests, repairs or comprehension checks) that emerge from the specifics of ELF communication and therefore have a greater chance of occurring in ELF discourse than in non-ELF discourse?

Either of these types of questions can be asked and answered from different perspectives. The first perspective is that of the appropriateness of speech acts/communicative functions in certain phases of the discourse. There is broad evidence from research into intercultural communication that there are culture-specific preferences for the realization of speech acts at certain points in the interaction (e.g. starting a conversation with a compliment, preferred seconds as reactions to a compliment, the sequencing of offering and accepting an offer; Gass and Neu, 1996; Günthner, 1993, 2008; Spencer-Oatey, 2000). This level is mainly dealt with in research on intercultural communication. The overall question in an ELF context is: How are speakers’ potentially diverging assumptions about the appropriateness of certain speech acts at certain points in the discourse reflected in ELF discourse? What role does their cultural background play at this level of ELF communication?

The second perspective concerns the way in which communicative functions are realized in interaction and the verbal means that are regarded as appropriate for expressing the intended pragmatic meanings. On this level, culture-specific preferences for directness and indirectness come into play, and an interesting question for research is how participants in ELF discourse manage to convey and to understand subtle pragmatic meanings, in particular interpersonal meanings. On this level, it is difficult to disentangle ELF and intercultural aspects.

The third perspective concerns meta-discourse, i.e. talking about pragmatic aspects of ELF communication. This involves negotiation of participant roles, of the time and setting of the discourse, and, of course, talking about communicative functions and illocutions. This perspective definitely has to take language-specific issues of ELF communication into account, since successful ELF metacommunication implies a shared understanding of the meanings of illocutionary verbs. This might be thwarted, however, by non-equivalences of lexical items for talking about communication across languages and subsequent transfer of L1 concepts into the use of English as a lingua franca. Some of these issues will reappear in our discussion of the data below.

# 4. The data

Our example is an extract of naturally occurring data from a course in engineering at a German university. The data were audio-recorded in a regular course session and were supplemented by an observer’s notes on non-verbal behavior. This course is characterized by a highly complex lingua franca constellation, with 23 students from 13 different countries (Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Germany, Guatemala, Emirates, India, Mexico, Pakistan, Palestine, Russia, Thailand, Vietnam and 5 students from India), speaking 14 different L1s, which are, according to the students’ self-reports, Portuguese, Bulgarian, Chinese (Mandarin), German, English, Arabic, Spanish, Telugu, Marathi, Gujarati, Urdu, Russian, Thai, and Vietnamese. The lecturer is German. In terms of sub-genre this course can be classified as a lecture. It shows, however, an unusual macro-structure, as a discourse phase of managing conflict is embedded into the lecture proper. The transcript below represents extracts from this discourse phase. In our discussion of the data, we will refer to this phase as the ‘‘conflict-managing phase’’. The conflict has resulted from three students’ inappropriate behavior in connection with student group work. We will refer to this interaction (which was not recorded) as ‘‘group-work session(s)’’. Only one of the three students (Ranjit) is present in the course session which our example is taken from.

The background is as follows: in addition to the lecture, the students have to work on an engineering project in three different groups. Each student group selects a project manager (team leader). The situation is a competitive one, with the group that produces the best results receiving the best grades. There is a rule which allows for exclusion of participants from the group if they do not contribute adequately to the group’s project. This case has occurred. The team leader of the respective group has written a letter to the lecturer, complaining about three uncooperative students. The lecturer announces that a problem has occurred and initiates the conflict-managing phase presented below.

The transcription of the data follows GAT (Gesprächsanalytisches Transkriptionssystem/transcription system for analyzing conversational data), which is widely used in Germany (for details see Selting et al., 1998).

TL: team leader   
S: student   
Ss: several students (All names have been changed.)   
001 Lecturer if you:: (- -) agree we can discuss (.) about this (1.0) in a open way? 002 if you DON’T agree (.) especially the people who are concerned with 003 this (-) we can do it INside the group; (- -) so it’s up to you’ (1.0) so IF 004 we do it inside the group we do it AFter the lecture; (1.0) if $\textbf { y } ( \textbf { -- } )$ you 005 want to dis discuss it completely .hh we do it NOW (-) but we make a 006 LImit to this (- -) so we DON’T extend the discussion too much .hh a 007 limit which means five minutes not longer:: (-) discussion about this. (2.0) 009 WHO is aGAINST that i make it public? (3.0)   
010 so please VOTE if somebody is against it’(- - -) if no $\left( - \right)$ we do it public 011 (1.0) OK.

((...))

<<Lecturer explains the situation and reads from a letter which the team leader has written to the lecturer>>

012 Lecturer (quotes from the letter) they are kicked out of the following REAsons: (- -) first   
013 they attended one meeting out of six .hh they even did not call to tell that they   
014 could not attend the meetings .hh they have not done any task (- -) gave to   
015 them hh they are not welcome to our group any more. (1.0) WARning for   
016 ((...Ranjit X...)) (3.0) $< <$ Lecturer looks around the room>>   
017 $< <$ continues reading> $\cdot >$ OK’ if he does NOT attend the next time   
018 meeting and perform the tasks’ he has to’ .hh then he is OUT; OK?   
(. . .)   
019 TL (Palestine) =yeah because they:: didn’t attend the::: (-) the MEETing=we cannot $\left( - - \right)$ see   
020 them and (-) we couldn’t say that (-) this task is attached to you’ $[ ( -- )$ so] (- - -)   
021 i don’t   
022 Lecturer [uh=huh]   
023 TL know but they can complain and (.) uh:: we can talk about it.   
024 Lecturer $=$ uh huh’ (1.) [so (- - -)]   
025 TL [you can ask him]   
026 Lecturer =yeah=yeah; (- -) <<addresses Ranjit $> > \mathrm { i }$ think you are the ONly who are $\left( - - \right)$   
027 REAlly here>   
028 Group ((laughter))   
029 Lecturer yeah; so (- -) you have the chance now to ARGUE and after that the group   
030 can (- - -) decide (-) whether they keep this decision (-) or they give you a   
031 chance (-) so as i said i i am OUT of the game; it’s $\left( - - \right)$ from the beginning   
032 on $\left( - - \right)$ it is YOUR problem $\left( - - \right)$ inside the group and YOU have to solve   
033 and i DON’T manage it; (- -) so i even $\left( - - \right)$ if the group decides NO (- -)   
080 Lecturer [so it’s] so you have (-) so give arguments (.) i don’t have this (-) arguments;   
081 (9.0)   
082 Lecturer time is running;   
083 (10.0) $< <$ murmur in the background $> >$   
084 Ranjit no (.) i don’t want (.) to talk anymore (2.0)   
085 Lecturer oK (-) so (---) i think (--) the arguments have been done (2.0) he has   
086 argument as a team leader (- - -) he has $\left( - \right)$ arguments or NOT $\ Y =$ you must   
087 decide   
088 TL [it’s not my decision]   
089 Lecturer no no its: [(.)]   
090 TL [it’s the group ()]   
091 Lecturer [jaja]   
092 TL [i don’t have anything i make against the guy]   
093 Lecturer NO NO that’s clear (.) it’s nothing against the person $\left( - - \right)$ it’s   
094 S2 (Mexico) i have just=i wan i don’t=just want to say something=i’m part of this   
095 group also (-) i just ah=i just say that the (.) of course not his (-) ah (-)   
096 his () (- -) ah we don’t intend to: (-) to kick out anybody (-) from   
097 our group and i just say that (.) ah in this case from $! ^ { = }$ from his case (-)   
098 that i think he he (.) if he want=if he wants he can also (.) he and others   
099 (.) he can ASK us what (-) i can do or $\left( - - \right)$ relieve the () to continue. (- -)   
100 And not ah:: not our our (-) our: (-) we have to go to him and say everything   
101 that he (). i think (- -) here (- -) i think you say: (.) i think you should eh::   
102 (-) if you want to continue (-) you can help’ (- -) and eh you can eh (- - -) you can   
103 go to him [team leader]= and say (.) i want to do this $= \mathrm { i }$ like to have this part   
104 () (- - -) and then eh (-) and then we can eh (- -)   
105 S3 (Mexico) the thing is that (-) he hasn’t (.) i’m also part of the team (-) he doesn’t   
106 (.) eh:: show anY: intention of (- -) ehm: working with the team. e: even   
107 now he he’s not $\left( - - \right)$ eh (- -) defending himself from (-) being kicked (.)   
108 kicked out (.) so (1.5) for ours (.) for us as a team (-) where does that l:   
109 leave us? if he doesn’t show any intention to: to work (1.0) its not my   
110 decision either=it’s the work the team decision (.) but (-)

<html><body><table><tr><td>042 043</td><td>Ranjit</td><td>i just ask one more chance:: (--) uh:: (5.0) i just ask one more chance to</td></tr><tr><td>044 045</td><td>Lecturer</td><td>BE: [in the group (-)] so that [yeah BUT] please explain why you didn&#x27;t come: and so on (--) so ONly to ask for a= for a chance is (--) is no REAson; (2.0)</td></tr><tr><td>046</td><td></td><td>come HERE and (--) explain;</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">&lt;&lt;Ranjit gets up and goes to the front. The lecturer turns round and starts to wipe the board&gt;&gt;</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>to WHOM should i explain&#x27; (-) professor?.</td></tr><tr><td>047 048</td><td>Ranjit Lecturer</td><td>to the group&#x27; (.) the whole group (-) to the whole group</td></tr><tr><td>049</td><td>TL</td><td>not really</td></tr><tr><td>050</td><td></td><td>(1.0)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ranjit</td><td> yeah (-) i can explain to the lea (-) LEAder</td></tr><tr><td>051 052</td><td>TL</td><td>yeah OK bitte2;</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ranjit</td><td>yeah in MY view i think that (--) uh everyone (.) tasks should</td></tr><tr><td>053 054</td><td></td><td>be [given (2.0) personally (--) to the (2.0) to INdividual (1.0) i mean]</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>(2.5)</td></tr><tr><td>055</td><td></td><td>i mean the (--) if there is a TASK (--) it should be given</td></tr><tr><td>056</td><td></td><td>(2.0)</td></tr><tr><td>057</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>058</td><td></td><td>to the INdividual (--) uh:: NOT in the meeting (-) anywhere =yeah&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td>059</td><td></td><td>(4.0)</td></tr><tr><td>060</td><td>Ranjit</td><td>sorry i can&#x27;t talk anymore; ((constrained giggle))</td></tr><tr><td>061</td><td>Lecturer</td><td> yeah but it&#x27;s NOw your chance=this is your ONly chance to speak (--)</td></tr><tr><td>062</td><td></td><td>to conVINCE</td></tr><tr><td>063 064</td><td>TL</td><td>yeah (-) he=he said that (-) uh we should uh:: (--) [distribute the task as individual; (-)]</td></tr><tr><td>065</td><td>Lecturer</td><td>&lt;&lt;facing the students again&gt;&gt; yes&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td>066</td><td>TL</td><td>and we have meeting (-) every monday&#x27; (1.0) uh we:: distribute the task</td></tr><tr><td>067</td><td></td><td>in this monday:: and uh (---) we have to be there. (--) and</td></tr><tr><td>068</td><td></td><td>[that&#x27;s all=i don&#x27;t know.] this is the team and uh (--) you can ask;</td></tr><tr><td>069</td><td>Lecturer</td><td>so (.) why didn&#x27;t you atTEND the: (-) the meeting? (--)</td></tr><tr><td>070</td><td>S1</td><td>me? &lt;&lt;discussion in the background &gt;&gt;</td></tr><tr><td>071</td><td>Ranjit</td><td>yeah (-) eh (.) well =that was the reason (.) I was in one meeting (---)</td></tr><tr><td>072</td><td></td><td>and: eh (.) i did not get any TASK (---) in that meeting; (1.0)</td></tr><tr><td>072</td><td>Lecturer</td><td>ja: (.) but that is not (-) an answer to the question =WHy did you</td></tr><tr><td>073</td><td></td><td>not attend EVERY meeting (--) that is my question-</td></tr><tr><td>074</td><td></td><td>(4.0)</td></tr><tr><td>075</td><td></td><td>why not?</td></tr><tr><td>076</td><td></td><td>(4.0)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>077</td><td></td><td>so you cannot COMMent (.) apologize and say (---) all is forGETTEN::</td></tr><tr><td>078</td><td></td><td>(1.0) i would= i like to sleep more [(--)]</td></tr><tr><td>079</td><td>Ranjit</td><td>[no (.) it&#x27;s not like that]</td></tr></table></body></html>

((. . .))<<Lecturer explains in how far this situation is similar to real life business situations>>

111 Lecturer and therefore (.) i gave HIM the possibility (.) to defend (-) and (.) i   
112 will (-) give you the chance as a group (.) to disCUSS after this lecture   
113 (.) what you will DO (.) probably together with him (.) and then i at the   
114 end $\cdot ^ { = }$ i accept your decision. (- - -) ok? five minutes are over;   
115 S4 ((laughs))   
116 Lecturer and $\left( - - \right)$ we will continue with our lecture.

# 5. Discussion

The data offer several perspectives for discussion, only some of which will be taken in the following analysis. In particular, we will not deal with macrostyles of managing conflict, as identified in business and communication studies (e.g. van Meurs and Spencer-Oatey, 2007), but rather with the organization of the discourse and the communicative strategies used by the participants. It will be argued that intercultural as well as language-specific factors can account for some of the problems in this ELF interaction.

# 5.1. Preliminaries: intercultural issues

In order to substantiate the claims that will be made about the intercultural basis of some of the problems of this interaction, a brief discussion of specifics of the participants’ cultural backgrounds seems necessary. In particular, Ranjit – as the central figure in this interaction – and his cultural background will be focused upon. Although we have no precise information about Ranjit’s (inter)cultural biography and the cultural influences he has been exposed to, we have good reasons to assume that to some extent he has been influenced by his ‘‘home culture’’, i.e. Indian culture. We need to be aware of the fact, though, that ‘‘Indian culture’’ is not homogeneous in itself, but displays a high degree of internal variation and, in addition, is subject to change. Nevertheless, scholars from the fields of linguistics as well as social psychology have tried to describe Indian English communicative style (Gumperz, 1982, 1996a) and Indian cultural standards (e.g. Mitterer et al., 2006), implying some degree of generalization. Furthermore, we can find descriptions of Indian culture and communicative style in parts of the high class intercultural training literature (e.g. Storti, 2007).

Cultural standards, as defined by Thomas, are ‘‘processes of perception, thought, evaluation and action that for the majority of the members of a particular culture are regarded, for themselves and for others, as normal, typical and obligatory’’ (www.psychologie.uni-regensburg.de/Thomas/publikationen/Training.PDF). What makes such standards interesting in the context of our discussion is that they may have an impact on communicative style. According to Mitterer et al. (2006:39ff. and 157), Indian cultural standards include the following: strong hierarchies determine all areas of life, authorities are not contradicted, and there is a tendency not to delegate responsibility to lower levels of hierarchy. This description is compatible with Storti’s (2007) characterization of Indian culture and communicative style. Drawing upon the categories used by Hofstede for describing cultural differences, he describes Indian culture as a collectivistic culture with high power distance.3 This implies a need for preserving harmony and face as well as deference and subservience towards superiors (Storti, 2007, passim). For communication, this implies, among other things, that a person socialized on the Indian subcontinent is likely to find the following communicative functions difficult to perform: disagreeing with someone else, especially if he is senior, criticizing someone else who is present, or admitting a mistake. Instead of overt disagreement or criticism, there are several other ways of ‘‘saying no’’ in Indian culture: the absence of ‘‘yes’’, hesitation, postponing the answer, or changing the subject. As we shall see in the discussion of our transcript, many of these issues materialize in the data. In addition, we will consider some of John Gumperz’ findings on Indian communicative style.

# 5.2. The participants’ institutional roles

After these preliminaries, let us get back to the data and their communicative context. The lecturer’s didactic concept (the students having to work on an engineering project in three different groups with a project manager as team leader, and a rule which allows for exclusion of participants from the group if they do not contribute adequately to the group’s project) has resulted in a set of interrelated discourses: the lecture itself, the group-work sessions, and another discourse that is to follow the lecture and in which the group will have to take the final decision on Ranjit’s remaining in the group. In addition, there is also a written text: a letter, written to the lecturer by one of the student team leaders. This set of interrelated discourses deviates considerably from the classic lecture concept and affects communication in each of them. One of the main challenges for the participants is the variability and uncertainty in the definition of institutional roles in each of the discourses and even in different phases of the same discourse. The data show that there is a lot of uncertainty in the group as to individuals’ communicative rights and obligations and to the structure of the discourses as a whole. The conflict itself, which is the object of discussion, seems to have originated from a misunderstanding concerning the obligation to take part in an interaction that is not chaired by the lecturer and, at the same time, from diverging assumptions about who is responsible for attending to tasks and who is expected to take the initiative in communicative terms.

The uncertainty about roles is clearly reflected in the following utterances: Ranjit asks: ‘‘To whom should I explain, professor?’’ The lecturer’s answer ‘‘to the group, the whole group, to the whole group’’ is contradicted by the team leader’s response ‘‘not really’’ (lines 47–49). In lines 85–91, the question of who has the power of decision is at issue. This sequence of turns reveals that the lecturer and the team leader do not share views on this question.

The lecturer himself behaves inconsistently with regard to his role. Although he attempts to give autonomy to his students, in this case Ranjit, by suggesting that he can decide for himself whether he prefers to stay in his seat or rather to come to the front, he then switches to a more authoritarian style and orders Ranjit to come to the front. The implications of this decision will be discussed in section 5.3.

Some of this uncertainty could also have occurred in a monolingual and monocultural constellation. However, there is some indication that cultural diversity has an impact on what happens during this conflict-managing phase and during group work. Considering our sketch of some of the specifics of Indian culture in section 5.1, we have good reasons to assume that high power distance is a crucial issue here. This assumption is supported by the fact that Ranjit addresses the lecturer with the formal ‘‘professor’’, without adding the lecturer’s name, a practice which is not common at German universities. Moreover, it is relatively unlikely that a student socialized in the German educational system would just not have attended the group meetings and would have waited until somebody had approached him and set a task. Rather, cultural differences in what is regarded as ‘‘normal’’ forms of interaction in the university context and perceptions of how much selfresponsibility is required, should be taken into account (Schumann, 2008:30; Wiesmann, 1999:253). It is noticeable that

Ranjit does not take the initiative, neither in communicative nor in non-verbal terms, and that he prefers to wait for others – the more powerful – to decide and to take action. He waits for a task being given to him. This is completely in line with Storti’s characterization of another feature of Indian culture: a certain reluctance of subordinates to use their own judgment and to make independent decisions: ‘‘Those not in charge usually wait for detailed and explicit instructions’’ (Storti, 2007:96). This may serve to explain why Ranjit did not attend the meetings and ask for a task, although his remaining in the group and obtaining the necessary credit points was at risk.

# 5.3. The temporal and spatial organization of the discourse

The conflict-managing phase displays an internal structure of its own. The lecturer starts this phase with a preparatory sequence to specify its temporal and spatial structure (lines 1–11). The fact that he regards it as necessary to do so indicates that the conflict-managing phase deviates from the normal course of the lecture and that it needs to be arranged. The first question to be settled is when the discussion about the problems that have occurred should take place and who should take part in it. The alternative which the lecturer suggests is between what he phrases as ‘‘in a open way’’, ‘‘discuss it completely’’, ‘‘make it public’’ and ‘‘do it public’’ on the one hand or ‘‘we can do it inside the group’’, ‘‘after the lecture’’ on the other.

Unfortunately, there is a certain ambiguity in the phrases ‘‘in a open way’’, ‘‘discuss it completely’’ and ‘‘make it public’’. While individuals who are familiar with the conventions at German universities and with Western standards of protecting privacy might not even consider the idea that ‘‘make it public’’ could imply something like publication on the university’s website, this is perhaps not all that self-evident for people with different cultural backgrounds who have just experienced that a lot of things are done and evaluated differently at a German university. Considering the enormous face threat that is involved in making inappropriate behavior more or less ‘‘public’’ as well as the fact that Ranjit behaves as if he feels extremely uncomfortable in the questioning that follows, we can assume that Ranjit is not happy at all with the lecturer’s idea of ‘‘making it public’’. Nevertheless, none of the students – not even Ranjit – takes the floor during the 2-s pause after the lecturer’s exposition of the alternatives and no one responds to the lecturer’s question ‘‘Who is against that I make it public?’’ either. Due to his cultural background, it may be completely unthinkable for Ranjit to criticize or contradict a superior’s suggestions. His silence, interpreted by the lecturer as agreement, may in fact be intended as just the opposite, that is dissent.

The lecturer also controls the discourse by setting a time limit of 5 min for discussing the problem. He uses this later on to put pressure on Ranjit, who is rather hesitant in responding to the reproach of misbehavior: ‘‘time is running’’ (line 82).

For Ranjit, the situation is becoming progressively tougher. We can assume that the temporal and spatial structure of the discourse as arranged by the lecturer contributes to an experience of an enormous face threat for Ranjit. As the other two students who are mentioned in the letter are not present, Ranjit is left alone with responding to the reproach of misbehavior. Furthermore, the lecturer’s decision to have Ranjit come to the front increases the face threat. In conjunction with his failure to meet the communicative requirements that the lecturer and the team leader place on him – and to do so immediately – the situation culminates in Ranjit’s refusal to communicate: ‘‘sorry I can’t talk anymore’’ (line 60) and ‘‘no I don’t want to talk anymore’’ (line 84). Again, we can explain his refusal to communicate on cultural grounds: as neither admittance of a mistake on Ranjit’s part nor contradicting the lecturer or criticizing his way of questioning is a viable strategy for Ranjit, he resorts to what must be the only way out for him: he explicitly states his inability to communicate any further. The constrained giggle that Ranjit produces after his utterance reinforces the impression of embarrassment and awkwardness.

# 5.4. Speech acts and their appropriateness

What is the discourse about? It is essentially about communication, and, as such, it is meta-discourse. More specifically, it is about verbal actions, about speech acts and their appropriateness. It is about the verbal actions that were (or should have been, but rather have not been) realized in a past event (distributing tasks, asking to be given a task, giving prior notice of non-attendance) as well as the verbal actions performed (or not performed) in the present event. In the transcript, we find a striking number of utterances in which speech acts are explicitly mentioned: agree, discuss, vote, warn, complain, ask (with the meaning of asking a question), ask (with the meaning of requesting or begging), argue, give arguments, convince, explain, answer, comment, apologize and defend oneself. We have already discussed the incongruent expectations of appropriate communicative behavior with regard to group work in this example. In the present extract the main controversy arises because of diverging assumptions with regard to pragmatically adequate verbal actions. When asked by the lecturer to argue and to convince the group, Ranjit fails to comply with this request. In a very hesitant reaction (cf. the pauses in lines 37, 41 and 42) he resorts to just pleading for another chance to be in the group. After a 5-s pause, he even repeats this plea. The lecturer reproaches Ranjit for his inappropriate pragmatic behavior (‘‘only to ask for a chance is no reason’’ (line 45)) and tries to push Ranjit into performing different types of speech acts: explaining and giving reasons. Ranjit reacts with an extremely hesitant (cf. the number and length of pauses in lines 54–59) attempt at explaining his view on how tasks should be set, indirectly blaming the team leader. At this point, communication breaks down for the first time. After a long pause (4 s), Ranjit refuses any further communication (‘‘sorry, I can’t talk any more’’, line 60). The lecturer, however, continues to push Ranjit towards what he (the lecturer) regards as appropriate communicative behavior. What follows instead is a sequence of turns that, in pragmatic terms, is almost identical to the one before. Ranjit, still caught in his awkward position in front of the whole group, has no choice but to continue communicating. Again, he tries to blame others by stating that he did not receive a task, and again, the lecturer criticizes Ranjit for his pragmatically inappropriate response. This in turn leads Ranjit to refuse further communication and to make the final communication breakdown explicit by repeating his statement that he does not want to talk any more.

The unusually long periods of silence before Ranjit’s utterances during this phase of the discourse deserve some attention. On the basis of Sorti’s descriptions, hesitating and pausing are ways of saying ‘‘no’’ or an alternative to explicit disagreement or admitting a mistake.

It is interesting to see that Ranjit’s failure to comply with the requirement to explain, to give reasons and arguments is also explicitly recognized by one of the fellow students: ‘‘even now he’s not defending himself’’ (lines 106–107). It is also important to note that – apart from two occurrences of ‘‘please’’, produced by the lecturer during the first half of this sequence, and one occurrence of the German word ‘‘bitte’’ for ‘‘please’’, produced by the team leader – there are no attempts at mitigating the face threat that the whole situation and the speech acts of criticism and reproach mean for Ranjit.

Assuming that Ranjit’s behavior cannot be (solely) attributed to laziness or unwillingness, cultural factors should be considered in an explanation of this interactional sequence. In dealing with the criticism that is brought forward against him, Ranjit uses the strategy of appealing to the person with the highest status and authority, the professor, counting just on this person’s power to decide in his favor. This, however, is not what is expected in the German university context in general and in this course in particular. The lecturer has defined the situation as one in which it is the quality of arguments that counts and not the goodwill of a person in power (lines 25–36). Cultural differences in the perception of power distance, as already mentioned in section 5.1, may again serve to explain these differences in communicative strategy.

Moreover, cultural differences in the social meaning of certain verbal actions, their appropriateness for certain communicative purposes and in certain situations as well as differences in ‘‘preferred seconds’’ in sequences of speech acts, which have been widely documented in the literature on intercultural communication, have to be considered here. Examples include culture-specific preferences in responding to compliments and offers (e.g. Spencer-Oatey et al., 2000; Günthner, 1993), the social meaning of asking questions (e.g. Sugitani, 1997), and differences in the readiness to express open contradictions and open criticism (e.g. Kotthoff, 1993; Günthner, 2007). With regard to academic contexts and making reference to Bardovi-Harlig and Hartford’s (1993) study of academic advising sessions, Dalton-Puffer (2007) points out that ‘‘the choice of speech act (over and above its linguistic realization) is culturally bound in decisive ways and depends on how participants perceive their roles in a given situation’’ (p. 177). Against this background, it is quite plausible to assume that what the lecturer, the team leader and one of the Mexican students seem to take for granted, i.e. to respond to criticism and reproaches by giving reasons and justifying oneself, is not shared as cultural knowledge by Ranjit. The situation in our example bears some resemblance to the gate-keeping interviews analyzed by John Gumperz. Gumperz notes that the Indian English speakers who participated in gate-keeping interviews seemed to have a concept of this communicative event that differed a lot from that of the normal British expectations. Whereas the British interviewers expected that one should make a case for one’s own rights under the rules, the Indian English speakers seemed to assume the interview was rather like a petition to a benevolent superior (Gumperz, 1996b:369).

Yet another line of thought might be worth following here: apart from the question of cultural differences in the perception of appropriateness of speech acts in certain contexts and situations, culture- and language-specific differences in how certain speech acts are conceptualized and named might also be an issue here. Given the fact that speech acts are the object of discussion in the conflict-managing phase of our data, successful communication is also dependent on how far participants share the meaning of the illocutionary verbs that are used, as there are differences in the lexicalization of pragmatic concepts across languages. Thus, differences in the semantics of illocutionary verbs might be involved: What does ‘‘defending oneself’’ mean for Ranjit, and what does it mean for the lecturer and the other students? The verb ‘‘argue’’ is another interesting example. The polysemy of this English verb, meaning ‘‘to fight’’ or ‘‘to quarrel’’ as well as ‘‘to state, giving clear reasons’’ is reflected in separate lexical items in other languages, like ‘‘streiten’’ and ‘‘argumentieren’’ in German, and therefore is a potential candidate for miscomprehension.

# 5.5. Attempts at resolving the conflict

It is interesting to see that the harsh tone of the letter and the unredressed face threats that occur during parts of the discourse are partially counterbalanced by participants’ attempts at relieving the growing tension and at resolving the conflict. Towards the end of the extract, when the lecturer has declared the collecting of arguments as finished, the lecturer and the team leader co-construct a face-restoring act: the team leader states explicitly: ‘‘I don’t have anything I make against the guy’’ (line 92). The lecturer takes the opportunity to agree to and at the same time specify this statement: ‘‘No no, that’s clear, it’s nothing against the person’’ (line 93), thus clearly distinguishing between the person and his behavior.

The next turn of speaking (lines 94–104) is taken by another Mexican student, who has not participated in the discourse so far. Although he seems to have a lot of problems in formulating his ideas in English, as he uses only a limited set of lexical items and his utterance is full of unfinished sentences and false starts (e.g. lines 94 and 101), the communicative function of his turn is clear: support for Ranjit, and the suggestion to somehow integrate him into the group again.

# 5.6. Summary

The analysis has shown that the introduction of innovative educational practices in university teaching requires the careful structuring of instructional discourse, the definition of participants’ institutional roles, their rights and obligations within various sub-genres of instructional discourse at universities and the realization of a wide range of pragmatic functions. In a lingua franca situation with participants from a variety of cultural backgrounds this may lead to a particularly high degree of uncertainty about appropriate communicative behavior, since not only is the wider cultural context more or less foreign to the participants, but also the norms and expectations concerning familiar genres, in particular that of a lecture, are challenged. In this context, a lack of shared knowledge about institutional practices as well as institution-specific genres and their internal variability may increase the danger of misunderstandings and, as a consequence, increase the need for making procedures, norms and expectations more explicit than in groups of participants with a shared cultural background and a shared L1. Since such misunderstandings seem to arise mainly from diverging expectations about the roles of participants in these interactions, the appropriateness of speech acts to be performed and adequate ways of realizing these speech acts, they are primarily situated on the pragmatic level and involve the negotiation of interpersonal and interactional meaning. Our data show that although in many cases the students and the lecturer are successful in conveying the pragmatic meaning of their utterances, they sometimes do not succeed in choosing appropriate speech acts or, alternatively, in negotiating conventions for communicating. Pragmatic ‘‘appropriateness’’ is difficult to determine in an intercultural ELF context, though. Should appropriateness be measured against what is regarded as culturally and institutionally appropriate in the German university context? Should it refer to the pragmatic norms and conventions followed by speakers of one of the native varieties of English – and if so: which variety? Or should it not rather be negotiated among the participants of ELF discourse?

In addition, the interactants in our example seem to lack linguistic means for the ‘‘fine-tuning’’ of speech acts, i.e. mitigating their illocutionary force. Without a sufficient amount of shared knowledge about communicative practices that are specific to an institution – in this case the German university – it is also more difficult for interactants to understand the meaning of semantically ambiguous phrases, like ‘‘make it public’’ or ‘‘discuss it completely’’. It may even be hypothesized that there is a lack of consensus on the meaning of illocutionary verbs. Thus, we can observe a complex interplay between culture-bound differences in what is considered as ‘‘normal’’ behavior in a specific discourse genre, ELF-specific realizations of speech acts, and innovative educational practices in the university context.

# 6. Conclusions

# 6.1. Theoretical and methodological conclusions

There is not enough space here to present and discuss further data from instructional discourse, for example the data from a course in chemistry, analyzed in Knapp (forthcoming). Yet even on the basis of the present data the results of this study suggest several conclusions, on the theoretical/ methodological as well as on the practical level.

Let us start with the theoretical and methodological ones. The problems that lecturer and students had to struggle with in our example are not problems of comprehensibility due to deviations from native-speaker norms in the areas of pronunciation, syntax and morphology. There is no indication in the data, for example, that the lecturer’s failure to produce native-speaker-like dental fricatives, his pronunciation of voiced consonants in final position as voiceless or occasional deviations from conventional stress patterns (which can be clearly perceived in the audio data) affect comprehensibility in any way. Neither is there any indication of miscomprehension due to ELF-specific syntactic or morphological forms. In so far, the data are quite in line with recent research on ELF use (e.g. Jenkins, 2000; Bjo¨ rkman, 2008, 2009). However, problems of comprehensibility and – at the same time – a failure to negotiate a common ground for communication emerge on the pragmatic level. In a university context, where communicative success – as ultimately defined by this institution itself in terms of its criteria for acquiring credit points and passing exams – is crucial, the ELF principle of ‘‘let it pass’’ just does not work. This finding is supported by Bjo¨ rkman’s recent investigation, focusing on the relevance of pragmatic strategies in settings where the stakes are very high and, consequently, interactants want to ensure comprehension (Bjo¨rkman, 2009). More research is needed to gain further insights into the pitfalls of pragmatic failure in the international university, into participants’ strategies of avoiding or repairing such failure and into strategies for relieving tension and resolving conflicts in a satisfactory way.

One of the problems that need to be discussed is how pragmatic ‘‘appropriateness’’ can be determined in an intercultural ELF context. Defining pragmatic appropriateness in terms of the pragmatic norms and conventions that hold for speakers of any of the native varieties of English or within institutions and organizations of English speaking countries would seem rather absurd in German university settings. But would it be much more convincing to make the prevailing pragmatic norms and conventions of communication in German university contexts the yardstick for lecturers and students while communicating in ELF? What seems to be a viable solution at first sight – the joint negotiation of pragmatic appropriateness among those who communicate regularly, e.g. during seminars or lectures – is a very demanding task, however, requiring communicative awareness as well as fairly advanced abilities in using ELF. Moreover, any form of explicit negotiation may be subject to the very problems that it is meant to solve.

Besides, it would not make sense to conceive of every university course as a communicative event in which all pragmatic norms and conventions have to be (or could be) negotiated from the start. A ‘‘pragmatic vision’’ for the international university might be a combination of a core of local and institution-specific pragmatic rules and an additional set of flexible pragmatic conventions negotiated in the respective communities of practice, supplemented by participants’ awareness of cultural differences and their potential impact.

A lot of effort will have to be put into the methodological aspects of research. As we have seen, there may be a set of related discourses that contribute to the emergence of a conflict-laden situation. An ideal database would have to incorporate whole sets of interrelated discourses. However, it was not possible to record interactions outside class, and in this case the relevance of these data emerged only post hoc by the indirect reference to preceding interactions.

Other methodological questions relate to the interpretation of data. Taking a critical stance, one might question if the difficulties of managing a conflict situation like the one presented in the data can indeed be regarded as the result of intercultural ELF communication or if they might not have occurred with native speakers as well. We have presented some plausibility arguments that draw upon what we know about cultural differences in speech act realization and what we know about Indian culture and communicative style in particular. Culture-specific interpretations have to be treated with some caution, though, since what is usually referred to as ‘‘cultures’’ is subject to internal variation as well as to influences from other cultures and subsequent change. Apart from this, in times of globalization and increased opportunities for intercultural communication, many individuals have come into contact with members from other cultures, which has shaped their perceptions, their expectations and their (communicative) actions and has led to the development of more or less individual cultural profiles (see Knapp, 2008).

Our analysis might have gained in validity if there had been a chance to collect additional introspective data. Post-event interviews, in which – on the basis of the transcripts – the participants would be questioned about their intentions and their constructions of meaning, would have added valuable information. Such an additional set of data could also help to compensate for one of the shortcomings of relying solely on conversational data in (university) classroom research: as in many other educational settings, most of the members of the course in which our data were collected did not show any form of overt verbal participation. Thus, misunderstandings and irritations do not necessarily materialize in conversational data, because those who misunderstand and those who are irritated may choose to withdraw from overt participation.

One has to bear in mind, however, that any kind of communication between researchers and producers of natural data of intercultural ELF interaction constitutes an intercultural ELF interaction in itself – with the same potential for pragmatic failure or misunderstanding as in the original data.

In summary, it can be stated that more complex and more sophisticated research designs will have to be developed to further explore the pragmatics of ELF communication in university contexts.

# 6.2. Practical conclusions

Practical conclusions relate to what kinds of action could be taken to support lecturers and students in managing the educational and organizational aspects of university courses in a language other than their L1. University teachers who – with the best of intentions and for the benefit of their students – introduce innovative and highly complex learning – teaching arrangements with groups of students from a variety of linguistic and cultural backgrounds are faced with a number of problems in organizing and performing the type of discourse that these arrangements require in ELF settings. Even though these university teachers may be highly proficient in the comprehension of written academic texts and even in using the English language for oral communication about the scientific contents of their subject, they may have difficulties in coping with the specific communicative demands of instructional discourse. A perception of inadequacy in dealing with organizational matters, conflicts and the like may entail the danger of falling back on traditional forms of instruction with less complex discourse structures and less ambiguously defined roles of lecturer and students, in order to avoid stress and the possible experience of failure.

The German Volkswagen Foundation’s funding initiative ‘‘University of the Future’’, which aims at supporting projects on structural innovation and the internationalization of German universities, has provided an opportunity for the author and three colleagues from German universities to develop and evaluate measures for practical improvement. In our ongoing research project (Mehrsprachigkeit und Multikulturalität im Studium/Multilingualism and Multiculturalism in University Studies), jointly undertaken by the universities of Siegen, Hamburg and Kassel, we have taken a dual-focused approach to preparing students and university lecturers for the specific challenges of intercultural and ELF communication in the German university context and thus increasing the chance of success for international students. The first focus is on raising awareness of how cultural diversity may affect communication at university and what kinds of misunderstandings it may produce. More than 100 critical incidents (CIs) have been collected and validated. They are structured according to the following categories: communication in university courses, communication between students and lecturers, communication in student work groups, and communication among students. All these CIs happened within the German university context with students from a variety of cultural backgrounds and have been explained by clashes of culture standards (Thomas, 1999) that cause irritation or even prevent successful communication. These critical incidents will be used as training materials for targeted intercultural training of lecturers and students. The second focus is on pragmatic functions and on ways of expressing these functions in English. An online dictionary for instructional discourse in English, allowing for continuous expansion by students and lecturers, is being developed and evaluated. This dictionary is organized according to pragmatic categories. Pragmatic functions that are particularly relevant for teaching and learning at universities, e.g. asking for clarification, agreeing, disagreeing, asking for critical comments or introducing a change of topic, can be looked up, and ways of expressing them in English are presented. Usually, several possibilities of varying length and complexity are suggested, from short phrases, formulaic utterances and prefabricated patterns to complete sentences and short texts. Some of these suggestions are supplemented by ‘‘cultural notes’’, with the intention of raising awareness of potential problems of communicating in an ELF and intercultural context.

Three examples may serve to illustrate how this dictionary could work. Of course, a dictionary offers very limited possibilities for answering questions about the appropriateness of speech acts at certain points in the interaction or about culture-specific communicative styles. It can, however, offer options for expressing the intended pragmatic and semantic meanings in English and raise some awareness of the intercultural problems involved. Example 1 refers to the pragmatics of negotiating meaning, no doubt particularly relevant in an ELF university classroom. Example 2 relates to one of the specific problems that the lecturer in our data seemed to have: negotiating who should be involved in discussing Ranjit’s inappropriate behavior, as well as where and when this discussion should take place. Example 3 will show what kinds of cultural notes will be integrated into the dictionary.

Example 1: Looking up the communicative function ‘‘asking for clarification’’ you will find the following suggestions for phrasing: ‘‘What exactly do you mean by ...?’’, ‘‘What sort of ... were you thinking of?’’, ‘‘What exactly does that mean?’’, ‘‘Could you be a bit more precise, please?’’   
Example 2: Looking up the communicative function ‘‘negotiating the setting of an interaction (time, place, participants)’’ you will find the following suggestions for phrasing: ‘‘Shall we discuss it after class?’’, ‘‘Would you prefer to discuss this in your work group $I$ working team?’’   
Example 3: Looking up the communicative function ‘‘encouraging critical comments’’ dictionary users will find – in addition to possible phrasings – the cultural note ‘‘Depending on their cultural background, some students may not find it appropriate to criticize a superior or an authority (e.g. a lecturer).’’

Dictionary users can obtain access to the relevant entries either by selecting the intended communicative function (e.g. ‘‘negotiating the setting of an interaction’’ $\longrightarrow$ ‘‘time’’) or by searching for particular lexical items (e.g. ‘‘work group’’) via fulltext search, which would lead to a list of all incidents of that lexical item in the database. Although the suggestions offered by the dictionary are expressions in standard varieties of English, it is not assumed that dictionary users will necessarily reproduce them as such. The suggestions for expressing the respective pragmatic functions are rather considered as wellformed starting-points that users may learn if they choose to, but from which they may also deviate in using English as a lingua franca. Nevertheless, the suggestions made in this dictionary will in some way or other push its users towards approximation to standard varieties of English. Although ELF speakers are not necessarily learners of English, they do need to learn how to communicate effectively. What we are striving for is to support lecturers in acquiring more precise ways of expressing themselves in English, with a likelihood of reducing ambiguity and misunderstandings, and in gaining confidence in their own ability to make themselves understood as intended. We hope that this kind of support will not only increase comprehension and overt participation of students in English-taught courses, but will also help to encourage university lecturers to pursue flexible and student-centered forms of teaching – in spite of the heavy communicative demands that such forms of teaching place on them.

# Main transcription conventions:

[.] Overlap and simultaneous speaking   
$=$ Quick, immediate connection of new turns or single units   
: Lengthening (: or:: or::: according to its duration)   
(.) Micro-pause   
(-) Pause of approximately 0.25–1 s ((-) or $\left( - - \right)$ or (- - -) according to its duration)   
(2.0) Estimated length of pause (more than 1 s)   
ACcent Primary or main accent

# Final pitch movements:

? High rise , Mid-rise ; Truncated fall Low fall

# References

Ailon, Galit, 2008. Mirror, mirror on the wall: Culture’s Consequences in a value test of its own design. The Academy of Management Review 33 (4), 885–904.   
Bardovi-Harlig, Kathleen, Hartford, Beverly S., 1993. Learning the rules of academic talk: a longitudinal study of pragmatic change. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 15 (3), 279–304.   
Bjo¨ rkman, Beyza, 2008. English as the lingua franca of engineering: the morphosyntax of academic speech events. Nordic Journal of English Studies 7 (3), 103–122.   
Bjo¨ rkman, Beyza, 2009. From code to discourse in spoken ELF. In: Mauranen, A., Ranta, E. (Eds.), English as a Lingua Franca. Studies and Findings. Cambridge Scholars Publishing, Newcastle upon Tyne, pp. 225–251.   
Blum-Kulka, Shoshana, House, Juliane, Kasper, Gabriele (Eds.), 1989. Cross-Cultural Pragmatics. Requests and Apologies. Ablex, Norwood, NJ.   
Cogo, Alessia, 2009. Accommodating difference in ELF conversations: a study of pragmatic strategies. In: Mauranen, A., Ranta, E. (Eds.), English as a Lingua, Franca. Studies and Findings. Cambridge Scholars Publishing, Newcastle upon Tyne, pp. 254–273.   
Dalton-Puffer, Christiane, 2007. Discourse in Content and Language Integrated (CLIL) Classrooms. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.   
Firth, Alan, 1996. The discursive accomplishment of normality: on ‘lingua franca’ English and conversation analysis. Journal of Pragmatics 26, 237–259.   
Gass, Susan, Neu, Joyce (Eds.), 1996. Speech Acts across Cultures. Challenges to Communication in a Second Language. de Gruyter, New York.   
Gumperz, John C., 1982. Discourse Strategies. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.   
Gumperz, John C., 1996a. The linguistic and cultural relativity of inference. In: Gumperz, J.C., Levinson, S. (Eds.), Rethinking Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 374–406.   
Gumperz, John C., 1996b. Introduction to part IV. In: Gumperz, J.C., Levinson, S. (Eds.), Rethinking Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 359–373.   
Günthner, Susanne, 1993. Diskursstrategien in der interkulturellen Kommunikation. Analysen deutsch-chinesischer Gespräche. Max Niemeyer, Tübingen.   
Günthner, Susanne, 2007. Intercultural communication and the relevance of cultural specific repertoires of communicative genres. In: Kotthoff, H., SpencerOatey, H. (Eds.), Handbook of Intercultural Communication. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp. 127–151.   
Günthner, Susanne, 2008. Interactional sociolinguistics. In: Antos, G., Ventola, E. (Eds.), Handbook of Interpersonal Communication. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp. 53–76.   
Haastrup, Kirsten, 2008. English-medium higher education in Denmark. Nordic Journal of English Studies 7 (3), 205–206.   
Hofstede, Geert, 1986. Cultural differences in teaching and learning. International Journal of Intercultural Relations 10 (3), 301–320.   
Hofstede, Geert, 2001. Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions and Organizations Across Nations. Sage, Thousand Oaks/London/ New Delhi.   
Hofstede, Geert, Hofstede, Gert Jan, 2005. Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind. McGraw Hill, New York.   
House, Juliane, 2002. Developing pragmatic competence in English as a lingua franca. In: Knapp, K., Meierkord, C. (Eds.), Lingua Franca Communication. Lang, Frankfurt/Main, pp. 245–267.   
House, Juliane, 2009. Introduction: the pragmatics of English as a lingua franca. Intercultural Pragmatics 6 (2), 141–145.   
House, Juliane, Lévy-To¨dter, Magdalène, 2008. Universitäre Kontaktgespräche als interkulturelle Kommunikationssituationen. In: Knapp, A., Schumann, A. (Eds.), Mehrsprachigkeit und Multikulturalität im Studium. Peter Lang, Frankfurt/Main, pp. 107–135.   
Jenkins, Jennifer, 2000. The Phonology of English as an International Language. Oxford University Press, Oxford.   
Knapp, Annelie, 2008. Interkulturelle Kompetenz: eine sprachwissenschaftliche Perspektive. In: Auernheimer, G. (Ed.), Interkulturelle Kompetenz und pädagogische Professionalität. Leske+Budrich, Opladen, pp. 63–78.   
Knapp, Annelie, forthcoming. When comprehension is crucial: using English as a medium of instruction in the German university context. In: Wilton, A., de Houwer, A. (Eds.), English in Europe Today. Educational and Sociopolitical Perspectives. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.   
Kotthoff, Helga, 1993. Disagreement and concession in disputes. On the context sensitivity of preference structures. Language in Society 22, 193–216.   
Limberg, Holger, Geluykens, Ronald, 2008. Spoken academic discourse: a critical review. In: Geluykens, R., Kraft, B. (Eds.), Institutional Discourse in CrossCultural Contexts. LINCOM, München, pp. 245–270.   
Mauranen, Anna, 2006. Signalling and preventing misunderstanding in English as lingua franca communication. International Journal of the Sociology of Language 177, 123–150.   
Mauranen, Anna, Ranta, Elina, 2008. English as an academic lingua franca – the ELFA project. Nordic Journal of English Studies 7 (3), 199–202.   
Mauranen, Anna, 2009. Chunking in ELF: expressions for managing interaction. Intercultural Pragmatics 6 (2), 217–233.   
Mitterer, Katrin, Mimler, Rosemarie, Thomas, Alexander, 2006. Beruflich in Indien. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Go¨ttingen.   
Pitzl, Marie-Louise, 2005. Non-understanding in English as a lingua franca: examples from a business context. Viewzs: Vienna English Working Papers 14 (2), 50–71.   
Poikela, Esa, Nummenmaa, Anna Raija (Eds.), 2006. Understanding Problem-based Learning. Tampere University Press, Tampere.   
Redder, Angelika, 2008. Functional pragmatics. In: Antos, G., Ventola, E. (Eds.), Handbook of Interpersonal Communication. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp. 133–178.   
Schneider, Ralf, Szcyrba, Birgit, Welbers, Ulrich, 2009. Wandel der Lehr- und Lernkulturen. Bertelsmann, Bielefeld.   
Schumann, Adelheid, 2008. Interkulturelle Fremdheitserfahrungen ausländischer Studierender an einer deutschen Universität. In: Knapp, A., Schumann, A. (Eds.), Mehrsprachigkeit und Multikulturalität im Studium. Lang, Frankfurt/Main, pp. 29–50.   
Selting, Margret, Auer, P., Barden, B., Bergmann, J., Couper-Kuhlen, E., Günthner, S., Meier, Ch., 1998. Gesprächsanalytisches Transkriptionssystem (GAT). Linguistische Berichte 173, 91–122.   
Spencer-Oatey, Helen (Ed.), 2000. Culturally Speaking: Managing Rapport in Talk Across Cultures. Continuum, London.   
Spencer-Oatey, Helen, Ng, P., Dong, L., 2000. Responding to compliments: British and Chinese evaluative judgments. In: Spencer-Oatey, H. (Ed.), Culturally Speaking. Managing Rapport through Talk across Cultures. Continuum, London/New York, pp. 98–120.   
Storti, Craig, 2007. Speaking of India. Bridging the Communication Gap When Working with Indians. Intercultural Press, Boston/London.   
Sugitani, Masako, 1997. Das Selbstkonzept im Sprachverhalten. In: Knapp-Potthoff, A., Liedke, M. (Eds.), Aspekte interkultureller Kommunikationsfähigkeit. Iudicium, München, pp. 41–64.   
Thomas, Alexander, 1999. Kultur und Kulturstandards. In: Thomas, A., Kinast, E.-U., Schroll-Machl, S. (Eds.), Handbuch interkulturelle Kommunikation und Kooperation. Vol. 1: Grundlagen und Praxisfelder. Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, Go¨ttingen, pp. 19–31.   
van Meurs, Nathalie, Spencer-Oatey, Helen, 2007. Multidisciplinary perspectives on intercultural conflict: the ‘Bermuda Triangle’ of conflict, culture and communication. In: Kotthoff, H., Spencer-Oatey, H. (Eds.), Handbook of Intercultural Communication. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp. 99– 120.   
Wächter, Bernd, Maiworm, Friedhelm, 2008. English-taught programmes in European higher education. Lemmens, Bonn.   
Wiesmann, Bettina, 1999. Mündliche Kommunikation im Studium. Iudicium, München.   
Wildt, Johannes, 2007. On the way from teaching to learning by competences as learning outcomes. In: Paisits, A., Pellert, A. (Eds.), Higher Education Management and Development in Central, Southern and Eastern Europe. Waxmann, Münster, pp. 115–123.

Annelie Knapp is Professor of Applied Linguistics and Foreign Language Teaching at the University of Siegen, Germany, where she is also head of the foreign language department in the university’s Centre for General Academic Competences. Her research interests focus on foreign language teaching and intercultural communication. In these areas, she has published on learner language, language awareness, English-medium instruction, intercultural communication and intercultural competence. She is currently leading a large-scale research project on multilingualism and multiculturalism in university studies, funded by the German Volkswagen Foundation.