# Novice EAP teacher identity construction: A qualitative study from Iran

Mahmmod Reza Atai a, Mostafa Nazari a,\*, Farzaneh Hamidi b

a Applied Linguistics, Kharazmi University, Tehran, Iran b Applied Linguistics, Allameh Tabataba'i University, Tehran, Iran

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
English for academic Purposes (EAP) EAP teaching   
Teacher identity construction.   
Novice teachers

English for Academic Purposes (EAP) teachers' job description involves contextual particularities that have roots in sociocultural and disciplinary dimensions. Such complexities may profoundly influence the identities novice teachers construct as they need to handle different dimensions of their career. However, there is little documented research on novice EAP teachers' identity construction. The present study reports on the identity construction of a novice Iranian EAP teacher (Alborz). Data were collected from semi-structured interviews, reflective journals, and classroom observations and the associated stimulated recall sessions. Our analysis of the data revealed three major themes in relation to Alborz's identity construction: (1) tensions between claimed and constructed EAP identities, (2) content-related emotional conflicts, and (3) EAP teacher as an undervalued professional. Alborz experienced various conceptual, emotional, and agency-related conflicts that had roots in contextual parameters of EAP teaching in Iran, yet at each stage of his development, these conflicts intensified, diminished, and took different shapes. In particular, managing the connection between language and content was a site of struggle for Alborz as he had to adopt identities that clashed with his professional understandings and idiosyncratic descriptions of EAP instruction.

# 1. Introduction

Over the past decade, research on EAP (English for Academic Purposes) teachers has exponentiall grown. This line of inquiry describes EAP teachers' work as heterogeneous and as connected to contextual parameters of EAP instruction (Basturkmen, 2014; Ding, 2019). Within this context-bound understanding of EAP instruction, teachers construct identities in response to sociocultural and pedagogical particularities of teaching (e.g., Mahendra, 2020; Ta0 & Ga0, 2018).I this vein, Ding (2019) explained thre factors that profoundly shape EAP teachers' identity construction, including neoliberal dynamics (sociocultural particularities), socialization processe institutional iscourses, and internal tensions of EAP intruction (disciplinary pecificities. Understanding these factors and their mplications helps to examine the \*conditions and materiality that govern what [EAP practitioners] can realistically achieve or would like to achieve' and the identities they construct over time (Ding, 2019, p. 70).

handle various professional responsibilities, including the roles they should fulfill and the balance they need to strike between language and content (see Basturkmen, 2014; Campion, 2016; Dudley-Evans & St John, 1998). Second, research on language teacher identity construction (e.g., Barkhuizen, 2016; Varghese et al., 2005; Yazan & Lindahl, 2020) has shown that teachers professional practice is profoundly influenced by contextual discourses, institutional particularities, and sociocultural dynamics, which could immensely (re)define novices' identity construction (e.g., Avalos-Rivera, 2020; Kanno & Stuart, 2011). Such disciplinary and contextual parameters may deeply influence novice EAP teachers' work, including their identities, agencies, emotions, and motivations. Against this background, the present study report on the identity construction of a novice Iranian EAP teacher during his first year of teaching. As we show later, this inquiry details the interaction between our focal teacher's (Alborz) internal sense-making processes and contextual particularities that define EAP instruction. In particular, we show how such an interaction operates as a site of experiencing tensions in claimed and constructed identities, content-related emotional conflicts, and perceptions about how EAP teachers are understood in the Iranian context.

# 2. Literature review

This section reports on the theoretical and empirical foundations f the study. We begin the section with a discussion on the nature of EAP teachers' professional carer, as followed by theoretical and empirical discussions of EAP teacher identity construction. Next, we report research on EAP teacher identity construction in the Iranian context inall, we situate the study within the scholarship on novice language teacher identity construction and state the purpose of the study.

# 2.1. EAP teacher identity construction

EAP teachers should fulfill multiple responsibilities in response to the dynamics of EAP instruction. According to Dudley-Evans and St John (1998), EAP teachers have diffrent roles in relation to disciplinary knowledge, materials, collboration with subject in. structors, and evaluation. In light of such complexity and multiplicity of job descriptions, Basturkmen (2014) reviewed research on EAP teachers and highlighted the significant role of specialized knowledge and practice-oriented compensating strategies in EAP teachers professionalization. She argued that there are many underexplored areas that demand further atention to gain a better understanding of EAP teachers' professional career. Furthermore, Nazari (2020) reviewed research on LSP (Language for Specific Purposes) teacher education from 200 to 2019. The review showed that despite the multiplicity of ISP teacher roles, there i a dearth of research on various dimensions of their work, especially professonal identit construction, which, according to Ding (2019), is intimately connected to the multiplicity of EAP teachers' professional work.

EAP teachers are considered as social agents that actively contribute to the growth of educational institutions (Campion, 2016; Gu & Benson, 2015). In particular, the context-bound nature of their work dialectically shapes their role as social agents in transcending mere delivery of content toward mirroring sociocultural dynamics in their work, which comes to shape the identities they construct over time (T0 & Gao, 2018). Relatedly, the definitio of identit in the present study partly resonates with Varghese e l. (2016) who conceptualize identity as "produced and discursively constructed within hierarchically organized racial, gendered, linguistic, religious, and classed categories and processes within teachers personal lives as well as in and through their teacher education programs, classrooms, schoos, disciplines and nation-states' (p. 546). In line with this stance, we explore how an EAP teacher's (Alborz) disciplinary work comes to shape his identity construction (here claimed and constructed identities; see Varghese et al., 2005), the personal side of his work featuring as emotions see Wolff & De Costa, 2017), and how sociocultural proceses form his institutional membership and performance (see Tao & Gao, 2018). This definition highlights that identity influences teachers' personal capitals dialecticaly (in this study as emotions), features discourse and context, and their rlational contributions for the types of constructed identities (in this study as claimed and constructed identities and the status of EAP teachers), and is bound to disciplinary particularities (in this study as the content of teaching, which is Sports Sciences).

Scholarship on EAP teachers has grown in capturing how they construct their identities in response to various personal, intitu. tional, and sociocultural factors of EAP teaching. For example, Tao and Gao (2018) examined the proces of identity construction of EAP teachers in China and concluded that the teachers identitie are influenced by a wide range of disciplinary, socio-economic, and institutional particularities in shaping how they construct, claim, and adopt their personal, professional, and institutional identities. Similar findings have been reported in Mahendra (2020) and Rebenko (2021) regarding the role of personal, disciplinary, and socio-historical localities in EAP teachers' adopted identities and agency. Moreover, Chang (2017) reports on emotional and identity tensions that an EAP teacher, Rachel, experienced while changing from EAP to ESP, which influenced her adaptability to the teaching context and her adopted role identity. These observations were also underlined by Guihang and Miao (2019) in claiming that besides EAP teachers personal effrts to build self-consciousness of their identities and to agentively enhance their interdisciplinary competence, universities should provide the affordances facilitating teachers effective identity construction and exercising agency.

# 2.2. EAP teacher identity construction research in Iran

Over the past decades, research (e.g., Atai & Nejadghanbar, 2017; Soodmand Afshar & Movassagh, 2016; Tavakoli & Tavakol. 2018) has indicated that Iranian EAP teachers face various challenges in their work, including the lack of high-quality materials and not using intenational textboos (Ata & Nejadghanbar, 2017), lack of effctive teacher training and development programs (Tavakoli & Tavakol, 2018), top-down decision-making in relation to course content and evaluation (Soodmand Afshar & Movassagh, 2016), and inadequate consideration of students' needs and interests (Tavakoli & Tavakol, 2018). Although several changes have recently been made, such as textbook development, there is a long way ahead for rendering EAP teaching more efficient and accountable, as also argued by Kaivanpanah et al. (2021).

Several studies have examined Iranian EAP teachers' identity construction. For instance, Atai and Fatahi-Majd (2014) investigated four EAP teachers cognitions about heir professional roles and the knowledge require for successull fulfilling their EAP roles. The study indings showed that awareness f program goals and role definition as manifestd in their professional performance functioned as strong parameters in the teachers identities. Similar comparative findings have been reported in Etherington et al. (2020), particularly in relation to the emotional side of EAP teachers work in the UK and Saudi Arabia. Additionall, Atai et al. (2018) examined Iranian in-service AP teachers role identiesto develop a typology of such roles. The findings revealed eight role identities that pertained to materials, evaluation, research, and ethical considerations. These findings resonate with those reported in Chang (2017) regarding the multiplicity of EAP teachers' roles as wel as those reported in Tao and Gao (2018) in the context of China.

# 2.3. Novice language teacher identity construction

Maynard and Furlong (1995, pp. 12-13) presented a detailed discussion on novice teachers' development. They stated that novice teachers experience five stages of development 1) early dealis, where the novice teacher istrongly identified with their students; 2) survival, where the novice teacher begins reacting to their perceived reality shock of the everyday classroom teaching; 3) recognizing difficulties, where the novice teacher gains more warenessof their teaching situation; 4) reching a plateau, where the novice teacher starts coping better with the routines of everyday teaching; and 5) moving on, where the novice teacher initiates focusing on the quality of student learning in their class.

Novice English teachers may face multiple challenges in relation to material, collegial ties, relationship with teacher educators and classrom management (Farrel, 2012) For example, Kanno and Stuart (2011) examined two novices' identity construction over one academic year, and showed how they developmentall negotiated their relationship with students, learned to use teacher authority effectively, and overcame professional challenges, findings also partly reported in Wolf and De Costa (2017) in the context of emotions and strategy use. Likewise, Nazari and Molana (2020) examined the factors shaping a novice EFL teacher's identity in the first year of her teaching, and showed that olicy-makers, leners and their parents, colleagues, and th teacher herself posed tensions that complicated her efective identity construction. On a similar point, Avalos-Rivera (2020) drew on narrative inquir and explored how a Mexican teacher positioned himself in relation to the professio students, and colleagues while narratig different episodes of his life. The findings showed that despite experiencing initial challenges, the teacher represented his ability to construct friendy relationship with other intitutional members, especiall students, as essential to lgitimizing his position as a professional teacher.

The research line on novice language teacher identit construction highlights that novice teachers experience vulnerabilit Falrll 2012), lack of adequate recognition from institutional stakeholders (Derakhshan & Nazari, 2022), and tensions that negatively in. fluence their effctive teaching (Kanno & Stuart, 2011). As Varghese et al. (2005, p. 22) argued, understanding language teachers "professonal, cultural, political, and individual identities which they claim or which are ssigned to them' helps to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of language teaching and learning, and reduces the challenges teachers, students, and teacher educators face. The challenges, however, could complicate EAP teachers' work more profoundly due to the multidimensional nature of their work (Basturkmen, 2014), especially novice EAP teachers. Relatedy, as research (e.g., Atai et al., 2018; Soodmand Afshar & Movassagh, 2016; Tavakoli & Tavakol, 2018) has shown that Iranian EAP teachers face multiple identity and emotion challenges in their work, exploring the identity construction of EAP teachers unpacks how such challenges contribute to their professionalism, particularly among novice teachers who might be nfluenced by such challenges more profoundy. With this in mind, we address how an Iranian EAP teacher (Alborz) reacted to the contextual challenges in his first year of teaching.

# 2.4. The present study

Scholarship on language teacher identity construction has highlighted the substantial role of contextual particularities and chal. lenges in shaping teachers' adopted, claimed, constructed, projected, and recognized identities (eg, Barkhuizen, 2016; Kanno & Stuart, 2011; Varghese et al., 2005). As many above-referenced works have shown, EAP teachers face a myriad of chllenges (e.g., Chang, 2017; Tao & Ga0, 2018), particularly in the Iranian context where EAP teachers' work features ideological discourses, professional conundrums, low economic support and high institutional pressure and expectations (Atai & Nejadghanbar, 2017; Soodmand Afshar & Movassagh, 2016; Tavakoli & Tavakol, 2018). Exploring how teaching particularities influence ranian EAP teachers exposes how setting shapes identity construction, especially among novices. However, there is ittle documented research on novice EAP teachers' identity construction. This study aimed tofill this gap by reporting on a novice Iranian EAP teacher's identity con. struction in the first year of his teaching by addressing the following question:

How does a novice Iranian EAP teacher construct his identity in the first year of teaching?

# 3. Method

# 3.1. Context and participant

Like many international ESL/EFL contexts, in the Iranian higher education system, both general and content-driven English courses are offered. The general English course i usually taught by ELT intructors in which the asics of language leaning are taught in order to prepare the students for content courses. Content English is usually taught by content instructors (Kaivanpanah et al., 2021) as it is ofen assumed that content is more important than linguisic competencies. Such a job description (i.e., general and content courses) has been legislated by the Ministry of Science, Research and Technology and exists in most of the Iranian universities. While the ELT teachers receive formal teacher education at BA, MA, and PhD levels, content instructors do not receive such preparatory courses.

The context of the study was a state university in Tehran, the capital of Iran. Our focal participant (Alborz, a pseudonym) was aPhD student of Biomechanics and Sports Sciences who was in the beginning of his PhD program. Alborz was offred an EAP course for BA students of Sports Sciences due to his intimate connection with the faculty members of the Sports Sciences department at the university. He was 29 years old and had no experience of language teaching. His English proficiency was approximately ow-intermediate as he could not speak and writ in Englis fluently, which was why we collcted the data (see below) in Persian (L1), although he had a good grasp of content (i. Sports Sciences) terminologies and expressins. We should note that not al EAP teachers in Iran are like Alborz in terms of experience and proficiency level, and he could teach the course based on his cordial relationship with faculy members.

Alborz was originally Persan and from a city located in the north of Iran. He had completed his BA and MA degrees at state universities in the field of Sports Sciences. He also had the experience of learning English in private language schools for several months during his studentship. However, i our interviews and personal talks, he did not consider the language learning experience as highly determining in his general vision toward English language teaching and leaning because he believed that his personal reading has contributed more significantly to his competence in English. His students were both male and female, their ages ranged from 18 to 19, and their proficiency level was low (beginner, with most of them not having the experience of attending English institutions), this point played out s a site of identit challenge for Alborz, as we report later. Moreover, Alborz had not received any teacher training courses for becoming an EAP teacher. His dual identitie of being an EAP teacher and a PhD student were aso influential in his identity construction, as we show later.

Before starting the study, the second researcher talked to Alborz and obtained his approval for participation. Alborz was selected conveniently because of the second researcher's familiarity with him. We selected Alborz due to (1) his record of language learning during studentshp, which could facilitate capturing how his identity is constructed over time in light of previous and current learning and teaching experience (see Wolff & De Costa, 2017), (2) his initial passion for teaching Sports Sciences, which could fluctuate over time in response to contextual particularities (see Kanno & Stuart, 2011), and (3) his interest to learn from the research project with regard to enhancing his reflectivity. These criteria, along with Albore's openness to participate in the study, the context of the study (state universty setting) in which teachers do not get recognized adequately (Tavakoli & Tavakol, 2018), and Alborz's personal investment for learning English (especially the faculty's trust in him to teach) rendered him and the research context as rich with in. formation to serve as the study case.

The material Alborz taught was a domestically-designed content textbook titled \*English for the Students of Physical Education and Sports Sciences'. EAP textbooks in Iran are designed and developed by the SAMT (The Organization for Researching and Composing University Textbooks in the Humanities, which was established in 1985 by the "Supreme Council for Cultural Revolution" after the Iranian Cultural Revolution. Over the years, SAMT \*has been supporting growing needs of the higher education of Iran by composing, compiling, translating and publishing textbooks, and journals specificto writing university textboos in collaboration with educators, professors and researchers of prominent universities and research institutes" (http://samt.ac.ir/en/page/77/about-us).

# 3.2. Data collection

The study was methodologically qualitative (Creswell, 2013). In this regard, data were collected from semi-structured interviews, reflective journals, and classroom observations and the associated field notes. Data were triangulated to obtain a comprehensive understanding of how Alborz constructed his EAP identity during the first year of teaching.

Semi-structured interviews: An initial interview was conducted with Alborz to explore his studentship experiences and perceptions about language teaching, claimed identity as an EAP teacher, and the atmosphere of EAP teaching in Iran. This interview lasted $3 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ and was conducted in Persian (L1). Another round of interview was conducted afer the first year to explore how different positive and negativeevents contributed to Alborz's EAP identit construction, the tensions and conflict he experienced, and his perceptions about being an EAP teacher. This interview lasted $5 0 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ and was again conducted in Persian.

Reflective journals: Alborz had two classes during the first year (one per semester). To collect data on Alborz's EAP identity development, he was asked to document his reflections in a journal. Ten and six journals were written in the two semesters, respectively. These journals (overall 16) partly fed the final interview questions. The questions of the jounal focused on Alborz's emotional luctations, tensions, and clamed idntity, and how his self-fficacy and agency were inluenced by his lived experienes. Alborz could write the journals either in Persian or English and he chose Persian.

Classroom observations and recall interviews: In each semester, three classes of Alborz were observed to document how he manages his classes and how in-las events shape his enacted EAP identity. The second reearcher attended his clases and wrote field notes that could influence his real-time decisions and practices. The field notes also involved instructional practices, facilitative or problematic content-related events, and Alborzs ability to actualize his mental plans. After each observation (overal six), the field notes were shared with Alborz in stimulated recall sessons and his associated perceptions were obtained. For example, when he used Persian or English in the cass the aftelas converton inoled how he vies this ssue and ts lunce on his P identit. These conversations (often lasting about $2 0 \mathrm { \ m i n } \mathrm { \cdot }$ were audio-recorded for further analysis.

# 3.3. Data analysis

Data analysis was informed by Lichtman's (2013) three Cs: Codes, Categories, and Concepts. In this sense, data were analyzed in several steps. irst all the audio-recordings were transcribed and all the Persian data were translatd into English. Second, the data from each source were read several times and separately to develop initial familiarity with their nature. Third, the intial codes were developed from each source acrossan open coding system of analysis. Fourth, the codes were rfined and put against the main data to disambiguate their accuracy.Fifth, after constant comparison and integrative analyses of data sources, the categories that emerged from the whole data were written down. Ths stage involved axial analysis of the emerging themes and their sub-categories. inally, the categories were organized around the central concepts describing Alborz's identity construction as: (1) Tensions between clamed and constructed EAP identities (2) content-related emotional conflicts, and (3) EAP teacher as an undervalued professional. It must be mentioned that besides the researchers individual and group discussions over the emerging data, the second researcher constantly sought Alborz's ideas (member-checking) during the year to enhance the credibility of the interpretations.

# 4. Findings

Data analyses revealed that three themes described Albor's EAP teacher identity construction. In what fllows, each of these themes is presented. In the following, Ex refers to extract.

# 4.1. Tensions between claimed and constructed EAP identities

Like many novice teachers, Alborz had ideal percetions about EAP teaching, which gradually produced tensions. Alborz's idealism was not marked by claims for transforming education in general and EAP teaching in particular. He constantly argued that he is aware f challnges that EAP teachers face. However, his idealism featured overemphas on his abilities to render EAP teaching efective, which was dominantly defined in content terms. He also added similar perspectives in relation to the textbook, as the extracts below show. In this sense, Alborz was more in the third phase of noviceteachers work Maynard and Furlong (1995) termed \*recognizing difficulties", yet such a recognition was a result of his situated understandings, after which tensions occurred:

I know that we have many problems in sports sciences and generall other parts of educational system (Ex1, Intial Interview)

I think that I can teach my students many terms and vocabularies of sports sciences, and help them read the content text.   
effectively (Ex2, Initial Interview).

I have seen the textbook and I think that what is important is that it has the necessary content words to teach the students to face fewer problems in reading (Ex3, Initial Interview).

Such perspectives later turned into problems as Alborz engaged more in teaching Sports Sciences. Two major factors created tensions in his claimed and constructed EAP identities. Claimed identity in this sense was the range of factors he claimed to characterize his EAP professionalism, and constructed identity was how his EAP identity was dynamicallyformed in response to professional events and participants. The first factor was students' inadequate knowledge of the field, which made Alborz mitigate his expectations. He used this point to emphasize the diffrences between general English offeed in language schools and content courses offered at universty. In this regard, he argued for the significance of student preparation for EAP classes, as the following extracts show:

Sometimes I think that they [students] never take a look at the textbook before coming to the class. This way, I always have to mitigate my expectations (Ex4, Third Reflective Journal).

This classis different from a general English clas as you have to be prepared to understand what we talk about in the class (Ex5, Tenth Reflective Journal).

Alborz generally perceived EAP students unpreparednessand inadequate knowledge as harmful for EAP teachers motivation and self-eficacy, including himself. In my opinion, these two factors [unprearednes and indequate knowledge] bother most f the tachers and sometimes you ask yourself why you are doing that [teaching]" (Ex6, Final Interview). The significant role of students has been recurrently underscored by EAP scholars (e.g., Dudley-Evans & St John, 1998). However, for Alborz such a role had a different coloring in negatively shaping his professional sense-making and identities.

The second tension Alborz faced was related to his pedagogical content knowledge and the textbook. In this regard, although he evaluated the material as responsive in terms of content terminology, he graduall became more critical of the textbook in lacking multimodal resources responding to students' needs, which complicated his efectively exercising agency. Alborz associated this issue with the students inadequat content knowledge of Sports Sciences and the necessty of integrating pictorial ffordances that facilitate EAP teaching, as the following extract shows:

I think that the material is good, but I have faced a persistent problem in teaching. Suppose I want to start teaching. There are many words that need content knowledge, but the students do not have such knowledge. So, when I want to teach them, I have to either use Persian or explain them a lot. And many words do not have perfect Persian equivalents. I think that if the textbook had more pictures of body or askeleton, it would be much easier. This ssue [explaining a lot] takes much time and makes me feel that I have not done what I had in mind. (Ex7, Ninth Reflective Journal)

Here, Alborz argues that although he perceives the material as adequate in terms of content, due to the students' knowledge inadequacy, h fa problems in effctive tching. He uses his io comment n alteative in matrign in ord to facilitate the teaching process. Moreover, he holds that as the materials lack such affordances, he has to over-explain thecontent and thus lose time, which counters his claimed identity in delivering the lesson effectively.

# 4.2. Content-related emotional conflicts

Alborz experienced multiple emotional conflicts, which dominantly arose from the interaction between content-related issues and his personalized emotional fluctuations. Emotional conflicts refer to situations when Alborz's internal feelings clashed with external events and (re)shaped his professonal sense-making, developing identities, and performances. Two major features underlay his emotional conflicts and identity construction: Subsiding his role to one of a content translator, and incongruities between his in struction and student performance inassessment. These emotional conflicts generally made him restructure his understanding of EAP teaching identity, as detailed below.

With regard to becoming a content translator, Alborsinitial eflective journals featured more focus on English than Persian, which occurred due to his perceptions about how carrier content should be delivered. However, he gradually realized that more use f English backfires and he needs to focus more on Persin so that the students understand the content Alborz held trong beliefs that this isue is incongruent with his understandings about EAP teaching as, according to him, he was not teaching Persin iteratre. This ssue was also raised afer the second researcher mentioned Alborz's use of Persian in a post-class discussion. The following extracts show these perspectives:

I try to use English synonyms for the [content] words more than Persian meanings as this way they [students] become more knowledgeable in English. For example, when the lesson is about gait, I use walking instead or when it is posture, I use body shape, although these are easy. This makes me more satisied with my own instruction (Ex8, Second Reflective Journal).

I have to use more Persian as I se them gaze at me when I say something in English. Our lesson some days ago was about dorsiflexion [a content term referring to limbs], but I had to simplify it in Persian, which was against my will but I did it (Ex9, Eighth Reflective Journal).

I agree that I use Persian a lot, but I have to do it and when I do it I feel that I am teaching Persian literature. This brings me negative feelings, but i is the content they should learn and I have no choice (Ex10, Post-Class Discussion, Third Observation).

Alborz considered this aspect of his work as conflicting with his professional standards and referred to the emotional conflicts it brings about. This practice was also extended to the second semester. However, Alborz gradually became more lenient with the use of Persian. The key to Alborz's leniency was the diminished emotional conflict he previously assumed by using L1 (Persian) and his current acetance of such incongruities in using more emotion regulation strategies when facing such instances, as shown below. Thus, Alborz seems to have gradually used his emotions as a conduit into constructing the identity of a more adaptable person to contextual definitions of EAP (i.e, adapting to the students' proficiency level). In this sense, his identity was primarily featured by emotional conflicts that gradually made him develop a contextualized sense-making of EAP practice:

I sometimes feel ashamed or disappointed that I doit, but I have to do it as I ose the students' side by adhering to overusing English. Besides, most of them may just want to understand the meaning of the content for other purposes and not for improving their English (Ex11, Post-Class Discussion, Fourth Observation).

I have to accept it, although I think that i does not align with what I believe. This way, I can ensure that they have learned the content they will use in future studies and careers (Ex12, Post-Class Discussion, Fifth Observation).

It [using Persian] does not bother me as compared to the past. I was very likely to react to become angry, but pas it now easily. I have adapted myself to the situation that content may be more important for them than being proficient in English related to the same content, although still deep in my heart it sometimes tickles my feeings (Ex13, Fourteenth Reflective Journal).

The second source of emotional conflicts was incongruities between his instruction and students' performance in assessment Alborz lamented over lack of a mutual connection between his instructional investment and the performance of students in the quizzes. He gave two quizzes each semester, yet the students performance did not align withis expectations. Alborz asociated the students poor performance with their own lack of time for English in comparison to other content leons. He argued that his ssue becomes problematic for students, although heatempts to make them aware of the necessty of developing English knowledge of carrier content in Sports Sciences, as shown in the following extracts:.

Each time I give a quiz to the students, I know what happens and they perform poorly (Ex14, Eighth Reflective Journal).

They think that English is es important than other content lessons, but they do not know that at some stage English becomes a pain in their neck. I tell them that their future is connected to English, but they do not listen and I se this in their exam performance (Ex15, Fourteenth Reflective Journal).

The incongruity between Alborz's instruction and students' performance in assessment was primarily a result of conflicts in his motional investment. Alborz argued that he maintains a caring perspective in relation to the students and their learning, yet he does not see much of his effrts as yielding effective outcomes. He argued for such emotional investment, particularly in relation to the nature of AP teaching a relevant to Sports Sciences. lborz considered such issues as motionally draning and s conflics that create anger, frustration, and disappointment in him. He also linked these emotions to his identity in that they had made him doubt his professional identity as an EAP teacher:

I study a lot and prepare many content vocabularies about body limbs, gait, and many other ssues in sports sciences, but whenI present such words in the exam, few students answer the questions correctly (Ex16, Fourteenth Reflective Journal.

When the students do not function well,I am about to lose my temper or really loseit. It really disappoints me when they do not care about English as much as they should (Ex17, Fifteenth Reflective Journal).

I don't know whether other teacher face such problems or it is just me, but when I want to resolve them inside it becomes really difficult to handle my feelings as a teacher (Ex18, Final Interview).

# 4.3. EAP teacher as an undervalued professional

Toward the end of the irst year, Alborz developed perceptions about his career that had roots in broad definitions of EAP in Iran. Alborz referred to three aspects f ranian AP tchers professional carer that according to him, highly contributed to their identity construction: Disciplinary challenges, institutional barrers, and sociocultural localities. Alborz had experienced these three dmensions at personal, institutional, and social levels, which had immensely influenced his own identity construction.

Regarding disciplinary hurdles, Alborz argued that managing the nexus between language and content is one of the major chal. lenges he had experienced: To control these two sides language and content] relly creates challenge for you in knowing what to do and how to do it" (Ex19, Final Interview). In this sense, he made a comparison between general English and EAP teaching as a site of struggle between variations in these two areas in creating multiple challenges for the teachers (for relevant discussions se Basturkmen, 2014; Taillefer, 2013):

In response to your question [perspectives of being an EAP teacher], I can refer to a comparison between general English teaching and content [EAP] teaching. I have gone to general English classes, but I never thought my teachers could experience these problems. At universty, itis very likely t face shocks that make you change totally. More than anything is the content you teach; how to make it efective is really difficult; how to keep the balance between language and content is reallydifficult, and how to engage them [students] and make them think and act is really more difficult. These make your work both worthy and sometimes makes you feel that you are doing something in vain, especially when the effects are not seen. $\mathbf { E x 2 0 }$ , Final Interview)

Here, Alborz uses the comparison between general English and EAP teaching as a discursive tool to describe the challenges of EAP instruction. He takes resort to his studentship experiences in general English classes, yet highlights that EAP teachers are likely to experience identity conflicts and vulnerability more than general English teachers due to disciplinary particularities (here managing language and content). The pedagogical fluctuations he mentions toward the end of the narrative signify the interconnection between emotional, agentive, and beliefs-related dimensions of EAP teachers' work in relation to their professional identities. He concludes with the role of such fluctuations i the extent to which EAP teachers view their work as both worthwhile and personally undervalued.

Alborz felt onelines regarding his institutional membership. He faced tensions between his claimed and constructed identitie as an EAP teacher. In this sense, Alborz had claimed a self a originating from his studentship experiences, which had become challenged by his own professional EAP practice. Most notably, Alborz felt loneliness as to his cllegial experiences. Nonalignment between Alborz's imaged understanding of EAP profession and lack of collegial relationships was the major institutional challenge he had experienced. He noted that such arelationship may not exist elsewhere in EAP contexts, yet is representation in the Iranian context has been demotivating for him:

Before starting my teaching, I thought that things would be like my language school experiences, but this is universty and things are not like that (Ex21, Final Interview).

I thought I can have colleagues with whom I can talk and share emotions, but I did not experience this. Specificall, I thought that colleagues could help in teaching the content better. (Ex22, Final Interview).

I feel that if I had colleagues with whom I could talk, things would be much easier. However, the experience has negatively influenced my motivation. (Ex23, Sixteenth Reflective Journal).

I know ittle about other countrie, but when I se some videos on YouTube or hear from friends in other countries, I think that maybe in Iran colleagues are less supportive (Ex24, Final Interview).

Alborz also referred to the role of universty staff and administrators in his instutional identit as an undervalued professional. In this regard, he felt initially disconnected and laer ill-connectd to the educational stuff at the department. Alborz interpreted such issues again in light of his claimed identity and the conflict t had with his constructed identity. Collctively, Alborz sems to have experienced conflicts between his claimed identity and the type of rlationships that strengthened or weakened such standards, which were here in relation to educational staff and administrators:

Sometimes they look at me as f I have done something wrong. Maybe it is just the way they look, but it makes me fel isolated (Ex25, Sixteenth Reflective Journal).

When I was a student, our instructors taught us like I teach now. I could not se this side of their work in the staffroom or their relationships with policymakers, but to me close relationships matter a lot (Ex26, Final Interview).

Alborz was also critical of the status of EAP teachers in the eyes of ordinary people. He mentioned that being an ostad [Persian for university instructor] carries meanings that are often associated with higher-order instructors who should be respected, yet this is not well-acknowledged by other individuals: "In our culture, being an ostad is something worthwhile, but when they realize that you are not a faculy member, they treat you diferently" (Ex27, Final Intrview). In this xtract, Aborz refers to a cultural particlrity regarding the status of university instructors, which lose is value once one is not faculty member. It must be mentioned that in the Iranian higher. education context, the term \*ostad' is used by students to refer to all univerity instructors, including faculty members, teacher as sistants, and those who are invited to teach an EAP course to gain experience. Among these teacher groups, faculty members are more widely acknowledged as socially-venerated individuals. Alborz used this issue to emphasize the credit of EAP teaching:

In my opinion, EAP teaching isa highly valued job as you deal with both content isues and at the same time English is your asset (Ex28, Final Interview).

When others ask me about my job and I ay I am an EAP teacher at university, they get excited, but when they realize that I am not a faculty member, even their silence bothers me (Ex29, Final Interview).

Overall, while Alborz acknowledged that EAP teaching is an established profession, he recognized that, to other individuals, one becomes legitimate if they are a faculty member of EAP, which was conflicting with his emotional understandings.

# 5. Discussion

This study explored the identity construction of a novice Iranian EAP teacher. Data analyses showed that Alborz faced various fluctuations in constructing his identit, which haped his claimed and constructe identities, and stemmed from emotional conflicts and perceptions about EAP instruction in the Iranian context.

Tensions between claimed and constructed identities were a major problem Alborz faced in constructing his identities. In this regard, contextual parameters of EAP instruction in the Iranian context were the major source of tension. The first contextual description was students' inadequate content knowledge. This finding arose partly from Albor's appraisal of the expected student proficiency at higher education and the realities he faced (see Kaivanpanah et al., 2021; Soodmand Afshar & Movassagh, 2016; Tavakoli & Tavakol, 2018). The clash between these two aspects created tensions for Alborz's identity in that he could not externalize his mental plans as impeded by students low proficiency level, which is also a problem reported in scholarship on novice language teachers' identity construction (Farrll, 2012; Kanno & Stuart, 2011). This finding shows that among the myriad of contextual parameters complicating EAP teachers efective identity construction is student proficiency as it bears direct implications for their exercising agency as well (see Avalos-Rivera, 2020).

Moreover,textbooks featured as a defining factor in the tensions between Albor's claimed and constructed identities. In this regard, the textbook did not provide a multimodal representation of content in a way that it could effctively respond to students needs, a finding also reported in Nazari and Molana (2020) in the context a novice Iranian EFL teacher's identity construction. The role of materials in facilitating or impeding EAP teachers' identity construction has been reported in previous research (e.g., Atai & Fatahi-Majd, 2014; Gu & Benson, 2015; Ta0 & Gao, 2018). However, the textbook had two implications for Alborz's identity construction. Frs, it impdd his ffeive exrcsig agncy in tms of implemeing his prerred practce eMnsouri t al., 2021). Second, using the textbook interacted with students' low proficiency to complicate Alborz's agency and result in tensions in his claimed and constructed identitie. These findings addto the body of knowledge on EAP teachers identity construction by highlighting (1) how materials relate to EAP teacher agency, specifically through the lack of a multimodal representation that responds to student needs and (2) how materials mix with ther contextual, mediating factors (here student proficiency) to create identit tensions for EAP teachers.

The content of Sports Sciences and students performance in asessment created emotional conflicts for Alborz's identity con. struction. While Alborz initiall attempted to adhere to using English as the major medium of teaching the content, he gradually realized that he has to approximate this practice to the contextual relities of teaching (i., using more Persian to render the content effectively). This ssue graduall defined Alborz's identit from one who keeps high standards of professionalism to one who sup. presses his emotions as arising from les using English to seek student satisfaction. The nexus between language and content is an inseparable component of EAP teachers work (e.g., Basturkmen, 2014; Campion, 2016; Ding, 2019), and reearch has also reported on novice English teachers attempts to develop adaptability in order to experience positive emotions (Avalos-Rivera, 2020; Wolf & De Costa, 2017). However, for Alborz, this meant sacrificing the use of English and his personal sense-making to obtain student satis faction, which shows how AP teachers have to abide by a contextual isue atthe expense of their intenal feelings. A relaed motional point for Alborz was incongruities between his instruction and students' performance in asessment. This incongruity resulted in a condition that bore emotional conflicts for Alborz and his identity in viewing his efforts as les significant, and gradualy demotivated him as an EAP teacher who can draw on his potentials to positively contribute tostudents growth (see Guihang & Miao, 2019; Tao & Gao, 2018). These findings indicate that the triad of personal standards, students' performance, and content feature prominently in EAP teachers' emotional conflicts and their professional identity vis-a-vis claming the identity of an efective teacher or being dismissive of context as an influential factor.

The way EAP teachers and teaching are understood in the Iranian context was also a source of challnge for Alborz's identity construction. In this regard, disciplinary particularities (here managing the language-content nexus) were one of the major problems he experienced in effectively navigating the first year f teaching. This finding parallels Ding's (2019) argument that intenal tensions of EAP are likely to complicate EAP teachers' effctive identity construction. For Alborz, such disciplinary particularities had socio-historical colorings (his studentship experiences and the comparison he drew between general and EAP teaching), bore emotional, agency-related, and beliefs-driven implications, and created tensions in his ability to easily navigate the first year. Moreover, the institutional context immensely shaped his perceptions of feeing loneliness and devalued as an EAP teacher. Previous research has highlighted how the instutional context can profoundy shape novices identit construction (e.g., Kanno & Stuart, 2011; Varghese et al., 2005; Yazan & Lindahl, 2020) and EAP teachers professional practice (e.g., Basturkmen, 2014; Ding, 2019; T0 & Gao, 2018). Alborz experienced the role of institutional factors and participants in his loneliness (see Farrel, 2012) and the value he assumed to be attributed to EAP teachers, which did not feature in his experience. These findings imply that colleagues and the value-laden nature of EAP teaching significantly shape teachers' constructed identities, which did not happen for Alborz. However, this aspect of EAP instruction nees more focal research in exploring how EAP teachers construct their institutional identity in light of system-induced factors and participants that contribute to EAP teachers' professional practice.

Additionally, Alborz's identity construction was substantially inluenced by the way \*ostads" are understood by Iranian people. In this sense, lack of adequate respect for "ostad" created tensions between his internal sense-making processes and external understandings of people. These fluctuations had made Alborz develop principles about his identity as partly a self-venerated and other. degraded individual. These findings parall the discursive level of identity construction Varghese et al. (2016) propose as shaping teachers identity construction. In this sense, the sociocultural description of "ostad'" in the Iranian context seems to have been represented in Albore's identity web as a venerated person, yet it was problematized by the individuals who constantly questioned Alborz's perceptions. These findings mean that EAP teaching, as Ding (2019) convincingly argued, i tied to various sociocultural parameters, which for Alborz featured in the contextual-discursive meaning of "ostad" as countering his perceptions of professionalism.

# 6. Conclusions

Collectively, the findings showed that Alborz's identity construction was largely defined in light of contextual particularitie f EAP teaching. These localities ranged from the content Alborz taught, which created emotional and practical tensions for him; to dissonances between his general English-oriented conceptions and EAP-driven understandings; tothe interpersonal conflict he experienced in constructing an EAP teacher role identity; to his changing roles s an EAP teacher during the year; and to his stuated definitions of EAP teaching in response to sociocultural understandings of higher education. These issues generally created tensions in Alborz's claimed and constructed identitie, and reulted indifferential adaptability and resistance in Albor's identity construction during the first year of his teaching.

Alborzs emotional, beliefs-related, and practcal challenges may happen for novice EAP teachers, particularly in contexts similar to Iran where there is no systematic EAP teacher education. Moreover, it sems that the initial tensions Alborz had experienced in the beginning of his teaching had gradually changed, yet they had taken other colorings. That is, Alborz constantly experienced various conceptual, emotional, and agency-related conflicts that had rots in EAP teaching in Iran, yet at each stage of his development, these conflicts intensified or diminished and took different shapes. The result of al these fluctuations was perstent dissonances between Alborz's subjectivity and performativit, which shaped his identit as a resilient, reistant, adaptable, and self-abiding EAP teacher. Broadly speaking, Alborz's experience may reflect the type of challenges EAP teachers experience. Two points sem to undergird such an iteration. Firs, like many EAP teachers across ifferent contexts, Alborz transitioned to EAP instruction with a history of general English background. This transition had created tensions and oscilltions in his identity construction regarding the balance between content and language, and particularities in Sports Sciences. Second, there is a long history of the significance of providing emotional support for language teachers (.g., Avalos-Rivea, 2020). I relation to EAP teachers, it ems tht, as Alborz's experience showed, besides the nature of socializing in the institutional context, content functions as astrong factor in positively influencing teachers' emotional investment or creating emotional challenges for them.

The findings of the study provide novel implications for conceptualizing how content shapes EAP teachers' professonal identity construction. First, the study findings imply that each of the factors of personal understandings, materials, institutional peculiarities, and students play a significant role in the way EAP teachers navigate the process of identity construction. For Alborz, each of these factors was accompanied by exclusive tensions and conflicts, which, in connection with the content of Sports Sciences, problematized his claimed and constructed identities, including his self-fficacy, motivation, sel-image, agency, and emotions. These aspects corroborate the heterogeneity and multiplicity of EAP practice, and elucidate how each of these factors contributes to teachers professional work. Specifically, it was highly problematic for Alborz to successully address the language-content nexus (ailler, 2013); as this issue finally remained unresolved for Alborz as a novice teacher, this finding underlines the significance of teacher education for EAP teachers in educating teachers how to draw on research and practice in managing this dlemma (Atai et a. 2018; Mahendra, 2020; Soodmand Afshar & Movassagh, 2016; Ta0 & Gao, 2018; Tavakoli & Tavakol, 2018). Thus, although Alborz is only one case, the range of challenges he experienced may happen to many EAP teachers, especill novies, and this isue demands close attention from policymakers and decision-makers.

Second, Alborz persistently extended his studentship experiences to the context of EAP teaching. Atai and Nejadghanbar (2017) argue that lack of systematic teacher education in Iran \*has resulted in a fuzy state in which teachers basicall follow their own tentative conceptualizations of the nature of EAP instruction' (p. 44). For Alborz, the state involved both his clamed identities and narratives of becoming an EAP teacher, which were primaril accompanied by multiple tensions. As the findings showed, jumping to the world of EAP teaching without adequate preparation was one of the largest deficiencies in Alborz's professonal carer as lck of adequate awareness of EAP difficulties turned out to face him with various personal and professional impediments. Inthis sense, we argue for the necesst of preparatory courses that create awareness in novice EAP teachers about the fact that posessing content knowledge may not be responsive to their professonal nees in the long run. Rather, they need to be trained in the localities of EAP teaching that embrace pedagogical, institutional, and sociocultural aspects of EAP instruction. The outcome of such an education would be essening the tensions and conflict, and thus aligning the teachers' EAP identities more with EAP realities or vice versa. Alborz's experience, thus, shows that novice AP teachers may face tesions that significantly shape their professional understandings and identities, which need to be resolved before becoming entrenched over time.

The present study had imitations that should be acknowledged. First, Alborz was the sole participant of this study. Although the policies of EAP teacher recruitment in Iran are generally the same, further research with a greater number of participants i needed to obtain a more comprehensive picture of EAP teacher identity construction. Relatedly, Alborz is not representative of al the EAP teachers working in th Iranian context in that EAP courses are usuall offered by experienced teachers and those who have a higher level of English proficiency than Alborz. Thus, comparative research on the later group could better demonstrate how novice and experienced EAP teachers construct their identites. Second, we conducted only two rounds of interviews with Alborz, one before and one afer the first year. Interviews afer each semester would better unpack how Alborz made sense of his identity construction. Relatedly, life-history interviews after some years would help to obtain a better understanding of how novice teachers perceive their first-year experiences. We hope that this study provides novel implications for understanding novice EAP teachers work and the range of isues contributing to their identity construction. Such an understanding would become more yielding if action is taken to prepare the novices for the fluctuating world of EAP teaching to render identity construction more effective, especially at the outset.

# Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

# Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

# References

Atai,  ai  18ti   ic  n Language Teaching Research, 6(2), 97-115. https://doi.org/10.30466/ijltr.2018.120562   
Ati M -014)    i   n  r   i. English for Specific Purposes, 33, 27-38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2013.07.007   
Atai,   017  u i    4354./ doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2017.08.001   
Avals-.0   t  f     195) 312-326. https://doi.org/15348458.2019.1673754.   
Brkuie . 2016).  sht stor pch  alying cr (imd ie er time. l Qrerl, 503), 6568. /.g/0.1002 tesq.311   
s Fines Especificos, 28, 17-34.   
amin . 6e  c t   s 23 59-70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.06.003   
Chng,  (017). From EAP to ESP: A ther's idty deemt n Jal of TE0L, 14(2) 7110. hp//.g/0.30397/L20171014 (2).0004   
ekh i,     thici  th  nc tr ti. The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40299-022-00666-1   
Dg 01 iot  .) i   i in  i .3-76) Routledge.   
Dudey-vans, T., St John, M. J. (198. eloments in English for peific upose: A mulidsilinay approch abridge Universty Press.   
he  . their classrooms. British Council. ELT Research Papers. 46(3), 435-449. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.36   
u .  015  c t  19 70./o. 10.1177/1362168814541725   
09   r e i  t. , 2) 20-27. https://doi.org/10.5539/ies.v12n7p20   
aiananah , lai,   zi  01)  the ead cie E the   pti,  f ian AP practitioners. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 50(1), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.100971   
ano,   . 1c ih  362. 10.1111/j.1540 4781.2011.01178.x   
Lichtman, M. (2013). Qualitative research in education. Sage.   
Mahedra.  t  r  h io  3) 229-240.   
anuri 1) t   c t s mediating role of institutional policies. System, 103, 1-11. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2021.102674   
Maynard, , Fuong, J. (195).  t tch and modes f mtoring, In . ly & A May (ds.) Is in mri (p. 10-30. Rted.   
i 331073 pdf.   
azri,  a 2020)   ack  d er e he mr th m tt r it ee The J AsiaTEFL, 17(4), 1488-1496.   
Rebenko,  2021ding P cr it  n ttio.  of g h for ific c , 201-213.   
Soomanr  sgh  (016 Aio    tho     of is or e 22, 132-151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.04.002   
Taller     (..0 asp.3290   
Tao, J     2018 t tiof  cr t. h for i , 49 113. /g/.1016/. esp.2017.09.003   
vakoli,  l,08) P rii   ol icl, . English for Academic Purposes, 31, 28-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2017.12.007   
Vaghe      5   it  ti d  f and Education, 4(1), 21-44. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327701jlie0401_2   
Wlf ,   t .. (2017 Exdn the  tcr idit ae: An inetigati f thetions anst of . The de Language Journal, 101(S1), 76-90. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12370