# A comparative study of thematic choices and thematic progression patterns in human-written and AI-generated texts

Shu Yang a , Shukun Chen b , Hailin Zhu a , Jiayi Lin a , Xi Wang c,\*

a Department of English, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China   
b School of Foreign Languages and Cultures, Guangdong University of Finance, Guangzhou, China   
c School of Humanities and Communication, School of Network Communication (jointly), Guangdong University of Finance & Economics,   
Guangzhou, China

# A R T I C L E I N F O

# A B S T R A C T

Keywords:   
Thematic choices   
Thematic progression patterns   
Human-written texts   
AI-Generated texts

By adopting systemic functional grammar as the theoretical framework, the present research investigates the choices of the textual, the interpersonal, the topical Themes, and thematic pro gression patterns in human-written and AI-generated argumentative texts to examine how the human author and the robot organize the clause and text. The findings suggest that humanwritten and AI-generated texts differ significantly in using the subtypes of textual, interper sonal, and marked topical Themes. In terms of textual Themes, the machine tends to use more concession signals to repeat information that has been stated earlier, adopt fewer condition sig nals since the robot may be less likely to imagine possible or impossible situations, and repeti tively rely on clause-initial conjunctive adjuncts of addition to extend the clause to the previous text. As for interpersonal Themes, the robot seldom adopts modal adjuncts or modal verbal op erators as interpersonal Themes, which may suggest its lack of awareness of interaction with the reader and its avoidance of expressing its viewpoints in a typical or congruent way. Regarding topical Themes, the less use of marked themes in AI-generated texts demonstrates that AI may less carefully plan the development of the text to foreground the setting or construct coherent text. Considering thematic progression patterns, the frequent use of the constant pattern in AIgenerated texts prevents the text from development and makes the text redundant and simplistic like a list of ideas.

# 1. Introduction

Artificial intelligence (AI), has witnessed great strides in recent years and is gaining the ability to autogenerate fluent texts that are difficult to distinguish from those written by human beings. The newly released AI writing tool ChatGPT can generate “coherent and informative text … in response to specific prompts from the user …” (Hosseini et al., 2023), and the texts can be difficult to distinguish from human-written text (Else, 2023). Since such AI language models mimic text created by humans, it is almost impossible to detect whether the texts are written by human writers or ChatGPT (Chatterjee & Dethlefs, 2023). Though Open AI has launched a tool that can distinguish the two types of texts, the company admits that this tool is very unreliable on short texts (below 1000 characters), and even longer texts are sometimes incorrectly identified (Open AI, 2023). In light of the current situation, systematic linguistic com parison and analysis of AI-generated texts and human-written texts is very necessary, but it has not been tapped sufficiently in the literature.

In the literature, the comparative studies on AI-generated and human-written texts primarily center on the accuracy, readability, or completeness of the content of the texts. For example, Ariyaratne et al. (2023) compare the accuracy and quality of five ChatGPT-generated academic articles with those written by human writers and conclude that AI-derived articles may closely resemble articles published by academic researchers, but are factually inaccurate and have fictitious references. Haq et al. (2023) distinguish between human-written and AI-generated articles for health journals, and they find that the articles produced by ChatGPT do not follow the conventional IMRaD structure (Introduction, methods, results, and discussion). Zhong et al. (2023) compare a ChatGPT-generated review article on the topic of catalysis with published human-written papers and discover that many contents of the paper are incorrect and unreliable, and some parts of the paper such as citations are missing. Buholayka et al. (2023) examine scientific case reports written by ChatGPT and a doctor and conclude that ChatGPT-generated reports include inaccurate diagnoses, fabricated references, and incomplete information.

A few studies on the comparison of AI-generated and human-written texts deal with the linguistic forms of the texts, but the analysis is mostly done from the angle of Natural Language Processing and the emphasis is mainly at the level of vocabulary or sentence variety rather than at the level of text. For instance, Liao et al., (2023) analyze the differences between ChatGPT-generated and human-written medical texts and find that the vocabulary size and the number of stems in ChatGPT-generated texts are smaller than those in human-written texts, and ChatGPT uses more nouns, determiners and coordinating conjunctions, but less cardinal-digit and adverbs. Herbold et al. (2023) distinguish argumentative essays written by ChatGPT and non-native speakers and find that ChatGPT-generated texts include fewer discourse and epistemic markers but more complex sentences and nominalizations. Reviriego et al. (2023) explore the vocabulary and lexical richness of ChatGPT and humans and point out that ChatGPT uses a smaller vocabulary and has lower lexical richness. Desaire et al. (2023) differentiate between human-written and ChatGPT-generated writing, and the study reveals that the average number of sentences per paragraph and the average number of total words per paragraph in ChatGPT-generated writing are significantly lower than those in human-written writing, and ChatGPT varies the sentence lengths less than scientists do and prefers to provide general information, while scientists use more specific proper nouns, acronyms, and numbers.

Despite such contributions, in-depth and systematic linguistic analysis and comparison of human-written and AI-derived texts at the level of text is still lacking in the literature. This paper thus aims to investigate how human-written and AI-generated texts are organized or cohered differently by comparing thematic choices and thematic progression patterns in human-written and AI-generated English argumentative essays from the perspective of Systemic Functional Linguistics.

In Systemic Functional Linguistics, the system of Theme is the major grammatical system to realize textual meanings, which indicate the use of language to construct coherent text and to organize messages so that they fit in and are relevant to the context (Thompson, 2014). As pointed out by Halliday (1985: 62), the choice of Themes plays a fundamental part in the way discourse is organized.

The Theme selection is closely related to the register of the text (Fries, 1995). The different kinds of Theme and different patterns of thematic progression are “characteristic of different registers” (Thompson, 2014: 176). In the literature, the thematic analysis of AI-generated texts is hardly found since AI writing has gained popularity just recently. The thematic analysis of native English speakers’ argumentative essays is often presented in second or foreign language studies in which native speakers’ essays act as reference data. Since the focuses of such studies are second or foreign language learners’ problems with Theme choices, less attention has been paid to the thematic choices and patterns in native speakers’ essays. Due to limited space and our focus on AI-generated texts, the previous thematic analysis of native speakers’ argumentative texts will be briefly introduced below.

In terms of thematic choices, Ho (2011) compares thematic choices in 30 model argumentative essays written by English native expert writers and essays written by Vietnamese learners of English. The research finds that in expert writers’ argumentative texts, interpersonal Themes are less frequently adopted compared to textual and topical Themes, and they are used to create a less authoritarian tone for the text and foreground personal viewpoints. In addition, the research reveals that unmarked Themes are predominant in native experts’ writing and the marked Themes are used to help maintain thematic continuity and create more linear thematic progression patterns. Wei (2016) examines thematic choices in argumentative essays written by Chinese college students and native speakers of English. The research reveals that in native English speakers’ essays, unmarked Themes are predominant, and the marked Themes are mainly used to indicate time or space. In addition, the topical Themes account for the majority of the Themes, textual and interpersonal Themes occur less frequently, and the textual Themes are predominantly realized by conjunctions. Chang and Lee (2019) explore textual and interpersonal Themes in the expository essays written by language learners and English profes sional writers and find that in English professional writers’ essays, conjunctive adjuncts and conjunctions are both frequently employed as textual Themes, and interpersonal Themes are often used to indicate the writer’s explicitly subjective rather than objective attitude towards the proposition. Dontcheva-Navratilov et al. (2020) investigate 48 argumentative essays written by British university students as the reference data and conclude that conjunctive adjuncts and conjunctions are the most frequent textual Themes, and modal adjuncts are the most frequent interpersonal Themes to indicate the writer’s implicitly objective attitude to the proposition. As for thematic progression patterns, Fries (1981: 6) argues that argumentative or expository texts are characterized by linear thematic patterns, that is, “each sentence should follow logically from what has gone before.” Crompton (2004) explores the thematic progression pattern in four samples of argumentative texts and finds that the constant pattern is the least common type and the linear pattern appears much more frequent than the constant pattern. Ho (2011) points out that in native speakers’ argumentative writing, the predominant thematic progression pattern is the linear pattern, and the constant pattern is the least frequent pattern. Herriman (2011) compares the thematic progression pattern in Swedish advanced learners’ writing and native English speaker’s writing and argues that the linear progression pattern predominates in both argumentative texts. Liu and Yang (2013) explore thematic progression patterns in the classic English argumentative essay ‘Of Studies’ written by Bacon and its Chinese translations and discover that the English essay predominantly adopts the simple linear pattern.

There are two reasons to choose argumentative essays. First of all, argumentative essays as an important text type in academic writing are conventional forms of educational assessment and are also required in influential standardized English tests such as TOEFL and IELTS. As academics have concerns about the impact of AI writing tools on education and publishing (Brainard, 2023; Eke, 2023), especially about the possibility of students’ using AI writing tools to submit essay assignments (Nature, 2022), the examination of ChatGPT-generated argumentative essays may help to identify AI-produced texts from a linguistic perspective. Secondly, in argumentative texts, the writer attempts to defend a controversial point, and therefore there will be noticeable linguistic means to indicate the writer’s judgment on the proposition. This will help to investigate how human writers and the robot thematize their angle on the message.

The reason to choose Systemic Functional Linguistics as the theoretical framework is that it is a powerful applicable linguistic theory (Halliday, 2009), and it has been successfully applied to a wide range of areas such as discourse analysis, second language education, translation and interpreting studies, clinical studies (Matthiessen, 2009). Most importantly, the theory itself is essentially constructed for purposes of text analysis (Halliday, 1994) and particular or comparative descriptions (Halliday, 2009). It is thus particularly appropriate for the comparative analysis of human-written and AI-generated texts.

In this study, by adopting Systemic Functional Linguistics as the theoretical framework and native English speakers’ argumentative essays as the reference data, we aim to describe how AI-generated texts are organized and cohered in terms of thematic choices and how they differ from human-written texts. The study may shed light on language education and most importantly on further development of AI-detecting tools and AI writing tools and applications.

The following research questions will be addressed.

(1) How are AI-generated essays different from human-written essays in terms of thematic choices? (2) How are AI-generated essays different from human-written essays in terms of thematic progression patterns?

In the following section, the theoretical framework of the present study will be outlined. Then, the data and research methods, and discussion of the results will be presented. Finally, the paper will present the conclusions and implications of the study.

# 2. Theoretical framework

The linguistic analysis of AI-generated texts and human-written texts is grounded in the systemic functional model of language (Halliday, 2009; Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014). In Systemic Functional Linguistics, language is organized metafunctionally (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014). The textual metafunction indicates the use of language to construct coherent text.

The textual metafunction is “language as relevance” (Halliday, 1979: 60). Textually, the clause represents “a quantum of information in the flow of discourse” (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014: 88). The central textual resources in English are the systems of THEME and INFORMATION (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014).

The Theme is the element that is “the point of departure of the message” and that “locates and orients the clause within its context” (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014: 89). The choice of different elements as Theme signals the commencement of the message from different points to fit in the context. In English, the Theme is “the first group or phrase that has some function in the experiential structure of the clause, i.e., that functions as a participant, a circumstance or the process” (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014: 91). The Rheme is the remainder of the message.

The system of THEME assigns thematic prominence to some experiential, textual, and interpersonal elements of the clause. There are three major types of Theme in English: topical, interpersonal, and textual (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014). The topical Theme refers to the first constituent in the clause that is either a participant, circumstance, or process. There may be other elements in the clause preceding the topical Theme, which are either interpersonal or textual elements, playing no part in the experiential meaning of the clause. The textual Themes refer to clause-initial elements that encode textual meanings. The elements that can function as textual Themes are continuatives, conjunctions and conjunctive adjuncts (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014: 107). Interpersonal Themes refer to clause-initial interpersonal elements that contribute thematic material in the clause, which express the writer’s judgment on the message (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014). The elements that can function as interpersonal Theme include vocatives, modal adjuncts, and finite verbal operators. Textual Themes and interpersonal Themes are “inherently thematic or characteristically thematic”, and they do not “take up the full thematic potential of the clause” (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014: 109–110). What follows them will also have thematic status. When the interpersonal Theme or the textual Theme occurs before the topical Theme, the clause has a “multiple” Theme, otherwise the clause only includes a topical Theme, or a “simple Theme”. The examples of the three types of Theme are given below.

(1) Plastic use (topical Theme) has increased dramatically over the last 50 years. (Text 1 of human-written essays) (2) Unfortunately (interpersonal Theme), this (topical Theme) has also resulted in a huge amount of plastic being discarded, and (textual Theme) this (topical Theme) has caused a number of environmental problems. (Text 1 of human-written essays)

In (1), the clause has a simple Theme or a topical Theme, which is the nominal group plastic use. It is the first element in the clause that functions as the participant in the transitivity system, which is a grammatical system for describing the clauses in terms of process types. In (2), each clause has a “multiple” Theme. In the first clause, the clause-initial modal adjunct unfortunately is the interpersonal Theme of the clause, indicating the writer’s judgment on the proposition, and in the second clause, the conjunction and is the textual Theme. The interpersonal Theme unfortunately and the textual Theme and are obligatorily or frequently thematic, and therefore the following element this still has thematic status and functions as the topical Theme of the clause.

Interpersonal Themes indicate the writer’s viewpoint on the message, and they can signal four types of modal orientations: “explicit subjective”, “explicit objective”, “implicit subjective”, and “explicit-implicit subjective”. “Explicit subjective” interpersonal Themes highlight subjectivity, which are projecting mental clauses, such as I think and I believe. “Explicit objective” interpersonal Themes emphasize objectivity, which are relational clauses with modal Complement, such as its possible that … and it’s likely that …. “Implicit subjective” interpersonal Themes include modal verbal operators (e.g. should, must) and modal adjuncts (e.g. probably, possibly),1 which are intermediate ways of expressing modality. “Explicit-implicit subjective” interpersonal Themes2 are preposition phrases that indicate the speaker’s subjective opinion, such as “in my opinion”.

Apart from the selection of three types of Themes, the system of THEME also distinguishes between unmarked and marked Themes. The term unmarked refers to “most typical/usual”, and the marked indicates “atypical/unusual” (Eggins, 2004:318). When a marked Theme is selected, the writer signals that there must be something in the context that requires an atypical Theme choice.

Theme markedness is related to the Mood structure of the clause. Unmarked Theme is when Theme conflates with the constituent that typically occurs in the first position in the Mood structure of the clause (Eggins, 2004). In a declarative clause, when Theme conflates with the Subject, the Subject realized by a nominal group is the unmarked Theme, which is “the element that is chosen as Theme unless there is good reason for choosing something else” (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014:97). In a polar interrogative clause, the unmarked Theme or the natural starting point is the finite verbal operators plus the Subject, and in a WH-interrogative clause, the natural or unmarked Theme is WH-element realized by a nominal group, adverbial group or prepositional phrase. In an imperative clause, the unmarked Theme is the Predicator, which is realized by a verbal group. Marked Theme is when Theme conflates with any other element in the Mood structure of the clause (Eggins, 2004). The typical marked Theme is Theme conflating with a circumstantial Adjunct. Since imperative clauses seldom occur in the sample texts, the unmarked and marked Themes of the declarative and inter rogative clauses are presented below:

(3) Another problem (unmarked, topical Theme) is that animals may mistake plastic items for food. (Text 1 of human-written essays)   
(4) In many developing countries (marked, topical Theme), tap water cannot be drunk. (Text 1of human-written essays)   
(5) So (textual Theme), what (unmarked, topical Theme) can be done about lack of sleep? (Text 2 of AI-generated essays)   
(6) Is a Facebook “friend” (unmarked, topical Theme) really a friend or just a passing acquaintance? (Text 5 of human-written essays)

In (3), the Subject realized by the nominal group another problem is the unmarked Theme of the declarative clause. In (4), the circumstantial adjunct realized by the prepositional phrase in many developing countries is the marked Theme of the declarative clause. In (5), the WH-element what constitutes the natural starting point of the WH-interrogative clause. In (6), the unmarked Theme of the polar interrogative clause is the finite verbal operator is plus the Subject a Facebook “friend”.

Apart from thematic choices, a further way of examining Theme in text is thematic progression. It investigates how Themes relate to preceding Themes and Rhemes, in terms of “where the content of each Theme is derived from” (Thompson, 2014:175). It contributes to the cohesion and coherence of a text (Eggins, 2004). Thematic progression was first proposed by Daneˇs (1974), who examined three types of thematic progression in written texts, namely constant, linear and derived. In constant progression, the Theme of the clause repeats the Theme of the preceding clause. In linear progression, the Theme is related back to one or more constituents in the Rheme of the preceding clause. In derived progression, Theme is related back to “a “hyper-Theme” which establishes the topic for a longer stretch of text” (Thompson, 2014:175).

In addition to the three major types of thematic progression patterns, there is another thematic progression pattern that needs to be addressed: gapped progressions. Dubois (1987) points out that thematic progression can be either contiguous or gapped, and in her examples, there may be a gap of 12 or even 80 clauses. McCabe (1999) argues that gaps of more than three clauses are not counted as part of a thematic progression chain. In this paper, we are following the rules proposed by Dubois (1987) since in argumentative essays, the human writer and the robot defend a point that will be repeatedly mentioned throughout the text, and this connection should be recognized as the thematic progression pattern.

Finally, there are thematic progression patterns that cannot be accounted for in terms of the four types of progression patterns. Dubois (1987) proposes the term ‘uncoverable’ progression. Ventola and Mauranen (1991: 471) argue that when “the themes are unconnected with the preceding text; in other words, they are “unmotivated”, and they found that a third of Themes that are unmotivated occur at the beginning of typographic paragraphs. In this paper, we adopt the term ‘unmotivated’ to refer to those themes that are not related to the preceding text. The examples of the five types of thematic progression patterns are presented below.

(7) One of the main issues with plastic is that it takes hundreds of years to decompose, meaning it will remain in the environment indefinitely. During this time, plastic can harm wildlife and ecosystems in a variety of ways. (linear pattern, Text 1 of ChatGPTwritten essays)   
(8) Governments can implement policies that restrict the use of single-use plastics, such as charging a fee for plastic bags or banning certain types of plastic products altogether. They can also invest in recycling programs and infrastructure … (constant pattern, Text 1 of ChatGPT-written essays)   
(9) Governments and individuals both have a role to play in reducing plastic pollution. Governments can implement policies that restrict the use of single-use plastics, such as charging a fee for plastic bags or banning certain types of plastic products altogether. Individuals can also play a role in reducing plastic pollution by making simple changes to their daily routines. (derived pattern, Text 1 of ChatGPT-written essays)   
(10) Plastic pollution is a serious environmental issue that affects all living beings, including humans … Additionally, plastic pollution can affect the quality of soil and water, making it unsuitable for the growth of plants and other organisms. (gapped constant pattern, Text 1 of ChatGPT-written essays)   
(11) One of the obvious solutions is to make plastic packaging more expensive in order to encourage people to re-use plastic or avoid it altogether. Supermarkets in many countries have started to charge consumers for plastic bags … (unmotivated pattern, Text 1 of human-written essays)

In (7), the topical Theme During this time relates back to the elements in the Rheme of the previous clause hundreds of years. In (8) the topical Theme They connects to the topical Theme in the previous clause Governments. In (9) the second topical Theme Governments and the third topical Theme Individuals relate back to the hype-Theme Governments and individuals. In (10) there is a gap of 5 sentences between the two repeated topical Themes Plastic pollution. In (11), the topical Theme Supermarkets in many countries is not related to the previous topical Theme One of the obvious solutions and Rheme, therefore resulting in an unmotivated progression pattern.

# 3. Data and methodology

In this study, 50 human-written argumentative essays are collected from three websites, which are developed to provide a wide range of useful materials for IELTS (The International English Language Testing System) test-takers. These essays are written by three professional and experienced IELTS teachers with more than 10 years of experience teaching IELTS writing, who are well-educated native speakers of English, and two of which are qualified former IELTS examiners. The essays are presented as model essays for the IELTS writing examination, and as sample essays, each essay is carefully analyzed by the original writer in terms of structure and language. Therefore, they can be regarded as representative sample of human-written argumentative essays and act as reference data.

The 50 sample essays are written for Writing Task 2 of the IELTS examination, which requires the test-takers to write at least 250 words expressing their opinion about a given topic. The 50 essay questions are about trends or problems in society and they can be classified into two types. In the first type of question, the examiners are asked whether they agree or disagree with a given statement and are required to give reasons for the answer. For example: Do you think the advantages of driverless vehicles outweigh the dis advantages? In the second type of question, the test-takers are required to discuss the causes, effects, and/or solutions to societal issues. For example: What damage does plastic do to the environment? What can be done by governments and individuals to solve this problem? The 50 human-written essays involve a wide range of topics, ranging from education and technological developments to environmental protection to entertainment.

The AI platform we choose is ChatGPT, which is a large language processing tool developed by OpenAI that can be used for text generation. It is based on the latest GPT 3.5 model, and it can generate “surprisingly intelligent-sounding text in response to user prompts” and the “replies are so lucid, well-researched and decently referenced” (Stokel-Walker, 2022). The 50 essay questions that are used in human-written essays are submitted to ChatGPT and it instantly creates 50 essays that answer the essay questions. Each essay contains about 300–350 words, which is similar to human-written texts in size.

Table 1 presents basic information about the data, including the total number of words in essays written by native English speakers and ChatGPT, the average number of words per essay, the total number of clauses, and the number of words per clause. The essays written by human writers are slightly shorter than those written by the robot. The human writers and ChatGPT have a similar number of clauses and a similar average number of words per essay.

The qualitative and quantitative methods are adopted in this study. The qualitative approach is used to identify the clause for analysis and types of Themes, examine the thematic progression patterns and analyze the results. The quantitative method is reflected in counting the number of types of Themes and thematic progression patterns, and in conducting independent T-tests. The thematic structure in the clause and clause complex is manually analyzed. The number of unmarked and marked Themes, and the number of the subtypes of interpersonal, topical, and textual Themes are respectively counted for comparison. The thematic progression patterns of both texts are also investigated and compared. Finally, the results are discussed and conclusions are presented.

Table 1 Basic information about the data.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Humand</td><td>ChatGPT</td></tr><tr><td>Total number of words</td><td>15,760</td><td>17,289</td></tr><tr><td>Average number of words per essay</td><td>315</td><td>346</td></tr><tr><td>Total number of clauses</td><td>1062</td><td>1068</td></tr><tr><td>Average number of words per clause</td><td>14.8</td><td>16.2</td></tr></table></body></html>

To ensure the consistency of manual analysis, the researchers who are experienced and specialize in systemic functional grammar had several discussions about the principles for identifying the clauses, the types of Theme and thematic progression patterns. Then, one of the researchers was responsible for analyzing the types of Themes and thematic progression patterns for the first time. After one week, the same researcher analyzed the texts again following the same principles. When the Themes in the texts were not easy to identify, the researchers had repeated discussions until finally they reached an agreement.

The clause rather than the T-unit is treated as the basic unit for analysis in this paper, which is defined as “any stretch of language centered around a verbal group” (Thompson, 2014: 17), and it includes the dependent and independent clauses. It is a unit in which the experiential, interpersonal and textual meanings are combined, and the choice of Theme in a clause “functions to organize and carry forward the discourse (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014: 88)”. The T-unit is frequently adopted in thematic analysis of texts (e.g., McCabe, 1999, Williams, 2009) since analyzing T-units allows the researchers to better perceive “the method of development” of a text, and the thematic structure of a dependent clause tends to be constrained by the independent clause (Fries & Francis, 1992:47). However, we believe though the thematic choice of a dependent clause may be limited, analyzing Theme in both dependent and independent clauses can help us better discern what the major and minor differences in thematic choices between AI-generated and human-written essays are and how people and the robot differ in organizing text. For example:

(12) If (textual Theme) they (topical Theme) are suddenly forced to spend more money on petrol, these people would find it a lot harder to make ends meet. (Text 4, written by the human writer)   
(13) While (textual Theme) it is true that (interpersonal Theme) higher petrol prices (topical Theme) can discourage the use of cars and reduce emissions, I believe that there are other measures that can be equally effective in addressing these problems. (Text 4, written by ChatGPT)

By analyzing Themes in dependent clauses in (12) and (13), we can find that the condition signal “if” is used in human-written text to indicate an imagined situation, and the concession signal “while” is employed in AI-written text to present known information. If the T-unit is adopted as the unit of analysis, the condition and concession signals as Themes in texts will be ignored. Our latter analysis shows there are significant differences in the use of condition and concession signals between human writers and robots.

# 4. Results and discussion

In this section, the thematic choices and thematic progression patterns between human-written and AI-generated essays will be explored. The emphasis will be put on the choices of the textual, the interpersonal, the marked topical Themes, and progression patterns to investigate how the human author and the robot organize discourse and make coherent texts.

Table 2 compares the raw numbers and proportion of topical, textual, and interpersonal Themes in human-written and AIgenerated essays. It indicates that human writers and the robot almost use the same proportion of topical Themes and textual Themes, but they differ slightly in their use of interpersonal Themes, with human writers employing more interpersonal Themes $( 4 . 2 5 \% )$ ).

To determine whether the difference between them is statistically significant, we have conducted independent-sample t-tests on the ratio of each theme type. The results show that there is no significant difference in the use of interpersonal theme $\mathbf { \tilde { t } } = 1 . 6 1 0$ , $\mathtt { p } = 0 . 1 1 1$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \small ~ \Omega ~ }$ ), topical theme $\mathbf { \tilde { t } } = - 1 . 0 5 9$ , ${ \tt p } = 0 . 2 9 2$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \small ~ \Omega ~ }$ ), and textual theme $\mathrm { \Delta t } = 0 . 1 2 2$ , $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 9 0 3$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \dot { \phantom { . } } }$ ). This demonstrates that AIgenerated texts on the surface seem to achieve human-like text in terms of how to organize the clause and the text. However, we will closely look at the subtypes of topical, interpersonal, and textual Themes to explore whether or how AI-generated and human-written texts differ from each other.

# 4.1. Textual theme

Textual Themes have cohesive function in relating the clause to its context (Eggins, 2004) or doing logical work in linking clauses together in a clause complex (Halliday, 1994). By exploring textual Themes in human-written and AI-generated texts, we can discover how human writers and the machine link clauses and construct coherent text.

Table 3 shows that textual Themes in human-written essays are mostly used to signal the relation of addition $( 2 9 . 5 2 \% )$ ), the adversative relation $( 1 8 . 2 4 \% )$ and the relation of condition $( 8 . 2 9 \% )$ ), and the Themes in AI-generated writing mainly indicate the relation of addition $( 3 4 . 7 2 \% )$ , the adversative relation $( 1 5 . 1 9 \% )$ ), and the relation of concession $( 1 1 . 1 9 \% )$ . The last category in Table 3 includes textual Themes indicating the relation of apposition (e.g. in other words, or, for example), clarification (e.g. in some cases, specifically), manner (e.g. similarly, likewise), result (consequently, as a result), temporality (e.g. meanwhile, when, whenever), etc. Due to limited space, they are not further discussed in this paper.

Table 2 An overview of Theme types in human-written and ChatGPT-generated essays.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Theme Type</td><td>Human</td><td></td><td>ChatGPT</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Topical Theme</td><td>1062</td><td>(59.46%)</td><td>1068</td><td>(60.65%)</td></tr><tr><td>Textual Theme</td><td>603</td><td>(33.76%)</td><td> 599</td><td>(34.01%)</td></tr><tr><td>Interpersonal Theme</td><td>121</td><td>(6.77%)</td><td>94</td><td>(5.34%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1786</td><td>(100%)</td><td>1761</td><td>(100%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

To determine whether the difference between the use of subtypes of textual Theme is statistically significant, T-tests are conducted and they reveal that there is no significant difference in the use of addition signals $\mathrm { ( t = - 1 } . 6 5 8$ , $\mathtt { p } = 0 . 1 0 1$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \dot { \phantom { . } } }$ and adversative signals $\mathrm { \Delta t } = 1 . 3 8 1$ , ${ \bf p } = { \bf 0 . 1 7 0 }$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \small ~ \Omega ~ }$ ), but there are significant differences in the use of concession signals $( \mathrm { t } = - 2 . 5 9 2$ , ${ \tt p } = 0 . 0 1 1 <$ 0.05, $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 $ ) and condition signals $\mathbf { \tilde { t } } = 4 . 2 4 9$ , $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 0 0 < 0 . 0 5$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 $ ). This means that AI-generated writing and human-written texts differ in the use of some subtypes of textual Themes.

Table 4 indicates that the conjunction “and” is the most frequent textual Theme in human-written and AI-generated essays, ac counting for $2 1 . 7 2 \%$ and $2 3 . 0 4 \%$ of the total textual Themes, which is in accordance with the findings of Wang and Ma (2018), Wei (2016), Jiang and Niu (2022), Chang and Lee (2019). The second frequent textual Theme in human-written texts is the conjunction “but”, which is also consistent with the findings of Wang and Ma (2018), Chang and Lee (2019), Jiang and Niu (2022), Desaire et al. (2023). The second most frequent textual Theme in AI-generated essays is the conjunction “while”, which is not in line with the previous findings mentioned above.

In AI-generated writing, textual Themes are mostly used to indicate the relation of addition, accounting for $3 4 . 7 2 \%$ of the total Themes, and in the top ten textual Themes, there are four addition signals including “and”, “additionally”, “furthermore”, “in addi tion”. This means that at the level of clause complex, the machine tends to extend the meaning of another clause by adding new information, so paratactic extension signaled by the conjunction “and” occurs frequently in the texts. At the level of discourse, the robot favors the use of conjunctive adjuncts of addition “additionally”, “furthermore” and “in addition” to add information to the previous text.

There are two main reasons for the frequent occurrence of the four addition signals “and”, “additionally”, “furthermore”, “in addition” as textual Themes in ChatGPT essays. For one thing, the machine prefers to rely on clause-initial conjunctive adjuncts of addition to extend the clause to the previous text, while in human-written texts, the human writers use a variety of expressions to add information to the previous discourse, as can be seen in the following two pairs:

(14a) One of the main problems … is that when plastic degrades, it releases tiny particles which eventually get washed into the water supply … Another problem is that animals may mistake plastic items for food. (Text 1 of human-written essays)   
(14b) One of the main issues with plastic is that it takes hundreds of years to decompose … Additionally(textual Theme), plastic pollution can affect the quality of soil and water … (Text 1 of ChatGPT-generated essays) (15a) The main problem, I feel, is that it draws children into the criminal justice system unnecessarily … Curfews also discriminate against low-income households. (Text 12 of human-written essays)   
(15b) On the other hand, curfews can also be viewed as an infringement of individual freedom … Additionally (textual Theme), curfews can be difficult to enforce … (Text 12 of ChatGPT-generated essays)

In (14b) and (15b), the robot uses the same addition signal “additionally” to add information to the previous text, but in (14a) and (15a), the human writer uses the expression “another problem” and the signal word “also” to extend the meaning.

For another, the machine sometimes misuses the addition signals to relate the clause to the preceding text so as to pile up evidence for the opinion to be defended. As indicated in the following two paragraphs, the addition signals “moreover” and “furthermore” are not appropriately adopted. The clause complex after the textual Theme “moreover” or “furthermore” elaborates on the previous clause complex. In other words, the relationship between the clause complex and the previous texts is elaboration instead of extension. The clause complex does not extend the meaning of the previous text by adding completely new information, but rather restates the meaning of that.

(16) While there may be some short-term trade-offs, such as investing in environmentally-friendly technologies and practices, in the long run, a clean environment can lead to a more sustainable and prosperous economy. Moreover (textual Theme), as climate change and environmental degradation become more pressing issues, it is becoming increasingly clear that a healthy environment is necessary for economic growth and social well-being. (Text 40 of ChatGPT-generated essays)

Table 3 Major subtypes of textual Theme in essays.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Textual Theme</td><td>Human</td><td>Frequency</td><td>ChatGPT</td><td>Frequency</td></tr><tr><td>Addition</td><td>178</td><td>(29.52%)</td><td>208</td><td>(34.72%)</td></tr><tr><td>Adversative</td><td>110</td><td>(18.24%)</td><td>91</td><td>(15.19%)</td></tr><tr><td>Concession</td><td>41</td><td>(6.80%)</td><td>67</td><td>(11.19%)</td></tr><tr><td> Reason</td><td>38</td><td>(6.30%)</td><td>35</td><td>(5.84%)</td></tr><tr><td>Condition</td><td>50</td><td>(8.29%)</td><td>11</td><td>(1.84%)</td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>186</td><td>(30.85%)</td><td>187</td><td>(31.22%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Top 10 textual Themes in human-written and ChatGPT-generated essays.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="4">Human</td><td colspan="4">ChatGPT</td></tr><tr><td>Rank</td><td>Types</td><td colspan="2">Frequency</td><td>Rank</td><td>Types</td><td colspan="2">Frequency</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>And</td><td>131</td><td>(21.72%)</td><td>1</td><td>And</td><td>138</td><td>(23.04%)</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>But</td><td>66</td><td>(10.95%)</td><td>2</td><td>While</td><td>85</td><td>(14.19%)</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>If</td><td>49</td><td>(8.13%)</td><td>3</td><td>As</td><td>35</td><td>(5.84%)</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>However</td><td>30</td><td>(4.98%)</td><td>4</td><td>However</td><td>34</td><td>(5.68%)</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>So</td><td>28</td><td>(4.64%)</td><td>5</td><td>Additionally</td><td>32</td><td>(5.34%)</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>in conclusion</td><td>23</td><td>(3.81%)</td><td>6</td><td>for example</td><td>32</td><td>(5.34%)</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>While</td><td>23</td><td>(3.81%)</td><td>7</td><td>Furthermore</td><td>26</td><td>(4.34%)</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>Because</td><td>22</td><td>(3.65%)</td><td>8</td><td>When</td><td>17</td><td>(2.84%)</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>When</td><td>20</td><td>(3.32%)</td><td>9</td><td>But</td><td>15</td><td>(2.50%)</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>for example</td><td>19</td><td>(3.15%)</td><td>10</td><td>in addition</td><td>14</td><td>(2.34%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

(17) One of the primary reasons for the growth in travel is the increased accessibility of transportation. With the development of lowcost airlines and the expansion of air travel networks, it is now easier and more affordable than ever to visit new destinations. Furthermore (textual Theme), technological advancements have made it easier to plan and book travel, allowing travelers to quickly and easily find the best deals on flights, accommodations, and activities. (Text 6 of ChatGPT-generated essays)

In (16) and (17), the conjunctive adjuncts “moreover” and “furthermore” are misused to indicate the relation of elaboration.

Besides the addition signals, ChatGPT writing also frequently employs conjunctions to indicate the relation of concession, and the conjunction “while” is the second most frequent textual Theme $( 1 4 . 1 9 \% )$ , compared with the conjunction “but” as the second frequent marker in human-written essays. One of the reasons for the high proportion of concession signals in AI-generated texts is that the machine tends to use the concessive clause introduced by “while” to reiterate or simply repeat information that has been stated earlier, which results in redundancy in writing. As pointed out by Thompson et al (2007: 286), the concessive clause may be used as a reit eration of the main topic of the paragraph. However, the machine overuses it to refer back to the previous idea. For example:

(18) Increasing the price of petrol is often touted as a solution to the growing problems of traffic and pollution. While(textual) it is true that higher petrol prices can discourage the use of cars and reduce emissions, I believe that there are other measures that can be equally effective in addressing these problems … While (textual) higher petrol prices can discourage the use of cars, it is possible that people may simply switch to other forms of transportation that are equally polluting … (Text 4 of ChatGPTgenerated essays)

In (18), the two concessive clauses introduced by “while” repeat the idea discussed in the previous sentences, which presents a redundant writing pattern.

Another reason is that the machine repeatedly concedes the clause introduced by “while” as the less important information, and the contrasting more important idea is presented in the main clause. As mentioned before, the textual Theme “but” is often the second or third most frequent textual Theme in native speakers’ essays as found in Wei (2016) and Chang and Lee (2019), and is also the second most frequent textual Theme in the 50 human-written essays. In human-written essays, the paratactic maker “but” is frequently used to introduce an idea of greater significance, which makes it the second most frequent textual Theme. However, in machine writing, the paratactic marker “but” appears much less frequently $( 2 . 5 \% )$ . Instead, the hypotactic marker “while” is frequently used to concede an idea of less importance, and the more important idea is presented in the main clause. Compared with the paratactic clause complex introduced by “but”, the clause complex indicated by “while” may demand more effort from the reader to process since dependency relations require “more effort by readers to interpret than parataxis” (Eggins, 2004: 338), as illustrated in the following two concluding paragraphs.

(19) In conclusion, while (textual Theme) being self-employed can offer significant advantages, such as flexibility and the potential for higher earnings, it also comes with many challenges, including a lack of job security, financial stress, and loneliness. (Text 10 of ChatGPT-generated essays)   
(20) In short, self-employment isn’t for everyone. There are clear drawbacks related to money and time, but (Textual Theme) for many people, the attraction of greater success and satisfaction is worth the risk. (Text 10 of human-written essays)

Another interesting phenomenon is that condition signals as textual Themes are much more frequently used in human-written essays than ChatGPT-generated essays, and there is a statistically significant difference between the two. In the former, there are 50 conditional clauses in 50 essays, while in the latter there are only 11 conditional clauses in 50 essays. In addition, in human-written essays, there are instances of conditional clauses indicating impossible situations, while in AI-generated essays this seldom appears. Conditional clauses deal with “imagined situations: some are possible, some are unlikely, some are impossible” (Carter & McCarthy, 2006) and the possible result of these situations. The low proportion of conditional clauses in AI-generated texts may be attributed to the fact that compared with human writers, the machine is less likely to imagine possible or impossible situations. For instance：

(21) There would be less incentive to develop intellectual property like new technologies and new drugs if (textual Theme) they were instantly shared for everyone to duplicate. (Text 18 of human-written essays)   
(22) If(textual Theme) we are in an unsatisfactory job (imagined situation), we may need to accept that we cannot change the job itself … (possible result). (Text 20 of ChatGPT-generated essays)

In (21), the textual Theme of the clause “if”, introduces a situation that is unlikely to happen. In (22) the textual Theme “if” presents a possible situation, and the main clause indicates the possible result of that situation.

# 4.2. Interpersonal theme

Interpersonal Themes are used to indicate the writer’s judgment of the proposition. Halliday (1994: 50) points out that it’s natural to make one’s own angle on the matter of the point of departure, “I’ll tell you what I think”. They are typically associated with texts that aim to persuade readers or argue a case (Thompson, 2014:177). They signal the writer’s awareness of the interaction with the reader and function as interactive thematic threads running through the text (Thompson, 2007: 690).

As shown in Table 2, interpersonal Themes are identified both in human-written and AI-generated essays, accounting for $6 . 7 7 \%$ and $5 . 3 4 \%$ of the total themes respectively. This means that the machine, similar to human writers, is able to thematize its evaluation of the message and is aware of the interaction with the reader.

Table 5 indicates that in human-written essays, “implicit subjective” interpersonal Themes realized by modal adjuncts and modal verbal operators are the most frequent, accounting for $3 8 . 0 2 \%$ of the total Themes. This is consistent with the previous findings of Dontcheva-Navratilova et al. (2020) in which modal adjuncts are the most frequent interpersonal Theme $( 6 1 . 5 \% )$ in native speakers’ essays. This can be explained by the fact that modal adjuncts such as “certainly, perhaps” are congruent or typical ways of expressing the writer’s modal evaluation (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014), and therefore are frequently adopted. “Explicit objective” and “explicit subjective” interpersonal Themes are also frequent in human-written essays, which are metaphorical ways of expressing the writer’s evaluation, either highlighting subjectivity or creating objectivity. By contrast, in AI-generated essays, the most frequent interpersonal Themes are expressions of “explicit objective” modal evaluation, the second most frequent ones are realizations of “explicit-implicit subjective” assessment, and the least frequent interpersonal Themes are modal adjuncts, which are contradictory to the previous findings in Dontcheva-Navratilova et al. (2020) and Chang and Lee (2019).

In terms of the use of the “explicit subjective” and “explicit objective” interpersonal Themes between the human writers and AI, there are no statistically significant differences between them $\mathrm { \Delta } ( \mathrm { t } = 1 . 3 8 6$ , ${ \tt p } = 0 . 1 6 9$ , $\mathbf { d f } = 9 8$ ; $\mathrm { t } = - 1 . 0 0 4$ , ${ \tt p } = 0 . 3 1 8$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \dot { \phantom { . } } }$ ). However, there is a statistically significant difference in the use of “implicit subjective” interpersonal Themes between human writers and AI $\left( \mathbf { t } = \right.$ 5.070, $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 0 0 < 0 . 0 5$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \small ~ \Omega ~ }$ ); the machine employs much fewer“implicit subjective” Themes than human writers do. There is also a statistically significant difference in the use of “explicit-implicit subjective” interpersonal Themes between them $( \mathrm { t } = - 3 . 7 6 7$ , $\boldsymbol { \mathbf { p } } =$ $0 . 0 0 0 < 0 . 0 5$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \small ~ \Omega ~ }$ ); the machine instead adopts much more “explicit-implicit subjective” expressions than human writers do.

Table 6 presents the use of interpersonal Themes in human and AI-written essays. In the former, the most frequent interpersonal Theme is the “explicit subjective” realization “I feel that/I do feel that”, which occurs 14 times, and the second most frequent one is the “implicit subjective” realization “perhaps”. In the latter, the most favored interpersonal Theme is the “explicit objective” realization “it’s important to/for/that …”, and the second frequent one is the “explicit-implicit subjective” realization “in my/our opinion”.

In AI-generated texts, more than half of interpersonal Themes $( 5 6 . 3 8 \% )$ indicate the machine’s explicitly objective modal assessment, and the most frequent interpersonal Theme is “it’s important to/for/that …”, which occurs 38 times. This means that the machine tends to start the message with its explicitly objective comment on the proposition, pretending that the judgment does not come from the machine itself but has some objective status. The interpersonal Themes “it’s important to/for/that …, it is possible to/ for/that …, or it is true that …” emphasize objectivity and hide the source of assessment. For example:

(23) However, it is important that (interpersonal Theme) we (topical Theme) carefully consider the potential downsides of this technology … (Text 41 of ChatGPT-generated essays)

In (23), the starting point of the clause in the concluding paragraph is the machine’s explicitly objective opinion on the proposition.

In AI-generated Texts, the “explicit-implicit subjective” realizations constitute the second major type of interpersonal Themes, and the second most frequent interpersonal Theme is “in my/our opinion”. These expressions lie halfway between explicit and implicit as the modality is expressed by a prepositional phrase rather than by a modal clause or a modal verb or adjunct. Instead of using the “explicit subjective” realizations “I feel that/I think that …” to thematize its explicitly subjective assessment of the proposition or the “implicit subjective” realizations “personally, certainly” to start the message, the machine thematizes its “explicit-implicit subjective” opinion on the matter. The frequent occurrence of this expression can be attributed to the prompts, which may trigger different interpersonal strategies in response (Herriman, 2011). In the current study, the prompts seek the writers’ opinion on a given topic, for example: What is your opinion about this? Discuss both these views and give your own opinion. The “explicit-implicit subjective” expression “in my opinion” occurs exclusively when the machine is prompted to voice its opinion on a controversial topic, and then it repeatedly uses the expression “in my/our opinion” to respond to the prompts. For example:

Table 5 Types of interpersonal theme.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Types of Realizations</td><td>Human</td><td>Frequency</td><td>ChatGPT</td><td>Frequency</td></tr><tr><td>Explicit subjective</td><td>29</td><td>(23.97%)</td><td>18</td><td>(19.15%)</td></tr><tr><td>Explicit objective</td><td>42</td><td>(34.71%)</td><td>53</td><td>(56.38%)</td></tr><tr><td>Explicit-implicit subjective</td><td>4</td><td>(3.31%)</td><td>20</td><td>(21.28%)</td></tr><tr><td>Implicit subjective</td><td>46</td><td>(38.02%)</td><td>3</td><td>(3.19%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>121</td><td>(100%)</td><td>94</td><td>(100%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 The use of interpersonal Themes in human-written and ChatGPT-generated essays.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Rank</td><td>Human</td><td>Frequency</td><td>Rank</td><td>ChatGPT</td><td>Frequency</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>I (do)feel that</td><td>14 (11.57%)</td><td>1</td><td>It&#x27;s important to/that/for</td><td>38 (40.43%)</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Perhaps</td><td>10 (8.26%)</td><td>2</td><td>In my/our opinion</td><td>20 (21.28%)</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>It&#x27;s important that/to</td><td>6 (4.96%)</td><td>3</td><td>I believe that</td><td>14 (14.89%)</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Of course</td><td>6 (4.96%)</td><td>4</td><td>it is true that</td><td>6 (6.38%)</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Indeed</td><td>5 (4.13%)</td><td>5</td><td> it is possible to/that</td><td>3 (3.19%)</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td> Personally</td><td>5 (4.13%)</td><td>6</td><td>It is a well-known fact that.</td><td>2 (2.13%)</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>it is true that</td><td>4 (3.31%)</td><td>6</td><td>I (do/do not) think</td><td>2 (2.13%)</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td> In my opinion</td><td>4 (3.31%)</td><td>7</td><td>It is often said that</td><td>1 (1.06%)</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>I think that</td><td>4 (3.31%)</td><td>7</td><td>it is possible for</td><td>1 (1.06%)</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>It&#x27;s possible to/for</td><td>3 (2.48%)</td><td>7</td><td>it is becoming increasingly clear</td><td>1 (1.06%)</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>it is understandable that</td><td>3 (2.48%)</td><td>7</td><td>it is likely that</td><td>1 (1.06%)</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>in fact</td><td>3 (2.48%)</td><td>7</td><td>I feel that</td><td>1 (1.06%)</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>Certainly</td><td>3 (2.48%)</td><td>7</td><td>I agree that</td><td>1 (1.06%)</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>Is</td><td>3 (2.48%)</td><td>7</td><td> Personally</td><td>1 (1.06%)</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>I (do not) believe that</td><td>3 (2.48%)</td><td>7</td><td>In fact</td><td>1 (1.06%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>7</td><td>Unfortunately</td><td>1 (1.06%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

(24) In some areas of the US, a ‘curfew’ is imposed, in which teenagers are not allowed to be out of doors after a particular time at night unless they are accompanied by an adult. What is your opinion about this?

In my opinion(interpersonal Theme), the imposition of curfews for teenagers is not an effective solution to the problem of youth crime. (Text 12 of ChatGPT-generated essays).

As in (24), the machine responds to the prompts and adopts the expression “in my opinion” to present its viewpoints.

Finally, in AI-generated essays, the machine seldom adopts modal adjuncts or modal verbal operators as interpersonal Themes; there are only three modal adjuncts $( 3 . 1 9 \% )$ and no modal verbal operators as interpersonal Themes. The modal adjuncts such as “perhaps, certainly” are usually used to thematize the writer’s subjective viewpoint on the proposition, which is the congruent and typical realization of the writer’s modal assessment, and when the finite modal operators such as “should, is” function as the interpersonal Theme, the interrogative mood is adopted, which creates a ‘rhetorical’ interactive context and reduces the distance between reader and writer (Eggins, 2004). The lack of modal verbal operators and modal adjuncts as the Theme may demonstrate the machine’s lack of awareness of interaction with the reader and its avoidance of exhibiting its viewpoints in a typical or congruent way. For example:

(25) Perhaps (interpersonal Theme) this is to do with people’s need for escapism. (Text 22 of human-written essays) (26) Should (interpersonal Theme) we simply accept such situations, or is (interpersonal) it better to strive to overcome these in order to make our lives better? (Text 20 of human-written essays)

In (25), the use of the modal adjunct “perhaps” indicates the human writer’s subjective assessment of the proposition. In (26), the use of the verbal operators “should, is” as the interpersonal Themes creates a dialogue with the readers.

# 4.3. Topical Themes: unmarked and marked

Topical Themes indicate the experiential content of the clause, and signal the actual starting point of the message (Thompson, 2014). They can be unmarked or marked. They help to signal “the maintenance or progression of ‘what the text is about’ at that point” (Thompson, 2014: 171).

Table 7 indicates that in human-written essays, unmarked themes and marked themes account for $9 1 . 2 4 \%$ and $8 . 7 6 \%$ of the total

Table 7 Distribution of marked and unmarked Themes in essays.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Types of Topical Themes</td><td>Human</td><td>Frequency</td><td>ChatGPT</td><td>Frequency</td></tr><tr><td>Unmarked</td><td>969</td><td>91.24%</td><td>1010</td><td>94.57%</td></tr><tr><td> Marked</td><td>93</td><td>8.76%</td><td>58</td><td>5.43%</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1062</td><td>100%</td><td>1068</td><td>100%</td></tr></table></body></html>

Themes respectively; however, in ChatGPT-generated writing, unmarked and marked themes occupy $9 4 . 5 7 \%$ and $5 . 4 3 \%$ . There is no significant difference in the use of unmarked Themes between the two types of essays $\mathrm { \Delta } ( \mathrm { t } = - 1 . 0 5 9$ , ${ \tt p } = 0 . 2 9 2$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \small ~ \cdot ~ }$ ), but statistically significant differences can be identified in the use of marked Themes between human-written and ChatGPT-generated essays $\left( \mathbf { t } = \right.$ 2.353, $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 2 1 < 0 . 0 5$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \dot { \mathrm { \Omega } } }$ ). This is consistent with the findings of Jiang and Niu (2022), in which marked Themes occur less in machine translated texts than those in human-translated texts.

As shown in Table 7, unmarked Themes predominate in both types of essays. They are the “most typical/usual” choice, and with all things being equal, a marked Theme will be chosen (Eggins, 2004). For example:

(27) Plastic use (unmarked, topical Theme) has increased dramatically over the last 50 years, replacing more traditional packaging such as glass bottles, tins and paper bags. (Text 1 of human-written essays)   
(28) Plastic pollution (unmarked, topical Theme) is a serious environmental issue that affects all living beings, including humans, wildlife, and aquatic life. (Text 1 of ChatGPT-generated essays.)

In (27) and (28), the topical Themes plastic use and plastic pollution are the Subjects of the clauses and also natural starting points of the messages.

Marked themes either “express some kind of setting for the clause or express a feature of contrast” (Halliday, 1994: 48). There must be good reasons to thematize a complement or adjunct. The use of the marked Theme indicates “a careful written mode, in which the writer has planned the rhetorical development of the text to allow the foregrounding of circumstantial information … (that) encode familiar (given) information” (Eggins, 2004). In addition, the option of marked Themes partly affords a smoother link to the preceding text (Baker, 2000). In ChatGPT-generated essays, marked themes appear significantly less frequently $\left( 5 . 4 3 \% \right)$ . The less frequent occurrence of marked Themes in AI-generated texts demonstrates that compared with human writers, the machine may be less likely to carefully plan the development of the text so as to foreground the setting, provide contrast, or construct coherent text. For example:

(29) Raising petrol prices is an overly simplistic solution to a rather complicated situation. It may have worked 30 years ago, but today (marked topical Theme) many people live some distance from their workplace. (Text 4 of human-written Essays)   
(30) The work of composers as diverse as Mozart, Shostakovich and Gershwin is popular the world over, and to these instrumental compositions (marked Theme) you could also add the music of famous popular music acts such as Abba and The Beatles. (Text 14 of human-written Essays)   
(31) In recent years (marked topical Theme), technology has had a profound impact on the way people interact with each other. (Text 5 of ChatGPT-generated essays)

In (29), the marked Theme today is used to form a contrast with time encoded in the previous clause. In (30), the marked theme realized by the preposition phrase to these instrumental compositions, indicating the human writer’s deliberate and unusual choice, affords a smooth link to the preceding text. In (31), the marked Theme in recent years in AI-generated texts is used to present the setting for the message.

Marked Themes are further analyzed to see what types of adjuncts are adopted as the marked Theme. Table 8 shows the types of marked Themes in human and ChatGPT essays. In human-written essays, marked Themes are mostly adopted to indicate time $( 4 0 . 8 6 \% )$ , space $( 1 6 . 1 3 \% )$ , manner $( 1 2 . 9 0 \% )$ , and contingency $( 1 2 . 9 0 \% )$ . This is consistent with the previous findings of marked Themes in native speakers’ essays (Wei, 2016). In ChatGPT-generated essays, marked Themes are primarily used to refer to space $( 3 9 . 6 6 \% )$ , manner $( 2 2 . 4 1 \% )$ , time $( 1 7 . 2 4 \% )$ and angle $( 1 0 . 3 4 \% )$ . T-tests are performed to see whether the distribution of the types of adjuncts is significantly different between the two types of essays, and the results show that there is no statistically significant dif ference between the use of spatial $( \mathrm { t } = - 1 . 0 5 , \mathrm { p } = 0 . 2 9 6 , \mathrm { d f } = 9 8 )$ , manner $( \mathrm { t } = - 0 . 1 6 8 , \mathrm { p } = 0 . 8 6 7 , \mathrm { d f } = 9 8 )$ , contingency $( \mathrm { t } = 1 . 7 4 9 , \mathrm { p } =$ $0 . 0 8 5 , \mathrm { d f } = 9 8 )$ and angle adjuncts $( \mathrm { t } = - 0 . 4 5 5 , \mathrm { p } = 0 . 6 5 , \mathrm { d f } = 9 8 )$ ), but the significant difference can be found in the use of temporal adjuncts $( \mathrm { t } = 3 . 0 0 4 $ , $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 0 4 < 0 . 0 5$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \dot { \mathrm { \Omega } } }$ ).

The scarce use of temporal adjuncts as marked Themes in AI-generated texts may suggest that the machine is less likely to fore ground the time of the clause and set the events in a specific timeline. In AI-generated essays, temporal adjuncts are mostly used to indicate a length of time such as “in recent years” or “during this time”, rather than a specific time. However, in human-written essays, temporal adjuncts are frequently adopted as the marked Theme to present events at a particular time, and to form a contrastive

Table 8 Marked Themes in human and ChatGPT essays.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Types of marked Themes</td><td>Human</td><td>Frequency</td><td>ChatGPT</td><td>Frequency</td></tr><tr><td>Temporal</td><td>38</td><td>(40.86%)</td><td>10</td><td>(17.24%)</td></tr><tr><td>Spatial</td><td>15</td><td>(16.13%)</td><td>23</td><td>(39.66%)</td></tr><tr><td>Manner</td><td>12</td><td>(12.90%)</td><td>13</td><td>(22.41%)</td></tr><tr><td>Contingency</td><td>12</td><td>(12.90%)</td><td>3</td><td>(5.17%)</td></tr><tr><td>Cause</td><td>7</td><td>(7.53%)</td><td>0</td><td>(0.00%)</td></tr><tr><td>Angle</td><td>4</td><td>(4.30%)</td><td>6</td><td>(10.34%)</td></tr><tr><td>Accompaniment</td><td>3</td><td>(3.23%)</td><td>3</td><td>(5.17%)</td></tr><tr><td> Matter</td><td>2.</td><td>(2.15%)</td><td>0</td><td>(0.00%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>93</td><td>(100%)</td><td>58</td><td>(100%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

situation.

(32) One of the major impacts of technology (unmarked, topical) is that it has enabled us to easily stay in touch with friends and family on the other side of the world. Thirty years ago(marked topical Theme), if you wanted to communicate with a friend or relative, you would either have written a letter (which could have taken weeks to arrive) or made an expensive international phone call. Today (marked topical Theme), we can simply send a text message on WhatsApp or call them on Zoom. (Text 5 of human-written Essays)   
(33) During this time (marked topical Theme), plastic can harm wildlife and ecosystems in a variety of ways. (Text 1 of ChatGPTgenerated essays)

In (32), the two marked Themes “thirty years ago” and “today” are used to indicate specific time and form a contrasting situation. In (33) the marked Theme “during this time” in an AI-generated essay is used to indicate a period of time.

Marked Themes realized by spatial adjuncts occur the most frequently in AI-generated writing, and this is because the spatial adjunct “in this essay”, referring to location in discourse processes, is adopted 12 times. The spatial adjunct “in this essay” does not refer to the real-world entity, but is oriented to the discourse entity (Gosden, 1992). The machine responds to the essay questions that require the writers to write an essay to discuss their opinion on a given topic, and thematizes “in this essay”.

(34) In this essay (marked topical Theme), I will outline my stance on the issue and provide reasons for my opinion. (Text 12 of ChatGPT-generated essays)

As indicated by (34), the spatial adjunct “in my essay” is used by the machine to respond to the essay questions.

# 4.4. Thematic progression patterns

An important contribution that Theme makes to the cohesion and coherence of a text has to do with thematic progression patterns. Constant patterns create cohesion by reiterating the same element as the Theme; linear patterns achieve cohesion in the text by “building on newly introduced information” (Eggins, 2004: 325).

Table 9 presents thematic progression patterns in human-written and AI-generated texts. In human-written essays, the most frequent pattern is the linear pattern, which accounts for $4 3 . 2 8 \%$ . This is consistent with the findings of Fries (1981), Crompton (2004), Jalilifar, (2009), Ebrahimi and Khedri (2011), Ho (2011), and Herriman (2011). Linear pattern is followed by constant and unmo tivated patterns, accounting for $2 4 . 9 0 \%$ and $2 9 . 0 5 \%$ . By contrast, the most often used pattern in AI-generated texts is the constant pattern $( 3 9 . 3 9 \% )$ . This is in line with the finding of Jiang and Niu, (2022) in which the constant pattern is the most frequent pattern in machine-translated texts. The second most frequent pattern is unmotivated pattern $( 3 5 . 5 6 \% )$ ). The significance tests show that in human-written and AI-generated texts there are significant differences between the use of constant pattern $\mathrm { ( t = 4 . 7 5 4 }$ , $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 0 0 <$ 0.01, $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \dot { \mathrm { \Omega } } }$ ), linear pattern $( \mathrm { t } = - 7 . 7 0 1$ , $\mathsf { p } = 0 . 0 0 0 < 0 . 0 1$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \dot { \mathrm { \Omega } } }$ ), derived pattern $\mathbf { \Phi } ( \mathbf { t } = 1 . 9 9 9$ ， $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 4 9 < 0 . 0 5$ , $\mathrm { d } \mathrm { f } = 9 8 \mathrm { \dot { \phantom { . } } }$ ), and unmotivated pattern $( \mathrm { t } = - 2 . 3 2 6$ , $\mathbf { p } = 0 . 0 2 2 < 0 . 0 5$ , $\mathrm { d f } = 9 8 $ ).

The results suggest that human-written texts are more coherent and dynamic than AI-generated texts. In human-written texts, the predominant use of the linear pattern better contributes to cohesion (Chang, 2023) since it allows writers to pick up the ideas developed in the preceding clause and further develop it. The linear pattern providing connections between events is more dynamic (McCabe, 1999: 203) and creates a “dynamic” style of writing (Enkvist, 1973). In addition, it “gives the text a sense of cumulative development (Eggins, 2004: 325), which may be absent in the constant pattern. The text thus moves smoothly from one idea to the next, which facilitates the reader’s comprehension of the text. The linear pattern used in human-written texts is illustrated as follows:

(35) One of the main problems – one that has only recently been discovered – is that when plastic degrades, it releases tiny particles which eventually get washed into the water supply. These particles can be toxic if ingested in large enough quantities, and may even be carcinogenic. Another problem is that animals may mistake plastic items for food. For example, seagulls often mistake plastic bags for jellyfish, and try to eat them, causing them to choke and die. (Text 1 of human-written essays)

In the paragraph above, the Theme of the second clause “these particles” relates back to part of the Rheme of the preceding clause “tiny particles”, and the Theme of the last clause “seagulls” refers back to the Rheme in the preceding clause. Therefore, the text is developed smoothly.

Table 9 Thematic progression patterns in human-written and AI-generated texts.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Type</td><td>Human</td><td>Frequency</td><td>ChatGPT</td><td>Frequency</td></tr><tr><td>Constant (gapped constant)</td><td>252 (117)</td><td>24.90% (11.56%)</td><td>401 (275)</td><td>39.39% (27.01%)</td></tr><tr><td>Linear (gapped linear)</td><td>438 (158)</td><td>43.28% (15.61%)</td><td>244 (79)</td><td>23.97% (7.76%)</td></tr><tr><td>Derived</td><td>28</td><td>2.76%</td><td>11</td><td>1.08%</td></tr><tr><td>Unmotivated</td><td>294</td><td>29.05%</td><td>362</td><td>35.56%</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1012</td><td></td><td>1018</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

In human-written texts, unmotivated patterns often occur as the first Theme in the body paragraphs of the text, signaling the boundaries of sections in the text. They may also function as metatextual Themes (McCabe, 1999), which are Themes referring to the text itself such as this essay and this figure, or grammatical Themes (McCabe, 1999) such as dummy subjects there and it. For example:

(36) So what can be done about this? One of the obvious solutions is to make plastic packaging more expensive in order to encourage people to re-use plastic or avoid it altogether. (Text 1 of human-written essays) (37) However, there is a downside to this since drivers would lose their jobs. (Text 3 of human-written essays) (38) This essay will consider the problems caused by lack of sleep, along with some solutions. (Text 2 of human-written texts)

In (36), the unmotivated Theme occurs as the first Theme in the body paragraph of the text. In (37), the unmotivated Theme “there is” indicates an existential process, and in (38), the unmotivated Theme “this essay” refers to the text itself.

However, in AI-generated Texts, the most frequent thematic progression pattern is the constant pattern. McCabe (1999: 203) points out that the constant thematic progression pattern centers on a single item, and is more static in nature. The constant pattern creates a “static” style of writing (Enkvist, 1973), making the text read as incoherent as a list (Ebrahimi & Khedri, 2011). Chang (2023) also argues that the overuse of constant patterns often prevents a text from developing. In the following paragraph, there are seven clauses and six constant patterns. The repetitive use of the same Theme prevents the text from development and makes the text redundant and simplistic like a list of ideas.

(39) On the other hand, alternative medicine and treatments can also be dangerous and ineffective. Many alternative therapies are not scientifically tested, and some have been found to be fraudulent. For example, some alternative therapies claim to cure cancer or other serious diseases, but there is no evidence to support these claims. In addition, alternative medicine and treatments can sometimes be harmful, as they may interact with other medications or have adverse side effects. (Text 50 of ChatGPT-generated essays)

In (39), the machine repeatedly uses the same Theme “alternative medicine and treatments”, and the ideas encoded in the Rheme of the clauses are repetitive, such as “dangerous, ineffective, dangerous, adverse side effects”.

Apart from the constant pattern, unmotivated patterns are also frequent in AI-generated texts. Like those in human-written texts, unmotivated patterns in AI-generated texts may occur as the first Theme in body paragraphs, or function as grammatical or metatextual Themes. However, unmotivated patterns also occur often because the machine presents redundant information and thus fails to achieve coherence.

(40) Another challenge is the lack of affordable housing. With the increasing prices of real estate, many young people are unable to find affordable housing. (Text 48 of ChatGPT-generated essays)

In (40), the Theme in the second clause with the increasing prices of real estate indicates new information and does not relate to the preceding clause, contributing to the unmotivated thematic progression pattern, and the Rheme in this clause mainly repeats information presented in the preceding clause.

# 5. Conclusions and implications

This paper has compared thematic choices and thematic progression patterns in human-written and AI-generated texts. The analysis of the textual Theme reveals that the machine tends to use clause-initial conjunctive adjuncts of addition to extend the clause to the previous text and the concessive signals to reiterate information that has been stated earlier and employ fewer condition signals as the textual Theme. In terms of interpersonal Themes, the machine seldom adopts modal verbal operators and modal adjuncts as the interpersonal Themes, which may suggest that it tends not to express its viewpoints in a typical or congruent way. As for topical Themes, marked themes appear significantly less frequently in ChatGPT-generated essays, which reveals that compared with human writers, the machine may less carefully plan the development of the text. Particularly, the scarce use of temporal adjuncts as marked Themes means that the machine may be less likely to foreground the time of the clause and set the events in a specific timeline. Regarding thematic progression patterns, human-written texts seem to be more coherent and dynamic than AI-generated texts since the predominant use of the linear pattern in human-written texts better contributes to cohesion. In AI-generated texts, the frequent use of the constant pattern prevents the text from development and makes the text redundant and simplistic like a list of ideas.

Findings from the study may have important pedagogical implications for second/foreign language teaching and learning. Firstly, the comparison of human-written and AI-generated texts reveals how AI tends to organize texts and indicate its viewpoints, which may benefit foreign language teachers in identifying the dishonest use of AI writing tools at schools and universities since students may outsource their writing assignments to AI. Secondly, the findings of the study may help foreign/second language learners and teachers to realize the importance of the roles of the Theme and thematic progression patterns in texts. It is suggested that in writing courses students should be taught explicitly to place appropriate information at the beginning of the clause so as to carefully plan the development of the text and indicate their viewpoints properly. This could be done through writing assignments such as identifying or providing cohesive devices in essays or joining sentences or paragraphs into texts. It is also important to teach student to organize the texts by using appropriate thematic progression patterns, and to avoid the overuse of the same Theme in their writing. The constant pattern occurs most frequently in AI-generated texts and is used more frequently than the linear pattern in students’ writing (Jalilifar,

2010). Students should realize that the predominant use of the constant pattern in their writing may result in simplistic and redundant texts.

The present study extends the application of SFL to a new type of text, AI-generated texts, and once again proves that it is a sound framework that is appropriate for text analysis. The study may also help to improve the quality of AI-generated texts at the textual level, and benefit the development of AI writing tools in that the analysis brings attention on the organization of coherent texts.

The limitations of this study may be that only thematic choices and thematic progression patterns are considered in this study. In future studies, more cohesive devices and interpersonal resources should be discussed to further reveal differences between humanwritten and AI-generated writing. Finally, more sample essays can be selected in future studies to validate the findings.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Shu Yang: Writing – original draft. Shukun Chen: Data curation. Hailin Zhu: Methodology. Jiayi Lin: Methodology. Xi Wang: Conceptualization.

# References

Ariyaratne, S., Iyengar, K. P., Nischal, N., Babu, N. C., & Botchu, R. (2023). A comparison of ChatGPT-generated articles with human-written articles. Skeletal Radiology, 52(9), 1–4.   
Baker, M. (2000). In other words: A coursebook on translation. Beijing: Foreign Language Teaching and Research Press.   
Brainard, J. (2023). Journals take up arms against AI-written text. Science, 379(6634), 740–741. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adh2762   
Buholayka, M., Zouabi, R., & Tadinada, A. (2023). The readiness of ChatGPT to write scientific case reports independently: A comparative evaluation between human and artificial intelligence. Cureus, 15(5), Article e39386.   
Butler, C. S. (2003). Structure and function: A guide to three major structural-functional theories. Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Caffarel, A. (2006). A systemic functional grammar of French: From grammar to discourse. London: Continuum.   
Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of English: A comprehensive guide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Chang, P. (2023). Reading research genre: The impact of thematic progression. RELC Journal, 54(1), 129–148.   
Chang, P. C., & Lee, M. (2019). Exploring textual and interpersonal themes in the expository essays of college students of different linguistic backgrounds. English for Specific Purposes, 54(0), 75–90.   
Chatterjee, J., & Dethlefs, N. (2023). This new conversational AI model can be your friend, philosopher, and guide ... and even your worst enemy. Patterns, 4(1), Article 100676.   
Crompton, P. (2004). Theme in discourse: ‘Thematic progression’ and ‘method of development’ re-evaluated. Functions of Language, 11(2), 213–249.   
Daneˇs, F. (1974). Functional sentence perspective and the organization of the text. In F. Daneˇs (Ed.), Papers on functional sentence perspective (pp. 106–128). The Hague: Mouton.   
Desaire, H., Chua, A. E., Isom, M., Jarosova, R., & Hua, D. (2023). Distinguishing academic science writing from humans or ChatGPT with over 99% accuracy using off-the-shelf machine learning tools. Cell Reports Physical Science, 4(6), Article 101426.   
Dontcheva-Navratilova, O., Janˇcaˇríkov´a, R., Hůlkova, ´ I., & Schmied, J. (2020). Theme choices in Czech University students’ English-medium Master’s theses. Lingua, 243, Article 102892.   
Dubois, B. L. (1987). A reformulation of thematic progression typology. Text, 7(2), 89–116.   
Ebrahimi, S. F., & Khedri, M. (2011). Thematicity in research article abstracts: A cross-disciplinary study. Educational Quest- An International Journal of Education and Applied Social Sciences, 2(3), 287–292.   
Eggins, S. (2004). An introduction to systemic functional linguistics. Continuum. New York.   
Eke, D. O. (2023). ChatGPT and the rise of generative AI: Threat to academic integrity? Journal of Responsible Technology, 13, Article 100060.   
Else, H. (2023). Abstracts written by ChatGPT fool scientists. Nature, 613(7944), 423. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-023-00056-7   
Enkvist, N. E. (1973). “Theme dynamics” and style: An experiment. Studia Anglica Posnaniensia, 5, 127–135.   
Fries, P. H. (1981). On the status of theme in English: Arguments from discourse. Forum Linguisticum, 6, 1–38.   
Fries, P. H. (1995). Themes, methods of development and texts. In R. Hasan, & P. H. Fries (Eds.), On subject and theme: A discourse functional perspective (pp. 317–359). Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Fries, P. H., & Francis, G. (1992). Exploring theme: Problems for research. Occasional Papers in Systemic Linguistics, 6, 45–59.   
Gosden, H. (1992). Discourse functions of marked theme in scientific research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 11(3), 207–224.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1979). Modes of meaning and modes of expression: Types of grammatical structure and their determination by different semantic functions. In D. J. Allerton, E. Carney, & D. Holdcroft (Eds.), Function and context in linguistic analysis: A festschrift for william haas (pp. 196–218). London: Continuum: On Grammar. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 57-79. Reprinted in J. J. Webster (ed.). (2002.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Arnold.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar (2nd ed.). London: Arnold.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (2009). Methods – techniques – problems. In M. A. K. Halliday, & J. J. Webster (Eds.), Continuum companion to systemic functional linguistics (pp. 59–86). London: Continuum.   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2014). Halliday’s introduction to functional grammar. London: Routledge.   
Haq, Z., Naeem, H., Naeem, A., Iqbal, F., & Zaeem, D. (2023). Comparing human and artificial intelligence in writing for health journals: An exploratory study. MedRxiv Preprint. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.02.22.23286322   
Herbold, S., Hautli-Janisz, A., Heuer, U., Kikteva, Z., & Trautsch, A. (2023). A large-scale comparison of human-written versus ChatGPT-generated essays. Scientific Reports, 13(1), Article 18617.   
Herriman, J. (2011). Themes and theme progression in Swedish advanced learners’ writing in English. Nordic Journal of English Studies, 10(1), 1–28.   
Ho, V. L. (2011). Non-native argumentative writing by Vietnamese learners of English: A contrastive study. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Washington, DC: Georgetown University.   
Hosseini, M., Rasmussen, L. M., & Resnik, D. (2023). Using AI to write scholarly publications. Accountability in Research: Policies & Quality Assurance, 30(1), 1–9.   
Jalilifar, A. (2009). Thematic development in English and translated academic texts. Journal of Universal Language, 10(1), 81–111.   
Jalilifar, A. (2010). Thematization in EFL students’ composition writing and its relation to academic experience. RELC Journal, 41(1), 31–45.   
Jiang, Y., & Niu, J. (2022). How are neural machine-translated Chinese-to-English short stories constructed and cohered? An exploratory study based on theme-rheme structure. Lingua, 273, Article 03318.   
Liao, W., Liu, Z., Dai, H., Xu, S., Wu, Z., Zhang, Y., Huang, X., Zhu, D., Cai, H., Liu, T., & Li, X. (2023). Differentiating ChatGPT-Generated and Human-Written Medical Texts: Quantitative Study. JMIR Medical Education, 9, e48904.   
Liu, X. J., & Yang, X. H. (2013). Thematic progression in English–Chinese translation of argumentative classics: A quantitative study of Francis Bacon’s ‘of studies’ and its 11 Chinese translations. Perspectives: Studies in Translatology, 21(2), 272–288.   
Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2009). Ideas and new directions. In M. A. K. Halliday, & J. J. Webster (Eds.), Continuum companion to systemic functional linguistics (pp. 12–58). London: Continuum.   
McCabe, A. (1999). Theme and thematic patterns in Spanish and English history texts. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Birmingham: Aston University.   
Nature. (2022). Are your students using AI to write papers? Take Nature’s Poll. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-04375-z   
Open AI. https://openai.com/blog/new-ai-classifier-for-indicating-ai-written-text, (2023).   
Reviriego, P., Conde, J., Merino-Gomez, ´ E., Martínez, G., & Hern´andez, J. A. (2023). Playing with words: Comparing the vocabulary and lexical richness of ChatGPT and humans. arXiv:2308.07462. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.07462   
Stokel-Walker, C. (2022). AI bot ChatGPT writes smart essays — should professors worry? Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-04397-7   
Thompson, G. (2007). Unfolding Theme: The development of clausal and textual perspectives on Theme. In J. J. Webster, C. M. I. M. Matthiessen, & R. Hasan (Eds.), Continuing discourse on language: A functional perspective (vol. 2, pp. 669–694). London: Equinox.   
Thompson, G. (2014). Introducing functional grammar (3rd ed.). London: Routledge.   
Thompson, S. A., Longacre, R. E., & Hwang, S. J. (2007). Adverbial clauses. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language typology and syntactic description (2nd ed., pp. 237–300).   
Ventola, E., & Mauranen, A. (1991). Non-native writing and native revising of scientific articles. In E. Ventola (Ed.), Functional and systemic linguistics: Approaches and uses (pp. 457–492). Berlin and New York: De Gruyter Mouton.   
Wang, B., & Ma, Y. (2018). Textual and logical choices in the dramatic monologue of Teahouse and its English translations. In A. Baklouti, & L. Fontaine (Eds.), Perspectives from systemic functional linguistics (pp. 140–162). New York: Routledge.   
Wei, J. (2016). Thematic choice in Chinese college students’ English essays. English for Specific Purposes, 41(0), 50–67.   
Williams, I. A. (2009). Discourse style and theme-rheme progression in biomedical research article discussions. Languages in Contrast, 9(2), 225–266.   
Zhong, Q., Tan, X., Du, R., Liu, J., Liao, L., Wang, C., Sun, R., Tang, Z., Ren, J., Mebrahtu, C., & Zeng, F. (2023). Is ChatGPT a reliable source for writing review articles in catalysis research? A case study on CO2 hydrogenation to higher alcohols. Preprints. , Article 2023020292. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202302.0292.v1