# Learning to critique in EAP

Richard Kiely 

Graduate School of Education, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1JA, UK

# Abstract

This paper explores how the critical learning dimension in an English for academic purposes (EAP) programme in a British university is developed in the context of one classroom task. The focus is on the speaking element of the activity which requires students in pairs to explore each other’s personal language history (PLH), present the account to the class as a whole, and finally write it up in an academic style as homework. Ethnographic observation and interview data are used to describe the task process in the classroom and the teacher’s and students’ views of it. The pedagogical features of the activity are situated in the programme as a whole, i.e. the institutional specification and the teacher’s introduction in the first session. The learning goals of both the programme and the task are related to current debates on pragmatic and critical approaches in EAP. The classroom and interview data are analysed using a framework for critical learning developed by Robert Young [Critical theory and classroom talk. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 1992]. The conclusion discusses the nature and process of critical learning as evidenced by the PLH task, the role of speaking in the development of the critical faculty in the EAP classroom, and how pedagogical approaches in relation to these might benefit from further evaluation and research.

$©$ 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: EAP; Critical learning; Speaking skills in EAP; Classroom ethnography; Task-based learning; Teacher feedback

# 1. Introduction

Critical learning or learning to critique1 has in recent decades become a focus for development in education generally, and higher education in particular. In English for academic purposes (EAP), the issues and challenges of the critical dimension have been engaged at theoretical and practical levels (Benesch, 2001; Canagarajah, 2002; Hyland & Hamp-Lyons, 2002; Lea & Street, 1998). One set of reasons for the attention to this aspect of the curriculum is the applied nature of higher education programmes, and the perceived need to engage with the complexity of such applications and the problem-solving which relates to learning and the assessment of learning (Gibbs, 1992; Laurillard, 1993). Another set of reasons, particularly relevant to EAP as an applied linguistics field, derives from critical linguistics and critical discourse analysis fields: understanding texts requires an understanding of the networks of social factors and interests which produce them (Benesch, 2001; Fairclough, 1995). What is meant by critical, however, has many strands in the educational literature, and perhaps even more in practice in higher education, where is it is often used as a somewhat taken for granted term in assessment criteria and feedback to students (Lea & Street, 1998). This paper explores many of these, as they emerge in the context of a classroom task. The notion of criticality is set out by the teacher, Anna2 , as a feature of British higher education, a view with echoes of cultural determinism (Hofstede, 1991) and contrastive rhetoric (Connor, 2002). This is linked to study and assessment practices which involve the reproduction of facts or theoretical knowledge on the one hand, and commentary on these from a personal perspective on the other. This latter view is consistent with academic literacies approaches (Ivanic, 1998; Lea & Street, 1998). A further link is to notions of simplicity and complexity, the latter representing the desired perspective on a problem or theoretical position. Anna in teaching this programme is working with two context factors which often characterise EAP programmes. First, the class is composed of students from a range of subject areas in the sciences, social sciences and humanities, and developing their academic skills separately from topics readings and tutors in the main subject areas. She discourages students from introducing assignments from those courses in tutorials as a workload management strategy, and is not informed in any routine way of expectations and requirements in subjects such as management and health science. Hyland and Hamp-Lyons (2002) describe such lack of integration as a general and enduring challenge for EAP. Second, she has long lessons—3-h sessions—and limited time for individual tutorials, features which promote instruction and interaction, and thus a focus on classroom talk rather than individual coaching. As Watson-Todd (2003) notes in distinguishing between EAP (which has a developed literature) and teaching EAP (which has received less attention), there are few established methodological procedures which might guide Anna in managing instruction and interaction in these long lessons. This paper examines a speaking activity which takes about $^ \textrm { \scriptsize 1 b }$ of a classroom session, and involves a pairwork activity in week 5 of a

12-week programme, in which students explore each other’s personal language history (PLH) using a set of questions supplied by Anna, and a plenary session where students present the PLH orally and Anna comments. The approach takes a slice of EAP practice as its focus, uses theoretical frameworks to understand the tacit epistemologies which generate this classroom pedagogy, and explores how such an analysis might further develop practice.

The next section sets out the key features of the Young view of critique (Young, 1992)—critique as self-realisation, as the development of ‘voice’ which underpins learning. This is an approach developed in mainstream classrooms (Young’s classrooms are in English as L1 primary and secondary schools). In Section 3, current practices and theoretical issues in critical learning in EAP are explored in the context of programme. In Section 4, a classroom task is examined in terms of how it represents the programme and Anna’s pedagogy, the student–student and teacher–student interactions in the classroom, and the students’ views of the curricular role of this particular task. The task is particularly suited to analysis in the Young framework for three reasons: first, the topic, a PLH, is one where the students are experts, and through analysis and reasoning can develop a new, critical perspective on their knowledge; second, they engage in an exploratory dialogue with a classmate on language use in her/his country and socio-cultural context, and personal language skills and levels of proficiency; third, there is a plenary presentation stage where the teacher, Anna, responds to the points made about language use. Thus Anna does not own or control the base data, each student has to elicit, organise, and communicate key elements of the history, and in the ensuing dialogue in the public space of the classroom, Anna leads the students towards a critical perspective. The paper concludes with a discussion of the nature of critical learning in the programme, the role of speaking activities in the development of this, and the potential of further research and development in relation to speaking activities in the EAP classroom.

# 2. Critical learning: the educational tradition

Robert Young is an educational researcher working in a tradition that borrows from Dewey, Marx and Habermas. His view of learning is based on two principles: democracy in the classroom context which acknowledges as valid all voices and views expressed; and a dialogic, problem-solving approach to learning (Young, 1992). These principles characterise classroom interaction, so that the teacher does not focus on presenting information and evaluating student performances based on reproduction of this information as good or bad: rather she introduces a problem, and manages the interaction, so that the range of resources available to students, including their own experience, is harnessed to the task of understanding and resolution. For Young, critical learning links personal perspectives based on experience, with notions of community—a discourse context to which the individual voice seeks to contribute. A critical perspective then, is not taking for granted, or accepting all facts as givens, but rather maintaining a questioning stance:

Open to inquiry means being aware of the processes that produced the knowledge, having some practice in open-ended inquiry for themselves, and/or awareness of the ongoing inquiry—the contemporary discourse—and some degree of access to the discourse. That means, of course, access to a community. Young (1992: p. 13) (italics in original)

This focus in teaching on positioning rather than on theory or topic knowledge does not mean that the teacher does not focus on these: she does, but in addition to developing such understanding, she leads an engagement with its provenance, its applications in particular instances, and its further development. This is an interesting parallel to the pedagogic task in EAP, where the teacher does not have responsibility for development of subject or topic knowledge. Rather, she has to help students develop a position vis-a\`-vis a theory or specific account, and a voice to communicate this in an academic discourse. Young’s view of how teachers, through the way they evaluate contributions to the classroom discourse can lead this development of critical skills, has a particular resonance for the EAP context:

There is an evaluation function [. . .] of simple acceptance of someone’s view as their view, and as prima facie a legitimate view, not as ‘Good!’ or bad according to the teacher’s version of the truth. If the teacher feels a view is problematic, the reasons for its being seen that way are made topical—e.g. overgeneralisation, generalisation on a thin data base—rather than the most common pattern in the method classroom of simply saying ‘no’. In this way the teacher responds to something seen as problematic to him or her with questions or with counterclaims, that is, in the speech role of a fellow enquirer. The pupils then have to make good their claims with reason and evidence. Young (1992: pp. 116–117)

These notions of participation in a discourse community, and a classroom pedagogy centred on the use of reason and evidence to support a position on a problem, or take issue with the position of the other, relate to both the goals of the EAP curriculum and current views of classroom practice.

# 3. Critical learning in EAP and in Anna’s programme

This section explores key themes in critical learning in EAP in the context of Anna’s programme. Two facets of the programme are presented here: first, the formal description of the programme as set out for students in the Module Guide, and second, Anna’s introduction to the programme in the first session. The Module Guide specifies three types of learning activity:

(a) Discussion of articles selected from a variety of sources, including newspapers and journals, audio and video tapes. To gain practice in seminar skills, you will be encouraged to prepare a text distributed, and discuss it with the rest of the class, paying particular attention to developing a critical analysis of the content of the text together with an understanding of its vocabulary, idioms and structures.

(b) Specific inputs on different essay styles, academic writing or study skills aimed at helping you to manage the progress you expect to achieve in your main body of study. You will have relevant tasks on these in groups or pairs.

(c) Opportunities for you to check corrections or comments made on your written homework, bring in assignments from other areas of study for general comprehension assistance or comment; work in groups to plan the written homework set for the following week (From The Module Guide).

This account of the programme emphasises three key themes: the development of language knowledge and skills; the critical dimension, linked to ‘content’ and academic field; and autonomous or self-directed work by students. These are all evident in Anna’s more personal, situated introduction to the programme in the first session:

Anna then introduces the content of the module: what we are going to do. The general aim is to help students do what is required in a British university. Also English for you—as people who have spoken and lived with other languages. In class we integrate the four skills—Listening, speaking, reading, writing—into activities. I am going to make you talk—you will be confident at the end of the module. [. . .]   
Anna talks about the importance of speaking in British education: Students’ programmes or other modules may involve them in speaking—you may be assessed in other modules on speaking.   
Reading—Anna points out how reading may be hindered by cultural content. $I \cdot \cdot \cdot J$ I will draw attention to the cultural content. As an example of what is involved here—metaphor. Often the literal reading is not enough. Anna tells students they will need to read a lot.   
Academic writing also pointed out as very important—developing argument; critical analysis—key point in British degree programmes. Emphasises that writing is not descriptive—as in other places where student may have studied—they just have to reproduce facts. Not like that in Britain, opinion on the work of others is required. This may seem strange, but you need to pass judgements and critical comment. We will spend a lot of time on that. Anna also emphasises talking to fellow students (Classroom notes—week 1).

Key: Unmarked font—Anna’s words Italics—Observer summary or comment

Anna’s introduction emphasises the features of the Module Guide in particular ways: the language development elements are set out as the four skills; the autonomy element is framed in terms of students talking and developing confidence;

and most significantly, the critical dimension is developed in two ways: first as a community feature—‘what is required in a British university’ and second, as an individual voice feature: ‘opinion is required . . . you need to pass judgment’.

Anna posits contrasting aspects of critical learning in ways reflected in the EAP literature. First, there is a form and content contrast. The form aspect sees EAP as practical language skills development: the four skills as Anna puts in the classroom, ‘a study skills or a ‘fix-it’ approach to student deficit areas defined as atomised skills, and surface language features such as grammar and spelling’ (Lea & Street, 1998: p. 172) or a repertoire of language and discourse forms and genre types (Swales, 1990). Critical learning in relation to content has two dimensions for Anna. On the one hand, it is a question of voice, of having an opinion and passing judgment, akin to the ‘cognitive demands of specific academic disciplines’ (Hyland & Hamp-Lyons, 2002: p. 2). On the other hand, it is an issue of meeting the demands of a discourse community. Canagarajah (2002) notes two problems for students in meeting such demands; they are as novices, peripheral to these disciplines; and there are questions of legitimacy for the opinions which the students manage to express. Anna, in her introduction to the module, conflates the issue of cognitive academic discipline demands with the issue of discourse community requirements. She establishes ‘British Higher Education’ as a community of academic language users with which the students must engage. There are both pragmatic and ideological dimension to this view. As the students are from a range of humanities, social science and health science disciplines (see below), this is a pragmatic approach to a simplified articulation of critical learning goals. Ideologically, however, it echoes a value-laden contrastive rhetoric perspective, ‘a cultural and linguistic determinism that considers one’s values as possibly preventing one from practising academic discourse effectively’ (Canagarajah, 2002: p. 31).

Second, in relation to the content issue, Anna cannot work with actual material from students’ academic fields in any continuous way (she did set one reading and writing task based on a selection of academic readings from the fields of the students on the course). She is thus working ‘for rather than with subject specialists, a vulnerability to claims that it ignores student cultures, and a reluctance to critically engage with the values of institutional practices’ (Hyland & Hamp-Lyons, 2002: p. 2). Anna’s approach to content as a notion of critique—having an opinion, passing judgment—is grounded in critical theory and critical discourse analysis (Fairclough, 1995). It is an approach to EAP which challenges orthodoxies, addresses questions of power and epistemological authority (Benesch, 2001; Ivanic, 1998), and relates in many ways to the Young perspective on the development of critical skills. Anna’s responses to the presentations in the plenary stage of the activity examined in the next section (see Table 2 below) illustrate this aspect of critical learning.

In summary then, Anna’s pedagogy in general and in the context of the task analysed in this paper represents a complex weave of themes determined by EAP theory, her own experience and beliefs, and the exigencies of practice in this particular situation. The next section illustrates this approach in practice.

# 4. Background of the research

The study reported in this paper is based on research into a 36-h EAP programme, taught over 12 weeks in a British university teaching context. The focus of the research was the evaluation of the programme, as carried out by the teacher of the programme, Anna, for the purposes of quality enhancement and assurance. Evaluation in this management discourse relates both to the achievement of the goals of the programme, and to the ongoing development of effective pedagogic strategies towards these goals (Kiely, 2001). In order to understand fully the meaning of the evaluative comments (and their pedagogic consequences) emerging during the programme and at the end, the research documented teaching and learning interactions and activities in the classroom, and teacher and student constructions of these in interviews. This ethnographic approach developed from a previous study (Kiely, 1998) and the work of researchers such as Young (1992), which illustrate that the nature of a programme is not so much the specification approved by the institution, or the teacher’s plan, but the sequence of learning opportunities afforded by the tasks and interactions in the classroom. The classroom observation documented over the $1 2 \ 3 { \cdot } \mathrm { h }$ sessions: (a) the physical space of the classroom—number of students; seating arrangements; movement within the classroom; phenomena in the vicinity of the classroom; (b) the temporal space of each session: what happened when and how long it endured; (c) acts of teaching and learning—what the teacher did (including notes on what she said), what the students did, the interactions in the classroom, and brief descriptions of the materials (Holliday, 1997; Roberts, Davies, & Jupp, 1992). The interview data involved ethnographic interviews with the teacher at two weekly intervals during the programme, and interviews with the students: at least one with each of the 17 regular students and several with some—Laure, for example, was interviewed six times. The interviews were structured by the classroom tasks and materials: these were set out on the table, and Anna and the students were invited to talk about them. These data constitute a thick description of the programme: participant accounts of the teaching and learning experiences, perceptions of and attitudes to the pedagogic processes, and the judgments and decisions which shaped these. This approach to the research provided extensive data sets on a range of activities in the classroom, the teacher’s rationale for selecting or designing these activities, and the students’ perspectives both on this rationale and the value to them as learners.

# 5. Critical learning: a personal language history

# 5.1. The teacher’s perspective

The PLH in week 5 of the programme required students to identify the key elements of their language skills and uses in their national and socio-cultural context, and explain this to another student in a pair activity. Each member of the pair then had to present to the whole group the PLH of the other, and subsequently write it up in an academic style. A summary of the classroom activity from the field notes is set out in Table 1.

Table 1 Summary of the PLH activity   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Stage 1</td><td>Pairwork interview and note-taking based on questionnaire (see Appendix A) (30 min) Preparation of the oral presentation (5 min)</td></tr><tr><td>Stage 2</td><td>Presentations and teacher comment (35 min)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Planning for writing (10 min)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Written homework</td></tr></table></body></html>

The teacher’s rationale for the activity illustrates two dimensions to the activity. First, there is the language skills benefit: speaking in pairs, taking notes, presenting orally and finally writing up.

Anna: The other task that I am going to get them to do is a paired activity, I’m getting them to interview each other about their language use, and present an oral report on the use of languages and then write a report on their own language use, which I will get them to start in class, and finish for homework [. . .] (Interview with Anna (week 4—before PLH activity))

Table 2 Presentations and teacher comment   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Presentation</td><td colspan="2">Teacher comment</td></tr><tr><td>EAP-technical</td><td>EAP-critical</td></tr><tr><td>Arnie on Jesus</td><td>... you need a sense of conclusion</td><td>... what is &#x27;better&#x27;? What is &#x27;correct&#x27;? . what is there that you can&#x27;t say, that needs further investigation?</td></tr><tr><td>Della on Annie</td><td>Thank you</td><td>. what are the languages that you spoke about? Why so many languages? Why are differ- ent languages at home and at school? That</td></tr><tr><td>Tigi on Jamie</td><td>points</td><td>would take you into colonialism.. Remember, only the main... Which accents [in Britain] can he under- stand? All? ...Why do people want their chil- dren to speak other languages in that context?</td></tr><tr><td>Sue on Mat</td><td>Good report</td><td>And in Britain, only English?. Are language Somali and nation state Somalia--the same? High status and low status languages there? Role of written languages and writing systems? Different kinds of English in</td></tr><tr><td>Helen on Sao</td><td></td><td>Britain which he uses? ... child not speaking the language of a par- ent-Why? What is dialect? Social dimension,</td></tr><tr><td>Sona on Mari</td><td></td><td>different from technical aspect? ... proper, correct, accurate - what do these mean? The role of value judgements. Sona and Dave argue that it is clear what these mean in Spanish.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Anna: [. . .] the Personal Language History work intended to practise skills like questioning, oral skills like questioning, discussing, explaining, it’s also of course a chance to practise taking notes of key points very economically, and it’s an opportunity for them to have a different kind of delivery, in other words they are talking in pairs, interviewing each other, then the next stage is where they give an oral report back, or selective people do, in plenary, again oral work, and then ends with a written task, and in terms of how people performed in it, [. . .] (Interview with Anna (week 7—after PLH activity))

Second, there is the critical learning dimension: Anna’s view of the activity as an opportunity to develop critical skills, based on personal experience, and constructions of that experience.

Anna: [. . .] I don’t think it was very variable, and on the whole, people are relatively unquestioning about language use, and in a sense see it as unproblematic a lot of the time, but in comments that I made in their written work, I attempt to put questioning in the margins, and to indicate where they’ve been very flat in what they said, you know, because again, that’s one of the skills we are trying to practise in the module, to try to say that, well, you’re in an academic arena, you need to go beyond a flat description of phenomena, and to be able to find the difficult areas in the problem, [. . .] to get people to understand why you think there’s something complicated about language use. It’s clearly something that people don’t find very obvious. [. . .] And what is interesting to me, teaching this module, is quite a few of the people, well everybody is at least, bilingual, and bilingual to a high degree, in this sense, I think everybody in the class comes from a country where they learn to read and write in another language, have got a high level of education in another language, and then transfer to English, and have achieved a high level of spoken, understanding of English, and that English, such that they can survive at undergraduate level, so they are all at least bilingual, and somehow or other multilingual, and also several of them are people actually studying language, and I find it a continually useful exercise, because given that these people have such a high degree of interest and expertise, they still don’t see much complexity in the whole situation, and, [. . .], I find that quite interesting (Interview with Anna (week 7—after PLH activity)).

Anna’s perspective on critical learning is evident here: her account of deficits in the students’ performance—‘beyond a flat description of phenomena’, ‘difficult areas of a problem’, ‘something complicated’, ‘complexity in the whole situation’—suggests a level of analysis which characterises an academic perspective. This perspective is directly linked to ‘an academic arena’, and is grounded in the personal experience of students: their interest and expertise in the subject need to be augmented by a more questioning, problematising approach to describing and accounting for what is happening in their social context.

# 5.2. The activity in the classroom

The field notes provide an account of how the first stage of the activity in the classroom proceeded for two pairs of students: Helen and Sao, and Dave and Sara:

Helen and Sao are near me [. . .. . .] They start by introducing themselves to each other—they clearly have not spoken before. As they read out the first question, it turns out not to be so easy to answer—Helen mentions French, then her dialect in Cameroon, where her family is from. They discuss the issues of dialect, with Sao saying national language and dialect are also in my country. Sao speaks Thai, and a little Japanese, but not Chinese, even though her father is Chinese. She talks about the way her father wanted her to speak Chinese, but she did not, so now she can understand it, but cannot speak it. Helen talks about the languages different people in her family speak, and to whom. They build up a common picture of diversity, but do not seem to really organise it in any systematic way. [. . .] They spend a long time on the first few questions. Dave and Sara on the other hand have almost completed the questionnaire. I wonder if as Spanish and German respectively, they find little of the complexity that Helen and Sao have. (Classroom notes on PLH (week 5))

In Stage 2, the plenary element of the activity, selected students (Anna nominated the students for oral presentations as a means of distributing opportunities to develop these skills over the weeks of the course) present the PLH of their partners, and Anna comments on each presentation. This illustrates Anna’s pedagogic approach to critical learning within the EAP programme, how she weaves this pedagogy from two strands evident in her feedback. She comments on issues of linguistic skills development, for example, focussing on the main points, and drawing a conclusion, which are labelled EAP—Technical and on issues to do with a critical perspective on the subject under discussion, which are labelled EAP—Critical. Table 2 summarises her response to the six presentations.

These data illustrate four points about the critical dimension of the curriculum here: first, Anna’s comments tend to relate to the topical issues of meanings in the oral presentations, rather than on the academic forms; as the plenary part of the activity proceeds, comments on linguistic and textual aspects of the presentations disappear. While Anna’s rationale for this activity (see Section 5.1 above) reflects both the linguistic and critical elements of the programme specification, her practice in the classroom tends to emphasise the latter. Second, just as the task is grounded in personal experience of a linguistic context, the way to be critical is also linked to individual voices and issues emerging from these presentations. This reflects Young’s view (based on Freire’s pedagogy for liberation) that ‘dialogic inquiry is situated in the language, politics and themes of the students, . . . pupils will start from what is real to them’ (Young, 1992: p. 120). Third, being critical is about the complexities, and the dangers of making assumptions; it is about the ‘difficult areas of a problem’, the ‘complexity in the whole situation’. Anna points individual students towards the aspects of a situation where a critical stance can be illustrated as questions. Her approach here illustrates a ‘talk asymmetry’ (Young,

1992: p. 118), where her role as the teacher gives her the right to comment in this way in the classroom. It is a form of ‘complementary asymmetry, a kind of educational teaching . . . [that] justifies the presence of the teacher’ (ibid:118). Fourth, being critical is linked to processes of definition and categorisation. Students are reminded not to assume that definitions are clear and unproblematic, but that definitions generate categories which may be contested or controversial, which in turn are the building blocks of argument and defensible positions. Anna here is checking, in Young’s terms, the ‘validity claims’ of the speakers. Her questions to Arnie and to Sona—What is correct?—and her comments about value judgments reflect her taking methodological responsibility (ibid: 117) for the essential sense-making purpose of the PLH.

Young sets out three types of classroom dialogue. What do pupils know (WDPK) and guess what teacher thinks (GWTT) focus on identifying what is already known by classroom participants—the teacher testing the pupils, and the pupils getting the right answer, respectively—without adding value in any way to such knowledge. The third type, discursive (D), takes existing knowledge as a starting point, and ‘where the teachers takes on a responsibility for the development of reasoning by asking clarifying questions’ (Young, 1992: p. 118). In Young’s classrooms, this third type represents educational or inductive teaching, and is evidenced in extended dialogues in the classroom (ibid: 106–121). In the PLH context, the stylised oral presentation and teacher comment format does not allow for dialogue—the students are not invited to, and do not attempt to answer the questions posed by Anna. But the way that the questions bridge specific issues in each presentation, and generic aspects of academic language use provides opportunities for critical learning accessible to all students. The next section explores the perspectives of students on the PLH activity, relating them to the Young framework for critical learning.

# 5.3. The student perspective

The interviews carried out as part of this research project invited students to talk about the classroom activities, usually with the handouts spread out on the table to stimulate comment. The PLH activity proved particularly rich in eliciting a diversity of comments: even several weeks later (Annie in week 9, for example), students clearly remembered the activity and were able to comment on it in detail. Some students saw it as a limited pairwork exercise to develop language skills, whereas others saw it as fundamentally altering their perspectives on social phenomena, and a stimulus to the development of a very different kind of questioning. Four kinds of response are evident in the interview data:

# (a) No sense of the value of the activity

Isa: . . . maybe she wants to know our background, our language background, [. . .] I think she has a lot of attention in some points that maybe are not very important, or, I don’t know, I think sometimes that she put the attention on some few details, for example, the dialect . . . (Interview with

Isa (week 5)) Niki: I just think this one was a personal language history, I think it is just for, I didn’t relate it to my academic skills (Interview with Niki (week 7)).

(b) A sense of value for language skills development only

Jamie: I think in my opinion, this lesson is useful practice, [. . .] develop speaking, and of course, language points I don’t know . . . (Interview with Jamie (week 5))   
Sara: Develop tense forms, make us talk to each other, and to note down the things . . . (Interview with Sue and Sara (week 5))

(c) A sense of value for language skills and self-awareness in relation to language

Ina: Oh I love it, doing it, because, when you have to write an activity about yourself, for me that is the easiest thing, because I didn’t have to look information or nothing for it, I have to think about myself, (Interview with Ina (week 6))

Sue: This was really interesting. My problem is that I am only speaking German. My mother isn’t German, but I don’t speak my mother’s language at all, and then I heard all these other people, how they are able to speak that language, and that language and that dialect, maybe ten languages. But it is incredible, and so interesting for me, such a wide range of languages. I really liked this activity, it also asked for, things like, not only the obvious things, but things like slips of the tongue, like attitudes (Interview with Sue and Sara (week 5)).

Della: . . . but my personal language history, for example, was useful in another context, because I thought about how I learn languages, and I thought about how could I do something better, maybe more effective. And this was very useful, yes (Interview with Della (week 7)).

(d) A sense of value for development of a problematising, critical faculty

Joe: Topics about language, I think were very useful, [. . .] I can see how should I look inside, how many different languages [there] can be, it is not only that it is one language and what is the culture that the language is changing, and in our country, it’s not so much problem, because [there is] only one spoken language, and, one official language, but some regions they have different, like dialect, they are talking, they use different words, and sometimes they are difficult to understand, and I was thinking about language, and particularly in my country, I thought it was only one language, when I didn’t take any different aspects in that region [that] can be different . . . (Interview with Joe (week 7))

Annie: Yes, it was useful, [. . .] because it helps with things you take for granted, it’s really useful for that [. . .] Like, how other people, how they communicate, some are very quiet, not very much talking, and I could understand how different people speak, how people use language in my country, that was interesting (Interview with Annie (week 9)).

Young’s (1992: p. 39) scheme for critical learning, developed from Habermas’ Theory of Communicative Action (McCarthy, 1989), sets out four kinds of communicative action, which represent different kinds of interaction between the self and the other. By interaction, he means a process of conceptualising and responding, a notion which can be used to analyse further the four categories of feedback from the student interview data. Young uses Habermas’ labels for these interactional voices: strategic, normatively regulated, dramaturgical and communicative.

(a) Strategic action is where there are different interest positions, and these are maintained, with the interactants agreeing to differ, and continuing to achieve previously established ends. Young describes this form of action as cognitiveinstrumental, with critique limited to noticing a failure of ends/means matching. In the case of the data explored here, Anna’s You can see that it is controversial (Table 2 above) signals a closure of the discussion which has not moved either party from their opposing positions. Strategic action on the part of students is represented to some extent by the view of Isa, a student who seemed determined to view language use as uncomplicated, and considers the activity as being about providing unimportant personal details only, is spite of different messages from the teacher.

(b) Normatively regulated action, where there are similar interest positions, and thus a common frame of reference, encompasses ‘common values and norms, instilled through socialisation’ (Young, 1992: p. 39). The form of critique found here is based on conformity and non-conformity: in this context, this approach is evident in the ventriloquising of EFL concepts and norms, e.g. Anna’s starting point in her rationale for the activity (Section 5.1 above), and the points raised by Jamie and Sara above. Anna’s view of the critical learning dimension of the programme is to familiarise students with other norms, to see the categories and concepts in the EFL view of language as limited, and falsely uncomplicated in representing language use and norms. She wants them to develop a view such as in (d) below, which would allow them to be competent participants in academic discussion of language use.

(c) Dramaturgical, or expressive actions represent an initial personal response to the other, possibly the recognition of a mismatch between the learning activities and personal feelings. The student is in the role of actor, experimenting with other voices, tentatively articulating ideas which are new, and both interesting and confusing. The responses of Ina, Sue and Della above illustrate in different ways this form of action: the personal expression is very strong, with a distinctive emotional component but there is as yet little certainty about how this questioning voice might relate to other domains. Anna’s positive response to the presentations of Della and Sue may mean that she sees something of value in terms of critical learning in their presentations.

(d) Communicative action represents for Young, as for Habermas, a pinnacle of learning. It is a ‘culturally encapsulated critique’, i.e. dealing with all aspects of the context in question, ‘relativised against the possibility that validity will be contested by others’ (Young, 1992: p. 39). Each participant holds a view which has itself been critiqued, but is still open to new critiques. Joe and Annie represent a questioning of their social context and their own experience within it, which illustrates achievements in critical learning—they show that they are ‘open to enquiry’ (see Section 2 above). Joe now sees the monolingual nature of his country (Poland) differently: it is a majority and an official view, but not the only one. His critical learning allows him to appreciate the official view, and also critique it by articulating the reality that it is not comprehensive. Annie’s critical learning has opened up for her what she previously took for granted: individual factors in language use, and the complex roles of different languages in her national context (Nigeria). Both have developed an ability to ‘communicate’ with Anna, to see the complexities of phenomena of language use as she would, and to categorise these complexities in a manner which identifies their stance as an academic one. Their comments illustrate achievements in relation to the critical aims of the programme as set out in the institutional specification, and as introduced by Anna in the first session of the programme (see Section 4 above).

# 6. Conclusion—teaching critical learning

# 6.1. The nature of critique

The discussion of critical learning in this article and the micro-analysis of it in the context of one classroom activity illustrate how teachers can orient classroom tasks towards the development of a critical perspective. The issues for teachers such as Anna, is not deciding whether to take a pragmatic of critical approach: rather is the development of a pedagogy which provides opportunities for the development of both. The Young framework provides a guide to epistemological issues which can be combined with academic literacy approaches to guide students towards the development and articulation of an academic identity. It also guides teachers on how they can position themselves in classroom discourse, through the nature of their questions and comments. The analysis in this paper has focused on the speaking aspect of this task: the data do not permit an analysis of the followup writing activities and Anna’s comments on these (two students in interview commented on how useful these comments were). It seems reasonable to assume however, that the writing process has an important contribution to learning—the EAP literature has focused to a large extent on understanding how writing and writing pedagogies support the development of academic skills. The role of speaking in the development of such skills has been less examined. The next section considers this role and hope it might be developed further.

# 6.2. The role of speaking

Classrooms are social, interactional environments, and even where the focus of skills development and of assessment is in writing, as is largely the case in EAP, a substantial proportion of classroom time is spent on discussion type activities. Teacher talk is important in two ways: it is a important form of feedback to students, whether on a task such as PLH, or on reading or writing tasks, and it is the context where students can witness academic or critical reasoning and position-taking (students are unlikely to be exposed to their teacher’s academic writing in this way). The talk which occupies the public space of the classroom becomes a resource for learning available to all students. Where the teacher structures this talk so that there is feedback on it from the teacher (as Anna does in PLH), the efforts of each student becomes a resource for all, an opportunity for learning to critique from initial hesitant efforts as well as from the modeling of the teacher. While the questioning style of Anna’s comments (see Table 2 above) corresponds to Young’s educational or inductive teaching (see Section 5 above), the lack of dialogue does not. The somewhat stylised turns (a presentation followed by feedback) of the plenary session of PLH may contribute to a safe environment, when the students as novices in the academic community are not exposed to a demolition of their justification, which might be discouraging and humiliating. In the data discussed in this paper, Anna closes a potential dialogue with Sona and David on the homogeneity of Spanish with the comment ‘you can see it is controversial’ (See Table 2 above), when she could have continued to show how their approach was untenable (Anna had a professional interest and expertise in aspects of sociolinguistics which was apparent in many aspects of the EAP programme, such as the choice of PLH as a topic).

A focus on speaking in the development of critical skills in EAP relates to learning and assessment in two ways. First, where the focus in assessment is on writing, the writing process, particularly in pedagogical contexts, has a discussion or interactive element. Reid (1995) and White (1998) place emphasis on the improving function of discussion at the pre-writing stage. Second, assessment in higher education contexts is increasingly using oral methods, such as oral presentations. The programme researched in this paper, like many in the UK Higher Education sector, has an oral presentation as part of the assessment. The criteria for these assessments generally contain a critical element, relating to both the content and the organisation of the argument. This activity illustrates how this kind of speaking can be developed in the classroom. There is no suggestion here that the four categories set out by Young (see Section 4 above) constitute a viable speaking syllabus: rather they provide a framework for teacher self-awareness in the first instance, and may have the potential to generate a framework for student awareness and self-assessment, one of the points discussed further in the next section.

# 6.3. Further evaluation and research

The data used in this article were gathered through a process of research into teacher-managed evaluation of the programme for quality assurance and quality enhancement purposes. These data, illustrating both the interactions generated by the PLH task in the classroom, and the views of the teacher and students on these, provide insights into critical learning not available to teachers through their teaching, or through routine programme evaluations. The development of EAP thus requires two kinds of activity: on the one hand, teacher-led innovation and experimentation in the classroom, such as the PLH activity developed by Anna, and on the other, evaluation and research activities, documenting and analysing the pedagogy such that the benefits and potential are understood and inform ongoing curriculum development in the classroom. This paper has set out what appear to be the benefits for critical learning of a speaking activity in the classroom. There is a need in our field for further studies into EAP classroom processes (as called for by Watson-Todd, 2003), and also an examination of what individual students take from the public discourse of the classroom, and how this contributes to the development of criticality in their writing, and to the development of their own academic identity.

# Appendix A

Notes for a discussion on . A Personal Language History (a) What languages can you speak? (b) What languages do/did your parents speak?

(i) to each other and to relatives of their age group? (ii) to you

(c) What attitudes did your parents have about how you should speak and what did they say to you about it?   
(d) What statements did your teachers make about speech, language and education?   
(e) Are there any languages which you can understand but cannot speak? (f) Are there any languages which you can speak and understand but cannot read or write?   
(g) If or when you have children what will you say to them about language?   
(h) Describe how you can change your use of language when you are speaking to different people. (i) When did you become aware that different British people spoke differently? (j) Have you ever felt that you had to alter the way you spoke in order to achieve something?   
(k) Have people ever teased you or laughed at you because of the way you speak? (l) As a child were you ever in the situation where you felt different from other children because of the way you spoke?   
(m) When did you first notice the association between accent and social class

which exists in Britain?

(n) In your life have you ever been embarrassed about the way your family/relatives spoke?   
(o) Do you speak differently now to the way you did when you were younger? If so, how?

# References

Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes: theory, politics and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Canagarajah, S. (2002). Multilingual writers and the academic community: towards a critical relationship. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1(1), 29–44.   
Connor, U. (2002). New directions in contrastive rhetoric. TESOL Quarterly, 36(4), 493–510.   
Fairclough, N. (1995). Critical discourse analysis: the critical study of language. London: Longman.   
Gibbs, G. (1992). Improving the quality of student learning. Bristol: CNAA Technical and Education Services.   
Hofstede, G. (1991). Cultures and organisations: software of the mind. Maidenhead: McGraw Hill.   
Holliday, A. (1997). Six lessons: cultural continuity in communicative language teaching. Language Teaching Research, 1(3), 212–238.   
Hyland, K., & Hamp-Lyons, L. (2002). EAP: issues and directions. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1(1), 1–12.   
Ivanic, R. (1998). Writing and identity: the discoursal construction of identity in academic writing. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Kiely, R. (1998). Programme evaluation by teachers: issues of policy and practice. In P. Rea-Dickins, & K. Germaine (Eds.), Managing evaluation and innovation in language teaching (pp. 78–104). Harlow: Longman.   
Kiely, R. (2001). Classroom evaluation—values, interests and teacher development. Language Teaching Research, 5(3), 241–261.   
Laurillard, D. (1993). Rethinking university teaching: a framework for the effective use of educational technology. London: Routledge.   
Lea, M. R., & Street, B. (1998). Student writing in higher education: an academic literacies approach. Studies in Higher Education, 23(2), 157–172.   
McCarthy, T. (1989). The theory of communicative action. Vol. 1. Cambridge: Polity (J. Habermas, Trans.) (Original work published 1968).   
Reid, J. (1995). Teaching ESL writing. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.   
Roberts, C., Davies, E., & Jupp, T. (1992). Language and discrimination. Harlow: Longman.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Watson-Todd, R. (2003). EAP or TEAP?. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(2), 147–156.   
White, R. (1998). New ways in teaching writing. Alexandria, VA: TESOL.   
Young, R. (1992). Critical theory and classroom talk. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.

Richard Kiely directs the M.Ed. TESOL Programme at the University of Bristol. He has worked as an English teacher and teacher educator in Zambia. Malaysia, Hong Kong, Poland and Mexico, as well as in universities in Britain, and has a PhD in programme evaluation from the University of Warwick.