Book review

# ISBN: 978-0472039128. Us\$29.95Thriving as a Graduate Writer: Principles, Strategies, and Habits for Effective Academic Writing, Rachael Cayley University of Michigan Press (2023). 236

As academic writing plays a central role in scholarly communication, it is of vital importance as a way for graduate students to produce and transmit disiplinary knowledge. The recent pate of boos on writig at the graduate levelattests to these concerns e.g, Allen, 2019; Curry et al., 2021; Thomson, 2022. These volumes address the fact that, unlike entering college students graduate writers are often expected already to be proficient in academic literacy; however, unlike established scholars, many graduate students have limited experience in writing in a scholarly environment..

Recognizing the growing presure on graduate students to produce academic texts of high quality and the often-insufficient support for their writing, Cayley, a sef-described monolingual, White teacher of graduate writing in Canada, provides a general guide in Thriving as a Graduate Writer. The book aims to help graduate writers to understand, think differently about, and craf their academic writing. It draws on Cayley's expertise in teaching academic literacy, her experiences as a PhD in philoophy, and posts from her blog, Explorations of Style (which may contribute to the unusual structure of the book's contents). Although Cayley notes that her ideal audience is North American readers (p. vii) students in other geolinguistic contexts who are using English for academic writing may also find the book useful.

The book consists of 10 chapters that focus on three main sues: developing a conducive mindset for writing; sharpening one's writing skils; and improving one's writing practices. The opening chapter acknowledges the importance of writing in graduate school and discuses the difficulties that graduate writers may face, such as lack of support targeted at their specific needs. In addition, this introductory chapter talks about common negative feeings that graduate writers may have (eg, feeing unprepared"/unqualified" to write, alienated"isolated" in the writing proces. It proposes instead to see writing as "difficult," but \*possible" "developmental," and \*communal" (p. 7). Carrying on this conception of writing, the rest of the book is divided into thre parts, mirroring its title: principles of academic writing; strategies for effective writing; and developing productive writing habits.

The first part (chapters 2 and 3) introduces and explains three key principles for managing the writing process: 1) \*writing t clarify thinking (p. 10) 2) "committing to extensive revision' (p. 12); and 3) "understanding the nees of readers (p.12). The frs principle suggests that having well-formed ideas is not a prerequisite for writing; instead, students should start to write during the thinking process because turning thoughts into words can help them figure out what they want to expres and thus explain and articulate their ideas. The second principle is ased on the view that writig i never a liear process that i, multiple iteations (p. 13) are nessary to achieve an effctive final draft. The third principle suggests that good writers should keep their target audience in mind when writing, think about what their readers may need and expect, and use that knowledge to guide writing and revision. Cayley also discusse the potential discomfort student may have with envisioning and practicing writing, based on the three principles (e.g, eling unprepared to start writing early, overwhelmed when reviewing an early draft, and intimidated when thinking about potential readers) and offers ways to deal with this discomfort. Next, Cayley dedicates a chapter to authorial responsibilities that explains why being \*present in the text' (p. 27)is important for authors and readers. It offers strategies for using linguisic features, including metadiscourse, to enhance one's authorial voice.

The second part (chapters 4 to 8) explores strategies to put the key principles from the first part into practice, based on general stages of writing from structuring a text to revising it. Chapter 4 discusses how to improve the structure of a text by making careful decisions about the overall organization, using signposting to guide readers, and skilfully tructuring each paragraph. This chapter also provides agood explanation of the role and uses of outlines in academic writing. Chapter 5 focuses on creating \*energetic (p. 57), "concise (p.6), and alanced" (p. 74) sentences to help readers understand a text easily and accurately. Chapter 6 covers how to use punctuation according to its function (e., combining, searatig, listig, inroducing, interrupting) to enhance readers' experience. A strength of these three chapters is Cayley's clear explanations of certain linguistic features of academic English, such as subject-verb placement, choosing subjects and verbs for a sentence, and using various clauses and punctuation.

In Chapter 7, Cayley discusses text flow by focusing on five topics: transition words; orienting-informing framing; clarity in reference; previewing upcoming information; and broader transitions across paragraphs and sentences. Finall, Chapter 8 covers how to revise a draft into it final version by following the order \*o big, go small, and gothrough (p. 128) to addres ssue at the level of structure, sentence, and movement/flow. This order aligns with the logic of the five chapters in ths ection, which may help writers reflect on their writing topics and processes. In addition, this section offers concrete examples, sample structures, and skeleton sen tences, which may be especially useful for writers who are new to English academic writing.

The third section (chapters 9 and 10) focuses on writing habits that contribute to productivity. From the start, Cayley stresses the social nature of writing and recognizes the complicated conditions under which graduate students work, including the need to complete ther ds; the instabilit they may feel rly in ther programs; and hallnges associatd wth \*he intectl ativity of learning to write," which may result in \*emotional costs" and entail the negotiation of multiple identities (e.g., student, researcher, expert in research topic; p. 163). Next, Cayley discusses how to chooe suggestions that may benefit writers depending on their "practical, intelectual, and emotional relities' (p. 162) and provides avice on how todevelop habit for productive writing, such as putting writing on one's agenda, making interim goal for large writing project, handing emotional burdens and self-doubts relatedto writing, and seeking support from others.

Overall, Thriving as a Graduate Writerserves s avaluable guide to English academic writing, particularly, but not only, for students in the North American context. The second section on structure, sentences, and punctuation offrs highly useful information that is often omitted in boos for graduate writers (but see Swales & Feak, 2012). The book also sheds important light on \*building a new mindset' (p. 3) for writing, which Cayley notes is "an ongoing learning process, ideall, one supported by others (p.7).

Despite is strengths, the book may benefit novice academic writers more than advanced writers who are familiar with the prin. ciples and strategies Cayley addresses. For instance, the discussion of structural coherence in Chapter 4 may be elementary for students who are experienced with learning, reearching, and/or publishing. The chapter dedicates much space to the importance and means of knowing the genre of the text being written, the requirements and expectations of the institution/university, and the disciplinary conventions of academic writing, which experienced writers may already understand.

Another limitation of the book may be its disciplinary and cultural biases. While Cayley indicates early on that she does extensively discuss disciplinary differences, some of the suggestions and examples provided may be inappropriate in some disciplines, such as certain stance cues (pp. 33-34) that are not commonly used in the natural and many social sciences.

Moreover, writers using English as an aditional language may not be as well served by this book as by others. Cayley does not always take account, for example, of the role of cultural variations across rhetorical style, or acknowledge the influence of culture. A box on author versus reader responsbility, for example, sugests that writrs will instnctively" know \*where the responsibilit lies" (pp. 28-29); however, such instincts often stem from cultural patterns and knowledge, which may not be shared by writers across contexts, even those studying in North America. Multilingual writers may also find itdifficult toapply some of the book's suggestions. In Chapter 3, for instance, to increase audience awareness, Cayley suggests, writers should larn by paying attention to how other writers enhance authorial voice in thir text; and she considers that graduate writers should be "attuned to those moments when a writer intervenes in their text (p. 30). However, writers whose cultures do not encourage the obvious presence of the author might benefit from more explanation of authorial voice and its instantiation in academic English writing.

In sum, Cayley's book i a useful sarting guide and good reference for novice graduate writers, using easy to understand language and including concrete examples. The book may be also helpful for graduate advisors and writing teachers who want strategies to help students deal with graduate writing. As wll the visuals (eg., charts, summary boxes, examples, and skeleton sentences offred are convenient and practical.

# References

Al . published. Stylus. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003448037 Michigan Press. https://doi.org/10.3998/mpub.11507415   
Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2012). Academic writing for graduate students (3 ed.). University of Michigan Press.   
Thomson, P. (2022). Rfinng your acadic wtig Saie fr ring, resing nd rewitin Rtedge. htps://doi.rg10.4324/9781003031680