# BALEAP News

The early months of 2022 have been marked by a cautious optimism about the return of face to face events for BALEAP and ongoing planning for the AGM event to take place on 2 April. As well as celebrating BALEAP's 50th anniversary and JEAP's 20th anniversary, the event will be providing sessions to launch the new criteria that have been created both for the BALEAP (institutional) Accreditation Scheme (BAS) and the individual accreditation scheme the Teaching EAP (TEAP) Fellowship scheme. A further session will be given to the launch of the Research and publications website plus time for showcasing the wide range of activities that BALEAP members are involved in within these areas and also in the Special Interest Groups (SIGs). The programme is planned to include plenary sessions with reflections on the last 50 years and lightning talks on the next 50 years and will see the official launch of the JEAP Special Issue ‘Practitioner voices, scholarship, and practice-led research in the evolution of $E A P$ ’, with papers appearing over the next few months. (https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/journal-of-english-for-academic-purposes/special-issue/10S1K1NN1MN). At the core of the day will be the 2022 AGM and we will conclude with a reception celebrating our first in person meeting for more than two years.

The 2022 AGM will see some changes to the membership of the BALEAP Executive committee. After many years of dedicated work for the organisation, Bella Reichard, who has acted as Ordinary Member, Web Officer and Treasurer, will be standing down from her current position. Bella's energy and commitment have underpinned the huge contribution she has made in maintaining the smooth functioning of the organisation, on top of which she has been enormously supportive of other committee members and the work that they have carried out. We will be saying goodbye to Bella, but welcoming Ben Brown who was elected to the Treasurer position in January. A further change will be my own move from Chair to Outgoing Chair as I hand over to Conrad Heyns who has been Incoming Chair for the last year, and the committee will also be welcoming Lia Blaj-Ward who returns to the committee as the new Chair of BAS.

Despite what seems like a gradual return to something of the old ‘normal’, there are, of course, still uncertainties affecting the BALEAP community as a sector within higher education that has been perhaps particularly hard hit by the pandemic. This has had an impact on BALEAP as it has been difficult for institutions to commit to hosting events such as the biennial conference and has also resulted in the withdrawing of some of the planned events. On the positive side, however, as I look back over the last two years, it's clear that we have made some substantial gains in, for example, the sense of inclusivity that came with hosting events online which provided access to many BALEAP members who would not normally be able to attend PIMs, conferences, and other events. The growth of the SIGs has also been very positive, and their activities have provided development opportunities, resources and a dissemination of expertise that would not otherwise have existed, as well as creating new and exciting ways of networking. It has always been important to me that opportunities for EAP practitioners to get involved in BALEAP activity should be as many and varied as possible and the development of the SIGs has extended these.

The coming year should see a good mix of both online and in person events with the next ResTES event coming up on 23 February and focusing on Systemic Functional Linguistics in EAP Scholarship. This event, organised by BALEAP's Research Officers, Susie Cowley-Haselden and Laetitia Monbec, focuses on the usefulness of SFL in practitioner-led, classroom-based scholarship with case studies on different aspects of SFL. The speakers will be looking at the type of practitioner scholarship SFL can contribute to, such as EAP classroom based pedagogical research, and wider interdisciplinary projects. Examples will include the ways elements of SFL can enrich our understanding of cumulative learning/transfer; how evaluative meanings function in reflection texts in undergraduate nursing; and how to use modality in explanation essay conclusions.

Looking beyond specifically BALEAP-focused activity, members of BALEAP have continued to support the Syria Programme of the Council for At-Risk Academics (Cara) supporting displaced Syrian academics. (https://www.cara.ngo/what-we-do/cara-syriaprogramme). The programme has five main work areas: English for Academic Purposes (EAP); Academic Development; Research Incubation Visits; Cara-Commissioned Research; and the Syrian Research Fellowship Scheme. By September 2021 some 200 academics were actively engaged with programme activities and many of them are active in the EAP strand. Over the last three years BALEAP members have volunteered to work with individual academics, providing one-to-one weekly online tutorials helping them develop their academic language skills. Members also provide weekly speaking practice in small groups and participate in the Cara Syria Programme Almultaka, a forum bringing together Syrian participants and EAP tutors to give academics an opportunity to present to an

audience and develop their skills in this area.

This is my last BALEAP News and I will now be handing over to our new Chair, Conrad Heyns, who will be taking over this column and providing these regular updates. It already looks as if there will be much of interest to report on in the next few months with further events hosted by the different SIGs, the developments in the accreditation schemes taking these to a wider constituency, research and publications' initiatives, and much more!