# Organizing Feedback

ISABEL OLTRA-MASSUET

# Framing the Issue

In the context of teaching, feedback is defined as information that is given to the learner about their performance of a learning task, generally with the objective of improving their performance and helping them develop skills and strategies for future learning.

According to Ur (1996), feedback has two main components: assessment and correction. Whereas with assessment, learners are informed of their good or bad performance, for example through a grade on an exam, in correction they are provided with information on aspects of their performance, either through direct output modification, explanation to elicit a new output from the learner pointing to alternative strategies, or appraisal confirming correctness. Competing second language acquisition (SLA) theories have made different claims about the role of feedback in language acquisition, and have mostly referred to it as error correction or corrective feedback. It is for this reason that this entry will focus on the correction component of feedback organization, with reference to some assessment strategies.

Although it has been acknowledged that feedback has a key role in the English as a second/foreign language (ESL/EFL) classroom, there is an extensive SLA research literature that highlights its limited effect on student learning. Whether the research focuses on feedback methodology or feedback actors, or on different linguistic targets and media (oral vs. written), there seems to be no conclusive evidence about its efficacy.

# Making the Case

Although corrective feedback is a widely applied pedagogical tool, whose use has found strong support in SLA, there is also extensive research that questions its usefulness as a facilitator, arguing that it can potentially impede language learning and language acquisition, as evidenced by the well-known Truscott–Ferris debate. Despite Truscott’s strong claim for the negative impact of corrective feedback, there is currently substantial empirical evidence showing that feedback can positively affect language acquisition. Among other positive aspects, different types of teacher feedback can be seen as providing the kind of scaffolding process that engages learners in formulating linguistic hypotheses about how the target language system works, negotiating meaning and form, and discussing language.

The use of feedback as a learning tool has been addressed in all theories of SLA (see e.g. Bitchener & Ferris (2012) for a recent thorough historical overview of error correction from an SLA language-learning perspective). According to Ur (1996), audio-lingualism claims that correction is of little or no use to learners, and that learner mistakes are avoided by progressing in very short, controlled steps. Positive feedback is fostered to the extent that it represents a reinforcement of performance. Likewise, in Krashen’s Monitor model, a highly influential approach, correction is not seen as contributing to real acquisition of the language, but only to the learner’s conscious monitoring of speech or writing. It therefore considers that the main activity of the teacher is to provide comprehensible input from which the learner can acquire language, rather than correcting learners’ performance. For cognitive code-learning approaches, mistakes are part of the learning process and should be corrected whenever they occur. Similarly, approaches to interlanguage consider corrective feedback a good strategy for bringing the learner’s interlanguage closer to the target language. For advocates of communicative approaches to language learning, language instruction has to be content-based, meaningful, contextualized, and discourse-based. Correction is restricted to mistakes that interfere with the main purpose of achieving meaningful communication, and grammatical inaccuracies are not the focus of corrective feedback.

However, new proposals within the communicative model question the nature of grammar instruction or grammar awareness activities that are appropriate for ESL/EFL. Current communicative models of ESL/EFL have integrated to a different extent a focus-on-form approach that views corrective feedback as a pedagogical instrument (e.g., Long, 1991; Swain, 1995). As a focus-on form tool, feedback can direct learners’ attention to form when performing a communicative task. This has two positive effects: it allows an intervention without disrupting the communicative activity, and it allows noticing. According to Schmidt’s (1994) noticing hypothesis, noticing combines two key components of cognitive linguistic processing, attention and awareness, and it is only through conscious attention that input can become intake, that is, that there can be acquisition. Also Long’s (1983) interaction hypothesis suggests that error correction helps language acquisition— not just language learning—by helping learners to negotiate meaning and map form with meaning. Interestingly, from the area of teacher pedagogy, Harmer (2007) also notes that making mistakes in the process of learning is natural, so that by paying attention to their various mistakes, and to where and why they are made, students themselves can learn more about the language they are studying. There is thus general consensus in psycholinguistics and SLA accounts that attention is a necessary condition of language learning, even if there is a certain amount of disagreement on the level of awareness that should be involved (see e.g. Bardovi-Hardig & Dörnyei, 1989; James & Garret, 1991; Schmidt, 1992).

Studies of SLA describe a number of factors and contextual variables that determine the organization of feedback (Lyster & Ranta, 1997; Ellis, 2009; Sheen & Ellis, 2011; Lyster, Saito, & Sato, 2013). These can be divided into six categories: (1) what?—the target and focus of feedback, (2) how?—the methodology (techniques and strategies), (3) who?—the source and the recipient of feedback, (4) when?—the timing factor, (5) how much?—the scope of feedback, and (6) other factors. As for the last of these, elements such as institutional setting, class size, or frequency of classes may play a role in organizing feedback. Point 3 would include aspects related to learners’ variables, such as age and proficiency level, both as patients or recipients of feedback but also, and importantly, as the agents or producers of the feedback.

The target of linguistic or formal feedback (1) in both oral and written modalities involves mechanical errors in spelling and punctuation, morphosyntactic errors (e.g., word order or tenses), phonological problems (e.g., mispronunciation, stress, or intonation), lexical errors (e.g., inappropriate use of vocabulary), semantic problems due to lack of understanding despite correctness (e.g., wrong word choice), or pragmatic problems (e.g., level of politeness or contextual requirements). When providing written feedback, this includes feedback on the use of specific grammatical devices for cohesion (e.g., substitution, ellipsis, reference, conjunctions), as well as on structural and content-based discourse-organizing features (e.g., coherence, text content, argumentation, placement and organization of ideas, paragraph order, text articulation, topical development). The feedback strategies and techniques that should be applied in each case will depend on the other variables: for example, whether students can correct themselves or need additional explanation, whether we are dealing with developmental errors—errors resulting from wrong assumptions or over-generalizations about the language system—whether feedback is oral or written.

With regard to (2), research on (mostly) corrective linguistic feedback has classified it into a variety of techniques or strategies that can be organized into recasts or reformulations (Ellis’s input-providing feedback) and prompts (Ellis’s outputprompting feedback). These can be used in oral or in written settings, which can in turn be explicit or explicit, as shown in Table 1, on oral feedback strategies. SLA research has mostly focused on examining the frequency of use of these strategies, but recently it has started to report reliable experimental studies on the effectiveness of the various techniques and on the relationship between these strategies and learner uptake. This development was triggered by the most recent theories of L2 that incorporate focus on form, which hypothesize the need for noticing (attention and awareness), plus further repair, for acquisition or intake.

The use of paralinguistic feedback has often been acknowledged to be an important element of human communication (e.g., Gullberg, 2006); however, the role of non-verbal behavior in providing corrective feedback has been largely overlooked in SLA research, so that little is known about its effect on learners’ acquisition. It is temporally co-expressive with oral feedback. Non-verbal feedback includes hand gestures, head movements, facial expressions, or eye movements. It has been argued that such devices can facilitate comprehension of the oral message, and can thus play a key role in SLA and learnability.

Table 1 Oral feedback strategies.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Implicit</td><td>Explicit</td></tr><tr><td>Reformulation (input-providing)</td><td>Conversational recasts</td><td>Didactic recasts</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Explicit correction</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Explicit correction with metalinguistic explanation</td></tr><tr><td>Prompts (output-prompting)</td><td>Repetition</td><td>Metalinguistic clue</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Clarification request</td><td>Elicitation</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Paralinguistic signal</td></tr></table></body></html>

Source: Adapted from Sheen & Ellis, 2011; Lyster, Saito, & Sato, 2013.

Table 2 Written feedback strategies.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Direct</td><td>Indirect</td></tr><tr><td>Metalinguistic information</td><td>Correct form with grammatical explanation</td><td>Use of error code</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Use of grammatical explanation</td></tr><tr><td>No metalinguistic information</td><td>Correct form</td><td>Errors indicated but nots. located</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Reformulation of entire sentence or paragraph</td><td>Errors indicated and. located</td></tr></table></body></html>

Source: Adapted from Sheen & Ellis, 2011.

In the case of written feedback, this is always explicit, but it can be direct or indirect, as classified in Table 2, depending on whether a correct version is provided or not.

Another factor that has been taken into account in organizing feedback is (3), the source of feedback: here we can talk about self-correction, peer feedback, teacher feedback, or computer-mediated feedback. Peer review has been widely used in ESL/EFL classrooms despite its potential shortcomings as reported in the literature; specifically, its reliability and effectiveness among learners have been questioned (see Lam, 2010, for suggestions on how to train learners before engaging in interactive peer work). As for the recipient of feedback, the learners, their proficiency level, age, and goals must be considered when organizing feedback. As has been mentioned in the ESL/EFL literature, it is important to note that what is appropriate for one student may be quite wrong for another; individual learners’ needs will thus play a role when planning or giving feedback.

The timing factor, (4), is key to deciding whether feedback should be immediate or delayed. This only applies to oral feedback, since written feedback will always be delayed. It is generally agreed that when students are involved in communicative activities requiring fluency, such as a role-play or conversation, immediate feedback is intrusive and not appropriate because it would interfere with the flow of the activity. It could also inhibit learners’ interaction. However, cognitive theories of SLA have argued that feedback should be provided immediately in what has been called a window of opportunity, a point at which the cognitive mechanisms that facilitate intake are activated.

As for the scope of feedback, (5), research is inconclusive as to the relative benefits of focused or intensive feedback versus unfocused or extensive feedback. The former refers to selective feedback on some specific linguistic aspects or error categories (Sheen, 2007), whereas the latter refers to providing feedback on any number of unrelated issues on a single occasion. Focused correction has been the type of feedback chosen for use in experimental studies (Sheen & Ellis, 2011).

Among the remaining factors, (6), the educational setting can have an influence on learners’ perceptions and preferences regarding corrective feedback, and therefore on its effectiveness (e.g., Sheen, 2004). Learner perceptions may likewise represent an important variable that can influence classroom dynamics because of social or cultural differences.

To conclude, when organizing feedback instructors need to identify the problem—whether grammatical, content-based, or discourse-related—consider the type of learners, the timing, and factors such as class objectives or class organization if oral feedback is involved, or the scope of feedback, before deciding on the best feedback strategy to apply.

# Pedagogical Implications

While most teachers value using feedback to help students bring their interlanguage closer to the target language, questions such as the amount or type of feedback that should be given on grammatical production are still unresolved, if we are to organize feedback on the basis of research-based effectiveness.

However, there seems to be consensus on a variety of aspects, and SLA researchers and teachers share a number of ideas that can be summarized as pedagogical suggestions and research-informed recommendations (e.g., Ferris, 2004; Harmer, 2007; Van Beuningen, 2010; Nassaji & Fotos, 2011; Sheen & Ellis, 2011).

Feedback is a necessary component of L2 instruction; teachers should be well prepared to be able to identify and effectively treat students’ errors and provide appropriate feedback. The proper organization of feedback requires the teacher to be sensitive to the type of problem and its most appropriate treatment, as well as to the students’ needs, their proficiency level, and the teaching context. Researchers also agree that learners must notice the corrective force of the feedback. In general, the type of feedback with greatest impact on L2 development is explicit feedback that elicits a student’s repair response, with or without metalinguistic clues. In providing written feedback, this can best be done through indirect feedback, which engages students in a cognitive learning process that is more likely to end up in acquisition. When dealing with oral feedback, since recasts or reformulations have been shown to appear ambiguous to learners, elicitations that prompt learners’ output modification may be more effective; this approach also prompts self-correction and learners’ active engagement in producing a modified output. Indeed, feedback that encourages uptake has been shown in the literature to be more effective.

Depending on the learners’ developmental level and proficiency, it may be advisable to begin by giving negotiated feedback with indirect elicitation and, if necessary, continue with a more direct reformulation or correction (Nassaji & Fotos, 2011). This provides learners with the opportunity to engage cognitively in the learning process and endows them with long-lasting learning strategies. Both immediate and delayed feedback promote linguistic development. In the case of oral feedback, Hedge (2001) suggests the use of recording to postpone feedback to a time when it won’t disrupt fluency practice—even at the expense of losing the window of opportunity. As mentioned above, research is inconclusive with respect to the amount of feedback teachers should give on each particular occasion. On the one hand, focused feedback that targets some specific linguistic feature in an oral context may be more effective in that it does not overburden the learner’s cognitive capacity. On the other hand, delayed written feedback involves no temporal limitation that affects cognition, so that here unfocused feedback may be preferable and even desirable, because focused written feedback would seem more like a simple grammar exercise than an instance of feedback.

Most of the literature on feedback revolves around error correction. Getting the students to keep their own error charts has been shown to be a valuable strategy to increase their awareness of their weaknesses and enhance opportunities for improvement. Note that correction is considered a case of negative feedback. Positive feedback in the form of praising students for their correctness may also be helpful in fostering motivation and encouraging accuracy, although praise is only effective if learners know the reason for it and believe it is merited (Harmer, 2007). Furthermore, almost all SLA and experimental studies on feedback have focused on corrective feedback that targets formal grammar correction, and do not consider aspects of content or discourse structure correction (cohesion, coherence, etc.) in their analysis of written feedback.

In addition, the use of portfolios, weekly journals, or reports which can integrate aspects of meaning, content, and discourse has provided useful as a self-feedback methodology that can trigger self-reflection and develop learners’ autonomy.

Finally, using feedback sheets or rubrics, either linked to learning outcomes or assessment objectives, can also be a fast and effective way of providing feedback to learners. Since they are directly connected to assessment and evaluation, they can be positively perceived by learners.

SEE ALSO: CALL (Computer-Assisted Language Learning) and Feedback; Direct Versus Indirect Grammar Feedback; Implicit Versus Explicit Grammar Feedback; Peer Feedback and Teaching Grammar; Teacher Written Feedback

# References

language violations? Pragmatic versus grammatical awareness in instructed L2 learning. TESOL Quarterly, 32(2), 233–62.   
Bitchener, J., & Ferris, D. R. (2012). Written corrective feedback in second language acquisition and writing. New York, NY: Routledge.   
Ellis, R. (2009). Corrective feedback and teacher development. L2 Journal, 1(1), 3–18.   
Ferris, D. R. (2004). The “grammar correction” debate in L2 writing: Where are we, and where do we go from here? (and what do we do in the meantime…?). Journal of Second Language Writing, 13(1), 49–62.   
Gullberg, M. (2006). Some reasons for studying gesture and second language acquisition. IRAL-International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 44(2), 103–24.   
Harmer, J. (2007). The practice of English language teaching. Harlow, England: Pearson Education.   
Hedge, T. (2001). Teaching and learning in the language classroom. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.   
James, C., & Garret, P. (1991). Language awareness in the classroom. Harlow, England: Longman.   
Lam, R. (2010). A peer review training workshop: Coaching students to give and evaluate peer feedback. TESL Canada Journal, 27(2), 114.   
Long, M. H. (1983). Native speaker/non-native speaker conversation and the negotiation of comprehensible input. Applied Linguistics, 4(2), 126–41.   
Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. Foreign Language Research in Cross-Cultural Perspective, 2(1), 39–52.   
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19(1), 37–66.   
Lyster, R., Saito, K., & Sato, M. (2013). Oral corrective feedback in second language classrooms. Language Teaching, 46(1), 1–40.   
Nassaji, H., & Fotos, S. S. (2011). Teaching grammar in second language classrooms: Integrating form-focused instruction in communicative context. New York, NY: Routledge.   
Schmidt, R. (1992). Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 13, 206–26.   
Schmidt, R. (1994). Deconstructing consciousness in search of useful definitions for applied linguistics. AILA Review, 11, 11–26.   
Sheen, Y. (2004). Corrective feedback and learner uptake in communicative classrooms across instructional settings. Language Teaching Research, 8(3), 263–300.   
Sheen, Y. (2007). The effect of focused written corrective feedback and language aptitude on ESL learners’ acquisition of articles. TESOL Quarterly, 41(2), 255–83.   
Sheen, Y., & Ellis, R. (2011). Corrective feedback in language teaching. Handbook of Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning, 2, 593–610.   
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B.  Seidlhofer (Eds.), Principle $\mathcal { E }$ practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honour of H. G. Widdowson (pp. 125–44). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.   
Ur, P. (1996). A course in language teaching. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Van Beuningen, C. (2010). Corrective feedback in L2 writing: Theoretical perspectives, empirical insights, and future directions. International Journal of English Studies, 10(2), 1–27.

# Suggested Readings

Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research, 77(1), 81–112.   
Loewen, S. (2012). The role of feedback. The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 442–60). New York, NY: Routledge.