# Pedagogical intentions behind teacher written feedback: The perspectives and practices of an English language teacher educator in Argentina

Hugo Santiago Sancheza\*, Livia de Araujo Donnini Rodriguest

a Department of Education, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7AY, UK b Department of Teaching Methodology and Comparative Education, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Handling Editor: Dr Hilary Nesi

# Keywords:

Written feedback   
Pedagogical intentions   
Pre-service language teacher education   
English language education

This paper examines, with specific reference to English language teacher education in Argentina, the pedagogical intentions which underlie and inform the written feedback practices of an L2 writing teacher educator. The study is part of a larger exploratory-interpretive investigation which adopted a within-site, embedded, multiple-case design, and used data obtained from document analysis and a range of interview types (background interviews, stimulated recall interviews, and reflective interviews). The findings demonstrate the influence of multiple pedagogical intentions on the teacher educator's written feedback practices, some with immediate relevance to L2 writing and others which extended beyond this field. This reinforces the conclusions drawn in previous studies that discuss the impact of pedagogical intentions which are broader than the specific content being taught. Additionally, however, the results expand on our current understanding of how pedagogical intentions operate at different levels by illustrating how micro-level, discipline-specific technicalities are embedded within and signified by macrolevel pedagogical intentions. The findings thus highlight the need to imbue fedback with educational principles that go beyond feedback itself, and have implications for L2 writing instruction and assessment, and L2 teacher education.

# 1. Introduction

Feedback has been widely recognised as a powerful pedagogical intervention with a central role in supporting student learning (Hattie & Timperley, 2007). It has been described as a an essential component in the learning cycle, providing for reflection and development (Weaver, 2006, p. 379), and as the catalyst that transforms assessment into learning (Watling & Ginsburg, 2019, p.77) Feedack has ben found to be particularly widespread, sought-afer, and effctive in second/foreign language (L2) writin classes in school and higher education contexts (Ferris, 2014; Lee, 2017), including EAP (English for Academic Purposes) setings (Zhang & Cheng, 2021) and L2 teacher education (Ferguson, 2011), given its potential to address multiple learning needs i large classes with diverse students (Boud & Dawson, 2021).

While there is general agrement about the potential of feedback as an effective pedagogical tol (Rust et al., 2005), there is also 'collective dsillusionment' (Rand, 2017) with the progres it has made towards realising this potential (Hyland, 2013; Price et al.,

2011). Recent research has found that feedback remains poorly understood and enacted by both educators and students' (Henderson et al., 2019, p. 1237) and constitutes a challenging endeavour for teachers across educational fields, levels, and contexts. Increasing understanding of how effective feedack operates requires in-deth reearch on the slippery spaces that defie fedack (Rand, 2017, p. 45), such as the strong yet elusive relationship between the public teacher feedback input) and private (teacher cognition) dimensions of feedback practice.

One area which has reeived no particularise attention in feedback research is teachers pedagogical intentions- refered to as the purpose, aims, and objectives behind practitioners teaching decisions (Nilsen, 2021, p. 4) - and the ways in which these intentions are enacted in teacher written feedback practice. The study reported in this paper addressed this research lacuna and pedagogical demand by investigating, with specific referenceto English languageteacher education in Argentina, the pedagogical intentions which underlay and informed the written feedback practices of an L2 writing teacher educator. Examining these intentions can provide invaluable insights into the unobservable dimension of the feedback process, which might deepen teachers' understanding of the underlying purposes and potential impacts of their feedback and thus support them in their eforts to align feedback with specific educational goals and improve their students' learning experiences and outcomes.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Teacher written feedback

Teacher written feedback, broadly defined as information provided in prose by the teacher about student performance and un. derstanding (Jolly & Boud, 2013), has received the mos attention in feedback research within and beyond writing education. This may be attributed largely to its ubiquity and pre-eminence in formal education (Ferris et a., 2013); the importance which both staff and students assign to ths practice (Dawson et al., 2019), possibly due to th close link between assessment and feedack (Robinson et al. 2013); as wel as the potency of teacher feedback as a formative assessment tol to improve student learning (Hattie, 2008). The effectiveness of teachr writen fdack hs also been ascribd to its pottial unique characteristic -t can be personalised, explicit tangible, traceable, and easily made private (Jolly & Boud, 2013).

Teacher writte fedback has been investigated from multiple perspectives which respond to different paradigmaticorientations in assessment (Chong, 2018; Earl, 2013). Some studies have focused on summative feedback or assessment of learning' and have thus examined the effctivenessof different types f wtten feedback through the anlysi of students writing performance. A case in point is feedack reearch on grmmar erro orrections ., Sheen t al., 2009). On the other hand, some rearch has explored formative feedback or assessment or learning', showing an interest in the collaboration and communication between teachers and students. Research under this paradigm has examined, for example, students' perspectives on feedback quality (e.g., Ferguson, 2011) and teachers' perceptions, belief, and practices (e.g, Lee, 2009). Finally, some research on formative assessment has been oriented towards an assesment as leaning paradigm, central to which s students' active engagement in the feedack cycle. Issues which this research has explored include students responses to teacher writtenfdback (e.g., Storch & Wigglesworth, 2010), the development of student feedback literacy through peer marking (g., Fnandez-Toro & Duensing, 2021), and the impact f student self-assessment on writing performance and self-regulation (e.g., Mak & Wong, 2018). Despite the significant contribution of teachers to feedback practice in school and higher education, their perspectives and experiences are notably under-researched in assessment of/for/as learning feedback research when compared to those of students (Ferris, 2014; Henderson et al., 2019).

Written fedback holds a long-standing tradition of practice and scholarship in L2 writing education (Chong, 2019; Lee 2017). This has taken the form of teacher writte corrections (widely known as written corrective feedack, wCF) and/or written commentries. Though both forms have been found to contribute to student learning (Lee, 2017), most L2 written feedback research has focused on the former, ecill from an ssment of leaing erspective (L t al., 2021). Thus stdies have examnd th efftieness of WCF types, including direct or indirect (e.g., Chander, 2003), comprehensive or focused (e.g., Rahimi, 2021), metalinguistc e.g, Bitchener & Knoch, 2010), and synchronous or asynchronous (e.g., Shintani, 2016). WCF research has recently examined learners and/or teachers percetions of WCF types, WCF practices in rel-lif classrooms, and student response to teacher wCF (Chong, 2022) This is consistent with the paradigmatic shift from positivistic (knowledge regarded as a product and feedback as the unidirectional transmission of information from teacher to students at a particular moment in time to social constructivist (knowledge conceived as socially co-constructed and feedback as a dialogic process) views on feedback (Boud & Dawson, 2021; Nicol, 2010).

Research on written commentaries has been considerably more limited in scope, focusing principally on the content (what to give feedback on) and formulation (how to give it) of written feedback. In terms of contet, written commentaries have been found to include a variety of forms, such as statements, questions, hedges, exclamations, and imperatives (Sugita, 206); and to cover a number of dimensions of writing, namely content, discourse organisation, syntax, grammar, lexical choice, register, mechanics, and style (Ferris 1997, 2003, 2014). In relaiont fomlatio, rearh has examned a range f issues, inudig clarity f epression, leve of specificity and explicitness comment length, consistency acos fdack providers, efetivenessof comment tyes, and indiduation of responses (Ferris, 1997, 2003, 2014). For instance, whil questions may be more ffective to promote cognitive enhancement and learner autonomy (Ferris 2014), imperatives seem more useful when prompting students to revise grammar ssues (Nurmukhamedo & Kim, 2010). There have also ben recent cll to increase thecological validity and pedagogical relevance of research on 2 teacher written eedack through the examination of real-life classrooms and authentic practices which capture the complexity and messiness of the feedback process (Lee et al., 2021).

The present study aimed to contribute to the body of research on teacher written feedback by, unlike most previous studies, adopting a holisic (examining both formative and summative feedback as wellas ifferent feedback types and forms) and ecologicel (using genuine samples of actual feedback practice) approach It thus examined evidence f and a teacher's perspectives on authentic written corrctions and commentaries within both formative and summative writtenfeedback in a real-life academic writing class

# 2.2. Pedagogical intentions

While teachers pedagogical intentions have not been specifically adressed in feedback research, insights into these can be gained from studies which examined quality assessment feedback (e.g., Dunworth & Sanchez, 2016; Nicol & Macfarlane-Dick, 2006Nicol & Macfarlane-Dick, 2006), teachers rationales for providing feedback (e.g., Hong, 2021), or academic literacy instruction and development more broadly (e.g., Kathpalia & Heah, 2008). Collectively, these studies have characterised quality teacher feedback and effective writing intruction as being transformative, thus supporting cognitive and ingustic development through pedagogical procedures and processes which involve, for example, promoting reflection and critical thinking, raising linguistic and metacognitive awareness, facilitating skills-development, and fostering accuracy and intelligibility (Dunworth & Sanchez, 2016; Hong, 2021; Kathpali & Heah, 2008). They also highlight the afective and social atribute of teacher fedback and writing teaching approaches given their potential to, inter alia, augment students' sense of self-eficacy and confidence, improve their emotional regulation, forge relationship building, and cultivate a deeper sense of personal and social identity (Dunworth & Sanchez, 2016; Kathpalia & Heah, 2008; Nicol & Macfarlane-Dick, 2006Nicol & Macfarlane-Dick, 2006; Yang & Carless, 2013).

Despite the multidimensional implications of these pedagogical practices, the sils agenda still dominates teacher feedback and academic writing istruction, with a focus on facilitating the acquisition of discrete, transferable skill or competences (Badenhorst et al., 2015), such as proficiency in using grammar, lexis, and punctuation (Pearson, 2018); and syntax, paraphrasing, and structuring of ideas (Orsini-Jones, 2009). The predominance of these pedagogical intentions and practices is not unexpected considering the measurable and transferale qualities of kills and their ability to offr tangible indicators of writig iteracy which areften mployed for evaluating students' literacy 'deficits'.

Beyond feedback and academic literacy research, scant scholarly attention has been directed towards elucidating the pedagogical intentions that inform educators instructional choices. Within this scholarly pursuit, a distinct strand endeavours to scrutinise the practical realisation of these pedagogical intentions. Hansen (2020), for example, examined the consistency level between mathe. matics teachers intentions in using Nicol and Macfarlane-Dick's (2006) principles of good feedback practice (e.g., in relation to self-assesment, rflection and dialogue) and the students experiences of them. She found alignment in key aspects of formative assesment, which she attributed to the concerted effrts and committed involvement of both parties. In L2 education in particular, Sanchez and Borg (2014) identified nine types of pedagogical concerns which motivated their teacher participants' choice of grammar teaching techniques. Whil some of these concerns related specifically to grammar teaching (e.g., monitoring understanding of grammar notions), most were broader in scope and extended beyond the specific content being taught (e.g, motivating learners, promoting reflction, and encouraging participation) Similarly, Yang and Sanchez (2021) found that teachers' selection and enactment of L2 motivational strategies were ofen grounded in non-motivational intentions, such as supporting the memorisation of vocabulary, facilitating language comprehension, and encouraging the adoption of learning strategies. These studies on pedagogical intentions, though distinctly limited in number acrosdisciplines, provide unique and valuable insights into teachers complex and multidimensional decision-making processes.

The study presented in this paper sought to advance reearch on pedagogical intentions through a comprehensive examination that incorporates cognitie, afective, inguistic, and social dimensions. By adopting a multifaceted aproach, the am was to offer a thorough understanding of the intricate nature of teacher written feedback practices. Moreover, this research contributes to the existing body of knowledge by delving into the specific pedagogical intentions and practices of an understudied stakeholder group: language teacher educators. Given their role in instructing future teachers on writing, they may offer nuanced insights into the dimensions mentioned above.

# 3. Methodology

# 3.1. Study design

The present study was guided by the following research question: What pedagogical intentions underlie and inform the written feedback ractces of an 2 witing teacher educator? It i part of a larger investgation into the role of teacher writte fdack in the development of pre-service L2 teachers language awareness and the cognitive, affctive, and contextual factors which facilitat or inhibit this development. The primary project was exploratory-interpretive in nature and followed a within-sit, embedded, multiplecase design. Two case studies were conducted within the same intial English language teacher education (IELE) programme at astate university in Argentina. Each case was bounded within the same English writing classand included three L2 student teachers and a team of teacher educators who provided writing instruction and asesmet feedback on students writte drafts and final assinments. All participants (six pre-service teachers and five writing teachers) were selected through convenience sampling, were provided with information about the study in advance, and consented to the research in writing. In order to maintain anonymity and confidentiality, they were all allocated pseudonyms, and identifiable personal and contextual information was removed.

This paper focuses on the perceptions and practices of Dora, one of the writing teachers. Centring our attention on a single participant enabled us to examine the depth and breadth of individual stories and the complexity of the pedagogical thinking underlying teachers written feedback decisions and actions. We selected Dora because, unlike the other teachers, she articulated a remarkably high level of pedagogical awarenes i her rtionales during stimulated recall interviews. Additionally, the pre-service teachers across the two cases had been taught by Dora at some point in their IELTE studies and individuall highlighted the effectivenessof her written feedback. We acknowledge that focusing on a single teacher limits the generalisability of the study indings to broader populations or contexts. Nevertheles, like Lincoln and Guba (1985), we believe that it is not within the researchers purview to furnish atransferabilit index; rather, our responsibility resides in presenting data of sustantive richness affrding readers and users of the research the capacity to independently evaluate the potential for transferability. The detailed findings presented below can, therefore, provide valuable insights into the intersection between pedagogical intentions and teaching practice and may thus be transferable to other L2 teaching practices involving assessment feedback.

# 3.2. Context and participant

The study was conducted in Argentina, a country with well-established and thriving IELTE programmes and yet under-represented in English-medium second language journals (Banegas et al., 2020). Data were collected in a four-year IELTE course which was structured around four core curricular areas: linguistic foundations, lingustic kills teacher education, and cultural studies. The two modules wherein pedagogical intentions and writte feedack were examined constituted compulsory elements of the linguistic skils area. They shared an interest in creative and academic writing and in supporting the development of students' writing skills and language awareness through ascaffolded proces-writing approach (e.g., se Flower, 1993) which involved iterative cycles of planning; drafting; seking teacher and, ccasionall, peer fdback; revising; and editing. Both modules were team-taught by at least two teachers, each with responsibilitie for providing writig intruction and written feedback. Each modul consisted of weekly lectures and practical seminars ( $^ { \textrm { \scriptsize 8 h } }$ per week, $^ { 1 2 8 \mathrm { h } }$ in total) extending over a period of 16 weeks.

Dora, the focal participant, was a teacher educator with over 30 years of teaching experience and qualifications at undergraduate and postgraduate levels. he spoke English and Spanish, both as anL1; perceived herself as an avid reader with an intermittent interest in fictional writing and publishing rearch and engagd systematiclly in refletive practice and in-srvice professional development particularly in relationto language skils aquisition, edgogy, and stdet wellbing. She taught a3-h interactive lecture every week and focused on text analysis and academic essay writing (using traditional and rigid typologies of esays, such as expository, descriptie, and narrative).Assesment in her module comprised an oral hlf-term exam (asessing students analysis f fiction and non-fiction texts) and a written end-term exam (consisting of a single written essay which was completed within $^ { 2 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$

# 3.3. Data collection and analysis

Data were collected using a multi-method approach, which included three types of interview and document analysis over three distinct stages.

Stage 1: a 120-min semi-structured background interview was conducted with Dora at the beginning of the project in order to establish a profile of her educational and professonal background, and of her perceptions of teacher language awareness and written fdack. This interview also rovided valuable contextual information about the ELTE course (e.., its explicit and hidden curriculum, pedagogical and learning practices, and linguistic values and biases) and the specific clases investigated (e.g., core aims, content, pedagogical approaches, and feedback practices). The student participants provided copies of the teacher written feedback they had received in Dora's classes.   
Stage 2: (a) an analysis of Dora's written feedback was performed in order to identify key feedback types (e.g., formative/summative, corrections/commentaries, direct/indirect, comprehensive/focused) and content (what the feedback focused on and how it was provided). Samples which captured our participant's feedback style were selected and used as written stimuli in a stimulated recall interview. (b) A $1 2 0 { \cdot } \mathrm { m i n }$ stimulated recall interview with Dora was carried out in order to discuss her written feedback practices. In relation to the focus of this paper, we explored the pedagogical intentions behind Dora's writte feedback as wellas the internal and external factors which she believed had facilitated or inhibited the enactment of such intentions.   
Stage 3: a 45-min final reflective interview with Dora was conducted in order to probe into specific issues concerning teacher Ianguage awareness 2 written feedback practices, and L2 teacher education which had been identified from the data analysis. Examples of the issues discussed include linguistic identity and prejudice, personalised learning, student agency and autonomy, and teacher professional education.

The interviews in which Dora participated produced a total of 29,805 words. Based on our participant's choice, they were con ducted in English, with occasional reference to Spanish when she made cross-linguistic comparisons.

The interview data collected were analysed inductively following asystematic and continuous process of data familiarisation; code generation; theme searching, reviewing, defining, and labelling; and thematic categorisation (Braun & Clarke, 2006) as wellas descriptive and interpretative phases (Paton, 2002). Within the data set, particular atention was paid to Dora's rationales, as they offered insight into her pedagogical intentions and the internal and external factors which influenced their enactment. The data collection and analysis were cyclical throughout the period of fieldwork, eac stage being informed by the analysi of the data collected in previous stages until data collection was complete.

# 4. Results

From the analysis of Dora's written feedback and rationales we identified four macro categories of pedagogical intentions and, within each, a series of strategies which she adopted to enact these intentions. These categories, whil they have ben isted here separately for ease of presentation and description, were in practice overlapping and integrated. The findings are ilustrated with quotations from the participant, and the following conventions are used: (BI) for background interviews, (SRI) for stimulated recall interviews, (DA) document analysis, and (RI) for reflective interview.

# 4.1. Promoting agency and autonomy

Promoting agency and autonomy was a pedagogical priority for Dora and permeated most of her pedagogical rationales and decisions when she provided written feedback.

I am particularly concened when I notice that the student doesnt think for himself or hrelf . they demand recipes, they want you to provide the answers, they copy down everything ou say ad then reeat it in n exam . that i otthe type of stuent tht I ould like to come out of my classes. I would ike a student who goes deeper, doesn't only stick to the notes they're taking in class but o and read, investigate further, even those who challenge you and your views.' (RI)

This intention framed not only Dora's practices but also her conceptualisations of language and participants roles, be they her own or those of her students. Dora believed that the role of the tacher was that fa facilitator (, offering sugestions' and explanations) or an informed reader who would react to the student's writing (e.g., voicing doubts'). Through comments which were intended as invitations, the student was encouraged to refect investigate further, and make decisions. At the same time, language was viewed as an open system with multiple possbilities and the intention of the writer was perceived by our participant as a key element in the writing process Dora thus conceptualised the student as someone capable of independent and critical thinking who could achieve agency (decide which form best expressed their intended meaning) by means of the resources and affordances of the environment.

In general, my comments are invitations. They are suggestions, or doubts, because I'm not sure if that is exactly what hey are meaning so they should go and check. In some cases I explain the grammar or vocabulary use so that they can choose if that i really what they wanted o say . here I'm inviting the student to decid ether to change this prepositional complement for a noun or to change the form of the verb altogether, to use the infinitive. I'm inviting the student to look this up and to make a decision.' (SRI)

Dora also promoted agency by raiing awarenessof key writing issues which the student then acted on. One of the strategies she used to do this was writing a summary comment at the end of apassage to highlight 'a serious problem' which the student needed to focus on (SRI). This summary not only pointed out the issue (e.g., You are missig a thesis/topic statement, DA) but also provided an explanation of why addressing this issue was important (e.g., for the reader to know what direction your narration istaking, DA).

The fact that they become aware of the problem and they can, in their second draft focus on that problem and solve it, or improe t, is aready proviing them wth  strateg for fure use. Probably, nt tie they write an essay, for xmple, in this case, thetde il probably check if she has included a thesis statement and . she will dready have developed some strategy to know how to inroduce a thesis statement, possibly she will have to goback to the notes sh had on how to organisesays, the theory that sh was given, in order to know how to do this.' (SRI)

In addition, promoting agency required that Dora create a non-threatening ambience where the student felt safe while addressing heir areas for improvement. To help create this affectie space from which agency may sprout, she attempted to strike a balance Jetween 'over-correction and under-correction' (BI).

You can threaten by overcorrecting but you can aso threaten by under-corrcting, by just leaving it for the student to ind out. Its very intimidating for the students when you dont know where to look up the infomation, where to find  phrase that could be bettr than the one that is possibly the only thing that they know. So,I ry to find thebalance between those two extremes - over-corrction and undercorrection.' (BI)

Providing balanced feedback which was conducive to students' agentic and autonomous behaviour was not an easy task and often called for a differentiated approach to feedback.

Sometimes I'm frad that  might e gin tomuch  the tudents.. I ight be a it motherly in this reect in the sens tat eel that they already have a great burden of having to write the essay and kee to the correct grammar, vocabulary, iscourse organisation, to overload them with teling them Ok, look up every single word yourself and find out yourself whats wrong'. It's sometimes expecting a litle it too much, especilly in the case of  student such as this who I know, because of previous writings that I've reeived from her, needs more guidance because she doesn't have the linguistic level. ' (SRI)

Dora here drew on her previous experience marking the student's work and her subsequent perception of the student's inguistic level to asses the amount of support (in the form of informative comments and explanations) which she perceived the student needed to respond to feedback.

Striking a balance between being overhelpful (e.g., giving them the words, BI) and unhelpful (leav[ing] everythingin their hands, BI) also required, Dora argued, providing orientational fedack in the form of questions which may orient the student as to what dirction' to take (BI). Our participant illustrated this point with the following example.

If you underline a whole phrase and you just write're-write, sometimes the students don't know how to start, where to look for, but, pehaps, if ou just writ one or two ids in questionmarks, that wil probably orient th student as to what i thedirection in which he [sic has to change hi phrase .I wouldnt ust orrect it and say no, this s the way you'd say it. Beause I'm not ure what the student really wanted to say, so I prefer to provide questions and ask the student to ask himself or herslf what he or she meant.' (BI)

# 4.2. Enhancing self-worth and self-efficacy

Dora enhanced students' self-worth and self-eficacy by helping them build up a positive image of themselves' as language users (BI). This required, she believed, commenting on students' strengths, as this would increase their resilience and sustain their motivation to improve.

The strengths are necessary because if they don't have a positive image of themseles as writers or speakers, they will not be willing to keep on trying and keep on improving; so, the first thing is to respect their self-esteem so that they will continue trying. (BI)

In addition, Dora argued that information about strengths would fed into students' linguistic knowledge and literacy skills, whicl they would confidently be able to draw on in subsequent experiences.

If they feelthat nthing that thy writ is wortwhile they probaly won't do the efor next ime . he tude ne to kow if part the paper has its strong points and which are those strong points so that they can repeat them, or they can repeat a similar strategy the next time they write.' (SRI)

Positive-oriented written feedback also took the form of comments on the contents or ideas of students writing, such as the teacher haring her personal reaction to the story (BI), and was intended to establish a trusting and trustworthy pedagogical relationship with he student, one which was encouraging and, yet, honest..

'I try to focus on the positive if I can. hat is, generally, making  gneral comment at the end of thefedack connected with the content or with the ideas or with my personal reacton to the story or whatever t is the student is writing that can let the students know that I'm with them, that I am making an effort to understand what they'e trying to ransmit to me. But, at the same time, ltig them know what their weak points are.' (BI)

Enhancing students' self-worth and selfeficacy represented a challenge when Dora perceived the students' writing as of poor quality (completely disorganised or very ilogical or fullof inaccuracies, BIl. To cope with this, astrategy she used involved providing neutral comments which were neither to positive nor absolutely detrimental or judgemental (BI). These balanced comments included a summative list of areas for improvement which guided the student on how to address ssues in a focused, gradual manner.

Dora also believed that students' affective state was impacted as much by the content of teacher feedback as by the way it was communicated. This would influence how students perceived the teacher's comments and whether and how they responded to them.

I think that students] are very affected by the feedback they receive . After years of experience, I hae discoered that one has to e really careful with how one says things .. the way you say it can be very problematic and can be the difference between a receptive answer, a student who is wlling to ite to you and do something bout the mistake and corretit and reiv t simplyas a constructive type of evaluation, and negative reception in which the student may feel under attack or feel that he [sic] is being judged or criticised unfairly.' (BI)

Dora claimed that, unlike face-to-face feedback, written feedback which the students may read on their own presented more hallenge, as the intention of the teacher was not always clearly communicated and there was no opportunity to reformulate what had seen written or clarify any misunderstandings.

Thave lened through experience that some comments, especially questions, can be misunderstod for irony, and therefore you an hae a negative answer. It happened to me with one student once [who] reacted negatively. She felt hurt because she thought that I was being ironic and that was not relly my intention... it s simply a question... that's the danger of witten feback when you are not face to face.' (BI)

Enhancing students' self-worth and self-fficacy also entailed a differentiated approach to formative feedback. Students with revious unsuccessul experiences in her clas may be lacking i confidence and linguistic sills and may require Dora believed, early ormative feedback which inducted them into the demands of the course and offered opportunities for extensive practice.

provide ctivty for those tents wh aretking the subect So, in the firt clse rey ieh the ess sks tht know they would be geting late on, because I know that those are the weaker students and, perhaps, the ones that have a more damaged self esteem and, therefore, need a lot of practice to gain confidence and to develop their skills.' (BI)

# 4.3. Promoting linguistic accuracy

Dora provided extensive feedback on what she considered were linguistic inaccuracies with a view to encouraging students to produce error-free texts. Her reference to 'a goal, 'a form or minimum norm', and some direction' suggests a prescriptivist view of L2 development as a linear process which uses the native speaker of the L2 as a point of reference (might not sound natural to a native speaker', SRI). This conceptualisation of accuracy and L2 development informed her pedagogical intentions and strategies as she promoted linguistic accuracy.

If a goal didn't exist if a certain form or minimum norm of approriateness and accuracy didn't exist, there would be no direction towards ... the student would be at a loss as to what direction to go.' (RI)

Dora approached the proces of promotig linguistic accuracy by reacting, as an informed reader,to part of the student's written xroduction which she felt uncomfortable with' (BI). As strategies, she indicated where the problem lay, nominated or labelled the nistake, and suggested sources which might help them correct inaccuracies.

In general, I highlight those parts that, as  reader, I'm feeing uncomfortable with, and I would probably indicate what is the problem or why I'm reacting negatively to that particular phrase. So, I would probably either nominate the problem and say something like Wrong word. Why don't you look for another word? In some cases, I would suggest that the student go for a certain source, a dictionary or thesaurus and find synonyms, see if one is more appropriate here.' (BI)

Dora also ilustrated her explanations with actual examples of the mistake from the student's work. This helped to show students that explanations were grounded in their own written production.

like to write down actual examples of the particular mistake the student has made . the example is what actually helps the student tc realise what they said and, possibly, to pay more attention in whatever make-up test they might have after that.' (BI)

The decision of what aspects of students' writing she would focus on was shaped by the course objectives. Considering she wa. eaching third-year students, she argued she prioritised issues concerning content and discourse organisation.

I'm working with third-year students and I am correcting esays. So, I prer to focus n . the students leaning the skil of organising their writing and their discourse organisation firt . the rationale behind our present course of studies is to incorporate content and critical thinking and organisational discourse much more as the student progresses through the course of studies. (SRI)

Having this broader goal in mind did not prevent Dora from commenting on discrete linguistic ssues at sentence level. Here is an example which she provided.

I marked certain very specific linguistic questions like wailing by the pain', indicating that it was a wrong word; so, there were some moments when I was zooming in purely into the linguistic question, the use of preposition in this case.' (SRI)

Assessing students work thus involved a constant process of zooming in and out, placing more emphasis on mistakes which she believed would intrfere wth the expresion of meaning f the vocabulary us was not correct but t did no ause serious confusion in the understanding of the text, I wouldn't have commented on it so repetitively', SRI).

A particular discrete linguistic aspect which Dora's fedback seemed to emphasise concerned terms or phrases which she though did not 'sound natural' in the L2.

When that [1 transfer mistake] happens  usually mark i as awkward, . it means thee's not  grammar or syntax problem i simply doesn't sound natural for some reason ... it's not a normal phrase that appears in English.' (SRI)

Providing fdback on this type of mistakes constituted, Dora believed, one of the greatest challenges for a correctr ince one feels it's wrong, but you don't have the label or the necessary word to explain why it s particuarly wrong (RI). This might suggest that, to our participant, the ffective promotion of linguistic accuracy required, whenever possble, not only signalling mistakes but also labelling and explaining them.

Promoting linguistic accuracy likewise involved raising awareness of terms or phrases which, albeit not erroneous, were not altogether clear and could be improved. Issues which were perceived as minor were usually indicated with dotted lines and, where neessary, wee accompanied by an explanation (When I mark it with dotted line it means t's not a tremendous mistake; i could ctally not be a mistake, but I think it's something that was slightly not clear or could be improved', SRI).

The analysis of Dora's feedback and rationales shows that her intention to promote linguistic accuracy of discrete items at sentence level was more marked when she perceived the level of the student as low.

As I had dlrady orcted severl things from [ths student] nd I knew her ingustic level was lower.., I was particulaly interested in marking certain linguistic aspects that were causing problems. So, if you take a look at my feedback in this paper, you willsee that although I did react mostly as a reader [focusing on content], I was marking linguistic questions much more.' (SRI)

Furthermore, Dora supported the development of metalanguage as astrategy to promote linguistic accuracy. Metalanguage proided ashorthand way of referring to language, raised students' awareness of language use and isues, and constituted a heuristc tool hich enabled them to monitor their language production and discuss language issues with others.

started nomntin  bit more recly some f the problems tht I otied like, for instance, parallelis. bause the stdnt has the name, thy ansot identiigt d latr on, eagt t thr. being ble o nminte the roblem, giv it anme or give it a category is important because if the category is too wide, like 'grammar, it's not much help.' (BI)

# 4.4. Supporting professional knowledge production and identity growth

Underlying Dora's pedagogical intentions while providing writte fdback was she believed, her intention to support professional knowledge production and identity growth. This involved both transmiting one's vocation for teaching and promoting, through feedback, the type of teacher she aimed to be and would like her students to be - reflective and critical.

I'm influenced, in the first place, by the knowledg that thee students are studying to be teachers and think that that has a great weight on me because, as I m very pleased with my vocation, I would like to transmit that to my students; that's why I emphasise the feedback that makes themreflect, doubt their wn ideas and ther ow expressions of ides, beause, erhaps, that's the type of tcher I like to be, I don't know if I am, but I would like to be at least, and I would like them to be.' (BI)

Dora's fedback highlighted the key role which language plays in communication. This was particularly important, she argued, for language teachers as they would act as role models for their students.

We always have to remember that students are learning content through language and the medium is as important as what is being communicated, especially as we are being trained to be teachers who are, in some way, gonna be models or be imitated in some way by our students . think that language is esentil for comuncation of ideas so f language doen't work, no mattr how much you want content to be transmitted, it won't be transmitted properly.' (BI)

Dora's rationales also indicate her intention to raise not only language awareness (explicit knowledge of language and language use) but also metacognitive awarenes by encouraging students both to monitor their linguistic development and to become cognizant of teachers language use and pedagogical purposes. The extract below, for example, shows that the pedagogical intentions behind teacher written fedback are multi-layered. Underlying Dora's intention to raise language and metacognitive awareness through reflective practice was her intention to support professional knowledge production and identity growth since she acknowledged the recipients of her written feedback both as student writers and as student teachers.

'I particularly worry when I realise that students don't monitor themselves and are not even able to monitor themselves. That is what worries me, rather than the mistakes themseles .. know that lening a language is an ongoing process and learning to be a teacher is an ongoinproces. So, th main thingis tht thy have those toos to reflect to monior to improve ther own spech s they go long and the attitude to want to do it ..So, I'm aware of their mistakes and problems, but I'm perhaps more focused on them as future pro fessionals . the main thing is that they have the tools to improve ther own language, their own transmissin of language, their own teaching skills.' (BI)

Dora facilitated the development of metacognitive awareness by encouraging students to analyse what she did as a teacher. She therefore served as a model for both language use and language teaching.

When I cn I ask them to reflect metaconitively, tha is, f I'm asking a question, I ask them  dify th type f quetion I'm making so that they're aware of what my purpose as a teacher is and, by doing so, thy can later reflect on thr own purpose and onthe iferent tools that they have as future teachers to produce or to focus on certain aspects.' (BI)

Thus, to Dora, professional identit formation for L2 teachers was multidimensional and involved growth as an L2 user, L2 teacher, and model of L2 use for their students.

I think I bear in mind the duality of that person as a language user, as a future model for his or her own students, and as a teacher, because I think the three aspects should be integrated at this point. They're already third-year students. They should be already inte grating their appropriate and accurate language use together with strategies to transmit that knowledge properly. (SRI)

# 5. Discussion

The analysis of Dora's written feedback practices and rationale reveal four macro categories of pedagogical intentions: promoting agency and autonomy, enhancing elf-worth and self-fficacy, promoting linguistic accuracy, and supportig professinal knowledge production and identity growth. Though these pedagogical intentions, as noted earlier, overlap and intertwine, each reveals in its own ways the complexity of L2 teaching. Every feedback correction or comment, be it underlining a word or providing a brief commentary on a given pasage, is loaded with meaning and connects micro-level technicalities of writing development to macro-level aspects of identity and language use. As Dora herself uts it her comments on grammar or vocabulary, for instance, are invitations for students to make their own decisions - a micro-level action (providing wrtten commentaries is thus signified by a macro-level concern (pro moting agency and autonomy).

As the above findings illutrate, the rovision of fdback on  writing is informed by a range of pedagogial intentions, some with immediate relevance to L2 writing (promoting linguisic accuracy) and others which extend beyond L2 writing (promoting agency and autonomy, enhancing self-worth and self-effcacy, supporting professional knowledge production and identity growth). This corroborates previous research findings (Sanchez & Borg, 2014; Yang & Sanchez, 2021) that emphasise the need to examine discrete pedagogical practice, such as teaching grammar or motivating learners, as an integral part of education rather than restricting our analysis to the specific content being taught. In this respect, our attempt to unveil Dora's pedagogical intentions when providing feedack constitute, ad we fe thi i a particlrly vauable utome fthis stu, a sht frm issin fack as athique or assessment tol to the understanding of fedback as an essential component of the educational triad of teaching, learning, and assessment.

The four categories of pedagogical intentions behind Dora's provision of feedback should not be read as prescribed recipes of professional practice for novice teachers. Rather, framed within an education perspective, they should be interpreted as threads within a complex tapestry that is characterised by unique combinations which respond to perceived contextual affordances and demands.

Technicalitie such as the level of specifict of written feedback - whether to indicat where the problem lies illstrate explanations with examples, or provide the correctform - fl upon a decision-making process that takes into acount not only the perceived in. adequacy of student-writer language use, but also - and mainly - an interpretation of who the student writer is and how they will respond to any commentary or marking made by the teacher. This contextually sensitive approach to teacher written feedback reinforces findings that underscore the need for teachers to support leamers in developing feedback iteracy (Carles & Boud, 2018), a pedagogical objective which can only be achieved if teachers embed their practice in broader educational goals.

It is not urprising, therefore, that providing positive-oriented written fdback has a dialogic nature for Dora, who constantl seeks to connect with her student writers without being judgmental (Nicol, 2010) or artificilly interested. Alongside this atitude, Dora's concern with promoting agency and autonomy i another prominent thread in the tapestry of her pedagogical rationale for providing written feedback. Her actions, such as creating a non-threatening ambience which help to reduce the social distance between the teacher and students (Yang & Carless 2013) or adopting a differentiated approach to the provision of feedback (Boud & Dawson, 2021), both connect and reflect her intention to reach out to her students as writers. Within this framework, an exclusive focus on language development is almost inadmissible, for the student is not restrictively seen as a language learner. The student i someone who has something to say, and Doras actions are geared towards respecting the student as a person who i capable of communicating their voice through the L2.

In this complex tapestry, promoting reflection, a pedagogical intention which features across the four macro categories identified and which has been highlighted in the literature as one of the key principles of good feedback practice (Hansen, 2020; Nicol & Macfarlane-Dick, 2006Nicol & Macfarlane-Dick, 2006), has two distinctive intended outcomes in Dora's written feedback practices. One acentuates the student as a language user in the \*here and now' of the learning process, while the other foreshadows the teacher-to-be for whom nurturing independent thinking needs to be an ongoing enterprise. The former is enacted in comments written on the margins of the paper that sometimes connect with the student writer's ideas and other times invite revision of more specific language aspects. The later acknowledges the student writer as a student tacher, establishing a parallel between student reflection and teacher reflection, both prompted by learning how to write in L2. Reflection is thus undersood as a process inexorably rooted in knowledge and awareness of language as a social practice.

Direct corrections, suggestions, questions, explanations, and examples are al feedback written commentaries which are adopted by Dora and documented in the literature as serving, collctively, multiple pedagogical purposes se Ferrs, 1997, 2003, 2014; Sugita 2006). For Dora, though, they all have a shared objective: they are invitations to reflect. The teacher directs her invitations for reflection to the student writr with a view to supporting the professional knowledge production and identity growth of the student teacher. In doing so she crates a loop effct (Wiliam, 2018) connecting present and future she devises ways to provide feedback to her student writers now through assessing and envisioning the student teachers in the future as they will, in thir turn, provide meaningful feedack to their own students. Loops within loops, providing writen feedback is part of asessment for learning the language and as learning to be a professinal teacher (Chong, 2018; Earl, 2013). In addition, the two intended outcomes of promoting reflection proclaim Dora's highest expectations: that her students turn out to be independent and critical thinkers who will- eventually if not yet rrenl-et ris and shts. he theds of agy, atmy, and refetio intrwine, crtirentation of fedback as part of the process of educating 2 users who freely and responsibly take charge f their learning to become writers and teachers.

In the dialogic feedback process tutors have been found to adopt multiple roles, including that of learning fcilitator (Li & De Luca 2014) and co-ordinator (Nicol, 2010), designer and maintainer of the learning milieu (Boud & Molloy, 2013), curriculum designer, guide and coach (Carless & Boud, 2018), and creator of feedback opportunities (Henderson et al., 2019). Embedded within Dora's dialogical written feedback practice, however, is a deeply ingrained perception of herself as an educator, embodying an all-encompassing and fluid role (rather than multiple discrete roles within a cllaborative process that necesstates both teachers and students t reciprocall provide feedback and assume shared reponsibility for the leaning journey. As Freire (1970/2017) argued, the educator transitions beyond the conventional role of mere instruction to become a participant in a dialogic exchange with students wherein all involved are simultaneously learners and educators, collectively accountable for a transformative educational process

The literre so charatri effetie fack s, iner dia, infomatie, honest, and spcific Frs et al., 2013; Molo  al. 2013) - qualities that gain a different shading in Doras tapestry. When she talks about how she attempts to avoid being speculative and prescriptive, or when she explains how she supports the development of metalanguage, one could argue that her intentions are to deliver informational, honest, and specific feedack. Similarly, micro-level actions, such as prioritising some areas for improvement and spelling out where key problems lie in a written passage, may be interpreted as the enactment of informational, honest, and specific fedack. Yet, Dora does so because she understands that raising awarenes, another pedagogical intention which runs across the four categories, is a gradual process She values the importance of accuracy; however, this is resignified and patched within the contours of raising awareness Her actions thus reflect a macro-level educational prspective of learning and feedback as a stepped and ongoing proces (Boud  Molloy, 2013). The provision of fdback meges int ning 2 writing in aproces that requires sccessive encounters between the student and the objects of knowledge in the course of time (Hatie, 2008), for it is part of a complex and long-term educational goal of communicating intelligibly.

Finall, enhancing students self-worth and self-eficacy is a strong and sensible thread with which the borders of the tapestry are stitched. Dora sees to emphasise positive aspects of her students productions - the impact of which has been extensively documented in the literature (see e., Hattie & Timperley, 2007) - and sometimes struggles to find creative ways to do so. The importance she assigns to this efort is not pragmatic or succes-driven in performative terms. It is humanising in the sense that she cares for her students' wellbeing, appreciates them beyond their strictly cognitie accomplishments, and wishes to empower them through the positive image of themselves which she helps them to forge. When Dora reflects upon how she creates a trusting (e.g, enhancing students' self-worth and self-efficacy, and empowering them to engage in critical reflection and take ownership of their learning) and trustworthy (e.g., providing honest feedback, respecting students' perspectives, and committing to supporting their professional growth) pedagogical relationship with her students through writte feedback, she considers how her intentions impact them as human and social beings. The human dimension is revealed in the way she relates with her students and ponders the unforesee felings which her actions may trigger in them. The social dimension gets her thinking about what part of her own way of providing feedback wil be embedded in her students' future teaching practices. Dora's written feedback is therefore, conceptualised and enacted as mindful, since it takes into consideration not simply the students L2 writing literacy development but also their whole learning persona (Diaz Maggioli & Painter-Farrell, 2016, p. 397).

# 6. Conclusion

The present study has identified four macro categories of pedagogical intentions which inform Dora's written fedback practices. However, a closer look at her rationales within and acrosthese categories reveals the influence of several other overlapping in. tentions. These include encouraging rflection, raising awareness differentiating instructio, supporting metacogntive development, facilitating multi-dimensional identity formation, and nurturing professional thinking and dispositions. Our analysis also indicates that certain pedagogical intentions hold immediate relevance to the domain of L2 writing, whereas others transcend its disciplinary boundaries. Moreover, our findings increase understanding of the operational dynamics of pedagogical intentions across ifferent levels, illstrating how micr-level, discipline-specific technicalities are embedded within and signified by macro-level pedagogical intentions. The results highlight the need to imbue feedback with educational principles that go beyond feedback itself.

These findings carry significant implications for L2 teacher education. Scholarly iterature concerning teacher feedback literacy underscores the imperative for L2 educators to develop comprehensive fedback knowledge, expertise, and dispositional trait Carless & Winstone, 2020), alongside multilayered competencies (Boud & Dawson, 2021) aimed at designing and implementing effective feedback process. In addition to these requirements, we contend that a thorough understanding of the diverse and multifaceted pedagogical intentions that underpin and inform teachers fedback practices, as wellas their implications for student leaning, is paramount. By integrating pedagogical intentions into the framework of teacher feedback literacy development, educators can potentially acquire the requisite competencies essential for delivering feedback that not only addresses the evolving needs of their students but also aligns with broader educational goals.

The case of Dora constitutes an attempt to situate feedback within an educational ethos where feedback effctiveness i defined by teachers' and students shared notions of quality teaching and learning, and where commitment to students and education always takes precedence.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Hugo Santiago Sanchez: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Livia de Araujo Donnini Rodrigues: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Formal analysis.

# References

t , ,          . , 01) 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2014.945160   
as ,  0te  cti on student-teachers' perceptions, motivation, and self-eficacy. System, 95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102371 (4), 207-217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2010.10.002   
Bd    i  82) 158-171. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2021.1910928   
Boud . o  013). n  ofck  g  f o ge i, 86, 698-712 https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2012.691462   
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77-101.   
Cales,  d 018).  t o d ak . in pafck i n gheio, 438) 1315-1325. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2018.1463354   
Car      00 13562517.2020.1782372   
andr, .003.  s n f   o  e ay d     w  f nge Writing, 12(3), 267-296. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1060-3743(03)00038-9   
Chong, ..18     wnk .  -37s/ doi.org/10.1080/15434303.2017.1405423   
Chog . 1 i   5.i.g 10.29140/lea.v2n2.138   
Chog, ..2    ik   k 9(1) https://doi.org/10.1080/2331186X.2022.2082120   
e h,  1  tief a ie. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 44(1), 25-36. https:/doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2018.1467877   
Diaz Maggioli, G., & Painter-Farrll, L. (2016). Lessons learned: First steps towards reflective teaching in ELT. Richmond.   
0q    () 576-589.   
Fgson, 11 i  t  n c   1), 12. i.g 10.1080/02602930903197883   
ad1  m    68) 1202-1220. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2020.1863911   
Ferris D. R. (1997). The influence of teacher commentary on student revisio. Teol Quartely, 31(2, 315-339. htps:/doi.org/10.2307/3588049   
Ferris, D. R. (2003). Response to student writing: Implications for second language students. Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Ferris, 014).   wtg rs phh a ctsn 19 2/i..10160309.004 doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2012.09.009   
Flower, L. (1993). Problem-solving strategies for writing (4th ed.). Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers.   
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. /2017. Penguin Classics.   
Hnen, .0ie tie      te  ti Evaluation, 66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2020.100904   
Hattie, J. (2008). Visible learning: A synthesis of over 800 meta-analyses relating to achievement. Routledge.   
Hatti, J., Timperley, H (2007. The wr f fdack. Rview of Etion Rch, 771) 112. tps/oi.org/10.3102/003465430298487   
Hedero,   P,019  f  heoo  gei, 48 237-122. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2019.1599815   
Hog, .1 t ie . Innovation, 1(1), 1-21. https://doi.org/10.61414/jeti.v1i01   
Hyland,  (2013)  fak tions ad prte i 2i wig.  o d  g 23) 20-253. t//.g 10.1016/j.jslw.2013.03.003   
Jolly, B. ud, .2013). Wienfeack n Bud,  Mollo (ds.) Fk n highr d rosonl tio pp. 104124). Re.   
Katalia  208.ti    e t  393,0017/.133820809843   
Le, . (009). Tn mismche twn tchrs beef an wien feack rctce.  Jol, 63(1), 13-22 tp/o.org/10.1093/t/cn010   
Lee, . (017 r fak   tin.   (.), w d eck  sc os .5-2. r ar. jslw.2021.100809   
Li, J, D Lca, R. (2014). Ri f amet feack  in Hghr tio 39() 378-393. htp:/.g/10.1080/03075079.2012.709494   
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.   
Mak   08 f     s, 1)961.//.1093/02   
Moloy,  -13    ., (pp. 50-71). Routledge.   
Nol, . 1 m  w k   e o o 5) 501-517. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602931003786559   
Nil c Education, 31(2), 199-218. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075070600572090   
Nise    tin c   athat  ria n the indoor ECEC environment. Intenational Joudl of Child Care and Edcation Policy, 15(1), 1-16. htps://di.org/10.1186/s40723-020-00078-y   
umk, ., Ki .H (20). uld yu as conider.: Hed o i  witing E Jodl, 6(3) 272-282. hp/do./10.1093 elt/ccp063   
Ors-Jn,00  s   the cf v   n  t  e a lg. Support for Learning, 24(1), 27-34. https:/doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9604.2009.01394.x   
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods (3rd ed.). Sage.   
Pearson, W. S. (2018).Writte ortivefedack in Es Writing ask 2: Techers pririties, pactice, and belies. TESL-E, 21(4), 132.   
Price,  e, a, . 11 k i .  in gio 368, 79. /g/0.1080/ 03075079.2010.483513   
hmi 1). tie    ff.iti  ir   qlt. Language Teaching Research, 25(5), 687-710. https:/doi.org/10.1177/1362168819879182   
and .1n  ti   ie  1, 334. https://doi.org/10.1177/0034523717697519   
Robinson, ., ope, . & Hk, 013).  w me hr expttinies ad to feak  firt y de stt. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 38(3), 260-272. https:/doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2011.629291   
ust, C  r0iis    t   s thi   t ptie. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 30(3), 231-240. https:/doi.org/10.1080/02602930500063819   
Sanchz,    o, . 2014) igts in  hers l on k tive etive n thr gr ein. t 441) 45-53.   
Shen,  f t learners. System, 37(4), 556-569. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2009.09.002   
Shini6fri Learning, 29(3), 517-538. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2014.993400   
Stoch  0   ke,   i wig   qo 2, 303-334. https://www.jstor.org/stable/44488130.   
Sugita, Y. (2006). The impact fteachers comment tpes on students revision. ELT Jounal, 60(1), 34-41. htp:/doi.org/10.1093/elt/cci079   
Wating,  .  . 019t k t a   i 365./13645   
Weaver 2006). s v  f o w . o gi 33, 379394 https:/doi.org/10.1080/02602930500353061   
Wiliam, D. (2018). Embedded formative assessment (2nd ed.) Solution Tree.   
g  03 e    k.   8 57./. org/10.1080/13562517.2012.719154   
Yang, Z., & Sanchez, H. S. (2021). Teachers' pedagogical intentions while using motivational strategies. ELT Jounal, 76(4), 508-518.   
a  1 i t study. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.101043

Livit of expertis inude Egish lanage cher catio, langg tcher identit, donisation of th langage currclum, and social justice.