# How English academic writing textbooks written by Chinese EFL teachers address the issue of plagiarism

Yongyan Lia,\*, Meng Geb, Qianshan Chenc

a Unit of Language and Literacy Education, Faculty of Education, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China b Foreign Language Teaching and Research Press, Bejing Foreign Studies Universit, Bejing, China c School of Foreign Language Studies, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Textbooks on academic writing   
China   
Plagiarism   
Triadic approach   
Teachers' knowledge of plagiarism   
"Cultural difference"

Studies have examined how EFL students and teachers understand plagiarism and the extent to which they can recognize subtle forms of plagiarism through their knowledge of the international conventions of source use. However, the precise ways in which plagiarism is conceptualized and anti-plagiarism strategies are presented to students in EFL contexts have received surprisingly little research attention. In the study reported in this paper, we investigated how the issue of plagiarism is addressed in English academic writing (EAW) textbooks authored by English language specialists and published in China. We collected a sample of 55 EAw textbooks that included a discussion of plagiarism and extracted the relevant teaching materials into a focal dataset. A qualitative content analysis of this dataset revealed four prominent features: defining plagiarism by international standards, reasoning on the causes of plagiarism among Chinese students, a triadic approach based on textual examples, and a pedagogical spotlight on paraphrasing. We conclude the paper by highlighting the important roles of English teachers and EAW textbooks in anti-plagiarism education in China and elsewhere. Further research is needed to explore how to effectively promote anti-plagiarism education in classrooms.

# 1. Introduction

There i very litle knowledge of how instruction on the use of sources in academic writing, including avoiding plagiarism, iscarried out in contexts outside Anglo-American academia, including in countries with a Confucian heritage culture such as China. Given that a large number of international students in Anglo-American universities are from the Greater China region, and it has ofen ben observed that many of them are prone to apparent plagiarism (e.g, Currie, 1998; Gu & Brooks, 2008; Sutherland-Smith, 2008; Val. entine, 2006), it may be unsurprising that a \*cultural difference" view of plagiarism could become a convenient explanation among Western teachers for Chinese ESL/EFL students transgresson of academic norms on source use (e.g., Deckert, 1993; Lund, 2004; Sowden, 2005). At the same time, it has been contended that rliance on a cultural view of plagiarism is not only misleading, but can also create stereotypes of ESL students and erect barriers to an instructional pproach to avoid plagiarism (eg., Adhikari, 2018; loch, 2008; Hu & Lei, 2012; Liu, 2005; Pecorari, 2013; Phan, 2006; Ting, 2012).

A powerful means for broadening the perspective on ESL students readines to follow the conventions expected in Anglo-American or international academia when writing from sources is to investigate the types of anti-plagiarism instruction avalable intheir home countries. Such research in L1 contexts has, however, been rather limited compared with the much greater atention devoted to the beliefs and practices of ESL students studying in Anglo-American universties. The few studies involving Chinese students studying in their home country as participants are nevertheless worth highlighting. These studies (reported in English), drawing upon questionnaire surveys, interviews, and text analysis techniques, have revealed that Chinese EFL students have an inadequate understanding of what constitutes plagiarism at the local (sentence and paragraph) level and that many are seriously underprepared for source-based writing (e.g., Bikowski & Gui, 2018; Cumming et al., 2018; Hu & Lei, 2012; Shi & Dong, 2018). Further indications of the anti-plagiarism education availabl at Chinese universties have been obtained from reports on English teachers pedagogical readiness to teach about plagiarism (Hu & Shen, 2021; Hu & Sun, 2016; Le & Hu, 2015), from examination of university anti-plagiarism policies (Hu & Sun, 2017), and from occasional case reports of classroom teaching (Du, 2022).

While there is much insight to be gleaned from these studies, itis important to examine textbooks as  signficant source for Chinese students in learning about academic writing. China has a large market for writing textbooks, with titles on Chinese-L1 academic writing and on EFL academic writing. In a previous study of collection of textbooks on Chinese academic writing (CAW), we found a lack of pecific text-based instruction on plagiarism and source acknowledgement (Li et a. 2023). The study reported in the present paper followed up on that previous study by investigating how the avoidance of plagiarism is addressed in English academic writing (EAW) textbooks authored by English language specialists and published in China. With the continued expansion of English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and EAW instruction at Chinese universitie Cheng, 2016; Li & Ma, 2020), these textboos are likely to remain an important source ofteaching materials at Chinese universties and to have a significant impact on the redines of Chinese students to follow international standards on the use of sources when pursuing studies outside of China or as academics engaged in academic communication on the global stage.

# 1.1. Chinese context and previous research

1.1.1. The consistent condemnation of plagiarism in Chinese history and atraditional focus on plagiarism as wholesale or large-scale copying Plagiarism, which has two commonly used contemporary Chinese equivalents in chaoxi (literall, copy-follow) and piaoqie (literall, loot-steal), and a wide range of synonymous expressions in classical Chinese writings, has a consistent history of being condemned in China. In the gigantic Database of Chinese Classic Ancient Boos (Zhongguo iben gujiku), which encompasses around 170,000 volumes of classical tites from the 11th century BCE to the beginning of the 20th century, several thousand results are returned for just a selected handful of expressions for plagiarism. The works depict and condemn plagiarism (in the sense of \*stealing others words as one's own) i all maginable kinds and spheres of literar activity. The linguistic contexts in which the expresions for plagiarism are found indicate that in classcal China, plagiarism was consistently ridiculed and looked down upon as both a sign of immorality, as a type of stealing and cheating, and of mediocrity, demonstrating a lack of creativity.

Four broad observations can be made of the Chinese context over the subsequent hundred years, from the early 20th to the early 21st century, in relation to the ssue of plagiarism (see also Li, in press).First, the condemnation of plagiarism continued, with the discourse colored by the socal, economic, and political environments of different eras. Second, as seen in published discosure reports and editorial statements, the focus of criticism at the societal level and within academia has ben, understandably, on wholesale or large-scale copying. Third, since the late 20th century, many policies and codes of ethics have ben issued at the national and institutional level to promote research integrity, and many documents aimed at regulating the format of citation of sources have ben issued by national agencies, academic journals, and disciplines. Fourth, and significantly, there is evidence that intertextual transgression at the sentence and paragraph levels (e.g, using others words or ideas without acknowledgement) has been more often referred to as "non-standard source annotation' (hushi bu guifan) or \*non-standard source citation/citation negligence (yinyong bu guifan/yinwen shifan) than as plagiarism. Given this traditional gap in defining and warning against local-level textual plagiarism it is perhaps unsurprising that the English word \*paraphrasing does not have an exact Chinese equivalent (as also pointed out by Bikowski & Gui, 2018). The commonly used Chinese counterpart for paraphrasing is shiyi (\*interpreting meaning"), which does not necessrily exclude "patchwriting," defined as the practice of "copying from a source text and then deleting some words, altering grammatical structure, or plugging in one-for-one synonym substitutes (Howard, 1993, p. 23), or more broadly, the practice of mixing material copied from sources with one's own words without source acknowledgement, also referred to as "inappropriate paraphrasing" (Cooper, 2016, p. 121). In other words, sentence- and paragraph-level patchwriting in Chinese academic writing might be allowed to pass without comment by students, teachers, journal editors, reviewers, and/or readers, although the plagiarism checks now commonly used for degree theses (but generally not yet for course papers) at Chinese universties and for submissions to Chinese journals might to some degree deter the practice of local-level textual plagiarism, including patchwriting.

1.1.2. Beginning to acknowledge local-level textual plagiarism with the absorption of international academic norms

English as an Additional Language (EAL) academics who are trained in Anglo-American/international academic discourse conventions, typicall through overseas study, tend to value those conventions, albeit sometimes having to juggle between them and the traditional 1 rhetrical expectations i their home country (Shi, 203). Evidence for this in Chinese academia over the decades can be found in the long journey of "academic standardization' (xueshu guifanhua) that unfolded in the early 1990, with many overseas-trained Chinese scholars (who had either returned to China or remained overseas) speaking of "differences between English and Chinese writings in their disciplines and calling for Chinese scholarship to conform to international standards in research methodology and norms of writing to gain a legitimate status in international academia. The notable scholars who advocated for this standardization of Chinese scholarship came from a wide range of humanities and social science disciplines, including musicology (Yang, 1988), legal studies (Zhu, 1996), history (Wang, 2001), intenational studies (Ren, 2004), human geography (Wei, 2010), and sociology (Peng, 2010). The conformity that these scholars called for has started to manifest in Chinese publications, with many journals' instructions for authors now emphasizing the literature review and proper citation, which are two areas that Chinese publications have traditionally been profusely criticized for overlooking.

Significantly, while the local-level failure to cite sources was traditionally dubbed \*non-standard source annotation'" in Chinese academia, the term \*textual plagiarism" (wenzi chaoxi) was introduced in a document isued by the National Press and Publication Administration in 2019 titled Academic publishing specification-Definitio of academic misconduct for jounals (CY/T 174-2019). This was the frs official document to distinguish between textual plagiarism" and \*wholesale plagiarism'" (zhengti chaoxi) in China Li, 2022). This recent change suggests a move toward intenational standards, which Chinese scholars have aspired to since the 1980s and 1990s in calling for the creation of standards to emulate style manuals such as The Chicago Manual of Style.

It willtake some time for this recent shift marked in an official document to be reflected in the educatio system (Li, 202). It may be unsurprising that in ordinary CAW textbooks published in China, commonly authored by content specialists across disciplines, there remains barely any sign of teaching about textual plagiarism and the effctive and appropriate use of sources through specific explanations and textual examples. Instead, plagarism is sill conceptualized as large-scale copying carried out a deliberate cheating, and besides repeating the formalities of source annotation as spelt out in oficial regulations, the weight of instruction falls on moral education (Li et al., 2023).

1.1.3. The awareness of students' knowledge gap on textudl plagiarism among experienced English language educators in China Several lines of empirical studies conducted in China and published in English or Chinese are worth reviewing because they reveal that experienced English language educators in the country are distinctly aware of the gap in Chinese students' knowledge of textual plagiarism, which is variously referred to in these studies as \*plagiarism, \*apparent plagiarism, verbatim copying," \*unatributed copying," "subtle plagiarism, "patchwriting," "unacknowledged paraphrasing," "approximated paraphrasing," or "textual borrowing.

In a pioneering study, Hu and Lei (2012) used texts and tass adapted from those used by Wheer (2009) with Japanese partic. ipants to investigate 270 Chinese undergraduates on their ability to recognize two forms of plagiarism: unacknowledged near-verbatim copying and unacknowledged paraphrasing with patchwriting. They reported that only about $3 5 \%$ of the students recognized verbatim copying as plagiarism and even fewer $( 1 2 \% )$ recognized unacknowledged paraphrasing as plagiarism. Zhang and Deng (2019) replicated Hu and Lei's (2012) study with 242 science and engineering postgraduates at a Chinese universty and found no significant difference between Year 1 and Year 2 students abilities to recognize apparent plagiarism (verbatim copying), subtl plagiarism (unacknowledged paraphrasing), and inappropriat rferencing,although the Year 2 students demonstrated a stronger ability in the use of sources. Among the Year 1 students $( 6 3 \% )$ in the study, only seven recognized apparent plagiarism and none identified unacknowledged paraphrasing as plagiarism.

With a dierent design, Gui et al. (2016) studied how 63 Year 2 undergraduates at a Chinese university responded to four scenarios, each demonstrated through a short video clip: (a) text copied with no quotation marks and no in-text citation; (b) text copied with no quotation marks but with in-text itation; (c) text copied with quotation marks but with no in-text citation; and (d) text paraphrased with no quotation marks and with in-text citation. The students achieved an accuracy rate of $9 8 \%$ and $8 7 \%$ in their judgement of scenario (a), which was the most obvious case of plagiarism, and scenario (d) in which the source was used and cited appropriately, respectively, but their accuracy rate for scenarios (b) and (c) was much lower at $9 \%$ and $4 4 \%$ respectively. In a related study from the same project, Bikowski and Gui (2018) compared the findings from a group of Chinese students studying in China with those from another group who were studying at universities in the United States and reported that the latter group \*were more likely [than the former] to refer to the three source use practices of unatributed copying, copying with a citation, and copying with quotation marks with a value-lden negative term such as plagiarism and more frequently specified citation errors' (p. 201). This shows th effects of enculturation into Anglo-American expectations on the Chinese students' knowledge of and attitudes toward plagiarism.

Learners' EFL texts have also been examined to shed light on their textual plagiarism and use of sources. Jia and Deng (2014) used Turnitin to check 500 master's disertations written in English by English majors (specializing in theoretical linguistics, alied lin guistics, translation, or literature) completed between 2006 and 2008 at a selection of Chinese universities and reported that $7 9 . 6 \%$ $1 9 . 2 \%$ and $1 . 2 \%$ had a similarity index of below $3 0 \%$ $3 1 - 5 0 \%$ , and above $5 0 \%$ , respectively. Analyzing 25 English-medium master's dissertations submitted by English majors to a single supervisor between 2008 and 2011, Ma and Qin (2014) found more evidence of "approximated paraphrasing" than of "complete paraphrasing." From a study involving around 100 undergraduate and master's students majoring in English or commerce at four Chinese universities, Cumming et al. (2018) reported that \*patchwriting" was "prevalent among these adult Chinese learners of English under timed, et-like conditions when presented with limited information sources and lexical resources on a specialized topic" (p. 10). With evidence gleaned from questionnaires, course papers, and a reading-writing assessment, Cumming et al. (2018) concluded that the \*findings from all three data sources point to needs for instruction' to elevate the participants' ability in the use of sources (p. 11). In another study, Shi and Dong (2018) found significantly more textual borrowing in Chinese students paraphrases in Chinese-L1 writing than in their English paraphrases (in EFL/ESL writing) and suggested that this \*imple different writig expectations in the English and Chinese contexts" (p. 54). From our perspective, this conclusion should not be interpreted to mean that local-level textual plagiarism is considered problem-freei the Chinese context but rather as indicating that the long-term neglect of this transgression in the education system and in publishing has led to lack of awareness and/or confusion among many Chinese students and authors.

The studies reviewed above, which reveal an overall gap in the knowledge of textual plagiarism among Chinese students and, by extension, many Chinese authors, and which point to inadequacies in anti-plagiarism instruction at Chinese universities, were conducted by Chinese EFL specialists (in collaboration with overseas researchers in a few cases). With some extrapolation, this suggests that the experienced English language specialiss in the country are generally well aware of the problem revealed in the studies. Furthermore, research on Chinese FL teachers knowledge of and atitudes toward plagiarism (Hu & Shen, 2021; Hu & Sun, 2016; Lei & Hu, 2015) has shown that overseas academic experience (e.g., studying in a postgraduate program in an overseas English-medium universty) can facilitate these language teachers socialization into intenational norms on the issue of plagiarism; as a result, they are significantly more able to recognize subtle forms of plagiarism than their home-trained counterparts. Overall, compared with many of their content specialist counterparts, Chinese EFL teachers may have an advantage in acquiring knowledge of the source atribution norms widely accepted by intenational publications, a their English-language proficiency and the demands of their teaching duties would prompt them to learn about such norms by accessing online and print resources. EFL teachers are thus perhaps the most likely group of educators to adopt international standards to address the isue of lagiarism in their teaching and, no les importantly, in any textbooks they produce.

# 1.1.4. English academic writing textbooks authored by English language specialists

China has a large market for textbooks on EAW. Yu and Shang (2016) identified 91 EAW textbooks authored by English language specialists and published in China in the decade of 2005-2014, noting that $6 5 \%$ of these were published by university presses and the rest by national and other publishing houses. Three factors were suggested by Yu and Shang (2016) as explaining the boom in the EAW textbook market in China. First, with the reform of English curricula in the process of a paradigm shift from English for Generl Purposes (EGP) to EAP at Chinese universities, EAW courses were increasingly becoming part of the undergraduate and postgraduate curricula, creating a niche for new EAW textboos in the meantime. Second, university preses were making it convenient to publish new textbooks, with the sale of textbooks an important source of their income. Third, textbook publication contributes to promotion through the academic ranks at Chinese universties. Inthe decade since 2014, the regular release of new EAW textbooks authored by English language specialists has continued.

It can be expected that many of these EAW textbooks cover the topic of plagiarism. With the ongoing rise and development of EAP at Chinese universtes and the growing emphasis placed on academic norms at these universtie, the attention paid to instruction on plagiarism in EAP teaching is likely to increase. EAW textboos are a major rference and source of teaching material for the large population of emerging EAP teachers in China and also serve as handy self-study resources for leaners. How these textbooks tackle the issue of plagiarism warrants investigation as itcould significantly influence the readiness of Chinese students and authors to become legitimate participants in academia and beyond.

# 1.1.5. Relevant research on textbooks

Surprisingly, it sms that very few studies have examined textbook materials that teach about plagiarism or, more broadly, writing from source texts. An excetion is un and Soden's (2021) study of how the use of sources is represented in a collection of 13 textbooks on academic writing published from 2005 to 2018 by international academic publishers, including Palgrave Macmillan, Pearson/ Longman, and Routledge. Apart from analyzing more broadly how the boos teach students how to use sources, the researchers reported that the topic of plagiarism is addressed in almost all of the books in their sample, with exercises generally provided on paraphrasing and summarizing and other tasks assigned for practicing citation.

In a previous study of 41 textboos on pre-tertiary Chinese-L1 composition, we examined how they recommend imitation, or imitative writing based on other texts, as a writing pedagogy. These textbooks published in China emphasize a distinction between imitation and plagiarism and place a pedagogical focus on how to go beyond imitation to achieve innovation (Li et al., 2022). In a follow-up study, which is mentioned above and i particularly relevant to the study reported in the present paper, we examined how a collection of 60 textbooks on CAW define plagiarism and discuss it avoidance and concluded that these books do not include textual examples or demonstrate go0d practices of citation to teach students how to avoid local-level plagiarism (Li et al., 2023). As part of a comparative context exploration in the same study, we also examined the teaching materials on plagiarism in a diverse sample of 12 writing textbooks/guidebooks published in the Anglo-American world and found that they provide specific, text-based instruction on avoiding plagiarism. The evidence from our research on CAW textbooks thus sets them apart from the Anglo-American books. However, it is not clear on which side EAW textbooks published in China fall do they more closely resemble the CAW books or the Anglo-American books? This is what the present study aimed to discover.

# 2. Methods

Our study was part of a larger project that received ethical approval from the Human Research Ethics Committeeof the first au. thor's home institution. The study aimed to investigate how the issue of plagiarism was being addressed in EAW textboos authored by English language specialists and published in China. ifty-five textbooks that fit the criteria and include a discussion on the issue of plagiarism were collcted for research purposes by purchasing hard or oft copies from online boostores in China. These boos were part f a much larger pool f textbooks that were urchased for this and for our earlier stdies (i., Li et l., 2022 i et l., 2023). In this paper, \*textbooks" refers only to books created for pedagogical purposes and not those aiming to present research. To ensure that we selected only books with English language specialists (typically EFL teachers teaching at Chinese universties) as sole or lead authors, we reviewed the authors biographical information in the books' prefaces/forewords/postscripts and checked for additional information on the authors by searching for them on Baidu.com, which is the largest Chinese search engine. The 55 boos were all single- or first-authored by English language specialists; two of the books had an overseas co-author who was not of Chinese ethnicity. By checking the authors' biographical information avalable in the books and online, we also determined that at least $6 5 \%$ of the single/first authors had been overseas for academic visiting or training purposes.

A complete list of the 55 titles is shown in Supplemental File 1. Most of the books (41 titles, or $7 4 . 5 \%$ ) were written in English, 12 $( 2 1 . 8 \% )$ were written in Chinese (but with English textual examples provided), and 2 $( 3 . 6 \% )$ were written bilingually.

Tables 1 and 2 map out the 5 EAW textbooks by decade of publication and target discipline, respectively. A more detailed version of Table 2 is provided in Supplemental File 2.

After identifying our sample of 55textbooks, we extracted our target data by scanning them for relevant sections and pages that discus the issue of plagiarism. It i not feasiblet estimat the total number of words in our dataset, but an average of about 19 pages were extracted from each of the 55textboos toform our dataset, which was circulated only among the researchers and used solely for the purpose of the present study. Our preliminary survey of the dataset containing the extracted teaching materials on plagiarism from the 55 EAW boos indicated that they completely reflect international standards in defining and teaching about plagiarism at the local textual level. This clearly distinguishes these textboos from the CAW textbooks used in our previous study, which found that plagiarism was treated in the sense of deliberate wholesale or large-scale copying (Li et al., 2023).

To obtain a detailed understanding of how the isue f plagiarism is addressed in this sample of textbooks, the scanned dataset was imported into QSR Intenational's NVivo (Version 14) qualitative analysis software for coding. Coding a large collection of scanned textbook materials in an image format was no easy task. Guided by our research aim, we looked for points of comparison with the CAW textbooks and the Anglo-American approaches to plagiarism pedagogy that we surveyed during our earlier research (Li et al, 2023). During our repeated reading of the data, this comparative intent sensitized us to a range of features that we pulled out from the dataset for a focused understanding. This list f features, which serve as subheadings in the findings section below, are as follows: defining plagiarism by intenational standards, reasoning onthe causes of plagiarism among Chinese students, a triadic approach (i.., teaching summarizing, paraphrasing, and quotation) based on textual examples, and a pedagogical spotlight on paraphrasing.

With these overarching features serving as top-level "organizational categories" (Maxwell & Chmiel, 2014) in NVivo, we then conducted more focused coding through a qualitative content analysis (Lankshear & Knobel, 2004). There were three characteristics of this analysis. First we combined categorizing and connecting strategies (Maxwel & Miller, 2008), whereby we looked for patterns in the handling of plagiarism acros the books whileals seeking to understand the nature of the materils on the issue within each book. Second, we performed a"definitional content analysis (Lankshear & Knobel, 2004), which involved paying attention to how the books conceptualize some key concepts such as \*plagiarism," \*paraphrasing," "inappropriate paraphrasing," and the Chinese concept of jinjie yinyong, which was used by some of the boos and translated as \*indirect quotation') and identifying patterns and categories of meaning associated with these concepts. Third, alongside the primary qualitative insights of the content analysis, a counting stratey was adopted to add a quanttative dimension to the dat analys. Specifically, given the prominence f textual examples in our daset, we counted them as a whole and for each category of focal knowledge/skills covered.

The present analysis thus had a different focus from our previous studies on writing textbooks published in China. In Li et a. (2022), our focus was on imitation as a pedagogical tol in a collection of Chinese-1 composition textboos for pre-trtiary school students. In Li et al. (2023), our interest was in how textbooks on CAW concetualize plagiarism and its avoidance. Furthermore, whereas the data analyses in the two previous studies were predominantly inductive, a deductive element was incorporated into the coding processfor the present study, in which we setted upon four \*organizational categories" (Maxwell & Chmiel, 2014) early in the analysis to meet our research aim, as noted above.

# 3. Findings

Bibliographic information for the items in our sample f 5 EAW textbooks can be found in Supplemental File 1. Twenty-eight of these books are cited in this section to illustrate the findings.

# 3.1. Defining plagiarism by international standards

The EAW textboos in our sample define plagiarism in a way that is completely consistent with definitions of the concept origi. nating from Anglo-American contexts that have become widly accepted at the intenational level. An illustration i as follows English in the original; the words in square brackets are ours):

Plagiarism means taking someone else's words or ideas and phrasing them as if they were your own, both [either] deliberately and [or] unintentionally. This is a form of intellctual theft, because you present the theories, ideas, assumptions, and/or findings of other people as if they were your own words and ideas, and you try to take credit for them. (Huang et al., 2014, p. 17)

The extract above makes t clear that, as another book puts it, plagiarism is the faure to document sources ., reardes of intent" (Liu & Patton, 2015,p. 96). Overall in contrast to the overwhelming focus of CAW textboos on wholeale/large-scale plagiarism and thus on plagiarism as an intentional act (Li et al., 2023), 27 $( 4 9 . 1 \% )$ of our sample of 55 EAW textbooks mention that plagiarism can be nintentional. This indicates that the focus of the discussion in the EAW books, in terms of both conceptualization and pedagogical force, fall on local-level textual plagiarism. Such a choice of focus echoes Anglo-American pedagogical materials and addresses the learning needs of Chinese students, given the glaring gap in defining local-level source-use failures as plagiarism and learning how to avoid such falures in the students Chinese-medium education. To llustrte, in one textbook, Hei and Guo (2017) point to \*three common acts of such plagiarism (which they call unintentional lagiarism): \*filing to cite quotations and borrowed ideas, \*failing to enclose borrowed language in quotation marks, and "failig to put summaries and paraphrases in your own words and in your own structure (p. 53). In fact, such locallevel textual plagiarism is not necessarily unintentional," but the crux of the issue here is not intention but rather understanding that plagiarism at the local level is unacceptable and one should learn to avoid it.

Table 1 The 55 textbooks as the sources of our dataset: By the decade of publication.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>2000s</td><td>2010s</td><td>2020s</td></tr><tr><td>9 (16.4%)</td><td>23 (41.8%)</td><td>23 (41.8%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 The 55 textbooks: By the discipline of target users.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Humanities &amp; social sciences</td><td>Science &amp; Engineering</td><td>Medicine</td><td>Academic writing (General)</td></tr><tr><td>24 (43.6%)</td><td>6 (10.9%)</td><td>4 (7.3%)</td><td>21 (38.2%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

In conceptualizing plagiarism by international standards, the EAW books often cite Anglo-American sources. Definitions of plagiarism are quoted from such sources as the MLA Handbook, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English, The American Heritage Dictionary, and Oxford English Dictionary. In additio, one book cites seven types of plagiarism from the Long Island University library and another cites 10 types of plagiarism from the University of Pittsburgh'splagiarism policy. As noted below, our collection of EAW books also contains textual examples taken from Anglo-American sources to illustrate plagiarism, quoting, paraphrasing, and/or summarizing.

# 3.2. Reasoning on the causes of plagiarism among Chinese students

Reasoning on the causes of plagiarism among Chinese students is not a prominent feature in the EAW books, which is under. standable give that thr discussion of plagiarism i fused on pdagogy.However, the views on this sue that aexpresed in these textbooks are of interest because they reflect those of their authors, who represent a sample of teachers experienced in teaching Chinese EFL students. This can also provide a point of comparison with the views of Western teachers. On the causes of plagiarism among Chinese students, our sample of books refer to a lack of confidence (Chen et al. 2020), poor academic reading and writing ability (Liu & Ding, 2020; Xu, 2011), attitude and or habits (Chen et al., 2020; Liu, 2022; Liu & Ding, 2020; Liu & Zhang, 2020; Zou, 2013), and ignorance of academic norms (Chen et al., 2020; Huang e al., 2014; Liu et al., 2019; Liu & Zhang, 2020; Zhou, 206; Zou, 2013). In addition, two insightful points of observations from the textbook authors on what have caused plagiarism among Chinese students can be highlighted: a lack of specific education on the issue and language difficulties.

Above al, it was pointed out that many Chinese students have ittle awareness of the isue of plagiarism and the need for source acknowledgement in writing, owing to a lack of relevant education (Cai & Liu, 2002; Liu & Ding, 2020; Liu & Patton, 2015; Wen, 2023). As Wen (2023) put it:

However, our students are not taught what is plagiarism and how to avoid it properly in their formal education. Therefore, in my opinion, many students plagiarize unintentionally. (p. 302)

In other words, it was agreed among the textbook authors that education on what constitutes textual plagiarism and how it can be avoided has traditionally not been part of the formal education for Chinese students. Several books specifically point out that part of the fault resides in pre-tertiary schooling and students carrying previous practces into their writig at university (Liu & Ding, 2020; Lu, 2006; Zhang, 2017; Zheng, 2021). Zhang's (2017) observation would be familiar to Western teachers in the sense that the later are likely to make a similar point in explaining Chinese students aparent pronenes to plagiarism: \*many f us have been used to learning from memorization and recitation in primary and middle chools, and the continuation of such a learning approach in collge i likly to trap us into plagiarizing (. 265). In arelatively early book in our ollectio, Lu (2006) observed that \*a elementary chool pupil, assigned to do a report on acertain topic, goes home and copies down, word for word, everything on the subject in an encyclopedia" (pp. 233-234). The textbook authors were suggesting that tertiary students adherence to certain pre-tertiary literacy practice can increase their tendency to plagiarize unless they are provided with educational opportunities to learn what is expected in academic writing at the tertiary level. In a more straightforward manner,Liu and Ding (2020) insightflly pointed to an overall absence of systematic training in writing for academic purposes in the Chinese education system as a major culprit. They characterized nonacademic writing in the form of short compositions for pre-tertiary school students as being oriented to expressing feelings, with quotes from famous people used for a certain rhetorical ffect, furthermore, students were also accustomed to not indicating sources When taking reading notes or doing reading-based writing exercises, such that \*in thir academic journey, most students have formed an inclination for casual writing which is hard to change" (p. 9).

Other than the lack of relevant instruction being a major factor, it is acknowledged in the textbooks that Chinese EFL learners struggles with the mastery of the English language contribute to their plagiarism in EFL writing:

[As] EFL (English as a Foreign Language) learners, our intention of being grammatically correct, lexically idiomatic and sty. listically appropriate may tempt us to copy established scholars' words, which may result in inadvertently plagiarizing these authors' ideas and expressions. (Zhang, 2017, p. 265)

Chinese students are often criticized for not obeying academic norms. .. We hold that besides different cultural and rhetorical tradition[s], lacking language competence to avoid plagiarism explains parts of the impression. (Wang, 2021, p. 63)

Going beyond the above, we examined whether the textbook authors, as experienced English teachers in China, made recourse to the "culturaldifference" explanation that may be convenient for many Western teachers in explaining Chinese tudents proclivity for plagiarism. There is hardly any evidence for this in our sample of textbooks. As noted above, some of the textbooks point out that certain types of literacy practices that Chinese students have grown accustomed to during their pre-tertiary years, such as memorization and echoing knowledge, may contribute to plagiarism in their writing at university level. However, there is no assertion in the EAW books that \*Chinese culture' tolerates or leads to plagiarism. We previously found that such an asertion was similarly absent from CAw textbooks published in China (Li et al., 2023).

# 3.3. A triadic approach based on textual examples

Of the 55 books in our collection, 53 $( 9 6 . 4 \% )$ present at least one of a total of 450 textual examples aiming to teach about plagiarism. Table 3 summarizes these textual examples by their distribution across eight types of focal knowledge/skill.

The largest share of the textual examples ( $3 4 . 9 \%$ of the total) aims to teach students how to summarize, paraphrase, and quote from sources, thus manifesting an Anglo-American \*triadic" approach to teaching about plagiarism (Barks & Wats, 2001). This is in stark contrast to the sample of CAW textbooks published in China that we examined in our previous study, among which we found a complete absence of textual examples for such purposes (Li et al., 2023).

To illustrate how the textual examples are presented, the book by Zou (2013) contains, within a section on \*Integrating information into your draft" a sub-section on How to quote," which includes two examples of short, sentence-embedded quotations and an example of an indented long quote. A checklist of five questions (e., \*Why do I want to use this quotation?") is also provided to help authors make informed decisions on whether and how to quote. The next sub-section i on How to paraphrase, which explains what paraphrasing means, provides a list of \*ransitional phrases" that can be used when paraphrasing (According to .. He argued that .. \*The researcher has pointed out .., et.), gives an example in theform of an original-paraphrase pair, and then provides a checklist of questions related to paraphrasing e.g., Have I understood correctly the original version?") and a classroom activity" of paraphrasing a passage. In the subsequent sub-section on How to avoid plagiarism, a definition of plagiarism is followed by two examples in the form original source-plagiarism-comment. After listing some causes of plagiarism, this sub-section ends with six recommendations on how to avoid it (e.g., \*In drafing, carefully observe the conventions for quoting, paraphrasing etc.").

Another textbook, by Yin et al. (2021), lists 14 scenarios of "General types of plagiarism, such as copying large sections of others materials and claiming them as your own, translating from another language without acknowledging the source, and changing sources by replacing or altering vocabulary and syntax It then presents a version of a direct copy of a source with a comment, and a revised version that paraphrases the source, again with a comment. In yet another book, by Zhang et al. (2022), a section on \*Plagiarism" begins by explaining when plagiarism has occurred and then provides list of principles tofollow to avoid plagiarism eg., change the original key lexis and syntax of the sentences, that is, use one's own words and sentencesto restate others work"). A source text extract and three plagiarized versions are then presented in turn with the problematic parts highlighted in bold, ilustrating \*intentional plagiarism without acknowledgement," original wording without quotation marks," and finally \*imitated sentence structure and wording. This section on Plagiarism' is followed by a section on "Paraphrase," which explains what paraphrasing is and its advantages and then gives five things that a writer must do to paraphrase appropriately (e.g., \*have a good command of the original ideas'" and "avoid using the original key wording"). This i followed by an example of a paraphrase f the original text used to llustrate plagiarism in the preceding section.

These ilustrations of how textual examples are presented in three books show that these examples are frequently used to demonstrate the transgressve (plagiarism) and appropriate (quotation and paraphrase, in particular the later) use of sources. extual examples of how to summarize, perhaps due to their greater length, were found les often but do appear in several of the books in our sample (Li, 2020; Sang, 2020; Yan et al., 2017; Zhang, 2017).

Given that they subscribe to an Anglo-American triadic approach based on textual examples, i is unsurprising that several of the textbooks contain textual examples directly adopted from Anglo-American sources. The textbook authors sometimes signal their borrowing of examples, as follows:

Table 3 The focal knowledge/skills taught through the textual examples found in 53 of the 55 books.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Focal knowledge/skill</td><td>No. of textual examples (%)</td><td>No. of textbooks involved</td></tr><tr><td>How to paraphrase, summarize, and quote from sources</td><td>157 (34.9%)</td><td>34</td></tr><tr><td>Mechanics of different documentation styles.</td><td>130 (28.9%)</td><td>42</td></tr><tr><td>How to use reporting language</td><td>73 (16.2%)</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>How to take notes from sources.</td><td>33 (7.3%)</td><td>8.</td></tr><tr><td>What constitutes plagiarism</td><td>28 (6.2%)</td><td>19</td></tr><tr><td>When citations to sources are (not) needed.</td><td>10 (2.2%)</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>How to integrate sources into writing.</td><td>10 (2.2%)</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Functions of citations and source use.</td><td>9 (2.0%)</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Total no.</td><td>450</td><td>53</td></tr></table></body></html>

llowing example is quoted from Gibaldi (2001: 22). (Liu et al., 2019, p. 103).

This paraphrase is provided as a model paraphrase in Oshima & Hogue (2006: 128). (Li, 2020, p. 211)

We would like to use one of Swales and Feak's examples to illustrate the summarizing part of a research paper. (Sang, 2020, p. 22)

Purdue online writing lab presents a good example to show the differences among a paraphrase, a summary, and a plagiarized version. (Sang, 2020, p. 133)

However, it is also likely that some textual examples adopted from Anglo-American sources are not marked as such and thus the borrowing is hidden from the textbook users. We detected unacknowledged borrowing in at least one book as we were able to identify the source.

Finally, the EAW textbooks' reliance on textual example for implementing atriadic approach to teaching about plagiarism is also reflected in the exercises/tasks section. In an activit assigned in Lu (206) students ae asked to read an extract of an original source and a piece of student writing, explain why the latter is an example of plagiarism, and then re-write it t avoid the plagiarism. In an exercise included in uang e al. (2014), thre versions of student writing ae derived from a passage of an riginal text and readers are invited to identify which version is " verbatim plagiarism," which is a paraphrasing plagiarism," and whichis not a plagiarism." In another example, students are set two tasks in Liu et al. (2019) to paraphrase two passages and summarize another.

# 3.4. A pedagogical spotlight on paraphrasing

The illustrations in the preceding section indicate that paraphrasing is given considerable attention in our collection of EAW textbooks. The following excerpt explains what paraphrasing means and notes a potential benefit of paraphrasing:

To paraphrase isto reproduce the exact sense of what someone has written or said in your own words. That is, to relate accurately the opinions, facts, or attitudes of someone in words that are natural to you. A paraphrased versin is often clearer or more concise than its original version. (Zou, 2013, p. 109)

The extract below distinguishes between the features of a \*proper" paraphrase and those of an "improper" one:

A paraphrase helps reconstruct the original text by transforming its lexis and syntactic structures. An improper paraphrase is only done with partial changes like lexical changes .. A proper paraphrase needs the rconstruction of the original source text in a fresh way ... (Yin et al., 2021, p. 201)

"Improper paraphrasing has also been calld "patchwriting" in English-language academic circles (Howard, 1993). Although we did not find the term \*patchwriting" in any of the books in our collection, the authors clearly regard this practice as a form of plagiarism. For example, in an early book in our ollection, Feng (2003), explicitl points out that retaining much of the wording and structure of the original, while making a few changes in it ..is considered a form of plagarism according to Western academic tradition and is not accetable' (p. 191). By echoing this Western academia norm, the textbook authors carefully align themselves to the expectations of English-language academic writing and relay these expectations to their Chinese readership.

In several books written in Chinese (but with English examples) a few Chinese terms are used to denote "paraphrasing": shiyi (explaining the meaning") and gaixie % (re-writing") (Ma, 2011), jianjie yinyong 5| (indirect quotation) (Mu, 2012) and its variant jianjie yinwen 3| (Pang, 2008), and yiyi  (\*interpretation of meaning") (Li & Liu, 2010). Beyond the textbooks, shiyi has most often been used to translate the English word \*paraphrase." However, as pointed out earlier in the present paper, the implications of the Chinese term shiyi are not strictly equivalent to those of "paraphrase" because the former does not exclude patchwriting.

In Chinese rhetoric, jianjie yinyong forms pair with zhijie yinyong  (direct quotation) and, like shiyi, it does not imply the strict exclusion of patchwriting. We identified five scenarios in which the term jianji yinyong or \*indirect quotation' appears in our collection of EAW textbooks:

1) It is used to mean paraphrasing (Mu, 2012; Pang, 2008; Zou 2013):

An indirect quotation is a paraphrase of the opinion or ideas that you get from the sources. (Zou, 2013, p. 8)

2) It is associated with summarizing:

There are two ways to cite an author--direct and indirect. Tocite directly is to quote a piece of source text word for word, while to cite indirectly is to summarize the source information or ideas in your own words. (Sun & Soden, 2021, p. 43)

3) Direct quotations, indirect quotations, paraphrases, and summaries are juxtaposed:

Remember to identify allthe direct or indirect quotations, paraphrases or summaries of key points you used in your paper.   
(Cheng & Qi, 2013, p. 121).

4) It is understood in a way that would be regarded as plagiarism in English writing, as shown in the following example taken from Yan et al. (2017, p. 31), in which the \*indirect quotation" version adds only the underlined segment to the original text our underlining below):

Original text: [from Christakis and Fowler, 2007, p. 370]

Having obese social contacts might change a person's attitude for being obese or might influence his or her adoption of specific behaviors (e.g., smoking, eating, and exercising).

# Indirect quotation:

Christakis N. A. & Fowler J H. (2007) argue that having obese social contacts might change a person's attitude for being obese or might influence his or her adoption of specific behaviors (e.g., smoking, eating, and exercising). (p. 370)

5) It covers paraphrasing and summarizing (a sense that we would agree on), as the following quote suggests:

There are two ways for you to use the materials from the sources: indirect quotations (summarizing and paraphrasing, presented without quotation marks) and direct quotations (quoting verbatim, or word for word, enclosed within quotation marks).(Chen et al., 2020, pp. 88-89)

We regard this last way of specifying the notion of jianjie yinyong (\*indirect quotation) borrowed from the Chinese context to render it a superordinate term for "paraphrasing" and "summarizing" as an innovative step.

# 4. Discussion

The study reported in this paper examined how a sample of 55 EAW textbooks written by Chinese EFL teachers and published in China addres the issue of plagiarism. Within the limited space of this paper, our study did not aim at a comprehensie examination of the treatment of the isue of plagiarism in these books. Instead, we chose t highlight a range f features that can be compared withthe pedagogical approach to plagiarism at the international lel and in CAW textbooks published in China, as revealed in our earlier study (Li e al., 2023). Specifically, four prominent features were identified: defining plagiarism by intenational tandards, rasoning on the causes of plagiarism among Chinese students, a triadic approach based on textual examples, and a pedagogical spotlight on paraphrasing. The study also reveals, to some extent, the understanding of plagiarism and pedagogical pproaches to plagiarism of a sample of experienced Chinese EFL teachers, by examining teaching materials that they have designed. Compared with the body of research that has investigated Chinese EFL teachers understanding of and pedagogical stance on plagiarism through questionnaire surveys and interviews Hu & Shen, 2021; Hu & Sun, 2016; Lei & Hu, 2015), the picture presented by our study is likely to be more proximate to the teachers' classroom practices and thus constitutes an extension of this literature.

As noted in the methods section of this paper, most of the authors of our sample of textbooks had overseas academic experience t has been reported that academic study or visit experience in Anglo-American universties can significantly increase Chinese EFL teachers' ability to recognize subtle forms of lagiarism such as inappropriate paraphrasing (Hu & Shen, 2021; Hu & Sun, 2016; Lei & Hu, 2015) shape Chinese EAP teachers' teaching, research, and professonal development Li & Ma, 2020), and orient Chinese TESOL professionals to Anglo-American rhetorical norms of academic writing (Shi, 2003). Our study showed that the English-language specialis authors of our sample of EAW textbooks, with or without overseas experience, have gained knowledge of international conventions for the use of sources and have unanimously placed a premium on these conventions in developing textbooks, taking them as standards that should be observed by Chinese students and authors in academic writig. There is no suggestion in the textboos that plagiarism may be tolerated in the Chinese culture, as Westen teachers subscribing to a handy cultural conditioning view of plagiarism might assume. Instead, the books point to a lack of training in the use of sources, inadequate academic writing education, and difficulties with the English language as contributors to the aleged greater prevalence of plagiarism among Chinese students. Whereas our previous study showed that CAW textboos tend to engage in moral education and state the general principles of source use (Li et al., 2023), our sample of EAW textbooks is unambiguously devoted to text-based instruction on plagiarism. In this sense, the EFL teacher authors of the books were pedagogically aligned with those educators in Anglo-American universities who are dedicated to an educational approach to plagiarism through explicit instruction on how to writ from sources without plagiarism (eg., Barks & Watt, 2001; Pecorari, 2013; Ting, 2012; Wette, 2010).

The EAW textbook authors gave due weight to the notion of paraphrasing in view of the significance of this practice and its challenging nature for learners (e.g., Liu et al., 2013), and made clear with the help of textual examples that \*patchwriting Howard 1993)a term that does not appear in the textbooks but i captured by \*inappropriate paraphrasing"is a form of plagiarism and therefore unacceptable. As pointed out above, the notion of "paraphrasing" does not have a strict Chinese equivalent, with the Chinese notions of shiyi (interpreting the meaning") and jianjie yinyong ("indirect quotation") not implying a strict exclusion of patchwriting. Therefore, the spotlight given to the practiceand stratgie of paraphrasing in the A textboos has exra significance and i likely to influence the classroom instruction of teachers who draw materials from these textbooks in their teaching. In the meantime, by being used to represent \*paraphrasing" in our sample of textbooks, the semantic dimensions of shiyi and jianjie yinyong has been expanded.

Several observations can be made on the adoption in some of the textbooks of a pair of concepts in Chinesezhijie yinyong (direct quotation") and jianjie yinyong (indirect quotation")in discussing English academic writing. Firs, it can be suggested that the authors performed an act of ocalization in anti-plagiarism instuction by using this pair of potentiall familiar concepts to explain the use of sources in English academic writing. Second, despite some confusion over these terms in several books, we regard one book (i.e, Chen et l., 2020) as achieving an innovation by subsuming both paraphrasing and summarizing under jianjie yinyong. Jianjie ynyong has a somewhat vague meaning in the context of Chinese writing and, like shiyi, does not necessrily exclude patchwriting. Third, this point of lexical interchange between the Chinese and English writing contexs could serve as a reminder that there are not innate and unchangeable differences in source-use conventions between the two contexts. Rather than resulting from some \*cultural difference," the disparity between the traditional neglect of addressing local-level textual plagiarism in the Chinese education system and the strong weight given to such local-level plagiarism in Anglo-American academia suggests only that the two contexts are at different points on a continum of development in terms of their alignment with the high standards expected at the international level. Our study provides evidence that the gap between the two contexs is reducing and that English teachers, through their design of teaching materials and hence through classroom instruction, could play a significant role in reducing it further.

We found that the authors of our sample of EAW textbooks relied on a triadic approach based on textual examples to teach about plagiarism, with a focus on demonstrating and teaching theskill of quotation, paraphrasing, and summarizing. However, it has ben pointed out in the literature that anti-plagiarism education needs to take place in a broader context of learning to write from sources and that the triadic approach, by focusing on isolated skils training, may be les than effective in helping leaners to adopt good practices of source use in authentic witing tas (Barks & Watt, 2001; Howard t al., 2010). Fromthis perspective, itcan be suggested that the adherencetothe triadic approach with textal examples in our collection of EAW textbooks is a limitation of their teaching of plagiarism. Nevertheles, we do not consider this a major fault; indeed, in view of the total absence of such an approach in the CAW textbooks in China written by content specialists (Li et al., 2023), we consider the specific, text-based teaching of how to quote, paraphrase, and summarize that appears in the EAW boos as a breakthrough in instruction on the use of sources in academic writing in China. The collection of EAW textbooks examined in our study provides some valuable teaching material for classroom teachers to draw upon, adapt, and incorporate into authentic tasks of writing from sources.

# 5. Conclusion

Beyond the scope of writing textbooks, reports from the Chinese context indicate that the same kind of anti-plagiarism instruction aimed at deliverig intenational standards of source use is taking place in English teachers' EAP classrooms (Du, 202; Zhang, 2021). However, such spic instrction is sill argely asent in hine classoms taght by ubject techers, incuding in those oted to academic integrity education, in which students rceive what i above all a moral education in addition to reearch methodologie in relevant disciplines) rather than developing the textual skillsnded for avoiding local-level plagiarism (Li, in pres). The apparent difference between a population of experienced English teachers and the average subject teachers (perhaps excluding those with overseas academic experience) in the level of detailed knowledge they posses on the question of plagiarism implies that the anti-plagiarism education roles of EAW textbooks, such as those examined in this study, and of English teachers should be taken seriously, not only in the Chinese setting but also elsewhere.

Our study showcases the kinds of local educational resources and materials currently available in the Chinese context, demonstrating that against the backdrop of internationalization, antiplagiarism instruction in China has increasingly come under the in. fluence of international practices as Chinese universities aspire to international standards of academic communication and the protection of intellectual property. Our findings could thus serve to weaken the \*cultural difference view that has bee a handy way for Western teachers to explain Asian students apparent pronenesst plagiarism (e.g., Deckert, 1993; Lund, 2004; Sowden, 2005). Our study might aso suggest that among the Chinese students who study in English-medium universities outside of China, those who have had a chance to benefit from the kind of learning resources contained in our sample of EAW textboos are likely to be better prepared than their forbears in knowing how to avoid plagiarism in writing. In view of the ongoing paradigm shift from EGP to EAP in English language education at Chinese universities (e.g., Cheng, 2016; Li & Ma, 2020), this population of beter-prepared Chinese students can be expected to grow. This should in turn reinforce an understanding on the part of educators in general that pedagogical effrts and resources ned o be dedcatd to helping students to develop knowledge and kills in the ue f source, irrespective of their education backgrounds. Only with the needed education in place will anti-plagiarism policies and plagiarism checks, which have become almost standard in universities across the world, make sense and play their intended role of nurturing a healthy academic environment.

While we applaud the authors of our sample of EAW textbooks fr adopting a pedagogical approach to plagiarism that i based on international standards, besides their resoning on the causes of plagiarism among Chinese students we found limited evidence in these books oftrying to make connections to the Chinese context. The exercises and tasks set for students in the books could be a good place to make these connections, such as through incorporating an ethnographic approach in the task design (Barks & Watt, 2001; Hirvela, 1997) to prompt students to explore local resources to sharpen their understanding of the question of plagiarism and the use f sources. In other words, the exercises and tasks in these textbooks, which are mostly focused on testing students' declarative knowledge or training specific skill, could be expanded into activities that are more student-centered and can nurture critical-pragmatic perspectives on the issue of plagiarism (Du, 2022) by, for example, reflcting upon the so-called \*Anglo-centric globalization of rhetorical development' (Shi, 2003, p. 386).

Taking this study together with our previous research on the topic (Li et al., 2022, 2023), we have taken steps to systematically examine how anti-plagiarism instruction plays out in writing textbooks published in China. Writing textbook publishing may well continue to be a booming busines in China and other countries and our research can provide a point freference for future studies along similar lines. As noted above, the study reported in this paper did not aim to be comprehensive in its examination of the subject matter but instead focused on those elements that could ffer rich evidence for comparison with Anglo-American plagiarism pedagogy and with the traditional Chinese teaching about plagiarism, as manifested in CAW textbooks published in China (Li et al., 2023). As the EAW textbooks in our sample target users with varied disciplinary backgrounds, one step that could be taken in future studies is to investigate how such books could aim to fruitfully addres the ssue of plagiarism within disciplinary contexts. Moving beyond researching and developing teaching materials, future research is also needed to explore how anti-plagiarism education can be effectively promoted in classrooms. This should extend beyond technical isues to cover what we cl intertextual education: in. struction that aims to nurture students' intertextual literacy, or their ability to link between texts, to read for writing, to write from sources, and to use sources apropriately without plagiarism. Future research should also explore how language teachers and content teachers can joinly engage in profesional development to better prepare themselves for the challnge of intertextual education in the fast-changing educational landscape, on which the impact of new technologies such as generative Al wil only increase in the years to come.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Yongyan Li: Writing - original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Meng Ge: Writing - review & editing, Formal analysis. Qianshan Chen: Formal analysis, Data curation.

# Acknowledgements

We gratefull acknowledge the constructive feedback of two anonymous reviewers and Zak Lancaster on an earlier version of this paper. The study reported in the paper was funded by the General Research Fund, Research Grants Council, Hong Kong, China (project code 17610019) and the Faculty Research Fund, Faculty of Education, University of Hong Kong. We would also like to acknowledge the professional English language editing support provided by AsiaEdit (asiaedit.com).

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2024.101388.

# References

Adikari, . (2018). Bend e  nion ss ad lris l of iontns, 81) 375-38. ./.g/10.5281/ zenodo.1134315   
Barks  1)    .)   i n 2 reading-writing connections (pp. 246-267). University of Michigan Press.   
iwsi 01e      at 74, 194-205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2018.03.017   
Bh .t age. The University of Michigan Press.   
Cheng,016  th    i. ln  ., Th  E or d purposes (pp. 97-108). Routledge.   
Cooper,     t   
h    0 practices and bilitie r wig r  in ish at uisiti in hi.  f d n ing 39, 1-15. /i./0.1016/. jslw.2017.11.001   
Cure,  19t     il  n(.//16/1060 3743(98)90003-0   
Deckert, G. (1993). Perspectives on plagiarism from ESL students in Hong Kong. Journal of Second Language Writing, 2, 131-148.   
Du .202 g crilc  o pl n h n  .  of  or  s 57 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101112   
Gu, Q., & Brooks, J. (2008). Beyond the accusation of plagiarism. Systm, 36(3), 37-352. htp:/doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2008.01.004   
Gui, M Ma g 016) h xing h  bie ng h t st dt ait en plagiarism in academic writing and their attitudes towards it]. Waiyu Jiaoxue [Foreign Language Education], 37(5), 57-61.   
Hrl(197.  "      .//0/4069600037   
Howard, R. M. (1993). A plagiarism pentimento. Journal of Teaching Writing, 11(3), 233-245.   
ad ,   1n  wn  2 - //8/ v2i2.177   
Hu G. ht   tig62 (3), 813-850. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2011.00650.x   
Hu .  e 1). tr   i p ,  i Behavior, 31(6), 433-450. https://doi.org/10.1080/10508422.2020.1776616   
Hu G. & u,  (2016). Chie nivrst EL techrs kwleg of an stance on plagiris. ocar, 48 29-37 htps:/i.org/0.3916/48-2016-03   
H, G.  7iref h  f t  668 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2017.03.015   
Jia ., 01)  e y h s        lnis mars MA theses]. Dangdai Waiyu Yanjiu [Contemporary Foreign Language Studies], 8, 23-28.   
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2004). A handbook for teacher research: From design to implementation. Open University Press.   
Lei, J  015).h t c fpi o 0 51565. /g/107/13-014985 225-245. https:/doi.org/10.1075/jerpp.22006.li   
Li, Y. (in press). Perspectives on plagiarism in China: History, genres, and education. Routledge.   
Li, ., Che Q, Ge, M  Wang, . (2022. he tone from anther mounain can help to ois jade: Imition as aChiee mposition dgy.1: Educational Studies in Language and Literature, 22(1), 3-29. https://doi.org/10.21248/11esll.2022.22.1.389   
Li, ., Ch      . 2023.  gri oo h a wi bs  h1ti Studies in Language and Literature, 23(1), 1-27. https:/doi.org/10.21248/l1esll.2023.23.1.490   
Li, Y  M 200).h  hrgsh  wn tion d hr siom ic 9, 141164   
Liu, D. (2005). Plaim in 0L stdt s rl ondiog ly the mr clrit?  l, 593), 234-241. hp/.g/0.1093//ci043   
Li  1  t study. Computers & Education, 69, 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2013.06.011   
Lund, J.  204). Plaris:l perctiv.  f Rgs h tion (34) 93101. ./i.g/10.100/1060308   
Ma, R  014). xn   j ristf    gae academic writig cittion]. Waiyu Jiaxue Foreign Language Education], 35(6), 50-54. htps://di.org/10.16362/j.cnki.cn61-1023/h.2014.06.020   
ael,   , 01   ti i.   ck ., he  f tis  34) Sage.   
Maell, J r  ii methods (pp. 461-477). Guilford Press.   
atn 1 ji academic misconduct for journals). CY/T 1742019) https://www.cdutcm.edu.cn/Upload/kjc/ContentManage/Article/File/2020/11/23/ 202011231026512298.pdf.   
Pecorari, D. (2013). Teaching to avoid plagiarism: How to promote good source use. Open University Press.   
eg .010). "     -"     e, 2), 80-210+246. https://doi.org/10.19934/j.cnki.shxyj.2010.02.009   
Phan, Le H. (2006). Plagiarism and overseas students: Stereotypes again? ELT Journal, 60(1), 76-78. https://doi.org/10.1093/lt/cci085   
Re .004).     w gh  rs d l    pr] Guoji Guancha [International Review], 2, 65-73.   
Shi, L. (2003). Writing in two cultures: Chinese professors return from the west. Canadian Modern Language Review, 59(3), 369-392.   
Shi, L   018.h   n is  h.   for   4 656. /. org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.03.002   
owden, . 005 li dt  in s  hgri ad.  , 593, 26-23././193/ci042   
Sun, Q   2021). e ion of e us  d wig textk.  l, 764), 97-507 /.g/.109/t/cab058   
Sutherland-Smith, W. (2008). Plagiarism, the Internet and student learning: Improving academic integrity. Routledge.   
Tg H012) r  it  .) B divides: Asian languages and cultures in global higher education (pp. 253-267). University of Adelaide Press.   
alentine, (2006). Plagrism as lity practice: Reonzing ad rethinkng thical inrie.Cole Cmsition & ctio, 581), 89-109.   
Wang, D. (2001). Xueshu guifan yu xueshu piping. Kaifang Shidai [Open Times], (12), 56-65 [Academic standards and academic criticism].   
Wi . 10 , 9 16 in human geography].   
Wet,  010n   t  i s.    93 7 /. org/10.1016/j.jslw.2010.06.002   
Weer,. 2009. i n the J ti     f  g 181 1729./.0.1016/] jslw.2008.09.004   
ng  18e  ,4, 67-72.   
Yu F.  h016). y x ji  y i s  wig xo uising n China]. Jiaoyu Pinglun, 2, 138-141 [Education Review]. Fanyi [Foreign Languages & Translation].   
1  i academic English writing]. Waiyu Xuekan [Foreign Language Research], 5, 76-82. htps://doi.org/10.16263/j.cnki.23-1071/h.2019.05.013   
Zhu, S.1. (aka Su, L) (1996) Fazhi jiqi bentu ziyuan [Ruleof law and local resources]. China Universt of Political Science and Law Pres.