# Specificity and generality of lexical bundles in the rhetorical moves of Applied Linguistics research article introductions

Maryam Farhang-Jua, Alireza Jalilifara\*, Mohammad Hossein Keshavarz b

a Shahid Chamran University of Ahvaz, Iran b Girne American University, North Cyprus

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Handling editorial by:L. McGrath

Keywords:   
Bundle-move connections   
Lexical bundles   
Rhetorical moves   
Research article introductions

Investigating the linguistic realizations of rhetorical moves through lexical bundles is a research area that has recently gained momentum. However, the lack of a fully annotated corpus has impeded the full understanding of the relationship between formulaic sequences and their corresponding moves. Accordingly, this study addressed this lacuna by annotating 1000 Applied Linguistics research article (RA) introductions using a framework developed for the current study to identify bundles characterizing communicative moves that configure introductions. Following a manual move identification of RA introductions, lexical bundles were extracted using AntConc and manually refined. This was followed by systematic identification of their functions in their cotext. Results indicated that some lexical bundles (i.e., move-general) occur in several moves or steps, whereas other bundles (i.e., move-specific) perform distinct discursive functions within each move. In other words, the development of rhetorical moves and bundles within each move is intricately interwoven and collaboratively contributes to developing ideas in the analyzed section. Furthermore, the functional analyses indicated that text-oriented bundles emerged as a strong indicator of the communicative moves of RA introductions, which performed distinct functions within each move. Drawing on key pedagogical insights, findings can serve as an instructional framework for instructors, students, and novice writers.

# 1. Introduction

Considering the importance of publication in top-tier journals, academic writing has been a high priority for scholars over the last decades (e.g., Devira & Westin, 2021; Kim & Kessler, 2022; Paltridge & Starfield, 2020). Previous research has adopted discourse analysis and corpus-based linguistics as two efective approaches for exploring the theoretical aspects of academic discourse and enhancing novice writers' awarenes of writing conventions (Flowerdew, 2013; Shokri et al., 2022). One area of discourse analysis research that has contributed significantly to academic writing is analyzing the research article (RA) rhetorical organization, as communicative moves, that is, \*rhetorical units that perform coherent communicative functions' (Swales, 1990, p. 228-229)

Researchers have also focused on analyzing the lexicogrammatical features of discourse units, with lexical bundles being among the most frequently studied features (Li et al., 2020; Ren, 2021). exical bundle, defined as recurrent word sequences in specific genes, have been inroduced as atype of formulaic chunk (Biber et al. 199). These expressions are \*prefabricated chunks that speakers and writers can easily retrieve from their memory and use again and again as text building blocks" (Biber et al., 2004, p.443)

Despite the abundance of research addresing the rhetorical structure (e.g., Del Saz Rubio, 2011; Fakri, 2009; Loi & Evans, 2010; Sheldon, 2011) and lxical bundles (e.g., Biber et al., 2004; Liu & Chen, 2020; Pan et al., 2016; Adel & Erman, 2012) in RAs, these studies have faled tocaptre gre knwledgi it fulles sense (wales, 2019, p. 76) ince they have analyzd htrical constructs and formulaic expresons in isolation. A few studies have adressed this form-function gap (e.., orte, 2013; Omidian et al., 2018); however, our understanding of the relationship between lexical bundes and rhetorical features seems to be inadequate. In light of this shortcoming, the overarching aim of this study is to examine the bundle-move connection in RA introductions.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Macro-structure and RA introductions

Move analysis is a method of analyzing text to identify its rhetorical characteristics within specific genres (Swales, 1990). This rigorous text analysis method has emerged as an important research agenda that elucidates the nuances and subtleties of written communication to discover how different texts are crafted to achieve different ends (Biber et al., 2007). Of the important researched genres that have relied on move analysis are RAs, whose primary function is reporting original research findings in aspecific discipline.

Being one of the most disputably complex parts of RAs, introductions have been widely studied using the Create a Research Space (CARS) model (wales, 1990, 2004). This model includes three rhetorical moves in RA introductions: estblishin  tertory, establishing a niche, and occupying the niche with several steps representing each move. These moves together provide a persuasive and effective rationale for the research and ensure the article convincingly and unequivocall establishes research in the pertinent field. For instance, acknowledging discourse community members in the first move through using citations helps authors support their claims and exercise caution.

Previous studies on RAs have delved into possible discernibledifferences in the rhetorical structure of inroductions across a range of disciplines (Lim, 2012; Loi, 2010; Samraj, 2002, 2005; Wang & Yang, 2015), subdisciplines (Del Saz Rubio, 2011; Kanoksilapatham, 2005; Ozturk, 2007), and cultures (Fakhri, 2009, Hirano, 2009; Lo1 & Evans, 2010; Sheldon, 2011). The majority of these studies have revealed that this section does not adhere strictly to the CARS model and exhibits variability with communicative moves across different disiplines, sudiscipline, and culture. These variations ae reflectd in the frequency, order, length of the moves s well as steps, and the presence of unique moves and steps.

The above-mentioned review suggests that the CARS model, despite its potential, may not fully capture the rhetorical structure of introductions i various disciplines and cultures. However, it can serve as a useful guide to identify the communicative functions ofthis section. Thus, guided by the Swales' CARS model, the current study draws on a bottom-up approach to identify the communicative moves in RA introductions to furnish grounds for the next phase of the study.

# 2.2. Previous studies on lexical bundles

Within academic discourse, the main reason to make the study of lexical bundles central in second language (L2) research and hence to reflect on their frequency, structures, and functions stems from the recognition of their pedagogical application for L2 neophytes' production (Kim & Kesser, 2022). This isprecisely why lexical bundles have been the subject of extensive research (e., Deng & Liu, 2023; Pan et al., 2016; Adel & Erman, 2012).

Reviewing the relevant body of literature pinpoints three criteria employed in lexical bundle studies for identifying these prefabricated patterns: frequency, dispersion, and bundle length It has been reported that the cut-off frequency ranges from 10 to 40 occurrences per millon words, dending on the orpus size (g., Chen & Baker, 2010; Li et l., 2023). Disribution threshold, another criterion for bundle extraction, concerns the frequency of occurrence of these formulaic utterances in the corpus and helps avoid the idiosyncrasies of individual users (Biber et al., 2004). A review of the existing literature reveals that some studies (e.g., yland, 2008; Liu & Chen, 2020; Shirazizadeh & Amirfazlian, 2021) have employed a distribution threshold of $1 0 \%$ of the corpus, whereas most studies have opted for a different measure. In these cases, a distribution threshold of thre (e.g, Chen & Baker, 2010) or a more conservative threshold of five was employed (e.g., Jalilifar, Ghoreishi, & Emam Roodband, 2016; Ren, 2021).

The length of bundles has been another criterion in previous research. Whereas previous studies have identified three, four, five, or more word sequences (Authors, 2016; Simpson-Vlach & llis, 2010), the majority of studies have examined four-word bunde e., Chen & Baker, 2010; Hyland, 2008). The rationale behind this is that four-word bundles contain thre-word bundles and are more prevalent than longer bundles (Simpson-Vlach & Ellis 2010). Accumulating evidence suggests that frequency and dispersion thresholds are arbitrary and depend on the corpus size (Pan, 2020). Whilereearch studies with a smaller corpus size usually choose a lower cut-offrequency (e.g., Ren, 2021), studies with a larger corpus set higher frequencies (e.g., Liu & Chen, 2020). Some of these studies used the frequency and dispersion thresholds based on repeated experiments (Chen & Baker, 2010) or the results of a pilot study (Huang, 2015).

The studies discussed above have drawn on a frequency-based approach to creating formulaic lis to assist instructors and novice writer. However, despite their eforts, they \*provide frequency data without any consideration of possble or potential pedagogical uptake (Swales, 2019, p. 5). Other scholars have also expressed concerns that the results of the formulaic analysis may only provide a partial understanding of structural units (e.g., although i is that might not be particularly beneficial for novice writers (Appel & Trofimovich, 2017).

These concerns are, first and foremost, roted in the flaws inherent in the methodology employed by previous research. One major potential limitation of this line of research is analyzing all sections of RAs as a single unit and neglecting the possbilit of distint phraseological features characterizing each section. This perspective is underpinned by the argument that the unavailability of appropriate guidelines for students about bundles used in the rhetorical structure of RAs can lead to confusion and the unconventional use of these formulaic sequences in communicative moves (Hong, 2019).

Over the past decade, a more eficient approach to analyzing lexical bundles has been expanded to overcome the limitations of previous research. This approach combines genre-based analys and corpus-based ingustics to identify the relationship between the rhetorical organization of the diferent sections of an RA and lexical bundles (Cortes, 2013; Deng & Liu, 2023; Omidian et al, 2018), hoping to unleash learners' writing potential and elevate their writing to the next level.

This burgeoning line of research has mostly focused on the abstracts. One of the studies documented in this section was conducted by Omidian et al. (2018) who analyzed 5910 abstracts of various isciplines t reflect on the relationship betweenrhtorical features of abstracts and bundles. The frequency and dispersion thresholds were 20 occurrences per million words and five texts, respectively. Following bundles analysis, each bundle was identified within a certain move. They argued that each field may have priorities for representing its research in RA abstracts.

Other empirical evidence of the potential connections between rhetorical structures and linguistic realizations was reported by Abdollahpour and Gholami (2019) who carried out acorpus analysis of 1500 medical RAs. They observed that four-word bundles specified the rhetorical feature of abstracts. For instance, the purpose of this was associated with Move # 2 Step $\# 2$ (i.e., indicating the main purpose). In another examination of the connection between bundles and communicative moves in Ph.D. abstracts, Li e al. (2020) analyzed a corpus of one million words of abstracts in different felds of arts and humanities. The analysis of 5-word sentence-initial bundles witha cut-ofpoint of 5 times per million words suggested a strong conection between discoursestuctures and bundes. For example, it is hoped that this was found to be associated with the implication function.

Some research has focused on other sections of RAs. In one of the preliminary attempts that have addressed bundle-move connections, Cortes (2013) analyzed a corpus of one milion words RA introductions of various academic disciplines to detect bundes associated with the moves of hs section. The cut-off points for four, five, and ix-word bundles were 20, 10, and 8 with the dispersion threshold of five. Similar to other investigations conducted in this line of research, the analysis involved examining bundles before identifying the corresponding embodiment move. The result illstrated that a group of bundles occurred in several moves/steps with general functions, whereas another group of bundles signaled rhetorical moves of introductions. Findings further revealed that longer bundles were bettr at characterizing moves and steps of introductions. For instance, the bundle in the next section reportedly was linked to Move $\# 3$ Step $\# 7$ (i.e., outlining the structure of the paper).

In another examination of the move-bundle connection with a focus on Discussion, Le and Harrington (2015) collected and analyzed a corpus of 124 Applied Linguistics RAs by the WordSmith program. The results indicated that bundles reflect the communicative purposes of this section. For instance, the bundle results/findings suggest that was used in interpreting the reults step. Finally, in the latest endeavor to investigate the potential connection between moves and bundles in the conclusion secion of hard sciences and soft sciences RAs, Deng and Liu (2023) sugested that certain bundes (i., resultative) can be astronger indicator of communicative moves of this section. For example, this study contributes to signaled Move # 2 Step # 1 by indicating the sig. nificance/advantage of the study.

In sum, the empirical evidence provided by the studies whose focus has been on bundle-move connections has indicated how bundles associate with the rhetorical organizations of RAs.

# 2.3. The current study

Previous contributions to move-bundleconnections, albeit primarily on abstracts, have offred an alternative approach to aca demic writing reearch (Cortes, 2013; eng & Liu, 2023; Li et a., 2020; Omidian et al., 2018). It isimportant tonote, however, that the core issue of previous research is the employed methodology. In this area of research, bundle extraction is followed by identifying communicative moves in which these bundles occur. Adopting such a methodology can lead to discarding certain lexical bundles in specific communicatie contexts and capturing a disorted image of the bundle-move relationship. Thus, it i important that additional studies provide more in-depth examinations of the potentially itricate relationship between bundles and rhetorical functions of RA sections.

This study, therefore, aimed to addressthe limitations of previous research by incorporating a manual approach in identifying the rhetorical features of RA introductions before the bundle identification and analyzing the corpus of each move separately. We argue that such an approach more efficiently captures the specificity and generality of the lexical bundles and rhetorical moves of RA introductions. More specifically, the current study adopted a sequential qualitative-quantitative approach to investigate how lexical bundles appear in the functional moves that characterize RA introductions in the discipline of Applied Linguisics.In this regard, the following research questions guided the present study.

1) What are the distributions of frequently occurring lexical bundle ineach of the rhetorical moves that characterize RA introductions in the discipline of Applied Linguistics?   
2) In drawing the concordance lines, what discourse functions do lexical bundles present?   
3) What are the potential connections between lexical bundles and rhetorical moves of RA introductions?

# 3. Method

# 3.1. Corpus selection and preparation

The corpus of this study consisted of 1000 Applied Linguistics empirical RAs selected from 10 internationall refereed high-impact journals, with an equal contribution of 100 RAs from each journal see Table 1). The journal selection was guided by two main criteria. impact factors (IFs) and scope. The selection proces involved identifying quartile-on jounals with the highest Fs by referring tothe Journal Citation Report released in 2021 and impactfactor.ir as wel as their copetoverify that they repreented the intended Applied Linguistics community. This interdisciplinary field draws upon a variety of disciplines such as psychology, education, and sociology, therefore, the corpus included empirical RAs that represented a range of subdisciplines within Applied Linguistics, including corpus linguistics, second language acquisition, English for academic purposes, assessment, and sociolinguisics. Throughout the selection process potential subdisciplinary differences that could arise from a narrow focus on one subdiscipline were avoided by seking expert advice.

To prevent the impact of time on the rhetorical organization of the RAs over time (Askehave & Swales, 2001; Paltridge & Starfield 2020), the corpus focused only on empirical studies published from 2023 backward until 1000 RAs were collected. Each RA was subject to an initil evaluation to confirm their compliance with the citria of this study: report an empirical investigation and include an introduction section. To accomplish this the overall organization of the RAs and the content of various sections (e.g., abstract, methods, and results) were reviewed. This process was repeated to ensure that only empirical RAs were selected for the study. As a result, other journal publications, such as review artices, book reviews, meta-analysis studies, and editorial notes, were excluded as they serve adistinct purpose. The included empirical RAs fllowed the Itroduction-Methods-Results-Discussio (IMRD) format and its variations (e.g., IMRDC and ILMRD), provided that they featured freestanding introductions. This decision was made after realizing that only a few studiestictly follow this format. The freestanding sections after the abstracts were considered RA introductions, which were either followed by a Methodology i.e, merged introductions) or a Literature Review. This approach enabled the researchers to verify the validity and applicabilit f the developed framework and consistently account for both types of introduction.It should be noted that literature review sections after freestanding introductions were not considered for analysis. The final corpus included RAs published by L1 and L2 users of English to ensure the corpus reflected a diverse range of authors within the discourse community.

The selected RAs were obtained from Shahid Chamran of Ahvaz Universty Library and were then renamed. A coding system was established, which involved using abreviated titles of journals, along with the publishing year, volume, and ssue information. Finally, a unique identifiction number was assigned to each RA For instance, the code L2224 (1) is a composite of the journal title abbreviation (Language Learning), I for inroduction, abbreviated form of publication year (2022), volume (2), and issue (4). This step was followed by converting PDFs into Word and extracting certain information (e.g., the tite of papers and the authors of RAs) in a table for ure reerence.o reare the files for alysis, l setios  tite, pag mbers, astrats, and the ctions following the introduction), excet inroductions, were removed. As indicated in Table 1, the final corpus included 539089 words, and the length of RA introductions varied from 56 to 2374 words, with an average of 539.089 words.

# 3.2. Move identification

After the completion of preliminary data processing, the rhetorical organization of RAs was manually identified using aframework developed specificall for ths study (see Table 2). As the current study did not impose theestablished MRD framework, (Swales, 1990, 2004), the model simply acted as a guide for the move-analysis phase. In this study, similar to Swales (2004), the unit of analysis was the communicative intentions of writers behind any stretch of discourse, whose length varied from a phrase to a paragraph (see Table 3).

The current study conceptualized moves as broader rhetorical sections that serve a specific communicative purpose in a text. For example, the third move of the proposed framework, named Research Problem, aims to provide the rationale for the study. This can be achieved through different steps, which are smallr and detailed units within moves that progres the communicative purpose of the move. The differentiation is ased on scale and specificty whers moves are the lager, ovrarching part of the text's structure, stes are the finer, more detailed elements that constitute those larger parts.

Table 1 Corpus specification.   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Journal</td><td>MLJ</td><td>LL</td><td>JSLW</td><td>s</td><td>ReCALL</td><td>AL</td><td>TQ</td><td>IJBEB</td><td>ESP</td><td>LT</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>IPY</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>8</td><td>3</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>10</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>TS</td><td>2023-18</td><td>2023-18</td><td>2023-18</td><td>2023-18</td><td>2023-18</td><td>2023-18</td><td>2023-18</td><td>2023-18</td><td>2023-18</td><td>2023-18</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>IF</td><td>7.500</td><td>5.24</td><td>5.448</td><td>4.518</td><td>4.235</td><td>4.155</td><td>3.41</td><td>3.165</td><td>2.417</td><td>2.4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>IL</td><td>51840</td><td>40999</td><td>59544</td><td>48604</td><td>46141</td><td>60333</td><td>51137</td><td>52827</td><td>72033</td><td>55631</td><td>539089</td></tr><tr><td>ALI</td><td>518.4</td><td>409.99</td><td>595.44</td><td>486.04</td><td>461.41</td><td>603.33</td><td>511.37</td><td>528.27</td><td>720.33</td><td>556.31</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: MLJ: The Moden Language Journal, LL: Language Learning, JSLW: The Journal of Second Language Writing, S: System, ReCALL: European Association for Computer Assted Language Learning, AL: Applied Linguistics, TQ: TESOL Quarterly, JBEB: International Jounal of Bilingul dion  ii, P:   is     ig, P r : t F  Time an IL: Introduction Length, ALI: Average Length of Introductions.

Table 2 Move-step framework for applied linguistics RA introductions.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move</td><td>Step</td><td>Definition</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 1 Field Framing?</td><td>Step # 1 Epigraph3</td><td>a quotation at the beginning of RAs, serving as an introduction to the topic</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 2 Epigraph Explanation3</td><td> an explanation of epigraph to clarify its meaning and relevance to the</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 3 Example Illustration3</td><td>RA real-life instances to elucidate or expound upon a general concept</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 4 Territory Statement?</td><td>indicating the importance, centrality, or value of a particular research area or involves widely accepted statements about the research area</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 5 Evolution3</td><td>denoting the gradual and progressive changes over a period of time</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 6 Scope3</td><td>identifying the boundaries of the topic and its specific aspects, angles, or perspectives</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 7 Application/Geography3</td><td>particular research geography pertinent to the study or practicality of the topic for a specific field, discipline, or area of study</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 2 Backgrounding?</td><td>Step # 8 Term Explanation3</td><td>defining the fundamental terms of the research topic</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 1 Background Information3</td><td>elaborating key concepts and theories pertinent to research</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 2 Previous Research?</td><td>reviewing previously conducted studies on the topic</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 3 Topic Specificity3</td><td>including highly focused information pertaining to research</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 4 Description of Reference Research (Data,.</td><td>providing details of the data, including methods, tools, frameworks,</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 3 Research Problem?</td><td>Methods, Tools, Approaches)3</td><td>and approaches used in prior research related to the same topic</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 1 Preview of the Problem3 Step # 2 Statement of the Problem (Disagreement</td><td>providing a brief overview of the research problem being addressed identifying the problem or obstacle that the study intends to tackle</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Statement, Examples, Reasons, Solutions)3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 3 Drawback3</td><td>identifying limitations of previous studies that the new research aims to rectify</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 4 Gap3</td><td>indicating unexplored or inadequately addressed research topic</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 5 Niche3 Step # 6 Research Context3</td><td>indicating where the research fits and its features or benefits describing the problem in a specific setting and research context</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 4 Differentiating the Present</td><td></td><td>identifying differences or enhancements in approach, methods, or data</td></tr><tr><td>Work from Previous Research?</td><td>Step # 1 Differentiating the Present Work from. Previous Research3</td><td>in order to distinguish present work from previous studies.</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 5 Present Work&#x27;</td><td>Step # 1 Aim3</td><td>providing a broad understanding of what the study sets out to accomplish, answer, or solve</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 2 Present research?</td><td>briefly outlining the key elements of the research and the scope of the</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 3 Method3</td><td>investigation to be undertaken providing a concise explanation of their main approach and research</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 4 Rationalization of Method3</td><td>design indicating how the methodology is appropriate for addressing the</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 5 Research Questions3</td><td>research question or problem at hand providing questions that will be addressed</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 6 Research Hypothesis3</td><td>providing a tentative statement that suggests a possible answer to</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 7 Findings3</td><td>research questions providing a brief description of outcomes</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 8 Contribution3</td><td>highlighting implications or impact that a study offers</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 9 Limitations and Suggestions for Further.</td><td>highlighting the study&#x27;s weaknesses and proposing potential avenues</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Research3</td><td>for future research</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Step # 10 RA Structure3</td><td>outlining the organization, structure, and arrangement of the article</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: ': Obligatory, 2: Conventional, 3: Optional.

Table 3 Word count and token count in the subcorpora..   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move</td><td>Move # 1</td><td>Move # 2</td><td>Move # 3</td><td>Move # 4</td><td>Move # 5</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Word count</td><td>86277</td><td>159485</td><td>158083</td><td>5080</td><td>130164</td><td>539089</td></tr><tr><td>Token count</td><td>92058</td><td>172574</td><td>166300</td><td>5106</td><td>134823</td><td>570861</td></tr><tr><td>WCMPVa</td><td>86.28</td><td>159.48</td><td>158.08</td><td>5.08</td><td>130.16</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

a WCMPV: Word Count Mean Per Move.

A text analytical approach was adopted throughout the pilot analysis to create a framework, which was further refined in the main data analysis phase. In this phase, RA introductions were analyzed intensively, leading to the discovery of new functions and the provision of further guidance for the subsequent data analysis phase. The move identification process included constantly observing generic features of the data and understanding the underlying patterns more thoroughly.

Researchers often include interrater reliability analysis to avoid subjectivity in genre-based studies. Such an analysis helps to augment the precision of analysis incorporated in these studies. To tackle the problem of subjectivity in the move identification phase, three coders, one of the researchers and two expert, collaborated to develop a rhetorical move framework. A postgraduate in lin. guistics from the Universt of Queensland with a rich background in linguistics was one of the coders in the current study. The other expert is adistinguished university professr with a Ph.D. in Applied Linguistcs and more than 20 years of research experience in this field. This collaboration enhanced the dependability and accuracy of the coding procedure.

In the firs step toward move identification, a pilot study was conducted in two phases through the collaboration of the researcher with the expert oders. For this purpose, 50 RAs published in 2021 were chosen from the selected journals. The introduction section of these RAs varied in length from 219 to 1244 words, with an average of 627.2 words. The coders independently were engaged in a round of coding to identify the communicative functions that specified introductions. In the first tep, 25 introductions were selected. The RA introductions were meticulously read several times for a more robust understanding. This was followed by identifying their macrostructure. To this aim, the coders labeled text units based on their communicative functions. The moves and steps that appeared in the introductions were drawn from a thorough and repeated reading of the texts. Atable was developed with two columns, with the text units and their corresponding functions (moves and steps) copied to each column, which helped organize and record generic patterns.

This step was followed by calculating the interrater reliability through Fleiss' Kappa coefficient $( k )$ , which was found to be 0.71. After calculating the interrater reliabilit, the coders exchanged their analyss and engaged in discussions to reduce any discreancies and coding differences. Eventuall, the preliminary framework included five moves: Field Framing, Backgrounding, Niche and Disagreement Statement, Differentiating the Present Work from Previous Research, and Present Work.

In the second phase of the study, another set of introductions $( n = 2 5$ were analyzed through which the framework was further polished. Similar to the previous phase, the move specification was conducted by careful examination of the rhetorical organization of RA introductions by the same thre coders. This step led to a few modifications in the framework. New steps (e.., Contribution), hich emerged in the second phase, were included in the preliminary version of the framework. The framework respectively was revised after coders discussed the coding diffrences, which was followed by calculating interrater reliabilit using the Kappa coefficient $( k = 0 . 7 5 )$ Following the sight improvement in reliabilit, one of the researchers analyzed the data for the main phase of the study, collaborating with the two experts to clarify any uncertainties in move identification. While identifying the rhetorical functions of introductions, Whenever new steps emerged, they were included in the preliminary version of th framework. To ensure the accuracy of the analysis, the corpus was coded twice by one of the researchers with an interval of two months, and around $1 0 \%$ of the corpus was independently coded by one of the expert coders. The indices obtained for the intra- and interrater reliability measured using the Cohen Kappa coefficient were $k _ { \mathrm { \ i n t r a r a t e r } } = 0 . 9 1$ and $k _ { n t e r r a t e r } = 0 . 8 7$ . Then, analyses were exchanged, and any remaining disagreements were discussed and resolved through discussion. Ultimatel, the main phase of the study provided novel insights that complemented the pilot study.

In order to check the stability of moves and categorize them as obligatory, conventional, or optional, frequency analysis of their occurrence in the corpus was conducted. Moves that appeared in $1 0 0 \%$ of the corpus were classified as obligatory, while those that surfaced in $9 9 \% - 6 0 \%$ were considered conventional. On the other hand, moves that were identified in less than $6 0 \%$ of the corpus were categorized as optional (Kanoksilapatham, 2005).

Following the move analysis, five subcorpora were created, one for each move. Then, Word files of each subcorpus were converted into.txt format for subsequent analysis that mapped formulaic expressons via the concordances, the details of which are presented below.

# 3.3. Lexical bundles extraction

In the bundle analysis phase of the study, the oftware-aided bundle extraction was followed by manual refinement of the list. The software to identify the frequently occurring bundes in the corpus was the latest version of AntConc (Anthony, 2023). This free software include features such s concordance lots,N-Grams, and word lis that failitate the bunde analysis phase. One of the main reasons for choosing this software is its ability to present bundles in a table that can be organized by frequency and dispersion thresholds.

The subcorpora were analyzed individually using the AntConc to identify the frequentl occurring four- and five-word bundles. In the current study, four-word bundles, being one of the most frequent strins of words in academic genres (Chen & Baker, 2010; Hyland 2008) and five-word length phrases shown to contain more information within the bundles (Cortes, 2013; Li et al., 2020) were selected. The frequency thresholds of 20 and 10 times per milion words were employed for four- and five-word bundle, respectively. A lower frequency cut-off i.e., 10 times per million was set for five-word bundles as they are les frequent (., Biber et al., 199; Li et al., 2020). Finally, a relatively conservative dispersion threshold of four was employed for filtring bundes and avoiding idio syncrasies, except for the Differentiating the Present Work (Move # 4), due to its smaller corpus size.

The initial is of bundles was manually refined by one of the researchers, and bundles dependent on the context (e.g., in the United States) or specific to a certain topic (e.g., alot of money) were removed as they have limited discourse functions (Chen & Baker, 2010). Eventuall, Salazar's (2014) functional clasification of lexical unde was usd to classfy bundes into three catorie ased ontheir communicative purpose: research-oriented, text-oriented, and stance-oriented. Research-oriented bundles structure authors' activities and experiences of the real world whereas text-oriented bundles organize thetext and indicate how the meaning of its elements relates to each other. Stance-oriented bundles convey authors' attitudes towards a statement and help engage with readers.

The process entailed conducting multiple concordance analyses of bundles to extract semantic and contextual information, which was used to assign functional labels to the identified bundles. To increase the accuracy of the analys, one of the researchers matched bundles and their functions twice with an interval of one month. Additionall, one of the expert coders independently checked the functions of $5 0 \%$ of the bundles in their surrounding context. The expert coder also checked the ist of bundles to ensure they were linked to the specified generic structures. The intra- and interrater reliabilities were found to be $k _ { \mathrm { \ i n t r a r a t e r } } = 0 . 9 5$ and $k _ { \mathrm { \ i n t e r r a t e r } } = 0 . 9 1$ Any discrepancies were resolved between the coders through discussion. Two internationally recognized researchers in the field of

Applied Linguistics, who were not involved in the previous phases of analysis, checked the final list of bundle-move connections to ensure their accuracy.

# 4. Results

In order to answer the first research question, the distribution of bundles across the communicative moves of introductions was calculated. Table 4 indicates the frequency of bundles associated with each move, along with examples for each (see Appendix for a complete list of bundles in each move). Atotal number of 334 lexical bundles were identifid in introductions, with 114 belonging to the move-general category. The most frequent move-general bundle types were found in the Present Work $( n = 4 9 )$ and Backgrounding $( n = 4 1 $ J. Additionally, 220 types of bundles signaled move-specificity. Based on their frequency of occurrence, the most versatile bundle types occurred in the Present Work $( n = 1 1 0 )$ , Backgrounding $( n = 4 5$ , Research Problem $( n = 3 6 )$ , Field Framing $( n = 2 1 )$ , and Differentiating the Present Work from Previous Research $( n = 8 )$ , respectively. Of all the five moves that occurred in the introductions, the Present Work move contained the highest number of move-specific and move-general lexical bundles.

3. The Bundle Type represents both move-general and move-specific bundles identified in each step.

To answer the second research question, Salazar's (2014) functional classfication of bundles, a slightly modified version of the classfication proposed by Hyland (2008), was utilized. As displayed in Table 5, the identified bundles were classfie into three functional categories: research-oriented, text-oriented, and participant-oriented. The results indicated the dominance of the text-oriented bundle $( 8 0 \% )$ in the communicative moves of RA introductions. The second and third frequent functional classification categories were research-oriented $( 1 4 . 5 5 \% )$ and participant-oriented $( 5 . 4 5 \% )$ , respectively.

The functional analysis of bundles indicated notable differences in each move. Analyzing discourse functions of Field Framing revealed that this move contained formulaic expressions that pertained to functional subcategories of description (e.g., thesignificance of the), quantity (e.g, great deal of), and causative (e.g., play an important role in). Backgrounding, conversely, mainly used recurrent sequence fr cittionuroses erencing exsting knowge and pratics with forulic expresons , tes hae show that. The other unle ocurring in his move were framig  intems of the), dive  s wel s the), casatie , s a result of the), and description (e.g., the development of the), which contributed to organizing the text and elaborating on the topic.

In Research Problem, the lexical bundles were used to present the argument of rearch through generalization (e. litle is known about), engagment features (e.g, it should be noted), quantification (e., a limted nmber of), and contrative markers (e., however few studies have). Move # 4 (Differentiatig the Present Work) included lexical bundles with description function and contrastive markers. For example, this move contained the bundle a more comprehensive questionnaire to describe the complexty and diversity of the investigated research, whereas unlike previous studies that highlighted the novelty and originality of its approach by indicating a contrast between present and previous research.

Lastly, Present Work employed bundles marked with 1) research objectives (e.g., the goal of this to show the aim of the study, 2) structure (e.g., rticl is organized as) to outine the structure of RA, 3) causative (e.g., in reponse to the) to show how the gap has influenced pursuing the analysis, 4) inferential (e.g, implications of the study) to show how the results have influenced the field, 5) descritio ett undetndng to show hw he par contriute t thexisting literatre, and6) raming ., with fos

Table 4 Distribution of lexical bundles across communicative moves of RA introductions.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move</td><td>Step</td><td>Bundle Type</td><td>Move- Specific Bundle Type</td><td>Move- General Bundle Type</td><td>Move-Specific Bundles</td><td>Move-General Bundles</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 1</td><td>Territory Statement</td><td>23</td><td>16</td><td>7</td><td>1439(56.72%)</td><td>444(17.50%)</td></tr><tr><td>Field Framing</td><td>Scope</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>0(0%)</td><td>258(10.17%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Term Explanation</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>350(13.80%)</td><td>46(1.81%)</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 2 Backgrounding</td><td>Background Information</td><td>36</td><td>17</td><td>19</td><td>1013(25.85%)</td><td>747(19.07%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Previous Research</td><td>50</td><td>28</td><td>22</td><td>1318(33.64%)</td><td>840(21.44%)</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 3</td><td>Statement of the Problem</td><td>11</td><td>4</td><td>7</td><td>133(5.19%)</td><td>464(18.11%)</td></tr><tr><td>Research Problem</td><td>Drawback</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>50(1.96%)</td><td>0(0%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Gap</td><td>24.</td><td>20</td><td>4.</td><td>989(38.60%)</td><td>172(6.71%)</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 4 Differentiating the Present</td><td>Niche</td><td>14</td><td>10</td><td>4</td><td>455(17.76%)</td><td>299(11.67%)</td></tr><tr><td>Work from Previous Research</td><td>Differentiating the Present Work from Previous Research</td><td>8</td><td>8</td><td>0</td><td>1600(100%)</td><td>0(0%)</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 5 Present Work</td><td></td><td>23</td><td>22</td><td>1</td><td>1333(14.05%)</td><td>38(0.4%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Aim Present Research</td><td>70</td><td>50</td><td>20</td><td>3515 (37.04%)</td><td>1608(16.94%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Method</td><td>24</td><td>2</td><td>22</td><td>76(0.8%)</td><td>1010(10.64%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Research Questions</td><td>3</td><td>3.</td><td>0</td><td>156(1.64)</td><td>0(0%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Contribution</td><td>23</td><td>18</td><td>5</td><td>874(9.21%)</td><td>203(2.14%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>RA Structure</td><td>16</td><td>15.</td><td>1</td><td>647(6.82%)</td><td>30(0.32%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>334</td><td>220</td><td>114</td><td>13948</td><td>6159</td></tr></table></body></html>

ote: 1. Each move enta wa ulatd on le f 100, with the total pentag of move-ific and moeral bude for ch moe adding up to 100. This table only includes steps that feature bundles meeting the criteria of this study.

Table 5 Distribution of functional classifications of bundles in RA introductions.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move</td><td>Step</td><td>Research- Oriented</td><td>Text- Oriented</td><td>Participant- Oriented</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 1 Field Framing</td><td>Territory Statement</td><td>9(4.09%)</td><td>7(3.18%)</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Term Explanation</td><td></td><td>5(2.27%)</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 2 Backgrounding</td><td>Background Information Previous Research</td><td>5(2.27%) 1(0.45%)</td><td>12(5.45%) 27(12.27%)</td><td>- -</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 3 Research Problem</td><td>Statement of the Problem</td><td>-</td><td>3(1.36%)</td><td>1(0.45%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Drawback</td><td>1(0.45%)</td><td>1(0.45%)</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Gap</td><td>1(0.45%)</td><td>18(8.18%)</td><td>1(0.45%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Niche</td><td>1(0.45%)</td><td></td><td>9(4.09%)</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 4 Differentiating the Present Work from</td><td>Differentiating the Present Work from Previous</td><td>6(2.73%)</td><td>2(0.91%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Previous Research</td><td>Research</td><td></td><td></td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Move # 5 Present Work.</td><td>Aim</td><td>-</td><td>22(10.00%)</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Present Research</td><td>1(0.45%)</td><td>49(22.27%)</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Method</td><td>2(0.91%)</td><td></td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Research Questions</td><td></td><td>3(1.36%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>5(2.27%)</td><td>12(5.45%)</td><td>1(0.45%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Contribution</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>RA Structure</td><td>32(14.55%)</td><td>15(6.82%) 176(80%)</td><td>12(5.45%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

on) to highlight the main aspect of the topic.

The identified bundles were divided into move-general and move-specific bundles. Move-general bundles, which accounted for $3 0 . 6 3 \%$ of ll the identified bundles, were present across two or more steps or moves. Although these types of formulaic expressions did not inherently specify any specific move, they asisted authors in specifying various kinds of information that were important in achieving diffrent rhetorical functions. For instance, n the present study had no inherent semantic link to any moves in the introduction section; however, it was prealent in the relization of different rhetorical unctions such as Present Reeach and Contribution.

The analysis of the functions of bundles and their surrounding context suggested a strong connection between several bundles and communicative moves of introductions. The lexical bundle associated with the irst move of RA introductions were used to signal the topic significance and interest among discourse community members. For example, in the extract below, the author uses the bundle one of the most to emphasize the topic's sgnificance and establish it as acrucial sill in academic writig. This importance is further emphasized by the bundle i is widely recognized. These formulaic expressins provide a persuasive introduction thateffectively establishes the research territory and its relevance to the readers.

# Extract #1

MLJI231071(3): It is widely recognized that learning to use citations accurately and effectively is one of the most important skills in academic writing (Hyland, 1999; Nesi, 2021; Swales, 1990; Wette, 2019).

Looking at the examples included in Table A1 (see Appendix), a key component of and has received increasing atention signal the importance of vocabulary knowledge and demonstrate the topic' (i.e., bilingual education) interest among discourse community members. ther example of this tale that belong toMove # 1 conin bunde ., has eendefined s and is used to reer to that help to define topic familiarity and interpersonal resources.

The lexical bundes that signaled the second move of RA introductions served diffrent functions, such as explaining the basic concepts, theories, models, or frameworks and expressing the current knowledge and research on the topic. For example, lexical bundes it has been argued and it is ssumed tht are used to introduce a premise or a hypothesis that underies the research or the argument. Other bundles like s pointed out by were used to indicate key figures' positions or statements in regard to theories, models, and frameworks. Other bundles (e.g., is used as a) used in this move describe the function of instruments or describe a component of theory or framework. In the example below, which is part of the Background Information step of an RA introduction, it i assumed that shows the current state of knowledge or consensus on the topic and indicates that writers are basing their argument on a widely accepted assumption.

# Extract#2

SI23114 (1): It is assumed that an opportunity to plan before a task can promote L2 performance by reducing the cognitive demands of a task (Robinson, 2001; Skehan. 1998).

The extract in Table A, coresponding to the second step of Backgrounding, includes a growing body of research that indicates the information provided in the following sentences is related to existing literature.

The lexical bundles asociated with the third move were used to highlight research gaps and signal further investigation. Incorporating such phrases into entences helped authors to create a cohesive and clear argument that connects Backgrounding to the Present Work. In the example below, when referring to the types of CoPs that may emerge in L2 teachers professional reading groups or the factors that sustain these CoPs, the phrase litl is known bout indicates that there is a gap in the current litrature that needs to be addressed.

# Extract#3

MLJI221063 (7): However, little is known about the types of CoPs that may emerge over time in L2 teachers' professional reading groups or the factors that sustain these CoPs.

In the fourth move of the introductions, bundles were used to distinguish present research from previous studies, often followed by information that showcases the uniqueness of the employed methodology. An example of this can be seen in the following extract, where the authors aim to challenge the existing literature and offer a new perspective on the roleof smal talk in traditional hinese medicine consultations. They argue for the constitutive status of CT, rather than the facilitory function that has been previously emphasized.

# Extract # 4

ALI22433(7): This research departs from previous research which foregrounds the facilitatory function of small talk. Instead, we argue for the constitutive status of CST in TCM consultations.

The formulaic expressions associated with Present Work served to introduce the addressed research problem. One such example of a bundle is the current study sets, which is helpful in indicating the focus of the study.

# Extract # 5

SI23113 (11): Against this backdrop, the current study sets out to examine the videorecorded classroom interactions in an undergraduate degree program on Mathematics and Science Education at a state EMI university in Tirkiye using multimodal Conversation Analysis as the research methodology.

As llustrated in the apendix, other examples (., the current study exmines and th goal of the paper) characterize the Present Work and serve to introduce the research and its objectives.

# 5. Discussion

The present inquiry sought to investigate the intriguing bundle-move connection in Applie Linguistics RA introductions. Through the analysis of a corpus of 1000 RA introductions, lexical bundles that coalesced into communicative moves of the introductions were identified. The resuls revealed that the Present Work move contained the highest number of lexical bundle. This move is particularly significant as it contains more information about the research, informs readers about the investigation, signals the structure, and convinces them of the study's contribution. Similar to the current study, Omidian et al. (2018) found Presenting the Research and it Purpose includes a higher number of bundles. The highestoccurrence of lexical bundles i this move may be atributed to the increased emphasis placed on the value of research in competitive research environments (Giannoni, 2009). As a result, using these formulaic expressions makes the research and its contribution stand out.

Furthermore, the findings indicated that some lexical bundles ocur in several moves or steps, which act as linguisic ools across multiple moves and structure the overalldiscourse. Notably, the findings also revealed that a group of bundles perform distinct discursive functions within each move. In the case of the analyzed discourse, the Field Framing move contains bundes with functions of description and quantity to indicate the significance of the research. This finding is in line with previous research (Cortes, 2013; Wang & Yang, 2015) on the communicative functions of the first move in introductions. t suggests that linguistic features and discourse are not arbitrary but rather conform to specific patterns that fulfill communicative purposes.

Regarding Backgrounding, move-specific formulaic sequences mostly feature as citation functions. This finding aligns with previous research (Kim & Lim, 2013), which found that the RA introduction sections of social sciences frequently included evidential as metadiscourse markers. The high frequency of citations in social sciences scholarship may lie in the inherent nature of Applied Lin. guistics as a social science, thereby manifesting the discipline's goals, characteristics, and norms. This icludes explaining complex social phenomena and sues that impact individuals and societies by delving into theories, methodologies, and approaches discussed in the iterature. Therefore, communicating previous research findings as well as the evolution of ideas is crucial in social sciences (Cohen et al., 2007). This could be achieved by using linguistic features known as lexical bundles specifically employed for citation purposes.

Furthermore, Move # 3, mainly in Niche, includes engagement markers indicating that authors aempt to establish their claims through more explicit evaluation and reader engagement (Hyland, 2008). Engagement markers are related to the writer or reader of the text (Hyland, 2008), and their asence in other moves could be explained by the fact that the focus of other moves was primaril on the research content rather than the reader-writer interaction. Besides, authors in Move $\# 3$ employed certain move-specific lexical bundles at the beginning of the statements, which served as contrastive markers. As Hyland (2004) noted, these expressions help authors align themselves with their readers thoughts and proactively adresspotential counterarguments. Including such formulaic sequences helps persuade readers to accept the authors' viewpoint. As per Hyland's (2004) analysis, these markers are meant to actively engage them with the content. This move further contains lexical bundles with the generalization function, contributing to fulfiling its argumentative. By poitioning themselves within the context of previous ideas, authors am to promote their point of view by identifying a specific gap that their new resarch can fil (Paltridge & Starfield, 2020). As such, these bundles function togther to form the foundation of effective argumentation. Similar to Research Problem, Move $\# 4$ contains engagement features and contrastive markers. The presence of these move-specific recurrent expressions could be atributed to the nature of this move, which involves mini-critiques and alternative perspectives to enhance the persuasiveness of the introduction.

It was further indicated that most of the move-specific bundles contributing to the Present Work belong to the text-oriented functional category (e.g., structuring, objective, and inferential). These formulaic sequences establish coherent textual connections and serve specific rhetorical functions. This finding aligns with Cortes (2013) that text-oriented bundles were the most frequent functional category in the last move of introductions. Although Cortes had utilized a different functional clasification for bundes, most of the identified bundles in her corpus belonged to objective and structuring subcategories. One reason for their extensive use, especially in the last move in RA introductions is to enhance comprehension by furnishing text-related clarifications and leading readers through the content. This finding underscores the importance of formulaic sequences in providing well-placed textual signposts, which ease readers' processing of introductions.

Overall, the findings indicated that communicative moves employ various move-specific bundles to express caution, persuasiveness, and importance. However, when comparing these formulaic expressions across communicative moves, it became evident that each move contains undes that serve to fulfll is intended communicative purpose The reearch further sugests astrong correlation between rhetorical functions and lexical bundles in terms of rhetorical purposes and semantic scopes.

# 6. Conclusion

The current study aimed to discern the relationship between lexical bundles and the generic features of Applied Linguistics RA introductions and ascertain how bundles contribute to achieving the communicative goals of the discourse. The findings indicated that moves are marked by distinct prefabricated patterns that contribute to coherence and persuasion and serve specific communicative purposes. In simpler words, the development of rhetorical moves and bundles within each move are intricately interconnected and collaboratively contribute to the development of ideas in the analyzed section. The present research builds upon previous research, Which has demonstrated a strong connection between formulaic expresions and communicative functions of ifferent sections of RAs. This connection is llustratd in more depth in the present study which employs a genre-based analysi followed by identifying lexical bundes (e.g., Cortes, 2013; Omidian et al, 2018). Given that the corpus has been annotated in more detail, hi ed to the identification of bundles associated with steps that were absent in previous research. For instance, bundes that signal Term Explanation, different steps of the Research Problem, Differentiatig the Present Work, and some steps of the Present work move (Method, Research Questions. Contribution) had not previously been discussed in previous research. Despite the dificulties posed by the time-consuming nature of identfying generic patterns manually, examining the range of formulaic expressions used in rhetorical structures sheds light on how bundles contribute to RA introductions.

The identfid connection between recurrent expressions and rhetorical moves can be beneficial for addressing the difficultie often faced by (post)graduate students and novice writers while onstructing a compelling introduction. For instance, the outcomes of this study can be utilied as a practical instructional framework for students at the macro and micro level. At the macro level,students can integrate the proposed rhetorical framework into their RA introduction and enhance their academic writing skill. At the micro level, the focus of materials can be linguistic feres that realize the moves, rasing the rhtorical awareness of students about this genre and the distinctions between move-specific and move-general bundles. With these genre-based teaching methods, intructors can design educational materials and activitie focusing on rhetorical pattening. Thus, students can become skilled at observing introductions rhetorical and linguistic conventions and writ well-structured introductions. Furthermore, the list of move-general and move-specific bundles can inform the EAP and ESP curculum to include move-general bundles to familiarize students with the basicsof academic writing and move-specific bundles to reflect on the linguistic realization of rhetorical structures of introductions.

While the current study may yield promising resuls, it is important to acknowledge its limitations. Firs, it is important to note that the scope of the study is limited to examining bundle-move connections in Applied Linguistics RA introductions. As such, the findings cannot be generalized to other sctions of RAs. Further studies are needed to explore the bundle-move connections in other disciplines or RA sections (introductions vs. discussions). Another limitation is that only frestanding RA introductions were included in the corpus, and the Literature Review was disregarded. This may have resulted in the omission of some crucial steps or moves, and consequently bundles. Future research might consider including any section between the abstract and method sections to ensure more comprehensive and representative findings. Yet another limitation of this study is the relatively small subcorpora size. With 539,089 words in the sample, the corpus for each move was relatively small herefore, the analys of formulai sequences may have been more robust with a larger corpus for each move. Accordingly, one of the directions for future studies isto collect larger subcorpora to better represent the linguistic features in the generic structure of introductions.

This study focused on empirical RAs. Future studies could examine the form-function connection in other genre types such as Ph.D. thesis and reports. Future research can also compare the bundle-move connections acros disciplines to shed light on possible disci plinary diffrences. Another direction for future research is to investigate the application of the move-bundle connection in English academic writing courses by EAP and ESP instructors. In so doing, intructors will be able to provide their students with more effective rhetorical structure instruction so that students can better manipulate the RA genre writing and further enhance their writing competence.

# Statement

During the preparation of this work, the author(s) used the latest version of AntConc (Anthony, 2023) in order to identify the frequently occurring bundes in the corpus. After using this ool, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Maryam Farhang-Ju: Writing - original draft, Methodology, Formal analysis. Alireza Jalilifar: Writing - review & editing Validation, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Mohammad Hossein Keshavarz: Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Conceptualization.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2024.101387.

# References

Abd 2  ti Language Studies, 37(4), 339-360. https://doi.org/10.2989/16073614.2019.1692681   
Adel,   012.  t i ig  ieiaf ishxa  c Specific Purposes, 31(2), 81-92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2011.08.004   
Anthony, L (2023). AntConc (version 4.2.4) [computer software]. Waseda University. Availal from: htt://ww.laurenceanthony.net.   
Appel,  c  t  ti i f    sics 2 (1), 24-43. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijal.12100   
Aseve   1is  2. doi.org/10.1093/applin/22.2.195. Authors. (2016.   
iber . 0  r .5/.2   
ber .   ,. 04.  k  it   .si, 3, 71-5. / 10.1093/applin/25.3.371   
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of poken and written English. Longman.   
Chen, Y. H., & Baker, P. (2010). Lexical bundles in L1 and L2 academic writing. Language, Leaming and Technology, 14(2), 30-49.   
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2007). Research methods in education (6th ed.). Routledge.   
Cor, . 203  t t a  h .   or 1 (1), 33-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2012.11.002   
Del az11  t e     t Sciences. English for Specific Purposes, 30(4), 258-271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2011.03.002 10.1093/applin/amac040 Research in Applied Linguistics, 12(2), 22-36. https://doi.org/10.22055/RALS.2021.17007   
Fakhri,  (209.il vait in rac  dr ie vs .  of Pmics, 41, 306324. h/g.106/. pragma.2008.08.001   
Fowerdw  (013). -d re ays  d . d.), The  hok of  is . 1718. . https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203809068.   
i (pp. 17-33). Palgrave Macmillan UK. 28(4), 240-250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2009.02.001   
Hong J. (019   thal 1  n 3 54..0.15858 engtea.74.3.201909.29   
Hung,5        13. doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2015.06.011   
Hd frameworks (pp. 5-23). Continuum.   
Hyland, (200.  e   a v.s f   271 1.//1016/j007.06.00   
Jallfar, hi,   206  r   n s   ubased study. Journal of World Languages, 3(3), 184-203. https://doi.org/10.1080/21698252.2017.1301279.   
anokila (205. i s f br h i. gish or ii  4(, 69292. /.g/10.106/. esp.2004.08.003   
m nt   aen 1tie 100589. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2021.100589   
Kim, L. C., & Lim, J.M. H. (2013). Metadiscourse in English and Chinese research articl introductions. Discourse Studies, 15(2), 129-146. Specific Purposes, 39, 45-61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2015.03.003 org/10.1016/j.esp.2020.04.006   
Li, M hn 023. pg d ic e rishig ssdp sic Review, 14(4), 847-873. https://doi.org/10.1515/applirev-2020-0129   
Li .2.    c h. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 11(3), 229-245. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2012.05.002   
Li.     8 122-137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2019.12.003   
Loi .  (2010 h tice iction in he ad gish mtive  d.  of ish or c Pe, 9(4, 267-279 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2010.09.004   
Loi  .0    i r   ish and Chinese. Journal of Pragmatics, 42(10), 2814-2825. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pragma.2010.03.010   
m r  -i -     . Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 36, 1-14. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.08.002   
zk  2 (1), 25-38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2005.12.003   
Pal Purposes, Article 100910. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100910 Language Studies, 38(4), 336-350. https://doi.org/10.2989/16073614.2020.1858897   
Pa i.        . Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 21, 60-71. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2015.11.003   
R, .21).t  t      f  st a c  f r Purposes, 50, Article 100968. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.100968   
Salar   a  tti  . 00023-5 doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2002.10.001   
hen 10(4), 238-251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2011.08.004   
Shi i1)  a a    it nd variation. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 49, Article 100946. https://doi.org/10.1016/jjeap.2020.100946 of Research in Applied Linguistics, 13(1), 70-83. https://doi.org/10.22055/RALS.2022.17426   
Simpon-h  i, . 2010n   it m   . sic 31(), 87-52 /g 10.1093/applin/amp058   
wales J. (19 s ih nc n h in.r t Ps. /.g/10116/37866(92)90010-9   
Swales, J. M. (204). Rearch gres: Exploratios and appication. ambridge Universit Pres.http:/oi.org/10.1017/09781139524827   
Swales, J.M. (2019. h ure f EAP g tudi:  pronal viwoint. Jol of Egish for dic Pe, 38, 75-82 htp:/do.g/10.1016/. jeap.2019.01.003   
Wng  g . 015).g t s io  pie nsic h i in. of gis fr c Pe, 0, 162-175.

has ubs   a        n  e Approaches to Text Analysis in Academic Discourse. Jalilifar is the editor-in-chief of the Journal of Research in Applied Linguistics.

ohammad shava s ce the ai f th mn t e mericasit in th u. e s ublisd xtsivly i peer rvied o j n  t, i J f e stc,  o  is, J of Pycholingstic rh, nio Dorrs el,  Joual, L, and the ntionl Jol of th Scoy f Lang. d interests include sociolinguistics, cultural linguistics, pragmatics, first and second language acquisition, and phonology.

aryam F is h.dd  Apid stic  ad hrit f Aa. r s f int adi ting and s in Langg