# Does "more complexity" equal "better writing'? Investigating the relationship between form-based complexity and meaning-based complexity in high school EFL learners' argumentative writing

Sachiko Yasuda

Kobe University, 1-2-1 Tsurukabuto Nada-ku, Kobe 657-8501, Japan

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
L2 complexity   
Form-based complexity   
Meaning-based complexity   
Argumentative writing   
High school EFL learners

The study examines the relationship between form-based complexity and meaning-based complexity in argumentative essays written by high school students learning English as a foreign language (EFL) in relation to writing quality. The data comprise argumentative essays written by 102 Japanese high school learners at different proficiency levels. The students' proficiency levels were determined based on the evaluation of their argumentative essays by human raters using the GTEC rubric. The students' essays were analyzed from multiple dimensions, focusing on both form-based complexity (lexical complexity, large-grained syntactic complexity, and fine-grained syntactic complexity features) and meaning-based complexity (argument quality). The results of the multidimensional analysis revealed that the most influential factor in determining overall essay scores was not form-based complexity but meaning-based complexity achieved through argument quality. Moreover, the results indicated that meaning-based complexity was strongly correlated with the use of complex nominals rather than clausal complexity. These insights have significant implications for both the teaching and assessment of argumentative essays among high school EFL learners, underscoring the importance of understanding what aspects of writing to prioritize and how best to assess student writing.

# 1. Introduction

Linguistic complexity is an important research tool in the field of second language acquisition, particularly in relation to second language (L2) writing development. It is conceptualized "as a valid and basic descriptor of L2 performance, as an indicator of proficiency and as an inde of language development and progres" (Bulte & Housen, 2014, p.43). Since the 1990s, it has been extensively researched as a developmental yardstick for gauging L2 proficiency 2 development, and L2 writig quality or maturity. Each measure or component contans a set of indices, features, or indicators, primarily focusing on form-based indice, such as lexical and syntactic complexit, asshown in studies by Bulte & Housen (2014), Khushik (2023, 2024), Kyl et al. (2021), Lu (2011), Ortea (2012) Pallti (2015), and Wolfe-Quintero et al. (1998).

The underlying assumption about linguistc complexity in L2 texs is that a learner's developmental level i the target language wil be indexed by more linguistically complex texts in terms of variation and sophistication (i.e, more diverse vocabulary, lesfrequent words, more phrasal variet, as well as more varied syntacticstructures, and longer clauses and/or T-units. The current L2 complexity features reflec the following fie assumptions about linguistic complexty: (1) more is more comple, (2) longer linguistc units are more complex, (3) more and/or more deeply embedded is more complex, (4) more varied or divers is more complex, and (5) more marked, infrequent, sophisticated, semantically abstract, costly, cognitively difficult or later acquired features are more complex (Bulte & Housen, 2014). In other words, greater levels of linguistic complexity are associated with more developed, mature, or better language use, reflecting \*the expansion of the capacity to use the additional language in ever more mature and skilful ways, tapping the ull rang f inguistc reoures feed by the given grammar in ordr  ull vrious commnicative gals scesfully (Ortega, 2015, p. 82). Cumulative evidence largely supports the assumption that the growth of lingustic complexity i a valid developmental index by which L2 researchers and teachers can determine and describe leaners overall language development or higher proficiency (e.g., Bulte & Housen, 2012, 2014; Crossey & McNamara, 2014; Khushik, 2023, 2024; Khushik & Huhta, 2020, 2022; Kyle & Crossley, 2018; Mazgutova & Kormos, 2015; Parkinson & Musgrave, 2014).

However, it is often difficult to genealize the reults acos various studies to support the notion of typical language delopment. Studies have commonly investigated how well such measures discriminate independently determined proficiency levels, but proficiency levels have been conceptualized in ways that are not always directly comparable. Some studies have used holistic rating of essays (e.g., Bulte & Housen, 2014; Casal & Lee, 2019; Connor-Linton & Polio, 2014; Crossey & McNamara, 2014; Jarvis e al., 2003; Kyle & Crossley, 2018; Li & Huang, 2022; Yang et al, 2015), while others have employed curricular/programme levels (.g, somay & Prades, 2018; Lu, 2011; Mazgutova & Kormos, 2015; Parkinson & Musgrave, 2014; Yoon & Polio, 2017; Vyatkina, 2012) and the Common European Framework of Reference (CEFR) scales (Peng et al., 2023; Treffers-Daller et l., 2016; Verspoor et al., 2012) Additionall, these tudies have been overwhemingly conducted i college-level 2 contexts, focusing on adult leners of Englis as a second language (ESL) or languages other than English contexts (.g., Russian, German, and Spanish). This indicates that the findings may not be extrapolated to other groups of learners, such as adolescent or secondary-level English as  foreign language (EFL) learners whose proficiency levels are relatively lower. Several studies have attempted to gauge the writing development of high school EFL learners, mosty in European contexts (e.g., Kyle et al., 2021 [the Netherlands]; Kormos, 2011 [Hungary]; hushik & Huhta, 2020 [Finland and Pakistan]; Siekmann et al., 202 [Germany]; Martinez, 2018 [Spain]); yet, given that L2 writing performances can vary by learners' first-language (L1) background (Khushik, 2024; Lu & Ai, 2015; Staples & Reppen, 2016) and L2 competence tends to develop les ull in EFL than in ESL instructional sttings (Ortega, 2003), there i a pressing need to investigate linguistc features of EFL writers beyond Europe, whose L1 is typologically distant from English. More research on the relationship between linguistic complexity and high school EFL learners' writing proficiency is thus warranted.

Furthermore, much of the analysis has focused on the structural and form-based properties of complexity, divorced of consider. ations of meaningful content production and realization of communicative goals. Complexity has generally been conceptualized as "text-intenal formal charactristics" (Kyle & Crossley, 2017,p. 515), and most of the studies have investigated frquency-(e.g, lexical diversity and sophistication), length (e.g, mean length of T-unit), and ratio-based (e.g., clauses per T-unit) absolute complexity and the presence of specific elements of an essay (e.g., claims, reasons, and counterarguments). In other words, researchers have been interested in form-based complexity (lexical and syntactic properties) rather than in meaning-based complexity (meaningful content production) of L2 writing. However, greater formal and structural complexity may not always parallel meaningful and conceptual complexity. There might be cases in which students are able to write lexically and syntactically more complex esays with certain structural elements, but the meaningul ontent within the eays is inaccurate, irrelevant, or lacking logical reasoning. In such cases, readers may remain unconvinced even if the essays are formally and structrally complex. Therefore, it is esential to consider how these superficial features contribute to the overall meaning and deth of the writing in a specific context. This perspective is especialy crucial in the practical application of research findings, given that the purpose of writing i not just to produce linguistically complex texts but also to communicate meaning to intended audiences.

Building on this background, this study aims to identify whether lexically and syntactically complex texts can really express meaningfully and conceptually complex ideas by investigating the relationship between the superficial formal features of writing (form-based complexity) and the soundnes of arguments (meaning-based complexity). This approach will help expand our current understanding of the relationship between L2 complexity and writing development. Furthermore, to avoid the possible effects of factors known to cause variation such as L1, age, and genre/task efects (Biber et a., 2011; Biber et al., 2016; Cosley & McNamara 2014; Csomay & Prades, 2018; Guo et al., 2013; Kyl et l., 2015; Mostafa & Crossley, 2020; Yoon & Polio, 2017; Staples et l., 2018; Yu, 2010), this study focuses on one largely homogeneous group of EFL learners under the same genre/task condition: Japanese students aged 15-16 in their first year of high school with similar English learning experiences, who engaged in argumentative writing in the classroom. Lasty, while the point-in-time approach has difficulty ilustratig longitudinal L2 writing development, it is meaningful to use a cros-sectional design to create a pseudo-longitudinal study (Casal & Le, 2019; Staples et al., 2018). In such a study, as noted by Gass and Selinker (2001), \*the emphasis, like that of a longitudinal study, is on language change, with data being collected at a ingle point in time, but with different proficiency levels represented' (pp. 32-33). Thus, i this study, students were grouped into three tiers based on their writing scores: high, medium, and low. By scrutinizing variations in lexical, syntactic, and argument features across proficiency levels, this study aimed to delineate the trajectory of L2 writing development.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Form-based complexity

In the current sudy, form-based complexity refers to two indices: lexical complexity and syntactic complexity. Empirical evidence has shown that lexical complexity and syntactic complexity do not develop in parall and constitute separate dimensions of L2 performance and L2 proficiency (Bulte & Housen, 2014), indicating that predictions of language development are more reliable and

informative when they are based on both lexical and syntactic features (Biber et al., 2016).

# 2.1.1. Lexical complexity in L2 writing research

Lexical complexity is often operationalized through such large-grained measures as lexical diversity, lexical sophistication (the proportion of les frequent, more specialized words, or advanced words), and lexical density (the proportion of lexical items, ., nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs) (Bulte & Housen, 2014; Higginbotham & Reid, 2019; Mazgutova & Kormos, 2015; Yoon & Polio, 2017). Among the three sub-components of lexical complexity, diversity is considered a robust indicator of L2 learners' lexical development and writing proficiency (Peng et al., 2023; Vogelin et l., 2019), whereas sophistication and density are more likely to be subject to genre or text types rather than L2 proficiency (Staples et al., 2018; Uccelli et al., 2013).

A well-recognized traditional measure of lexical diversty is the type-token ratio (TTR). However, as TTRs for samples of different lengths are not directly comparable because of their sensitivity to the iz of the sample (i., the longer the sample, the lower the TR; the shorter the sample, the higher the TTR) (Richards, 1987), other measures of lexical diversty have been developed to reduce the effects of text length. These include corrcted TTR (Vyatkina, 2012), D (Malvern et al., 2004), the Guiraud index (Guiraud, 1954), the measure of textual lexical diversity (MTLD; Barkaoui & Hadidi, 2020; Mazgutova & Kormos, 2015), and vocd-D (Yoon & Polio, 2017)

Researchers commonly observe that essays receiving higher ratings exhibit greater lexical diversty, indicating a correlation with levels of language proficiency (Barkaoui & Hadidi, 2020; Guo et al., 2013; Kisselev et al., 2022; Mazgutova & Kormos, 2015). For example, Jarvis et al. (2003) analyzed 178 ESL placement compositions produced by universty-level L2 writers to determine whether high-ratd comsitions are hmgneus in tems of 1 lingisic eres e, lexicadiverity, heges, mphatics, c.).The reults suggested that while high-scoring compositions had a number of linguistic features for impressing readers, lexical diversity based on the TTR was a consistent predictor of perceived writing quality. Similarly, Staples and Reppen (2016) analyzed a corpus of 40 rhetorical analyses and 40 long argument papers written by undergraduate L2 writers n a first-year writing course. They investigated how various lexical features are associated with analytic writing scores, using the modified TOEFL iT rubric. The results showed that the strongest correlations between analytic rating and linguistic features were for lexical diversity based on the TTR ${ \bf \underline { { \Gamma } } } ( { \bf r = 0 . 4 2 }$ $\boldsymbol { \mathsf { p } } <$ 0.0001).

Further evidence regarding the link between lexical diversty and overall writing proficiency comes from studies using other measures, such as D, MTLD, and Guiraud. In a Hungarian high school context, Kormos (2011) analyzed two narrative tasks written by 44 students at an intermediate level (corresponding to B1/2 in the CEFR), focusing on how their writig performances iffer from L1 undergraduate students. Her findings revealed that the primary ifference between L1 and foreign language high-school writer ay in their lexical diversity, as indicated by D values. Yu's (2010) analysis of acorpus of 200 compositions produced by ESL writers from diverse inguistic backgrounds also observed that compositions with a higher D tended to receive a higher score, and D accounted for around $1 1 ~ \%$ of the variances in the overall quality ratings. In another context, Peng et al. (2023) analyzed 220 argumentative essays written by college-level Chinese EFL learners at different proficiency levels. Structural equation modeling demonstrated that lexical diversity measured by MTLD was a significant predictor of human assessment of L2 writing qualit across two language proficiency levels (CEFR A2 to lower B1 and CEFR upper B1 to ${ \tt B 2 + }$ . In a secondary school context in Switzerland, Vogelin et al. (2019) evaluated argumentative essays written by Year 11 students to investigate the influence of lexical features on teachers' judgments of writing proficiency. The results indicated that lexical diversty measures, such as D, MTLD, and word range, were significant predictors of writing proficiency. Verspoor et al. (2012) measured lexical diversity through the Guiraud index, chunks of language, and lexical sophistication based on a lexicl frequeny profileo investigat which linguistic feures occurred at ech stagef the five C levels (Level $1 = \mathsf { A } 1 . 1$ , Level $2 = \mathsf { A } 1 . 2$ , Level $3 = \mathsf { A } 2$ , Level $4 = \mathbf { B } 1 . 1$ , and Level $5 = \mathtt { B } 1 . 2 $ among 489 senior high school students in the Netherlands. They found that the use of chunks and the Guiraud index discriminated among proficiency levels, but lexical sophistication did not. Taken together, these studies suggest that using diverse types of vocabulary is likely to have a positive impact on readers' assessments of writing proficiency.

# 2.1.2. Syntactic complexity in L2 writing research

Syntactic complexity is broadly construed as \*the range of forms that surface in language production and the degre of sophisti. cation of these forms' (Ortega, 2003, p. 492). As indicated by Ortega's (2003) definition, syntactic complexity is undersood as a multidimensional construct that can be broadly categorized into length of production, coordination, subordination, and phrasal sophistication. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in using automated tools to analyze the syntactic complexity of English texts written by L2 learners. The L2 syntactic complexity analyzer (L2scA) (Lu, 2010) has ben instrumental in evaluating th overal degre f syntactic complexity in L2 English texts (Khushik, 2023, 2024; Khushik & Huhta, 2020; Lan et al., 2019; Lu, 2011; Lu & Ai 2015; Polat et al., 2020). Nonetheles, studies using altenative analytcal tols such as Coh-Metri (eg., Crossey & Mcamara, 2014, Guo et al., 2013; Khushik, 2023; Mazgutova & Kormos, 2015; Mamuujav et al., 2021) and the Tool for the Automatic Analysis of Syntactic Sophistication and Complexity (TAAssc) (e.g., Kyle & Crossey, 2017, 2018; Kyle et al., 2021) have indicated that the holistic features of syntactic complexity provided by L2scA do not offer a detailed portrayal of L2 writers' use of specific types of clausal or phrasalstructures. Recent research has therefore suggested the use of detailed clausal and phrasal complexity measures that differentiat pecific subtypes of clausal and phrasal structures to complement comprehensive measures. This approach enables re searchers to supplement the broader, comprehensive measures currently employed, providing a more nuanced understanding of syntactic complexity features in L2 English texts.

What researchers have identified through the use of automated analytical tool is that as L2 students progress in proficiency, thir written language complexity evolves in ways that align with the global categories of syntactic complexity. Beginners predominantly use longer sentences and coordination, intermediate writers employ increasing subordination, and advanced writer elaborate their texts via phrasal complexity. Advanced L2 texts show similarities with academic writing, characterized by a prevalence of nomina lizations, attibutive adjectives, and preositional phrases (Biber et al., 2011; ier et l., 2016; Parkinson & Musrave, 2014). Inded, the developmental sequence has been documented in a variety of educational contexts. In their analysis of argumentative essays written by high school EFL writers in Pakistan $\left( \mathrm { N } = 8 6 8 \right)$ and Finland $( \Nu = 2 8 7 )$ at diverse proficiency levels (A1, A2, and B1 in the CEFR), Khushik and Huhta (2020) found that length of production unit (sentence and mean T-unit length) separated all CEFR levels in both groups. Their findings also revealed that subordination and phrasal density increased with proficiency. Martinez (2018) replicated similar indings in her study, which analyzed 188 argumentative essays written by Spanish EFL high school students at lower-intermediate CEFR-A2 $( \mathrm { N } = 9 8 )$ and intermediate CEFR-B1 $( \mathrm { N } = 9 0 )$ proficiency levels. The results indicated a progression in the coordinate clause ratio, dependent clause ratio, and mean length of noun phrases from the lower intermediate to intermediate proficiency stages. n another high school EFL context, Kyle et al. (2021) analyzed longitudinal essays written by nine Dutch students at a low-intermediate proficiency level (equivalent to A2 in the CEFR) over two academic years and discovered that with increased exposure to English study, the students exhibited a tendency to incorporate more deendent clauses into thir writig. Lu (2011) found that more proficient college-level ESL writers used complex nominal phrases more frequently in their writing, based on an analysis f 3678 essays. Taguchi et al. (2015), who investigated 54 argumentative essays written by ESL students in an American universty context, documented that higher-proficiency writers did not necessarily produce more complex texsa the clausal level rather, noun phrase modification tended to contribute to essay qualit. Mazgutova and Kormos (2015) similarl reported development in noun phrase complexity in 39 argumentative essays written by ifferent levels of ESL learners in an intensive English programme at a British universty. In examining 64 argumentative essays contained in a learner corpus, Sarte and Gnevsheva (2022) revealed that the group with the lowest proficiency used fewer noun modifiers than the higher-proficiency groups.

These findings cumulatively suggest that relying solely on the widely recognized index of subordination to measure L2 complexity may oversimplif the construct and overook the features that characterize good writing. Syntactic complexity is not a single construct and therefore, when investigating L2 complexity, it is important to consider multiple measures to gauge at what level, be it global, clausal, or phrasal, elaboration is increasing.

Additionally, recent studies have emphasized using more fine-grained measures to complement previous findings focusing on large. grained objective measures. To explore what syntactic faures contribute to holistic scores of writing quality, recent work g, yle & Crossley, 2017; Kyle et al, 2021; Mostafa & Crossley, 2020) has focused on verb-argument constructions (VACs) and investigated the relationship betwen indices of VAC sophistication, syntactic complexity (e.g., MLT and MLC), and overall esay scores. Their findings suggest that a model consisting of indices of VAC sophistication explains significantly greater variance in writing qualit scores than a model consisting of indices of syntactic complexity. ther fine-grained measures tilized in prior studies (e.g., Jiang et al, 2019; Kyle & Crossley, 2018; Zhang & Lu, 2022) focused on noun modifiers. Based on the investigation of academic writing by three types of writers (master's students, PhD students, and expert writers), Ansarifar et al. (2018) found that the most common types of noun premodifiers in the thre corpora were atributie adjectives and nouns, while prepositional phrases were the most common form of postmodification. More pecificall, their analysis revealed that two types of grammatical features differentiated student writers and expert writers a nonfinite dependent clause (-ed participle as postmodifier) and the other thre as dependent phrases (premodfying nouns, adjective/noun combination as premodifiers, and multiple prepositional phrases as postmodifiers). This finding supports Biber et al. (1998) observation that noun phrases with nouns and adjectives as phrasal premodifiers, as wellas prepositional phrases as postmodifiers, are highly characteristic features of advanced writers' texts in academic contexts.

# 2.2. Meaning-based complexity: quality of argumentation

As mentioned earlier, the majority of research on L2 complexity has centered around the formal aspects of complexity, mainly focusing on lexical and syntactic complexity. However, what sems to be missing in this research is an understanding of how L2 learners construct meaning in written texts through contextually apropriate linguistic choices. This aspect is important to consider as it can fil the knowledge gap left by previous research and help us understand the developmental stages of L2 learners towards greater complexity. Certain language forms, such as subordinate clauses or modifications, not only indicate the developmental stages of L2 learners but also tend to appear in specific genres or types of texts. The notion of meaning-based complexity was first introduced by Ryshina-Pankova (2015), who insightflly observed that \*language use and development are motivated by the meaning-based. contextual, and communicative demands of the tasks to which learners actively respond' (Ryshina-Pankova, 2015, p.52). Ryshina-- Pankova's proposal indicates that formal-structural complexity nees to be studied in relation to specific tasks or text types while acknowledging how this complexity is linked to contextually-determined demands.

The meaning dimension of complexity is worth exploring in research into L2 argumentative writing, a it isa highly demanding task that requires \*complex thinking, planning, and organizing proceses" (Vogelin et al, 2019, p. 51) to persuade readers. Given that \*the overarching goal of argumentative writing is to develop an argument" (Chuang & Yan, 2022, p. 2),i is crucial to asess not only whether texts are linguistically complex but also whether they are meaningfully complex in terms of the depth of agumentation. In a study conducted by Liardet (2013), the significance of analyzing learners' meaning-making attempts in argumentation was highlighted. The study focused on six Chinese EFL learners with varying proficiency levels and their abilit to create academically valued meanings in their essays. The study paid particular attention to grammatical metaphor, a key resource for achieving academic discourse (se Ryshina-Pankova, 2010, for more details on grammatical metaphor). The findings showed that advanced learners had established control over metaphorical resources, frequently using grammatical metaphors to achieve argument organization (e.g, Inarguably globalization has diversified our cultre) and text cohesion (eg., With the open-up policy, China has atracted  lot f overses investment).

Table 1 Scoring rubric for assessing argumentative essays in GTEC basic version   

<html><body><table><tr><td>0 Goal achievement 1</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td> 5</td></tr><tr><td>(claim expression)</td><td>An opinion about the essay theme is unclear or not communicated.</td><td>An opinion about the essay theme is communicated clearly enough that people who have not read the prompt can understand the test taker&#x27;s opinion.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Goal achievement 2 (claim support)</td><td>No reasons are provided, OR the reason(s) fails to support the opinion. Not attempt (the entire</td><td>At least one reason is given to support the opinion given.</td><td></td><td>Uses a narrow range of</td><td>Uses a satisfactory range of vocabulary</td><td>Uses a satisfactory range of</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary</td><td>essay is off-topic, no answer sheet is blank). Nothing is communicated. prevent communication.</td><td>Uses only a very basic vocabulary repertoire of words and phrases. English is produced, or the There may be very frequent and/or appropriately.. severe vocabulary errors that</td><td>Uses a narrow range of vocabulary somewhat There may be frequent vocabulary errors that</td><td>vocabulary mostly appropriately. There may be some errors that make it difficult to understand what the test taker is trying to</td><td>but not always appropriately. There may be some errors but what the There may be a few errors, but. test taker wants to communicate can still be understood.</td><td>vocabulary appropriately. what the test taker wants to communicate is clear.</td></tr><tr><td>Grammar</td><td>Not attempt (the entire essay is off-topic, no answer sheet is blank). Nothing is communicated. prevent communication.</td><td>Can employ very simple principles Uses a limited simple of word order in short statements. English is produced, or the There may be very frequent and/or appropriately.. severe grammatical errors that</td><td>grammar somewhat Frequent errors may prevent communication.</td><td>Uses a limited range of simple grammar mostly appropriately. There may be some errors that make it difficult to understand what the test taker is trying to communicate.</td><td>Uses simple grammar but not always appropriately. May use some complex grammar but fails to do so appropriately. May use a limited range of complex grammar, but fails to do so appropriately. There may be some errors in basic sentence structures and grammatical components, but what the test taker</td><td>Uses simple grammar appropriately. May use some complex grammar, but fails to do so appropriately. There may be a few errors in basic sentence structures and grammatical components, but what the test taker wants to</td></tr><tr><td>Organization</td><td>Not attempt (the entire essay is off-topic, no answer sheet is blank). Not enough written to assess the relationship</td><td>Ideas may be presented, but there  Ideas are presented, but. are no relationships between ideas. the relationships between. English is produced, or the Words and phrases are written, but ideas lack connection and they lack connection.</td><td>are unclear. Can link words or groups of words with very basic</td><td>Ideas are presented, but the relationships between ideas are weak. Can write a series of simple phrases and sentences with connect ideas. simple connectors to connect ideas.</td><td>understood. Ideas presented are related to each other, but there may be several jumps in each other, but there may be a logic. Can use most common connectors to</td><td>Ideas presented are related to few jumps in logic. Can form longer sentences and connect them together in an attempt to develop ideas.</td></tr></table></body></html>

In research into L2 argumentative writing, scholars have primarily investigated the distinctive argument structures of L2 writers within the framework of contrastive rhetoric. One widely used framework for analyzing argumentation is Toulmin's (2003) model, which divides an argument into several elements, including clam, data, warrant, backing, qualifir, and reuttl. This model has een used by researchers to analyze how L2 writersuse these elements in their argumentation (Nussbaum & Schraw, 2007; Qin & Karabacak, 2010; Stapleton & Wu, 2015; Chuang & Yan, 2022). Their findings show that certain elements are more prevalent than others; warrant, counterarguments, and rebuttas are considerably les frequent than claims and data i L2 writers argumentative writing. The scarcity of the latter elements suggests the relative challenge L2 writer face in incorporating them (Qin & Karabacak, 2010; Stapleton & Wu, 2015), though other factors such as task conditions, time constraints, and esay prompts may also play a role in these variations.

While most research using Toulmin's framework has focused on identifying certain structural elements of argumentative writing, what is missing in this research is an evaluation of how effectively these structural elements help arguments achieve the communicative goal shared by the readers. Sampson and Clark (2008) rightly pointed out that "a standard application of Toulmin's framework does not include an asessment of the logical structure and coherence of the justification beyond the presence or absence of data, warrants, and backings" (p. 452). To date, a limited number of empirical studies have addressed this limitation. Stapleton and Wu (2015) studied argumentative essays written by 125 high school students from a Band 2 government school in Hong Kong. The researchers carefully examined 125 scripts to identify the frequency of argumentatie elements, such as claims, data, counterargument claims, counterargument data, rebuttal claims, and rebuttal data, that appeared in them. Additionall, they asessed how these ele. ments contribute to the overall quality of the arguments presented in each essay. To evaluat argument quality, experienced teachers assesed the 20 most common reasons expressed in students argumentative esas for supporting claims and counterarguments based on four scales: acceptable, weak/vague, not acceptable, and not relevant. Their findings showed that a surface argument structure based on Toulmin's model does not always equate to high-quality arguments. Chuang and Yan (2022) replicated these findings in their study of 150 essays written by undergraduate ESL students at an American university. Using Toulmin's model to assesargument structure frequency counts of claim, data, warrant, counterargument, rebuttal claim, rebuttal data, and reuttal warrant) and argument quality based n accetability (accetable, vague, not acctable, and no clam) and relevance (relvant, weak, not releant and no clam), they found that the presence or absence of certain structural elements did not relialy indicate essay proficiency level or structure type. These results underscore the need to assess argument quality beyond simply identifying individual elements.

# 3. Research questions

The present study responds to the need to call for further investigation into the relationship between the form-based and meaning. based complexity in L2 writing and how these two measures are related to each other and could contribute to overal esay scores in the context of argumentative writing. Focusing on an underrepresented cohort of learners--lower-intermediate high school learners in the Japanese EFL context, the following research questions are addressed:

RQ1: How do high-, mid, and low-quality argumentative essays written by high school EFL students differ in terms of form-based complexity and meaning-based complexity features? RQ2: How strongly are form-based complexity and meaning-based complexity features correlated in argumentative essays? RQ3: What is the association between form-based complexity, meaning-based complexity, and raters' scores on argumentative essays?

# 4. Methods

# 4.1. Participants and writing task

This study was conducted at a public secondary school in Japan in 2023. The participants were Year 10 students $( \Nu = 1 0 2 )$ ) enrolled in a two-semester compulsory English course tled "Logic and Expression I. The purpose of this course was to enhance students critical, logical reasoning, and analytical sills through activities such as discussions, debates, and composing arguments in English. According to the Minisry's guidelines, the English currculum for senior high school students i designed to align with cEFR levels A2 to B1 (MEXT, 2020). At the time of the study, the students had been learning English for approximately six years, beginning in the fth grade of elementary school.

Table 2 Descriptive statistics for writing scores and fluency across three proficiency levels   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">High</td><td colspan="2">Mid</td><td colspan="2">Low</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Writing scores (out of 17)</td><td>14.80 *bc</td><td>1.37</td><td>11.63 * ac</td><td>1.00</td><td>6.88 *ab</td><td>1.04</td></tr><tr><td>Writing fluency (word count)</td><td>188.17 *bc</td><td>37.45</td><td>158.29 *ac</td><td>26.31</td><td>127.19 *ab</td><td>28.97</td></tr></table></body></html>

$\mathbf { p } < . 0 5 \div \mathbf { S } \mathbf { D } =$ standard deviation a: significantly different from High b: significantly different from Mid c: significantly different from Low

Table 3 A description of form-based complexity features   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Construct</td><td>Index</td><td> Measure</td><td>Description</td><td>Method</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical complexity</td><td>Lexical diversity</td><td>Guiraud</td><td>Mathematical transformations of the type-token ratio</td><td>Lexical Diversity Measurements</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Lexical density</td><td>Lexical density</td><td>Proportion of content words (nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs) to the total number of words</td><td>Vocabprofilers</td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic complexity (large-grained)</td><td>Global complexity by length of production unit</td><td>Mean length of T-unit (MLT)</td><td>Number of words per T-unit</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mean length of sentence (MLS)</td><td>Number of words per sentence</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td> Mean length of clause</td><td>Number of words per clause</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Complexity by amount of subordination</td><td>(MLC) Clause per sentence (C/ s)</td><td>Number of clauses per sentence.</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Clauses per T-unit (C/ T)</td><td>Number of clauses per T-unit</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Complex T-units per T- unit (CT/T)</td><td>Number of complex T-unit divided by T-units</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Dependent clauses per clause (DC/C)</td><td>Number of dependent clauses per clause</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Dependent clauses per T-unit (DC/T)</td><td>Number of dependent clauses per T-unit</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Complexity by amount of coordination</td><td>T-units per sentence (T/S)</td><td>Number of T-units per sentence</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Coordinate phrases per clause (CP/C)</td><td>Number of coordinate phrases per clause</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Coordinate phrases per T-unit (CP/T)</td><td>Number of coordinate phrases per T-unit</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Phrasal Complexity</td><td>Complex nominals per clause (CN/C)</td><td>Number of complex nominals per clause</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Complex nominals per</td><td>Number of complex nominals per T-unit</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>T-unit (CN/T) Verb phrases per T-unit</td><td>Number of verb phrases per T-unit</td><td>L2SCA</td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic complexity (fine-grained)</td><td>Finite dependent clause</td><td>(VP/T)</td><td>Proportion of finite dependent clauses per 100</td><td> Manual analysis</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Nonfinite dependent clause</td><td></td><td>words Proportion of nonfinite dependent clauses per</td><td>Manual analysis</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Non-clausal dependent phrase</td><td></td><td>100 words Proportion of non-clausal dependent phrases per 100 words</td><td> Manual analysis</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 A description of syntactic features analyzed by L2SCA   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Feature</td><td>Description</td><td>Examples</td></tr><tr><td>Clause</td><td>A syntactic structure with a subject and a finite verb</td><td>- More students should study abroad. - because it is a great learning opportunity.</td></tr><tr><td>T-unit</td><td>An independent clause and any clauses dependent on it</td><td>- Most students should study abroad. - More students should study abroad because it is a great learning</td></tr><tr><td>Complex T-unit</td><td>A T-unit that includes a dependent clause</td><td>opportunity. More students should study abroad because it is a great learning</td></tr><tr><td>Dependent</td><td>A finite clause that is a nominal, adverbial, or adjective clause</td><td>opportunity. More students should study abroad because it is a great learning</td></tr><tr><td>clause Coordinate</td><td>Adjective, adverb, noun, and verb phrases connected by a</td><td>opportunity. I am interested in languages and cultures.</td></tr><tr><td>phrase</td><td>coordinating conjunction</td><td>I wanted to study abroad but I gave it up because of the COvID-19. She is reading a book.</td></tr><tr><td>Verb phrase</td><td>A finite or nonfinite verb phrase that is dominated by a clause marker</td><td>I have always enjoyed learning foreign languages.</td></tr><tr><td>Complex nominal</td><td>A complex noun phrase that consists of a head noun and one or more premodifiers and/or postmodifiers (i) Nouns plus adjective, possessive, prepositional phrase, adjective clause, or participle</td><td>(i) various jobs, the government&#x27;s suggestions, people who want to study, the languages spoken in other countries (ii) I think that more students should study abroad.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: Examples were extracted from the students in the current study.

The participating students wrote an argumentative essay during a regular English class at the end of the second semester of the Logic and Expresson I course. The students were given the following prompt: It isaid that the number of Japanese students studying abroad has declined rapidy. The Jaanese govenment expresse ther concens about this sitation and uggests that more Japanese students should study abroad. Do you agree or disagree with the government's suggestion? Write your opinion with specific reasons and examples. The students were not allowed to use dictionaries or other external resources. They wrote their essays by hand under the supervision of their English teacher. The students had $3 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ to complete the writing task. The students were informed that their participation was voluntary and they could withdraw from the study at any time without facing any negative consequences. Afer obtaining permissin from the students, all collected data was anonymized using codes and stored securely to protect the students' privacy.

# 4.2. Rating of essays

Each essay was scored by two blind raters using the scoring rubric of argumentative writing for the Global Test of English Communication (GTEC) basic version (Benesse Corporation, 2023). The GTEC, a standardized English proficiency test that asseses English communicative abilities of high school students, is one of the most impactful tests adopted by a vast majorit of secondary schoos in Japan. The GTEC's construct validity and reliability have been rigorously evaluated by several studies (e.g., Kim & Chin, 2019; Vafaee, 2020).

Table 1 provides an overview of the argumentative essay scoring rubric in GTEC. Esays were evaluated using the GTEC scoring rubric acros ive analytical features: goal achievement 1 (claim expression: 0 or 1), goal achievement 2 (claim support: 0 or 1), vocabulary (05), grammar (05), and organization (0-5). Raters gave a grade for each of the five main areas in the esay, the sum of which was the overall rating for each essay. The verall qualit scores for all 102 essays ranged from a minimum of 6 to a maximum of 17. To categorize the scores into high, medium, and low tiers, cut-ff scores were established using equal intervals. The range of scores (11) was first divided by 3 $( 1 1 / 3 = 3 . 6 7 $ , after which the width was added to the minimum score of each group. Accordingly, essays scored 14-17 were classfied as high-rated, 10-13as mid-rated, and 6-9 as low-rated. This resulted in 35 high-scoring, 35 mid-scoring, and 32 low-scoring esays. able 2 preents the descriptive tatistc of writing scores and fluency acros the three groups. It i evident that students at the high proficiency level $( \mathbf { M } = 1 4 . 8 0$ $\mathrm { S D } = 1 . 3 7 $ significantly outperformed those at the mid $\mathbf { \Delta M } = 1 1 . 6 3$ $\mathbf { S D } = 1 . 0 0 $ and lower proficiency levels $( \mathbf { M } = 6 . 8 8$ $\mathbf { S D } = 1 . 0 4 \_$ in overall writing scores. Similarly, regarding writing fluency measured by the total number of words, students at the high proficiency level performed significantly better $( \mathbf { M } = 1 8 8 . 1 7$ $\mathrm { \bullet D } = 3 7 . 4 5 $ than their mid $\mathbf { ( M = }$ 158.29, $\mathbf { S D } = 2 6 . 3 1 $ ) and low proficiency peers $( \mathbf { M } = 1 2 7 . 1 9$ $\mathrm { S D } = 2 8 . 9 7 .$ . The statistically significant differences between the three groups in both overall writing scores and writing fluency justify the scoring parameters for proficiency levels.

The GTEC rubric was chosen for three reasons. irst, the essay prompt was aligned with previous GTEC questions, making the rubric a suitable gere-specific evaluation tool for asessing argumentatie essays. Aditionally, using an analytical scoring rubric can better reflect the multiple facts of writing proficiency, reducing reliance on subjective judgment and preventing the inclusion of criteria not specified in the scal. Lastly, the consistent use f the GTEC rubri by the senior high school over the years has allowed teachers to identify students strengths, weaknesses, and areas for improvement in English language proficiency, making it familiar and valuable resource for instruction.

The essays were scored by two blind raters who were unaware of the students identities and were not informed of the purpose of the evaluation. The two raters had over 20 years of teaching experience across various EFL educational settings, including senior high school and university level. These raters underwent a rigorous two-stage training processto ensure consistent scoring. Initiall, they familiarized themselves with the GTEC rubric and benchmark performances derived from a pool of previous students essays. Following this, the raters practiced scoring sample esays obtained during a pilot study, which were then discussed to establish unanimous bnchmarks for the present study (Huhta et l., 2014). If the two raters agreed on a core, the score was kept. If they did not agree on a score, the score was then adjudicated by the raters until sufficient agreement was reached (Kyle et al., 2021). This meticulous process yielded highly reliable scores, demonstrating strong agreement between raters (Krippendorff's alpha $= 0 . 9 1 5$ indicative of high inter-rater reliability.

Table 5 A description of syntactic types and functions   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Syntactic type</td><td>Syntactic function</td><td>Examples</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5"></td><td rowspan="2">Adverbial</td><td>: When you go to the United States to study abroad, you will have many opportunities to talk with native speakers of English.</td></tr><tr><td>: I agree with the government&#x27;s suggestion because students can learn many things by studying abroad.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Adjectival (relative clause)</td><td>. You will not get to know about different cultures if you do not see the world. : People who want to study abroad probably say that studying abroad is good.</td></tr><tr><td>: Studying abroad gives us many good skills which are necessary for us in the future.</td></tr><tr><td> Nominal</td><td>I think that she developed her confidence by studying abroad.. I did not know what language they spoke.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Nonfinite dependent clause. (to-infinitive, gerund, participle)</td><td>Adverbial</td><td>- It is wonderful that we can communicate with foreign people in English. To live in such an unfamiliar situation, you will need to understand English.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Adjectival</td><td>: Government should give more opportunities to have those experiences.</td></tr><tr><td>: Some countries, including the United States, permit people to own guns. . The languages spoken in other countries are different from those we study in the</td></tr><tr><td>Nominal</td><td>classroom. : Some students may not want to study abroad.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Non-clausal dependent phrase (noun)</td><td rowspan="2">Attributive adjectives as</td><td>: Others are not interested in studying abroad.</td></tr><tr><td>: We have been facing difficult times in the recent decade.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">premodifiers Nouns as premodifiers</td><td>: We have to create a global connection for sustainable development goals.</td></tr><tr><td>- Wars, climate changes, natural disasters, and corona infections...</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">Prepositional phrases ase postmodifiers</td><td>: Serious problems, such as labor shortages, environmental issues, .... : Japan is one of the most developed countries in the world.</td></tr><tr><td> We should have wider perspectives for the development of Japan.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.3. Form-based complexity

Form-based complexity refers to formal features of linguistic complexity in EFL learners' argumentative essays, including lexical and syntactic complexity measures. Table 3 comprises a list of the form-based complexity indices that were examined in this study, along with a brief description of each.

In this study, lexical complexity refersto what Bulte and Housen (2012) called "systemic lexical complexity" (p. 28), which consists of lexical diversity and lexical density. Lexical sophistication was excluded from the target of the analysis because the extent to which less frequent, rare or advanced words are used is very sensitive to the genre and writing topic and is not fine-grained enough for learners at lower proficiency levels, especially when writing on a non-academic topic (Csomay & Prades, 2018; Verspoor et al, 2012). Higginbotham and Reid (2019 also note that if we wish to measure the lexical sophistication of L2 learners writing, \*the text needs to be of a suitable length" and "200-300 words is not long enough' (p. 130).

As the measure of lexical diversity, this study utilized the Guiraud index, a well-established TTR widely recognized in the literature (van Hout & Vermeer, 2007; Verspoo et al., 2012). These Guiraud-based metrics were derived using an automated text analysis tool developed by Reuneker (2017). Recent studies show that basic measures such as the Guiraud index are more reliable predictors of L2 proficiency levels compared to more complex formulas (such as D, HD-D, and MTLD), provided text length remains constant across texts (Treffers-allr et al., 2016). For asessing lexical density, VOocabprofilers (Cobb, 2002) was used to determine the proportion of content words used by high school EFL learners in their argumentative essays.

In examining syntactic complexity, we considered both large-grained and fine-grained syntactic features. For large-grained features of syntactic complexity, we drew on Norris and Ortega's (2009) recommendation that L2 syntactic complexity should be measured multidimensionally, including global complexity, complexity by subordination, coordination, and complexity via phrasal elaboration. In line with this approach, we used the L25CA (Lu, 2010, 2011; Ai & Lu, 2013; Lu & Ai, 2015), a free Python-based automated text analyzer that can yield data on 14 syntactic complexit indices, as presented in Table 3. These indice include mean length of sentence (MLS), mean length of T-unit (MLT), mean length of clause (MLC), clauses per sentence (C/S), clauses per T-unit (C/T), dependent clauses per clause (DC/C), dependent clauses per T-unit (DC/T), T-units per sentence (T/S), complex T-unit ratio (Cr/T), coordinate phrases per clause (CP/C), coordinate phrases per T-unit (CP/T) complex nominals per clause (CN/C), complex nominals per T-unit (CN/T), and verb phrases per T-unit (VP/T). Table 4 provides a description of each of the syntactic features.

However, such large-grained complexity features do not fully capture the emergence of specific syntacticstructures in L2 devel. opment (Kyle & Crossey, 2018; Li et al., 2023). To complement this limitation, this study investgated more fine-grained syntactic features, with a focus on syntactic types finite dependent clauses, nonfinite deendent clauses, and dependent phrases) and functions (adverbial, complement, and noun modifier ased on Biber et al. (2011). Syntactic types and functions used in Biber et al. (2011) were selected to delve into fine-grained syntactic features because previous research has reported that these features hold stronger predictive power than holistic complexity measures when assessing L2 writing qualit (e.g., Kyle & Crossley, 2017, 2018). Table 5 provides a description of syntactic types and functions, along with some examples. With regard to syntactic functions, we used an inductive bottom-up analysis of essays written by the high school EFL learners, rather than relying on a predefined certain rule, to identify certain commonly used functions. Under fnite deendent clauses i.., a subordinate clause that contains a subject and a finite verb), there are three main functions: adverbial, adjectival, and nominal clauses. Nonfinite dependent clauses (i.e., to-infintives, gerund, and participles) also include adverbial, adjectival, and nominal clauses. Under non-clausal dependent phrases, there are three types of noun modifiers, including adjetives as premodifiers nouns as premodifiers, and preositional phrases as postmodifirs.

Table 6 Descriptive statistics of lexical, syntactic, and meaning-based complexity across three proficiency levels   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Construct</td><td>Measure</td><td>High</td><td></td><td>Mid</td><td></td><td>Low</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical complexity</td><td>Diversity</td><td>7.26</td><td>0.72</td><td>6.57</td><td>0.59</td><td>6.27</td><td>0.81</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Density</td><td>0.52</td><td>0.05</td><td>0.51</td><td>0.04</td><td>0.54</td><td>0.05</td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic complexity</td><td>MLT</td><td>11.98</td><td>1.77</td><td>10.58</td><td>1.86</td><td>10.12</td><td>1.87</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MLC</td><td>7.98</td><td>1.18</td><td>7.08</td><td>0.90</td><td>7.04</td><td>1.03</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>C/T</td><td>1.52</td><td>0.22</td><td>1.50</td><td>0.28</td><td>1.45</td><td>0.26</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T/S</td><td>1.09</td><td>0.10</td><td>1.06</td><td>0.07</td><td>1.09</td><td>0.09</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CP/T</td><td>0.22</td><td>0.14</td><td>0.15</td><td>0.11</td><td>0.13</td><td>0.09</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CN/T</td><td>1.42</td><td>0.36</td><td>1.21</td><td>0.36</td><td>1.11</td><td>0.29</td></tr><tr><td> Meaning complexity</td><td>AQ</td><td>4.71</td><td>1.85</td><td>3.26</td><td>0.91</td><td>2.44</td><td>0.91</td></tr></table></body></html>

$\mathbf { S D = }$ standard deviation $\mathbf { M L T } =$ mean length of T-unit; MLC $=$ mean length of clause; $\mathrm { C } / \mathrm { T } =$ clause per T-unit; T/S $=$ T-unit per sentence; $\mathrm { { C P / T = } }$ coordinate phrase per t-unit; $\mathrm { C N / T = }$ complex nominals per T-unit: $\mathbf { A Q } =$ argument quality

The syntactic functions of ll fine-grained features were manually analyzed by the author and a research asstant because they could not be accurately determined using automatic analysis. The inter-rater reliabilit for the two manually coded measures, asessed using Krippendorfs alpha, ranged between 0.886 and 0.914, indicating acceptable levels f reliability for manual analysis. Counts for all features were tandardized asoccrrence rates per 100 words in each essay, llowing comparisons across texts of differing lengths. Subsequently, means and standard deviations for each feature were calculated across high-scoring, mid-scoring, and low-scoring essays.

# 4.4. Meaning-based complexity

Meaning-based complexity refers to the reasoning quality of students' argumentation. This study analyzed two aspects of argu. mentation, namely, the soundnessof an argument and the total number of reasons provided, using coding schemes developed by Means and Voss(1996) and Stapleton and Wu (2015). The soundness of an argument was assessed by examining the acceptability and relevance of the reasons supporting a claim. Relevance was deemed necessary for further consideration of acceptability. Following Stapleton and Wu (2015), the two rater (the same individuals involved in overall esay scoring intilly evaluated the relevance of the reasons (Yes/No), which refers to whether the statment is relevant to the claim or not. If they judged a reason as relevant, they then assessed aceptaility on a scale from \*Not ceptable to Acceptable. This resulted in four possible choices for evaluating agument quality: Not relevant $= 0$ ; Not Acceptable $^ { \textrm { \scriptsize = 1 } }$ ; Weak/Vague $= 2$ ; Acceptable $= 3$ As not all reasons necessarily support a claim, the raters evaluated the quality of the arument in each paragraph, tllying frequency counts f rsons under ch qualit level. To ensure consistent evaluation, the two raters underwent a two-stage training proces. In the firt stage, they familiarized themselves with the criteria for evaluating argument quality. In the second stage, they practiced scoring the argument quality of sample essays obtained during a pilot study. After the training sesson, the two raters worked independently and evaluated all the reasons contained in each script separately. The analytic ratings and evaluation of argument quality were conducted separately with a minimum of two weeks in between, following Barkaoui's (2010) procedures. High inter-rater reliability was achieved (Krippendorffs alpha $= 0 . 9 7 7 $ , with any discrepancies resolved through discussion.

Table 7 Results of pairwise post-hoc Tukey for complexity measures across proficiency levels   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Construct</td><td> Measure</td><td>Pair</td><td> p value</td><td>95 % CI Lower Upper</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Lexical complexity</td><td>Lexical diversity</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.16</td><td>1.23</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>High-Low</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.43</td><td>1.54</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.228</td><td>-.26</td><td>.84</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Lexical density</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>.299</td><td>-.02</td><td>.05</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>High-Low</td><td>.720</td><td>-.05</td><td>.03</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.071</td><td>-.06</td><td>.10</td></tr><tr><td>Syntactic complexity</td><td>MLT</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.02</td><td>2.79</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>High-Low</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.44</td><td>3.28</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.570</td><td>-.96</td><td>1.87</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MLC</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.10</td><td>1.68</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>High-Low</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.13</td><td>1.75</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.983</td><td>-.76</td><td>.85</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>C/T</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>.987</td><td>-.18</td><td>.20</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>High-Low</td><td>.539</td><td>-.13</td><td>.27</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mid-Low.</td><td>.635</td><td>-.14</td><td>.26</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T/S</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>.474</td><td>-.04</td><td>.09</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>High-Low</td><td>.942</td><td>-.08</td><td>.06</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.308</td><td>-.10</td><td>.04</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CP/T</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>&lt;.05 *</td><td>-.01</td><td>.17</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>High-Low</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.01</td><td>.19</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.733</td><td>-.08</td><td>.11</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CN/T</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>&lt;.05 *</td><td>-.06</td><td>.46</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>High-Low</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.04</td><td>.57</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.431</td><td>-.16</td><td>.37</td></tr><tr><td>Meaning complexity</td><td>AQ</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.46</td><td>2.45</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>High-Low</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>1.26</td><td>3.29</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.033</td><td>-.20</td><td>1.84</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* \* Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). \* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). $\mathbf { M L T } =$ mean length of T-unit; MLC $=$ mean length of clause; $\mathrm { C } / \mathrm { T } =$ clause per T-unit; $\mathrm { T } / \mathrm { S } = \mathrm { T }$ -unit per sentence; $\mathrm { { C P / T = } }$ coordinate phrase per t-unit; $\mathrm { C N / T = }$ complex nominals per T-unit: $\mathbf { A Q } =$ argument quality

# 4.5. Statistical analysis

Three types of statistical analyses were conducted using SPss 25.0 to address the research questions. First, Pearson correlation analyses were performed to examine relationships among multiple variables and identify multicollinearity. For pairs of components exhibiting strong correlations $( \mathbf { r } \geq . 7 0 )$ , the component more strongly correlated with the holistic scores was retained, following guidelines by Zhang and Lu (2022) and Kyle and Crossley (2018). Some syntacti complexity indices showing multicollnearit were removed (i.e., MLS, VP/T, C/S, DC/C, DC/T, CT/T, and CP/C), resulting in the retention of nine complexity indices: lexical diversity, lexical density, MLT, MLC, C/T, T/S, CP/T, CN/T, and argumentative quality. The results of the nine indices were converted into standardized z-scores using pss 25.0. Converting the values of different variables into z-scores standardizes them, allowing for more accurate comparison and analysis. These standardized $\mathbf { z }$ scores were utilized in all subsequent analyses. As the analyzed variables were normally distributed, parametric statistics were used.

Next, to answer the frst research question, the remaining variables underwent correlation analysis and one-way multivariate analysis of variance (MANovA) to determine their statistical significance in explaining group dfferences. The assumptions for the oneway MAnOVA were met for the following three main reasons. First, we checked the distribution of each dependent variable within each group using Q-Q plots and the Shapiro-Wilk test to ensure multivariate normality. The results indicated that the data approximated a normal distribution. Second, we inspected scattrplots of each pair of dependent variables to confirm linear relationships among the variables within each group, meeting the assumption of linearity. Third, as noted earlier, we verified the absence of multicollinearity by examining the correlations between dependent variables. Post-hoc Tukey tests were employed for pairwise comparisons of group means to identify significant differences when the MAnovA indicated overalldifferences among groups.We report partil et squared efect size for significant variables. According to Cohen (1988), smal, medium, and large effects are reflected in values of $f$ equal to 0.10, 0.25, and 0.40 respectively, which corresponds to partial eta squared values of 0.0099, 0.0588, and 0.1379, respectively (Richardson, 2011). Following this guideline, we consider partial eta squared $\geq 0 . 0 1$ a small effect size, $\geq 0 . 0 6$ a medium effect, and $\geq 0 . 1 4$ a large effect.

To address the second reearch question, we conducted correlation analysis and regression analyses to explore to what extent form based complexity measures (i.e, lexical diverst, lexical density, MLT, MLC, C/T, T/S, CP/T, and CN/T) are related to meaning-based complexit (i., argument quality f argumentative essas. Finally, to answer the third research question, we performed regression analysis to identify which indices are the most meaningful predictors of holistic essay scores.

# 5. Results

# 5.1. Differences in complexity across proficiency levels

Our first research question pertained to how high, mid, and low-scoring argumentative essays written by high school EFL leaners differed in terms of form-based complexity and meaning-based complexity features. The nine complexity features chosen spanned the two dimensions of lexical complexity (diversity and density), six dimensions of syntactic complexity (MLT, MLC, C/T, T/S, CP/T, and CN/T), and one dimension of meaning-based complexity (argument quality). Table 6 presents the descriptive statistics for these features. There was an observable pattern acros lexical, syntactic, and meaning-based complexity features: high-rated esays contained the highest levels of complexity in terms of lexical diversity, length-based global complexity (MLT and MLC), complexity via coordination, and complex nominals (CP/T and CN/T), and meaning-based complexity (AQ); mid-rated esays contained somewhat lower complexity than high-rated essays and somewhat higher complexity than low-rated essays; and low-rated essays contained the owest levels of complexity in these measures. What i noteworthy is that there was littl overallvariation for both lexical density and subordination-based complexity features (C/T and T/S).

A one-way MAnovA was carried out to determine if there was a statistically meaningful ifference between high, mid, and low tiers of students on mean values for the nine complexity features. Tukey's post-hoc comparison was used to determine significant differences in multiple pairwise comparisons. Further univariate tests were performed for each item to examine whether the means for the three proficiency groups differe significantly from each other on individual items. The results of the one-way MAnA revealed a significant difference by proficiency levels: F (18, $1 8 4 ) = 4 . 5 0 $ $\mathbf { p < . 0 5 }$ , Pillai's trace $= 0 . 6 1$ . As the partial eta squared was 0.31, the effect size can be interpreted as a large effect. Pairwise post-hoc Tukey results are presented in Table 7.

Table 8 Descriptive statistics of fine-grained syntactic complexity across three proficiency levels   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Syntactic type</td><td>Syntactic function</td><td colspan="2">High</td><td colspan="2">Mid</td><td colspan="2">Low</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Finite dependent clauses</td><td>Adverbial</td><td>1.05</td><td>0.79</td><td>1.51</td><td>1.21</td><td>1.59</td><td>0.91</td></tr><tr><td>Adjectivale</td><td>0.96</td><td>0.61</td><td>0.79</td><td>0.89</td><td>0.44</td><td>0.65</td></tr><tr><td>Nominal</td><td>1.85</td><td>0.86</td><td>1.82</td><td>1.47</td><td>1.63</td><td>0.92</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Nonfinite dependent clauses</td><td>Adverbial</td><td>0.44</td><td>0.41</td><td>0.24</td><td>0.39</td><td>0.25</td><td>0.53</td></tr><tr><td>Adjectivale</td><td>1.15</td><td>0.82</td><td>0.62</td><td>0.78</td><td>0.51</td><td>0.56</td></tr><tr><td>Nominal</td><td>2.07</td><td>1.27</td><td>1.92</td><td>1.31</td><td>1.54</td><td>1.07</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Non-clausal dependent phrase</td><td>Attributive adjectives as premodifiers</td><td>10.27</td><td>2.57</td><td>10.05</td><td>2.24</td><td>8.29</td><td>2.09</td></tr><tr><td>Nouns as premodifiers</td><td>0.92</td><td>0.55</td><td>0.84</td><td>0.62</td><td>0.69</td><td>0.39</td></tr><tr><td>Prepositional phrases as postmodifiers</td><td>1.71</td><td>0.92</td><td>1.51</td><td>0.31</td><td>1.27</td><td>0.94</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 9 Examples of noun modifiers used in high-scoring essays   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Syntactic type and function</td><td>Examples</td></tr><tr><td>Finite dependent adjectival clauses</td><td>: People who want to study abroad probably say that studying abroad is good. (High Scoring Essay #2) As you livein another country, you can get a skil to live without your family and communicate with people who don&#x27;t know you</td></tr><tr><td>Nonfinite adjectival clauses</td><td>at all. (High Scoring Essay #5) Studying abroad is one of the best ways to improve your English language skill. (High Scoring Essay #1) In fact, the languages spoken in other countries in daly live are different from the languages we study at school. (High Scoring</td></tr><tr><td>Attributive adjectives</td><td>Essay #7) By studying abroad, students can learn many cultural differences and different social systems. (High Scoring Essay #3) : I think that Japanese students should explore various perspectives at a global level. (High Scoring Essay # 4)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 10 Results of pairwise post-hoc Tukey for complexity measures across proficiency levels (fine-grained)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Syntactic type</td><td>Syntactic function</td><td>Pair</td><td> p value</td><td colspan="2">95 % CI Lower Upper</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="8">Finite dependent clauses</td><td rowspan="2">Adverbial</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>.175</td><td>-1.11</td><td>.22</td></tr><tr><td>High-Low</td><td>.214</td><td>-1.11</td><td>.26</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.997</td><td>.66</td><td>.70</td></tr><tr><td>High-Mid</td><td>.606</td><td>-.31</td><td>.64</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Adjectival</td><td>High-Low</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.02</td><td>1.01</td></tr><tr><td>Mid-Low.</td><td>.126</td><td>-.13</td><td>.84</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Nominal</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>.100</td><td>-.77</td><td>.76</td></tr><tr><td>High-Low</td><td>.769</td><td>-.58</td><td>.98</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="8">Nonfinite dependent clauses</td><td rowspan="2">Adverbial</td><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.761</td><td>-.59</td><td>.99</td></tr><tr><td>High-Mid</td><td>.302</td><td>-.14</td><td>.47</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td>High-Low</td><td>.374</td><td>-.16</td><td>.46</td></tr><tr><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.994</td><td>-.32</td><td>.30</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Adjectival</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>.073</td><td>-.09</td><td>.88</td></tr><tr><td>High-Low</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.00</td><td>1.00</td></tr><tr><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.826</td><td>-.39</td><td>.61</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Nominal</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>.857</td><td>-.64</td><td>.96</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>.186</td><td>-.29</td><td>1.35</td></tr><tr><td>High-Low Mid-Low.</td><td>.426</td><td>-.44</td><td>1.20</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="8">Non-clausal dependent phrase</td><td rowspan="3">Attributive adjectives as premodifiers</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>.942</td><td>-1.52</td><td>1.93</td></tr><tr><td>High-Low</td><td>&lt;.01 * *</td><td>.20</td><td>3.74</td></tr><tr><td>Mid-Low</td><td>&lt;.05 *</td><td>-.01</td><td>3.53</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Nouns as premodifiers</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>.926</td><td>-.44</td><td>.58</td></tr><tr><td>High-Low</td><td>.570</td><td>-.72</td><td>.33</td></tr><tr><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.356</td><td>-.79</td><td>.26</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Prepositional phrases as postmodifiers</td><td>High-Mid</td><td>.805</td><td>-.65</td><td>1.04</td></tr><tr><td>High-Low</td><td>.365</td><td>-.43</td><td>1.29</td></tr><tr><td>Mid-Low</td><td>.736</td><td>-.62</td><td>1.10</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* \* Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). \* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

Table 11 Correlations between lexical and syntactic complexity and meaning-based complexity   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2" colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">Lexical Complexity</td><td colspan="6">Syntactic Complexity</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical Diversity</td><td>Lexical Density</td><td>MLT</td><td>MLC</td><td>C/T</td><td>T/S</td><td>CP/T</td><td>CN/T</td></tr><tr><td>Meaning</td><td>AQ</td><td>.32 * *</td><td>-.13</td><td>.23 *</td><td>.17</td><td>.12</td><td>-.09</td><td>.12</td><td>.09</td></tr><tr><td>Complexitya</td><td>95 % CI</td><td>[.24,.56]</td><td>[ .36,.02]</td><td>[ .02,.36]</td><td>[ .03,.35]</td><td>[ .15,.24]</td><td>[ .25,.14]</td><td>[ .03,.35]</td><td>[ .14,.25]</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* \* Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). \* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). $\mathbf { M L T } =$ mean length of T-unit; MLC $=$ mean length of clause; $\mathrm { C } / \mathrm { T } =$ clause per T-unit; $\mathbf { T } / S = \mathbf { T }$ -unit per sentence; $\mathrm { { C P / T = } }$ coordinate phrase per t-unit; $\mathrm { C N / T = }$ complex nominals per T-unit: $\mathbf { A Q } =$ argument quality

Significant diffrences were found for lexical diversty, length-based global complexity (MLT and MLC), complexity via coord. nation and complex nominals (CP/T and CN/T), and meaning-based complexity (argument quality), but not for lexical density and clausal complexity (C/T and T/S). For lexical complexity, high-scoring essays tended to contain significantly more diverse words than mid- and low-scoring essays. Lexical density, on the contry, did not affect differences in proficiency levels. For global syntactic complexity, the high-scoring essays were constructed withsignificantly longer T-units and clauses than mid- and low-scoring essays. Meanwhile, no statistical group differences were found for either of the clausal complexity features. For phrase-based complexity, high-rated essays differed significantl from low-rated essays in terms of the use f coordinated phrases and complex nominal phrases. For meaning-based complexity, high-rated essays were significantlydiferent from mid- and low-rated essays, suggesting that argument quality was another important factor that could affect proficiency levels. No significant differences were found between mid- and Jow-rated essays for any feature. Thus, the findings suggest that argumentative writigs produced by students with higher proficiency levels were typicall distinguished by several formal features, including longer production units, a broad range of vocabulary, dense use of cordinated phrases, and more elaborate noun phrases, rather than relying heavily on clausal subordination. The findings also indicate that not only these formal features but also meaning-based complexity features are important characteristics of high-scoring argumentative essays written by high school EFL learners.

Table 12 Summary of the stepwise multiple regresson model: Predicting meaning-based complexity with form-based complexity   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Model</td><td>R</td><td>R2</td><td>Adjusted R2</td><td>SE</td></tr><tr><td>1: (constant), Lexical Diversity</td><td>.416</td><td>.173</td><td>.164</td><td>1.471</td></tr></table></body></html>

${ \bf R } =$ multiple correlation coefficient (overall goodness-of-fit of a regression model); $\mathbf { S } \mathbf { E } =$ standard error

Table 13 Regression model: Lexical diversity as a predictor of meaning-based complexity   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Unstandardized Coefficients</td><td colspan="3"> Standardized Coefficients</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>SE</td><td>B</td><td>t</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td>Constant</td><td>-1.979</td><td>1.208</td><td></td><td>-1.638</td><td>.105</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical diversity</td><td>.816</td><td>.179</td><td>.416</td><td>4.569</td><td>&lt;.001</td></tr></table></body></html>

$\beta =$ unstandardized beta; $\mathbf { S } \mathbf { E } =$ standard error; $\mathbf { B } =$ standardized beta

To gain a more in-depth picture of the high school EFL learners developing syntactic features, we conducted a fine-grained analysis of particular syntacti fature, fousing onhe tes f finite aerbil clauses, thre tyes f nonfite ddent clauses, and three types of non-clausal dependent phrase. Table 8 shows the results across three proficiency levels.

Overall, high-rated essays contained the highest levels of complexit in terms of al the indices excet for finite adverbial dependent clauses (e.g., dependent clauses using $i f ,$ when, and because). Interestingly, low-rated essays demonstrated the highest level of complexity in finite adverbial dependent clauses. In contrast, high-rated essays were more likely to be characterized by the use of adjectival clauses as noun modifiers. The excerpts in Table 9 show the examples.

A one-way MAnoOVA was carried out to determine if there was a statistically meaningfuldifference between high, mid, and low tiers of students on mean values for the nine fine-grained complexity features. Tukey's post-hoc comparison was used to determine significant differences in multiple pair-wise comparisons. The results of the one-way MANOVA revealed a significant difference by proficiency levels: F (18, $1 8 4 ) = 2 . 6 7$ $ { \mathbf { p } } < . 0 0 1$ , Pillai's trace $= 0 . 4 1$ . As the partial eta squared was 0.21, the effect size can be interpreted as large. Pairwise post-hoc Tukey results are presented in Table 10.

# Table 10.

Significant differences were found between high-graded and low-graded essays for finite adjectival dependent clauses, nonfinite adjectival dependent clauses, and atributive adjectives but not for other features. The results indicated that writers' attempts to provide more in-depth information by modifying nouns with a variety of adjectival functions i.., the use of complex nominals could lead to a higher evaluation of argumentative essays. In other words, high-scoring essays tended to include more features of phrasal complexity and fewer features of clausal complexity than low-scoring essays.

# 5.2. Relationship between form-based complexity and meaning-based complexity

Our second research question addressed the ssociation between form-based complexity and meaning-based complexity features in high school EFL learners argumentatie essays. Table 11 provides a summary of the corrlations between the lexical and syntactic complexity and meaning-based complexit features. The results revealed statisticall significant positive correlations measured by Pearson's $r$ at the .01 level (two-tailed) between lexical diversity and argument quality $( \mathbf { r } = 0 . 3 2$ $9 5 ~ \%$ CI [.24,.56]). The results also revealed statisticall significant positive correlations at the .05 level (two-tailed) between MLT and argument quality $( \mathbf { r } = 0 . 2 3$ $9 5 \%$ CI [.02,.36]).

A stepwise multiple regresson analysis was conducted in order to investigate to what extent the form-based linguistic complexity influences the meaning-based complexity of the argumentative essays. The results of the stepwise multiple regression analysis are shown in Tables 12 and 13. The results showed that lexical diversity was the only significant predictor of meaning-based complexity. The resulting model explained $1 6 . 4 ~ \%$ of the variance $( R = . 4 1 6$ $R ^ { 2 } = . 1 7 3 )$ in argument quality. The results suggest that the more diverse words the essays contain, the more complex meaning the essays can create in terms of argument quality. Conversely, no significant causal relationships were found betwen the syntactic complexity and the meaning-based complexity of argumentative essays.

Table 14 Correlations between fine-grained syntactic complexity and meaning-based complexity   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="3">Finite Dependent Clauses</td><td colspan="3">Nonfinite Dependent Clausese</td><td colspan="3">Non-clausal Dependent Phrased</td></tr><tr><td>Adverbial</td><td>Adjectival</td><td>Nominal</td><td>Adverbial</td><td> Adjectival</td><td>Nominal</td><td>Attributive Adjectives</td><td>Nouns as Premodifiers</td><td>Prepositional Phrases as Postmodifiers</td></tr><tr><td>Meaning</td><td>AQ</td><td>-.04</td><td>.19 *</td><td>.02</td><td>.13</td><td>.23 * *</td><td>.22 *</td><td>.12</td><td>.03</td><td>.001</td></tr><tr><td>Complexity</td><td>95 % CI</td><td>[ .16,.45]</td><td>[.15,.99]</td><td>[ .08,.47]</td><td>[ .01,1.2]</td><td>[.09,.88]</td><td>[.02,.51]</td><td>[ .01,.23]</td><td>[ .17,.66]</td><td>[ .26,.22]</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* \* Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). \* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

Table 15 Summary of the stepwise multiple regression model: Predicting meaning-based complexity with fine-grained syntactic complexity   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Model</td><td>R</td><td>R2</td><td>Adjusted R2</td><td>SE</td></tr><tr><td>1: (constant), Nonfinite adjectival dependent clauses, Nonfinite nominal dependent clauses</td><td>.307</td><td>.094</td><td>.076</td><td>1.547</td></tr></table></body></html>

${ \bf R } =$ multiple correlation coefficient (overall goodness-of-fit of a regression model); $\mathbf { S } \mathbf { E } =$ standard error

Table 16 Regresson model: Nonfinite adjectival dependent clauses and nonfinite nominal lauses as predictors of meaning-based complexity   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Unstandardized Coefficients</td><td colspan="3">Standardized Coefficients</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>SE</td><td>B</td><td></td><td>p</td><td>VIF</td></tr><tr><td>Constant</td><td>2.679</td><td>.307</td><td></td><td>8.729</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Nonfinite adjective dependent clauses</td><td>.462</td><td>.201</td><td>.220</td><td>2.300</td><td>.024</td><td>1.003</td></tr><tr><td>Nonfinite nominal dependent clauses</td><td>.263</td><td>.124</td><td>.202</td><td>2.114</td><td>.037</td><td>1.003</td></tr></table></body></html>

$\beta =$ unstandardized beta; SE $=$ standard error; $\mathbf { B } =$ standardized beta

Table 17 Correlations between lexical, syntactic, and meaning-based complexity and overall essay scores   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Lexical Complexity</td><td colspan="6">Syntactic Complexity</td><td>Meaning Complexity</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Lexical Diversity</td><td>Lexical Density</td><td>MLT</td><td>MLC</td><td>C/T</td><td>T/S</td><td>CP/T</td><td>CN/T</td><td>AQ</td></tr><tr><td>Overall essay scores</td><td>.54 * *</td><td>-.07</td><td>.43 * *</td><td>.42 * *</td><td>.11</td><td>-.03</td><td>.33 * *</td><td>.34 * *</td><td>.57 * *</td></tr><tr><td>95 % CI</td><td>[.39,.67]</td><td>[ .29,.09]</td><td>[.21,.54]</td><td>[.21,.54]</td><td>[ .13,.26]</td><td>[.22,.17]</td><td>[.16,.51]</td><td>[.16,.51]</td><td>[.43,.70]</td></tr></table></body></html>

\* \* Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). \* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). $\mathbf { M L T } =$ mean length of T-unit; MLC $=$ mean length of clause; $\mathrm { C } / \mathrm { T } =$ clause per T-unit; $\mathrm { T } / \mathrm { S } = \mathrm { T }$ -unit per sentence; $\mathrm { { C P / T = } }$ coordinate phrase per t-unit; $\mathrm { C N / T = }$ complex nominals per T-unit: AQ $=$ argument quality

Table 18 Summary of the stewise multiple regresson model: Predicting the overall esay scores with lexical, syntactic, and mening-based complexity   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Model</td><td>R</td><td>R2</td><td>Adjusted R2</td><td>SE</td></tr><tr><td>1: (constant), AQ</td><td>.580</td><td>.336</td><td>.330</td><td>2.810</td></tr><tr><td>2: (constant), AQ, Lexical Diversity</td><td>.667</td><td>.446</td><td>.434</td><td>2.581</td></tr><tr><td>3: (constant), AQ, Lexical Diversity, CN/T</td><td>.720</td><td>.518</td><td>.504</td><td>2.418</td></tr></table></body></html>

${ \bf R } =$ multiple correlation coefficient (overall goodness-of-fit of a regression model); $\mathbf { S } \mathbf { E } =$ standard error

However, our fine-grained analysis of particular syntactic features provided a complementary result It showed that some of the phrasal complexity features may influence the meaning-based complexit f argumentative essays. Table 14 displays the correlations between these fine-grained syntactic complexity features and the meaning-based complexity. The results demonstrated that meaningbased complexity was correlated stongly with the features related to complex nominals, including nonfinite adjectival dependent clauses (i.e., noun $+ t o$ -infinitives, participle $^ +$ nouns) $( \mathbf { r } = . 2 3$ $ { \mathbf { p } } < . 0 1 ^ { \ast \ast }$ $9 5 \%$ CI [.09,.88]), nonfinite nominal clauses (i.e., verb $^ +$ that-clauses) $( \mathbf { r } = . 2 2$ $\mathbf { p } < . 0 5 ^ { * }$ $9 5 ~ \%$ CI [.02,.51]), and finite adjectival dependent clauses (i.e., noun $^ +$ relative clauses) $( \mathbf { r } = . 1 9 $ $\boldsymbol { \mathsf { p } } <$ $. 0 5 ^ { \ast }$ $9 5 ~ \%$ CI [.15,.99]). As demonstrated in Tables 15 and 16, the results of the stepwise multiple regression analysis showed that among the three features, nonfinite dependent adjective clauses and nonfinite nominal clauses were predictive of the meaning-based complexity of argumentative essays. The resulting model explained $7 . 6 ~ \%$ of the variance $( R = . 3 0 7$ $R ^ { 2 } = . 0 9 4 )$ in meaning-based complexity of argumentative essays. These findings imply the importance of phrasal complexity over clausal complexity in increasing meaning-based complexity in argumentative writing. This is possbly because, as illustrated in the examples in Table 5, phrasal complexity, primarily through nominalizations, can be modified by various language structures, such as attributes, relative clauses, and prepositional phrases. These characteristics make nominal phrases not only more semanticallycomplex in and of themselves but also allow for aditional semantic density around them, which can ultimately lead to increasing meaning-based complexity in terms of argument quality.

# 5.3. Relationship between form-based complexity, meaning-based complexity, and overall writing scores

Our third research question investigated the association between form-based complexity, meaning-based complexity, and raters scores on argumentative essays. The results of the corrlation analysis are shown in Table 17. The results revealed statisically sig. nificant correlations measured by the Pearson's $r$ at the 0.1 level (two-tailed) between the overall essay scores and the six complexity features: lexical diversity, $r = . 5 4$ $9 5 \%$ CI [.39,.67]; MLT, $r = . 3 9$ $9 5 \%$ CI [.21,.54]; MLC, $r = 3 9$ $9 5 \%$ CI [.21,.54]; CP/T, $r = . 3 5$ , 95 $\%$ CI [.16,.51]; CN/T, $r = . 3 5$ $9 5 \%$ CI [.16,.51]; and meaning-based complexity, $r = . 5 8$ $9 5 \%$ CI [.43,.70]. Among the six statistically meaningful features, argument quality demonstrated the highest positie corrlation with overall esay core, followed by lexical diversity, which showed the second-highest correlation. On the contrary, the correlation between subordination-based syntactic complexity measures and the overall essay scores was not significant: $\mathrm { C } / \mathrm { T }$ $r = . 1 2$ $9 5 \%$ CI $[ -$ .13,.26] and T/S, $r = - . 0 9$ $9 5 \%$ CI $[ -$ .22,.17]. The results suggest that merely having complex sentence structures does not necessarily equate to a better essay. Rather, complexity in terms of meaning-such as using a wider range of words, coordinated phrases, and more intricate nominals--might contribute more significantly to the overall quality of the essay.

Table 19 Regression model: Three complexity features as predictors of overall essay scores   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Unstandardized Coefficients</td><td colspan="4">Standardized Coefficients</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>SE</td><td>B</td><td></td><td>p</td><td>VIF</td></tr><tr><td>Constant</td><td>-4.28</td><td>2.084</td><td></td><td>-2.053</td><td>.043</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>AQ</td><td>.917</td><td>.164</td><td>.430</td><td>5.575</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>1.209</td></tr><tr><td> Lexical diversity</td><td>1.348</td><td>.326</td><td>.322</td><td>4.137</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>1.232</td></tr><tr><td>CN/T</td><td>2.585</td><td>.672</td><td>.273</td><td>3.848</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>1.023</td></tr></table></body></html>

$\beta =$ unstandardized beta; $\mathbf { S } \mathbf { E } =$ standard error; $\mathbf { B } =$ standardized beta; VIF $=$ variance inflation factor (a measure used to assess multicollinearity. A VIF of 1 indicates that there is no multicollinearity among the predictor variables.) $\mathbf { A Q } =$ argument quality; CN/T $=$ complex nouns per T-unit

Table 20 Correlations between fine-grained syntactic complexity and overall essay scores   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">Finite Dependent Clauses</td><td colspan="3">Nonfinite Dependent Clauses</td><td colspan="3"> Non-clausal Dependent Phrase</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Adverbial</td><td>Adjectival</td><td>Nominal</td><td>Adverbial</td><td>Adjectival</td><td>Nominal</td><td>Attributive Adjectives</td><td>Nouns as. Premodifiers</td><td>Prepositional Phrases as Postmodifiers</td></tr><tr><td>Overall Essay</td><td>-.20 *</td><td>.33 * *</td><td>.05</td><td>.11</td><td>.22 * *</td><td>.19 *</td><td>.32 * *</td><td>-.11</td><td>.17</td></tr><tr><td>Scores</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>95 % CI</td><td>[-</td><td>[.97,</td><td>[.04,</td><td>[.05,</td><td>[.32,</td><td>[-</td><td>[.21,.66]</td><td>[ .57,.99]</td><td>[ .07,.83]</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>.79,.37]</td><td>2.56]</td><td>1.08]</td><td>2.49]</td><td>1.82]</td><td>.08,.95]</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

$* *$ Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). \* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

Table 21 Summary of the stepwise multiple regression model: Predicting overall essay scores with fine-grained syntactic complexity   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Model</td><td>R</td><td>R2</td><td>Adjusted R2</td><td>SE</td></tr><tr><td>1: (constant), Attributive adjectives, Finite dependent adjectival clauses, Nonfinite adjectival clauses</td><td>.516</td><td>.266</td><td>.244</td><td> 2.984</td></tr></table></body></html>

${ \bf R } =$ multiple correlation coefficient (overall goodness-of-fit of a regression model); $\mathbf { S } \mathbf { E } =$ standard error

Table 22 Regresson model: Ariutie adjetie, finite dndent adjetival lse, nninite adjetival lse, and finite ddet nminal lases as predictors of overall essay scores   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Unstandardized Coefficients</td><td colspan="4">Standardized Coefficients</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>SE</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>VIF</td></tr><tr><td>Constant</td><td>5.351</td><td>1.157</td><td></td><td></td><td>4.625</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>1.002</td></tr><tr><td>Attributive adjective</td><td>.422</td><td>.108</td><td>.340</td><td></td><td>3.921</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Finite dependent</td><td>1.538</td><td>.394</td><td>.338</td><td></td><td>3.906</td><td>&lt;.001</td><td>1.002</td></tr><tr><td>adjectival clauses Nonfinite adjectival clauses</td><td>.958</td><td>.387</td><td></td><td>.214</td><td>2.476</td><td>.015</td><td>1.000</td></tr></table></body></html>

$\beta =$ unstandardized beta; SE $=$ standard error; $\mathbf { B } =$ standardized beta

Next, a stepwise multiple regression analysis was conducted to explore how the complexity of the lexical, syntactic, and meaning. based features relates to the overall scores of argumentative esays. As multicollinarity was aready checked at the beginning of the statistical analys, al nine indices were entered into stepwise multiple regressin (Tables 18 and 19). The results showed that three indices were significant predictors of overallessay scores: argument quality, lexical diversity, and complex nominals per T-unit. Together, these variables accounted for $5 0 . 4 ~ \%$ of the variance $( R = . 7 2 0$ $R ^ { 2 } = . 5 1 8 )$ in overall scores of argumentative writing. The standardized coefficient values showed that argument quality was the most influential predictor of overall esay scores $( \beta = . 4 3 0 )$ followed by lexical diversity $( \beta = . 3 2 2 )$ and CN/T $( \beta = . 2 7 3 )$ . The model indicated that indices related to the quality of argument, the use of diverse words, and complex nominals were predictive of proficiency levels established by essay scores. It is noticeable that the meaning-based complexity had a greater influence on essay scores than the formal aspects of the essays.

The fine-grained analysis offered a more nuanced understanding of how specific syntactic features affected overall essay scores. Table 20 shows correlations between fine-grained syntactic complexity measures and overall esay scores. The results demonstrated that overall essay scores were correlated positively with attributive adjectives $( r = . 3 3$ $\mathbb { p } < . 0 1$ $9 5 \ \%$ CI [.21,.66]), finite dependent adjectival clauses $( r = . 3 3$ $ { \mathbf { p } } < . 0 1$ $9 5 \%$ CI [.97, 2.56]), nonfinite adjectival dependent clauses $( r = . 2 2$ $\mathbf { p } < . 0 1$ $9 5 \%$ CI [.32, 1.82]), and nonfinite nominal clauses $( r = . 1 9$ $9 5 \%$ $\mathsf { p } < . 0 5$ , CI [-.08,.95]). On the contrary, a negative correlation was found between finite dependent adverbial clauses and overall essay scores $( r = - . 2 0$ $\mathtt { p } < . 0 5$ $9 5 ~ \%$ CI [-.79,.37]).

As demonstrated in Tables 21 and 22, the results of the stepwise multiple regression analysis showed that the three syntactic features attributive adjectives, inite deendent adjectival clauses, and nonfinite adjective dependent clauses) were predictive of the overall scores of the argumentative essays. The resulting model explained $2 4 . 4 \%$ of the variance $( R = . 5 1 6$ $R ^ { 2 } = . 2 6 6 )$ in overall scores. These findings suggest that writers' attempts to provide in-depth information by incorporating a broader range of complex nominals could contribute to more complex meaning, ultimately leading to a higher evaluation of argumentative essays.

# 6. Discussion

Our analysis revealed that students with higher proficiency levels tend to produce argumentative essays with specifi features that distinguish them from those with lower proficiency level. Such features include longer production units, the use of a broad range of vocabulary, dense use of coordinated phrases, and more elaborate noun phrases. The findings aso revealed that the ability to convey meaning-based complexit is a critical characteritic of high-scoring argumentatie essays written by high school EFL learners. Moreover, our fine-grained analysis of syntactic features highlighted that there are significant differences between high-graded and low-graded essays concerning finte adjectival dependent clauses, nonfinite adjectival dependent clauses, and atributive adjectives, but not for other syntactic features. In other words, using complex nominals or modifying nouns with various adjectival functions is a strategy writers use to provide in-deth information, which can lead to a higher evaluation of argumentative esays. I summary, high scoring essays tend to include more phrasal complexity features and fewer clausal complexity features than low-scoring essays. The overal rsults support previous findings that L2 writing development would first be characterized by the addition of clausal constituents and would then move to the addition of noun phrase modifiers (Biber et al., 2011; Kyle & Crossey, 2018; Parkinson & Musgrave, 2014; Taguchi et a., 2013. The results also provide empirical evidence for the writing development path of high school EFL writers. Specifially, the finding that there was a decrease in the use of subordinated clausal structure and an increase in the phrasal structure as students progressed from lower to higher level aligns with the reults reported by other scholars who examined adolescent EFL learners'esays in European contexts (e.g., Kyle et al., 2021; Khushik, 2024; Khushik & Huhta, 2020; Siekmann et al., 2022, Martinez, 2018) and adult EL witers (e.g, Li & Huang, 2022; Biber et al., 2011. The results iffer, hower, from he findings of Kyle et al. (2021), which found that as adolescent EFL learners spent time studying English, they tended to write longer T-units by using more dependent clauses in their essays. The latter results are in line with commonly observed trends in studies of L2 writing devel. opment in lower proficiency learners suggesting a meaningful relationship between clausal subordination and holistic writing scores (Crossley & McNamara, 2014; Ortega, 2003; Verspoor et al., 2012).

Our analysis further revealed that increasing form-based conventional global complexity is less relevant to increasing meaning. based complexity in the context of EFL high school learners writing argumentative essays. Instead, fine-grained features associated with complex nominal feature, such as pre-adjective, post-preposition, and nominal modifiers, significantly corrlate with or predict the complexity of meaning in terms of argument quality. These findings are in line with some previous studies that fine-grained complexity features are positively correlated with overall esay quality (e.g., Casal & Le, 2019; Li & Huang, 2022; and Parkinson & Musgrave, 2014). The findings suggest that in argumentative writing, phrasal complexity in the form of nominalization holds greater significance in enhancing meaning-based complexity than clausal complexity. This is atributed to the fact that the use of complex phrases leads to greater meaning expansion, thereby enabling writers to effectively communicate their intended message in a particular context. Our results underscore that these advanced fine-grained features emerge in adolescent EFL writers at a lower-intermediate level, distinguishing our findings from previous studies focusing on college-leel second language learners (Zhang & Lu, 2022; Kyle & Crossley, 2017, 2018).

The key finding of this study is that meaning-based complexity had a greater influence on overall esay scores than the formal aspects of the essays. It can be argued that merely having comple sentence structures does not necessrily lead to a betteressay. This finding is consistent with previous studies (Stapleton & Wu, 2015; Chuang & Yan, 2022) that highlight the inadequacy of specific formal structures alone in representing an essay's overall argument quality. Furthermore, ths finding aligns with the proposal by composition scholars (Liardet, 2013; Ryshina-Pankova, 2015) that complexity in L2 writig can be beter undersood by examining the link between the different aspect of inguistc omplexity and ther semantic function in creating specific types of meanings in written texts.

From the perspective of L2 writing assessment, the findings suggest that adding the construct of argument quality to the existing rubrics will help researchers and educators to grasp not just L2 learners writing development but both thestrengths and weaknesses of their argumentation abilitie. The ability to write an effective argumentative essay is an important marker of L2 writing abilit, as standardized language proficiency tests ofen require students to write argumentative essays, and this type of essay \*serves as a gatekeeper to advanced secondary and tertiary work" (Kibler & Hardigree, 2017, p. 76). However, the conventional categories of content, organization, and language may not entirely represent the complexities of argumentation. For instance, in the rubric for the TOEFL iBT writing for an academic discussion, students' argumentative abilities are evaluated based on elaborated explanations, syntactic features, and lexical and grammatical errors (Es, 2023). Yet, these categories may not comprehensively capture the nuances of argumentation. Similarly, the GTEC writing rubric used for the current study evaluates students' argumentation based on goal achievement, organization, vocabulary, and grammar. Although goal achievement may be associated with the qualit ofargument the criteria based on a presence-or-absence binary (0 or 1 point, see Table 1) that focuses on superficial elements of agumentation may not be effective in asssing learners argumentative sills. Therefore, learners whose argumentative essays scored highly based on the GTEC rubric may still have problems with their argumentaton itself. Such asimplistc rubric design may fail to ffer leaners detailed feedback on specific areas of their argument that require improvement. Adding the construct of argument quality may thus provide a fuller picture of L2 writers development not just as anguage users but also as arguer in academic contexts. This is especiall crucial for adolescent EFL learners who need to develop their proficiency in the target language and the ability to write persuasively in that language simultaneously. Altenatively, the categories of goal achievement, organization, vocabulary, and grammar can be aligned to the acceptability and relevance of argument, argument development, lexical complexity, and syntacticelaboration (i.e., the use of language that is effective for meeting the goals of the genre).

A notable implication to be drawn from this study is that a multidimensional set of measures needs to be adopted to asess the complexity of L2 writing in ways that () focus on both form-based and meaning-based complexity and (i) combine global complexity with fine-grained complexity features based on syntactic types and functions. Analyzing complexity beyond mere global form-based complexit features by delving into the meaning dimension of complexity through fine-grained analysis allowed us to challenge the conventional belief that longer or more grammaticall complex sentences necessrily equate to high-quality writing. Our findings support the notion that \*more complex" does not necessrily mean better" suggesting that there might be good and bad shorter/ simpler sentences, and good and bad longer/more complex sentences. Thus, it would be misguided to equate more linguistically complex writing with good or expert writing in the context of high school EFL learners' writing. Considering that the choice of particular linguistic features is influenced by the communicative demands of a task, analyzing complexity should start with assesing the meaning dimension of complexity (the communicative goal that an L2 writer aims to achieve) and then move on to an exploration of how linguistic complexity contributes to this success.

# 7. Conclusion

This study examined how form-based and meaning-based complexity features contribute to the overallqualit of essays written by Japanese high school EFL learners. Our analysis revealed the following findings. First, four complexity features significantly discriminated learner proficiency levels, namely, lexical diverst, length-based global syntactic complexity, phrasal complexity, and meaning-based complexity. High-rated essays were characterized by the use of adjectival clauses as noun modifiers, whereas lowscoring essays relied on finite adverbial dependent clauses introduced by subordinating conjunctions, such as $i f ,$ when, and because. Second, the meaning-based complexity was asociated strongly with lexical complexity and complex nominals rather than clausal complexity. The ability to create information density through the use of diverse vocabulary and phrasal laborations might be more influential in enhancing meaning-based complexity than the ability to use subordinate clauses. Third, the strongest predictor of essay scores was not the form-based complexity but rather the meaning-based complexity achieved by argument quality. The depth and effectiveness of the arguments presented in the essays had a stronger influence on the scores than the superficial form-oriented syntactic complexity.

It is mportant to note that this study has limitations that may afect is gneralizability. One such limitation is the small sample size and the specific group of participants. The results obtained from analyzing only 102 esays may not be representative of a larger population. Thus, future studies should investigate whether the findings can be replicated by analyzing argumentative esays writen by high school learners in other EFL contexts. Additionally, the use of cros-sectional data in this study may hinder the data's representtiveness. utre studes could addressthis by examining the developmental trajectory of writig ailities over time, tracking changes within the same individuals acros different EFL high school setigs. Moreover, considering that writig topics or prompts could affect the ways writer elaborate their texs, it would be worthwhile to investigate the relative impact of the topic on writers meaning-making choices. These limitations notwithstanding, this study substantiates the value of including both form-based complexity and meaning-based complexity in exploring L2 complexity and provides valuable insight into the question of what constitutes good writing.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Sachiko Yasuda: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Investigation, Conceptualization.

# Data Availability

The data that has been used is confidential.

# Acknowledgments

This research was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 24K04031.

# References

Ai H  13i ic i  i  tin   er mpn (Eds.), Automatic treatment and analysis of learner corpus data (pp. 249-264). John Benjamins.   
Anrar, hriri, P018 Pt n i is win   et writers in applied linguistics. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 31, 58-71. htps:/doi.org/10.1016/jjeap.2017.12.008   
rka, 0a   t   ,  /. org/10.1080/15434300903464418   
Barkaui,  d,20sg g sh d  wig e. io in ge l  t. Routledge.   
e  n i l.i14 2, r /p//TEC ScoringCriteria.pdf).   
Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Reppen, R. (1998). Corpus iguistics: Investigating language structure and use. Cambridge University Pres,   
Biber ., ra, B., & Ponpon,  (201). Should we use chctrisicsf converain t meure gatica complexit i 2 wtin dement? TESOL Quarterly, 45, 5-35. https://doi.org/10.5054/tq.2011.244483   
iber .  t  t   ics 37 639 668. https:/doi.org/10.1093/applin/amu059   
u ., 02 i2 t.  .), Complexity, accuracy, and fluency in SLA (pp. 21-46). John Benjamins.   
But  se (2014. g  mrig sh h i 2 wtin xt.  ofS  wn 2, 265../ doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2014.09.005   
al   20t ng i  t f g 4 5. /. rg/10.1016/j.jslw.2019.03.00!   
huan, 2t t  t  e an  qt  wi f ge Writing, 56, 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2022.100892   
Cobb, T. (2002). Web Vocabprofile. Retrieved September 15, 2023, from http://www.lextutor.ca/vp/.   
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd edition). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Conor-Lino ., & io. 2014). mparin etives on  witing: Miple alyf a on corus. Jl of nd ange wing 26 1-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2014.09.002   
Crosley,   &caa, . (2014). Do witig dlent equal wiing qulit? ompttion ietigationf syctic complxty in 2 r. Journal of Second Language Writing, 26, 66-79. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2014.09.006   
ma,  08 L     0. /. org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.02.003   
TS (2023.   w or anr.e, 202 r / b.p h/i wn an_academic_discussion _rubrics.pdf.   
Gass, S., & Selinker, L. (2001). Second language acquisition: An introductory course. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Guiraud, P. (1954). Les characteres statistiques du vocabulaire. Essai de methodologie. Presses Universitaires de France.   
u, L  1         m A comparison study. Assessing Writing, 18, 218-238. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2013.05.002   
Hgi  019 ex ssticif  a     f s  c , 37, 27-140 https:/doi.org/10.1016/j. jeap.2018.12.002. and languages. Language Testing, 31, 307-328. https://doi.org/10.1177/0265532214526176   
Jarvis ., Gra , ikski, ris  (203). Expi miple fle f hhy rad r comtio.  of d  ting 12, 377-403. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2003.09.001   
Jig, ., B,    (0ti ct  n the wtin    r  i coru. Journal of Second Language Writing, 46, Article 100666. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2019.100666   
Kushik, 0. h  rk e ff f isti  ish    corora by using Natural Language Processing tools. JYU Dissertations.   
hshi, 024) th i ic   i  1 e    Pakistn attributable exclusively to their L1? Asessing Writing, 60, Article 100839. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2024.100839   
shi, 0tiic   r w   rk  e 2, an B1. Applied Linguistics, 41, 506-532. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amy064   
shi  2)   h- .   scs, 1, 142-184. https://doi.org/10.1515/eujal-2021-0011   
Kiber   . (017 in in 2mti ng   st cr h   rst.  ng 67, 75-109. https://doi.org/10.1111/LANG.12198   
Kim  hi . 019.td  sco  th l t o is io s m.  r fo tg tieed February 6, 2024, from (https://www.benesse.co.jp/gtec/schoolofficials/research/pdf/doc-2019-01.pdf).   
Kisele  s    n i  iity Evidence from longitudinal Russian leamer corpus data (https) Moden Languge Jounal, 106(4), 798-817.htps:/oi.og/10.111/mod.12808.   
ros, . 01k xt d sti a   riv win .     n 20 14861./ doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2011.02.001   
Kyle  e  m. 15. v    m s  3, 319-340. https://doi.org/10.1177/0265532215587391   
yle    017in tciio in 2 wtin c  ing 34, 513-35.//10.1177 0265532217712554   
yle        f  y i Language Acquisition, 43, 781-812. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263120000546   
Kyle K  018g ic t n i s  . , 10, 349 https:/doi.org/10.1111/modl.12468   
Lan,   te. 2019.ratic omlty t d i mnd what o 2 wtin r  of d  wing 46, Article 100673. https://doi.org/10.1016/jjslw.2019.100673 and national writing raters. Assessing Writing, 51, 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2021.100604   
Li,    ti      r   pai appropriateness. Assessing Writing. , Article 100707. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2023.100707   
Liadet C (2013). An extio of Chi er's me of cal methr. g to make all aed men. Second Language Writing, 22, 161-178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2013.03.008   
Lu  01 t   ,4362. https://doi.org/10.5054/tq.2011.240859   
Lu,  i 15.tic  i -eishwtg f aes he kd.  f Writing, 29, 16-27. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.jslw.2015.06.003.   
am,    g  21)ti d x     i     ng 53, 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2021.100822   
alven  d,  he   . 004)  rics  i  an,   
ar ti  f   /. org/10.1016/j.asw.2017.11.002   
azta .015ic x   ih e  ng 29, 3-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2015.06.004   
ens,    19 e     at in and Instruction, 14, 139-178. https://doi.org/10.1207/s1532690xci1402_1   
MEXT (2020 ioh th  r f s lie d e  sh a i .  u13, 23, from (https://www.mext.go.jp/content/20200318-mxt_daigakuc02-000005103_5.pdf).   
osafa   0  otint n  wig qlt   win  a  f eond Language Writing, 49, 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2020.100730   
oris   209   achsiging  int L   f xit. ed sis, 0 55-578. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amp044   
ussam  c207). Prg mt-tm itio in st witig Jol f Erlin 7, 59-2. s/ doi.org/10.3200/JEXE.76.1.59-92   
rega L003. tc t m d r eh  i y f - wi  ics, 2, 492-518. https:/doi.org/10.1093/ applin/24.4.492.   
Orega L 012)ra coml tt in  f thi wal n y s.) sic o con language acquisition, indigenization, contact (pp. 127-155). De Gruyter.   
Ortega, L. (2015. yntactic complexity in 2 writing: Proges and expansin. Jol of Second Lnuage Wrtig, 29, 82-94. htp://do.og/10.1016/. jslw.2015.06.008   
Pallt, G. (2015. A simple view of linguistic complexit. Second Langug Rerch, 31, 117-134. htp:/doi.org/10.1177/0267658314536435   
Paka 14 ei  r    f  or d Purposes, 14, 48-59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2013.12.001   
eg , u , an , g,  ,   g,  (2023). Pti h  h w t n tiv win hou multidimensional computational indices of lexical complexity. Assesing Writing, 56, 1-15. htps://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2023.100722   
Polt,  gp  anl 0  ref w tic y  c h r n inensie English program. Applied Linguistics, 41, 688-711. https:/doi.org/10.1093/applin/amz034   
Qin, J.  a  010he as o n n h t 384456. //101010.06.012   
Reuneker, A. (2017). Lexical diversity measurements. Retrieved 15 September, 2023, from https://www.reuneker.nl/files/ld.   
Richard, . (1987. Tp/ke ratio:  d he ell tll us dl f hid Lnag, 14 01-20. tps/do.g/10.1017/030500900012885   
R 1    3- doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2010.12.001   
yshina-Pana,. 010 srig ther f    mpra a f foe  aqsi o Language Journal, 94, 181-197. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2010.01016.x   
Ryshina-Pankova,  (2015.A menig-a aprch to the study f complexty in 2 witing The caf graaticl metaphor. Jodl of ond Langue Writing, 29, 51-63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2015.06.005   
Sam .8. t   t  r ute directions. Science Education, 92, 447-472. https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20276   
Sarte,  M  Gshea  202).  phe mplxity i  wie s dr one-e k: x proiciy ad  effect. Assessing Writing, 51, 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2021.100595   
a P s e a    n      t. Assessing Writing, 54, 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2022.100672   
ape  ir 0  r  te t icit  h s  risonf TOEFL iBT and disciplinary writing tasks. Modern Language Journal, 102, 310-332. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12465   
Staple, .,   016 n rst  2 wtigexil is r , e, anaa rt. Jof econ Language Writing, 32, 17-35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2016.02.002   
Staplto . 15. ltf    iwt c  h eh t tte and substance. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 17, 12-23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2014.11.006   
achi   sti   ti n   tiitio program. TEs0L Quarterly, 47, 420-430. https:/doi.org/10.1002/tesq.91   
Toulmin, S. E. (2003). The uses of argument. Cambridge University Press,   
Tefe-,    t 39, 302-327. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amw009   
Ueell, , s,     . 013string c  tion a t i the ei tin  h c n. ien Communication, 30, 36-62. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741088312469013   
Vafae, . 020 alt tigtion nth akg an wing ti of .  atin . ie , 02, r ./ www.benesse.co.jp/gtec/schoolofficials/research/pdf/doc-2020-01.pdf).   
van t,  e0. of  i  ,  f- .),in  y knowledge (pp. 93-115). Cambridge University Press.   
Verpor,  h  012)  tive  wi  f  1, 39-263./o. 10.1016/j.jslw.2012.03.007   
g   1   tig Writing, 39, 50-63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2018.12.003   
Vyatkina  01)he delopment f sond nge wiing coplxit in gops ad inividl:  ongtdl er corus suy. Md angge Journal, 96, 576-598. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2012.01401.x   
le-ki   f  , s,   
g  .5f t    c  ic t, writine aualitv. Joumal of Second Language Writino. 28. 53-67. httns:/doi.org/10.1016/i.islw.2015.02.002   
Yon  . 017     151.. org/10.1002/tesq.296   
Yu, G. (2010). Lexical diversty in writing and speaking task pefomance. Aplid Lingustic, 31, 36-259. htps:/oi.org/10.1093/applin/amp024   
g,  in  ti e. t  qt   e. Assessing Writing, 51, Article 100597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2021.100597