# Editorial

We are wrapping up another exciting year for the Journal of Second Language Writing (JSLW). By the end of 2024, we will have published 25 regular articles, one special issue collection on AI and L2 writing (edited by Chaoran Wang, Zhongfeng Tian, Sidury Christiansen), eight book reviews, four annotated bibliographies, and a set of disciplinary dialogues.

In the current issue, five full-length articles that report cutting-edge research are included. As we try to promote articles that focus on multilingual writing and non-English writing, we are particularly excited about the two articles exploring second language writing in Chinese (i.e., Lu & Pan 2024; Shu, Wang & Xu, 2024). This issue also includes three articles that belong to an upcoming special issue. They are being published in this volume due to the online first publication workflow. The topic of the disciplinary dialogues is “ungrading as an alternative assessment of L2 writing.” The focus article written by Deborah Crusan offers critical insights about the topic, and five response papers allow us to engage in productive discussion. We would like to share our special thanks to the outgoing disciplinary dialogue editors (Soo Hyon Kim and Tanita Saehkhum) for their contribution to the journal. We really appreciate that Drs. Kim and Saehkhum introduced timely and important topics in the field of L2 writing and organized insightful dialogues among the leading scholars.

For next year, the editorial team will continue to do our best to process manuscripts in a timely manner and publish high-quality articles that would benefit the audience of JSLW. This year we are likely to receive almost 600 submissions by the end of this year, which is about 150 more than in 2023. Our impact factor continues to be very strong, and we are proud that JSLW is a popular venue for sharing L2 writing research.

We had a very productive in-person editorial board meeting in November at the Symposium on Second Language Writing in Tucson, AZ. We would like to thank the editorial board members and ad hoc reviewers who graciously provide productive reviews for JSLW. We wish you happy holidays!