# Critical analysis versus description? Examining the relationship in successful student writing

R. Woodward-Kron\*

University of Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia

Accepted 9 September 2002

# Abstract

In Western tertiary contexts, critical analysis is firmly established as one of the most desirable characteristics of student writing. In subject guidelines and assessment criteria, the distinction between successful and less successful writing is often couched in terms of critical analysis as opposed to description. Student writing which merely describes aspects of theories, issues or concepts is not highly valued. A functional linguistic investigation of 20 successful essays written by trainee teachers shows, however, that forms of descriptive writing such as naming, taxonomising, and reporting are intrinsic to students’ attempts at critical analysis. This paper argues that descriptive writing has an important role in disciplinary learning for novice students. It also argues that the discussion of critical analysis and critical thinking in tertiary learning could benefit from a linguistic perspective on how critical analysis is realised in student writing. This could assist educators in demystifying for novice writers what critical analysis is.

$©$ 2002 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd.

# 1. Background

In Western tertiary contexts, critical analysis is firmly established as one of the most desirable characteristics of undergraduate writing. It is frequently named as a necessary component of successful writing in subject guidelines, assessment criteria, and in written feedback on students’ assignments. Its prevalence, however, does not mean that it is a term that is widely understood amongst students, or that lecturers are adept at explaining what critical analysis in writing involves. There also appears to be an overlap in usage of the terms ‘analysis’, ‘critical analysis’ and ‘critical thinking’. Subject guidelines and assessment criteria rarely include definitions of analysis or ‘critical’ analysis, nor do they include accessible explanations or examples of critical analysis in writing. What they sometimes include, however, are explanations of good writing as analytical, while less successful writing is characterised as merely descriptive.

In a discipline-based study of students’ writing development, this analysis versus description distinction was evident in departmental guidelines on good writing. However, a preliminary investigation of 10 High Distinction scoring essays suggested that description was an intrinsic component of successful writing, and, significantly, that it played an important role in the students’ learning through writing. This finding prompted a broader investigation into the relation between description and analysis in successful writing. This involved attempting to unpack the concept of critical analysis in writing from the perspective of the subject specialists. The site of the study is a Faculty of Education at one Australian university.

# 2. Critical analysis as a disciplinary discursive practice

One way to examine the practice of critical analysis at university is to consider professional academic writers and their discourse communities (Bizzell, 1982; Swales, 1990). It is also helpful to consider the nature of disciplinary knowledge. Discourse community members share knowledge about the textual practices of a discipline, practices which are intrinsic to the ways disciplinary knowledge is constructed and expanded. Unlike types of knowledge which are viewed by the dominant culture as less contestable, such as religious revelations or Platonic forms, disciplinary knowledge is a social and rhetorical construct, and can therefore be deconstructed in ways sanctioned by the discourse community. In academic discourse communities, writing is a process of interpreting, arguing, evaluating and persuading. Making knowledge claims involves not only reporting information, but negotiating with prior texts and persuading the community to accommodate new claims (Bazerman, 1992; Hunston, 1994; Hyland, 2000).

The discursive practices of professional academic writers are too multi-faceted to be labelled simply as ‘critical analysis’, yet the terms ‘critical analysis’, ‘a critical approach’, and ‘critical thinking’1 are frequently used to characterise the approach required in undergraduate writing and in student learning generally. While critical analysis is arguably not the same as the socially and rhetorically motivated discursive practices of a discipline, it seems that there are distinct commonalities which are the result of viewing disciplinary knowledge as constructed and contestable. Aspects of critical analysis such as critiquing established knowledge, developing an argument supported by evidence, and evaluating phenomena according to selected criteria are not unlike the discursive practices of expert disciplinary writers. The discursive practices of a discipline are far more transparent when viewed from within the contextual framework of the disciplinary community. However, the lack of such an explicit framework for students is a major contributing factor to student confusion about the role and nature of critical analysis (Lea & Street, 1999).

# 3. Critical analysis as an educational ideal

Viewing critical analysis from the perspective of language and its social context, however, is not a common approach in the literature focussing on critical thinking and critical analysis. The concepts of critical analysis and critical thinking have been traditionally discussed in the disciplinary domains of the philosophy of education and cognitive psychology. With the focus on cognitive processes, critical analysis and critical thinking are often framed as transferable skills and educational ideals (Norris, 1992). These processes are seen as playing an intrinsic role in lifelong learning, as well as contributing towards ‘citizenship’ education, in which graduates learn to act and reflect upon the world to facilitate change (Heath, 2000). Not surprisingly, teaching innovations which aim to develop ‘critical’ graduates and aim for students to use higher order thinking processes have been an enduring feature in the tertiary teaching and learning literature (for example, Biggs, 1999; Taylor, 1994).

# 4. The centrality of critical analysis in higher education

Critical analysis is not only an educational ideal, but it is a required university practice. Lea and Street (1999) identify three levels of practice in higher education: institutional, disciplinary and individual. In Australia, the valuing of critical analysis in the academy is evident at all of these levels. At an institutional level, critical analysis, analysis and critical thinking are often identified as desirable graduate attributes (Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs, 2000; National Board of Employment, Education and Training, 1992). At the site of this study, critical analysis is considered to be a desirable attribute of the university’s graduates. For example (aspects relating to critical analysis are in bold script):

Attributes of a graduate (excerpt from the University’s web page) A commitment to continued and independent learning, intellectual development, critical analysis and creativity

At a disciplinary level the requirements of analysis and critical analysis in student writing appear in subject guidelines, assessment criteria, essay questions and essay writing guides (for example, Clanchy & Ballard, 1981; Germov, 2000; James et al., 1995). The examples below are drawn from the Faculty of Education in which this study was undertaken:

Faculty of Education assessment guide, Faculty of Education Handbook, 1999 (excerpt) Critical analysis of source material, rather than unquestioning acceptance and description

Objectives from subject guidelines, Faculty of Education (excerpt) Critically analyse the concepts of culture and education and the relationship between the schooling, the individual and society

Assessment criteria from subject guidelines, Faculty of Education (excerpt) Please note that mere description of your data is not adequate.

Sample essay questions from the Faculty of Education Give a critical analysis of the notion of social justice in education.

At the individual level of practice the requirement of critical analysis also appears in evaluative commentary in marker feedback (Spinks, 1998). The examples below are likewise from the Faculty of Education:

Sample marker commentary Excellent. This is a comprehensive and critical treatment of Piaget’s theory. (High Distinction)

Your critical analysis of the sources shows your extensive understanding of the complexity and controversy of the issue. (Distinction)

Your title doesn’t quite indicate the full extent of your focus and there is little room for critical analysis. (Pass $^ +$ )

To gain a higher grade you have to do less summarizing and more discussing. $( \mathrm { P a s s + ) }$

The excerpts from the disciplinary and individual levels show that in practice the concept of critical analysis is sometimes made distinct from description, with the latter having little value in the disciplinary context.

# 5. Unpacking critical analysis

Critical thinking and critical analysis are notoriously difficult concepts to ‘unpack’ for novice students (Bizzell, 1992; Farrell, James, Carmichael, & Scoufis, 1997; James et al., 1995). This is partly due to the need to consider disciplinary contexts (Hare, 1999). In the following section, I attempt to unpack what critical analysis in writing involves for the participants in this study. The discussion is restricted to undergraduate writing in the disciplinary context of Education. The first step is to compile an inventory of features from the available data. The main data are the Faculty Handbook and interviews with participating tutors.

# 5.1. Faculty handbook

In the 1999 Faculty Handbook, five assessment criteria are listed for writing: knowledge, distribution and processing skills, research, creativity/initiative, written presentation and control of genre. The two criteria most relevant to critical analysis are knowledge, and discrimination and processing skills. For a High Distinction to be anticipated these criteria are further elaborated as:

Knowledge Discrimination and processing skills

 Extensive understanding of key knowledge, theories and concepts and the relationships among them.  Capacity to evaluate conflicting interpretations and draw conclusions  High degree of precision and vigor in arguments

(Faculty Handbook, 1999)

These elaborations can be distilled as the following processes in writing:

Making connections   
Evaluating interpretations and drawing conclusions   
Arguing persuasively

# 5.2. Tutor interviews

As tutors and lecturers are the main interface between students and the other contextual levels of practice, their conceptions of critical analysis in writing are important. As part of the larger longitudinal study on students’ writing development, individual interviews were conducted with five tutors who taught in the primary teacher education program. With the exception of one participant, the tutors marked the assignments that form the textual data for this paper. The interviews were taped and transcribed. Issues of critical analysis featured in the responses to the following questions:

What role do you see assignment writing as playing?   
What genres do you require your students to write?   
What are you looking for when you assess?   
How do your expectations of students’ writing change during the course of   
the degree?

In response to the first question on the role of assignment writing, one tutor commented on the need to evaluate theories and consider the implications for classroom practice. The sections relevant to critical analysis are in italic script.

[tutor 4] I see it as an analytical tool . . . what the written assessment forces them to do is to get much more into the heart of key issues that we are dealing with. . . in the third year subject we are really trying to focus in on the nature of thinking and learning for children. . . . They go on practicum experiences, and that’s their prac, you know, and then they go to these lectures and that’s theory, and they have very little exposure to research that promotes theory, or disconfirms a theory. . .And so um the written assignments, all the written assignments that we do are trying to get them to get to that level of analysis. To say, well, what does this mean for me? So rather than learning, because there is nothing out there that does it for them, just read and learn and spit it back out again at us, they actually have to work it out for themselves.

This tutor’s response echoes aspects of critical analysis identified in the assessment criteria, that is, making connections, evaluating and drawing conclusions. However, it is more elaborated in that ‘‘making connections’’ refers to making connections between theory and classroom practice, and ‘‘evaluate and draw conclusions’’ refers to evaluating theories for their implications for classroom practice and drawing conclusions for the students’ teaching practice.

In response to the second question, two tutors commented on a journal article review assignment and its role in developing critical analysis. According to these tutors the purpose of the review was to engage the students with primary research and with disciplinary knowledge building practices. These tutors emphasised the need for students to be critical, make links between theory and practice, and to evaluate research for the classroom.

[tutor 4]. . . if they don’t have an understanding of how research is conducted, and have some kind of critical understanding of the limitations of research, they can be too easily buffeted by the winds of change. So I want them to be able to, to be actually in their teaching practice to be critical consumers of research that comes out. To question how, where this finding came from, how credible it is, and so on. How it compares.

[tutor 5]. . . they learn how to draw knowledge from research articles. So it’s not done for them by somebody. It’s not described for them. They go to original research. They learn how to draw knowledge and they learn how to judge on $i t$ , how to judge real knowledge and what that is. They can question it, how to evaluate it.. .

In response to the question on assessment, recurrent themes were structure and argument, echoing the Faculty assessment criterion of ‘‘vigour in argument’’. In response to the final question on changing expectations of students’ writing, one tutor drew on the critical analysis versus description distinction:

[tutor 3] Have they moved beyond description? Description is just fine, but that’s only a pass. Have they analysed? Have they been able to draw threads, show tension? Have they been critical in their approach? . .

Now [in third year] I’ve said, look. I don’t really accept anything from you which is just description of the theories. Because that’s your past. I assume you know it. If you don’t, go and read the textbook. I don’t want any descriptions. Because I assume you have to know it, and you have to be able to describe it. And now I need your understanding of all parts—what sense does it make to you in the classroom most? Just look at the theory, what thoughts does it provoke in your mind? What ideas does it bring to your mind when you teach in the classroom? Or how you connect it to the classroom. That’s what I want.

This tutor echoes the need for students to make links in their writing between theory and practice as well as the need to ‘‘draw threads and show tension’’, and ‘‘show an understanding of all parts’’. In response to this question on changing expectations, another tutor noted the need for students to speak ‘‘from their own position’’.

In summary, Faculty documents and excerpts from interviews with tutors have contributed to a provisional account of critical analysis in the writing of undergraduate trainee teachers. It is a discipline-specific account of critical analysis from the perspective of the subject specialists. According to the tutors, aspects of critical analysis in writing include making connections between theory and practice, drawing links between theories, evaluating theories and research and considering implications for the classroom as well as arguing and reasoning.

# 6. Critical analysis versus description

For novice students who are in the process of developing their own semiotic map of a discipline, critiquing established disciplinary knowledge can be a bewildering task. Students need to understand theories, issues, field aspects before they can construct a substantiated opinion. This assertion echoes Macken-Horarik (1996):

I assume that, as a general principle, when they are first learning something, people move from everyday, into specialized and then into reflexive learning. The effectiveness with which they can problematize and critique a field depends on how thoroughly they have engaged with it as a specialized area of knowledge (Macken-Horarik, 1996: 244–245).

As the excerpts from the marker commentary and subject guidelines suggest, lecturers’ well-intentioned attempts to clarify what is meant by critical analysis, however, are often in terms of an analysis versus description dichotomy. Description is regarded as having limited value while analysis is highly valued. In the next section of this paper the discussion turns to genre and linguistic analysis of twenty high distinction assignments in order to examine the relationship of description to analysis in successful student writing.

# 7. Description of the linguistic data and procedure for textual analysis

Twenty High Distinction assignments collected over a three-year period from Primary Education students were investigated for descriptive as well as analytical elements. These assignments were collected as part of a larger project investigating students’ writing development. The number of High Distinction assignments for each year together with the assignment questions are given in Table 1.

The main analytical tools for the textual analysis are from systemic functional linguistics (Halliday, 1994) and genre based literacy pedagogy and theory (in particular, Halliday & Martin, 1993; Martin, 1985, 1992; NSW Department of Education, 1996). The first task in the textual analysis was to determine the dominant text types and their generic structure. Genre analysis provided a means of segmenting texts approximately 2000 words in length into functional stages. Generic structure refers to the distinct schematic stages through which a text moves to achieve its overall purpose. In the case of longer texts, schematic stages can consist of Recounts and Reports functioning as Micro-genres in a Macro-genre structure. In this study at the level of Macro-genre the students’ texts were either Expositions or Discussions. In genre based theory Expositions are texts whose social purpose is to present a logically sequenced argument in favour of a judgment. Examples of Expositions are lectures, seminars, letters to the editor, essay writing and examination answers. Discussions are texts whose social purpose is to consider arguments for both sides of a topical issue, and to make an informed recommendation. Examples of Discussions are government or local council commissioned discussion papers and essay writing.

Table 1 Summary of textual data and assignment questions

Table 2 Descriptions of the Macro-genres occuring in this study   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Genre</td><td>Social purpose</td><td>Schematic stages</td><td>Sub-stages</td></tr><tr><td>Exposition</td><td>To present a logically sequenced argument in favour of a judgment..</td><td>Thesis^</td><td>Thesis: Orientation, Position, Preview</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Argument^</td><td>Argument: Point, Elaboration</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>(Implications)</td><td>Implications: Point, Elaboration, Recommendation</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Reiteration</td><td>Reiteration: Summary, Reiteration, Implications</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>To present both sides of an issue and to</td><td>Issue^</td><td>Issue: Orientation, Issue, Preview</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>make an informed. recommendation</td><td>Arguments/</td><td>Argument/Viewpoints: Point,</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Viewpoints^</td><td>Elaboration</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>(Implications)</td><td>Implications: Point,</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Elaboration, Recommendation</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Position</td><td>Position: Summary, Position,</td></tr></table></body></html>

The symbol ^ means that the element to the left precedes the following element. Stages in brackets ( ) are optional stages.

The schematic structure of the Macro-genres Exposition and Discussion are provided in Table 2, while descriptions of the social purpose and schematic structure of the Micro-genres occuring in the students’ texts are provided in Table 3. The excerpts from the students’ texts included in Table 3 are unedited.

The preliminary investigation of the students’ texts showed that many of the points in the students’ arguments were arguments or position statements of theorists or authorities in the field. For example:

[Text Excerpt A]

<html><body><table><tr><td>Macro-schematic stages</td><td>Sub-stages</td><td>Excerpt from student&#x27;s text</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">ARGUMENT</td><td>Reported Point</td><td>Behaviourists, such as B. F. Skinner believed that the environment is the major contributing factor to child.</td></tr><tr><td>Elaboration</td><td>development. Skinner&#x27;s research shows that animals would respond to certain external stimuli and the. response could be increased or decreased with. reinforcement. A child&#x27;s behaviour can be increased with rewards and decreased with punishment (Berk 1997, p. 18).</td></tr></table></body></html>

Counter Point Elaboration

Implications

While this seems to work in a controlled environment, each individual child, due to his previous experiences and his genetic makeup has a different notion of rewards and punishment. A teacher may use ‘‘timeout’’ as a method of punishment, some children will dislike being separated from the class, while another child will enjoy their own company. A teacher with a predetermined set of rewards and punishments may be able to teach some students, but will need to adjust rewards and punishments to suit the individual.

The reporting of knowledge claims appeared to function as an important discourse-organisational strategy in the students’ texts. This strategy raised two related questions. The first was what functional stage in the text did this strategy achieve: Argument, or Description of Theory? To distinguish between the two was important, as the tutors value arguments that are the result of synthesised information. The second question was to do with the issue of the students’ learning. Did this strategy reflect a lack of synthesis of information on the student’s part, or was it a necessary stage in building up the student’s understanding of the various viewpoints within the theoretical domain? To reflect these concerns I have identified reported knowledge claims functioning as arguments as the sub-stage Reported Point. Reported evidence was similarly identified as the functional sub-stage Reported Elaboration. A sample table showing the results for generic structure is included in the Appendix.

Once the students’ texts had been analysed for generic structure, a number of representative Argument stages in these texts were analysed at clause level. This analysis was informed by systemic functional theory, in particular research into the pedagogic discourses of history (Coffin, 1997; Martin, 1991; Martin, Wignell, Eggins, & Rothery, 1991; Veel & Coffin, 1996), and science (Christie, 1998; Halliday & Martin, 1993; Love, 1993; Veel, 1997, 1998). These studies provide a useful theoretical framework to investigate the ways in which language constructs disciplinary knowledge.

The clausal analysis mostly focussed on the experiential dimension of language, that is, how language represents experience. The experiential component is realised by the grammatical system of Transitivity. Within this system, the clause construes experience through a process consisting of the process itself (the happenings, relations, reactions etc.), the participants in the process (persons, places, concrete and abstract things) and circumstances associated with the process (cause, extent, role, angle, manner, location in time and space, and so on; Halliday, 1994).

The main questions guiding the text analysis were:

1. What role does descriptive writing play in successful writing?   
2. In what ways are the students’ texts concerned with aspects of critical analysis (as identified in the previous section) such as reasoning, arguing, engaging with the issues of the discipline, and reflecting on the application of theory to practice?

Table 3 Summary of Micro-genres and their features   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Genre and social purpose</td><td>Schematic stages</td><td>Excerpts from students&#x27; texts</td></tr><tr><td>EMPIRICAL ACCOUNT The social purpose is</td><td>the experiment)</td><td>Orientation (reason for To refute the sceptics&#x27; criticisms (being that identical twins are mostly raised together in the same environment, and are treated in a similar or identical fashion), studies of identical twins raised apart were</td></tr><tr><td>to provide a record of an experiment as evidence for a Point</td><td>Recount of experimental</td><td>conducted. The University of Minneapolis study, conducted between 1970 and 1984, and reported by DiLalla et al. In 1996, took a sample of 217</td></tr><tr><td>within an Argument</td><td>procedure</td><td>pairs of identical twins reared together, 114 pairs of fraternal twins reared together, 44 pairs of identical twins reared apart, and 27 pairs of fraternal twins reared apart. For the twins reared apart, the median age for separation was 2  months, and the median length</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Report of findings</td><td>of separation was almost 34 years. The results shown on pages 494 498 of Weiten (1998) show that identical twins, even when reared apart, still have more similarities in their personalities than fraternal twins who</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Evaluation</td><td>are raised together in the same environment. This is strong evidence that genetics have a large role in personality development. [CONTINUED].</td></tr><tr><td>EXEMPLUM Plum (1988, cited in Eggins &amp; Slade, 1997) describes Exemplums</td><td>Orientation</td><td>I intend to integrate play into each day of my teaching career. I hope to be able to make school a fun place to be, where the children will respect me and I will respect them. I have recently seen a classroom where a teacher has modelled exactly how I hope not to teach.</td></tr><tr><td>as texts whose purpose is to comment on the significance of an</td><td>Incident</td><td>[CONTINUED] When I took this class for the first lesson (during which I taught Science, this involved growing Brussel Sprouts, they learnt a lot</td></tr><tr><td>event for the context in which the event is told.</td><td>Interpretation</td><td>about the environment, and had a lot of fun). Completing a fun, practical experiment like this one helps children to observe what is happening, rather than just hearing about it from their teacher or, seeing pictures in a book. It provides experiences that they can relate to.</td></tr><tr><td>DESCRIPTIVE REPORT In primary teacher education, Descriptive</td><td>Classification</td><td>Vygotsky&#x27;s sociocultural-theory focuses on how culture (values, beliefs, customs and skills of a social group) affects the next Description of Theory/ generation&#x27; (Berk, 1997 p. 27). Social interaction and dialogue with</td></tr><tr><td>Reports describe phenomena and theoretical approaches</td><td>Belief Statements</td><td>more knowledgeable members of society help children develop the ways of thinking and behaving that make up the community&#x27;s culture (Berk, 1997 p. 27). Vygotsky believed social interaction and adult regulation are essential to the child&#x27;s cognitive development. He also believed that humans are born with simple abilities [CONTINUED].</td></tr><tr><td>TAXONOMIC REPORT Taxonomic Reports</td><td>Classification</td><td>Piaget then asked the group of children to give him their insights of the nature and purpose of rules. His analysis of their understanding Description of Parts (1) (cited in Williams, 1970) was put into three stages, which coincide</td></tr><tr><td>function to describe &quot;a number of classes of things in a system of</td><td></td><td>with the four stages outlined above. The first stage of understanding coincides with the motor and early egocentric stages. At the beginning of this stage the child has no notion of rules. [CONTINUED].</td></tr><tr><td>classification&quot; (NSW</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Description of Parts (2) The second (transcendental) stage occurs at the end of the egocentric</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Department of Education</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>stage, and lasts until the middle of the stage of incipient cooperation.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1996, p. 102).</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>The child is very aware of rules, but they are the rules imposed by</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>adults, which are fixed and immutable. [CONTINUED].</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>EXPLANATION</td><td></td><td>Precisely how language development takes place is not fully understood.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>General Statement</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Explanations focus on</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>However, language researchers agree on the course of language</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>processes</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>development. Babies around 2 months old begin to make vowel like</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sequenced Statements</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>noises. This is called cooing. At around six months they add</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>consonants and repeat these combinations for example &quot;bababababa&quot;&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></table></body></html>

# 8. Results of the genre analysis

These results for the generic structure analysis are that the 20 High Distinction texts were either Exposition or Discussion genres.2 The results also show that these Macro-genres include other genres functioning as Micro-genres in a Macro-genre structure. These Micro-genres are predominantly of a descriptive orientation. That is, the Descriptive Reports and Taxonomic Reports function to describe and classify phenomena, while other ostensibly descriptive genres have an explanatory dimension. These are the genres of Empirical Account and Exemplum.

The most common Micro-genre in the students’ texts is the Taxonomic Report, occuring in just under half of the twenty assignments, that is, in seven student texts in June 1999 and once in 2000. Other genres feature sporadically, with the next most prominent genre being the Empirical Account. This occurs in one of the March 1999 texts and in three of the June 1999 texts. The Micro-genre that occurs the least is the Exemplum, occuring once in a June 1999 text.

In the students’ texts the Micro-genres function implicitly as part of the Macrogenre Argument stage of a Discussion or Exposition. However, they also have an important function for the students’ learning through writing. That is, genres such as the Taxonomic Report and Descriptive Report are a means through which the students review and build up knowledge of the field within an expository structure. Other illustrative genres, such as Exemplums and Empirical Accounts, are a means through which the students make links between theory and practice.

Another comment from the findings on schematic staging is to do with the presence of the sub-stages Reported Point and Reported Elaboration in the students’ texts. Reported Points or Reported Elaborations occur at least once in fifteen of the twenty texts. While Reported Points may appear as a form of descriptive writing, merely reporting the knowledge claims of authorities in the field, the reporting of knowledge claims appears to function as an important discourse-organisational strategy to present arguments for the Thesis or Issue. Reported Points are one means through which students introduce new points, make counter points, and build up evidence in support of their argument.

Thus far, the discussion of the results for the textual analysis has focussed on the presence of descriptive genres in the students’ texts, and considered the function of description for the students’ learning through writing. The results for schematic structure also allow some comment on the more analytical aspects of the students’ writing. One recurring theme in the tutor interviews is the need for students to make links between theory and practice. The findings show that one means of doing this is through the Micro-genre of Exemplum. A more common means is through the schematic stage of Implications or as a sub-stage in the Arguments, in which the students consider the implications of a theory for classroom practice. This linking of theory to practice occurs as a schematic stage or sub-stage in 17 of the 20 texts. A more detailed account of the ways in which the students use language in the written mode to link theory to practice is presented in the following section.

In the next section of this paper, the linguistic analysis of the students’ texts moves beyond discussion of generic structure to further explore (i) description in successful writing, and (ii) the ways in which some aspects of critical analysis are realised in successful writing. The investigation focusses on four representative text excerpts. The first two excerpts can be characterised as chiefly descriptive in their orientation, while the second two excerpts contain more analytical elements. The analytical aspects under investigation are primarily argumentation (reasoning), making recommendations for classroom practice and evaluation of theories. The term ‘evaluation’ has been adopted as it was the term used in the Faculty documents. However, evaluation in texts is an established area of inquiry in linguistics (for example, Hunston & Thompson, 2000), and in academic discourse in particular (Hunston, 1994; Hyland, 1999). The commonalities between the two areas are revisited in the section on evaluation in the student’s text.

# 9. Processes of naming, defining and taxonomising

The first excerpt is a Taxonomic Report on the components of play. This Microgenre functions implicitly in the Macro-genre structure as an argument in support of the student’s thesis: the importance of make believe play in child development. Descriptive genres such as this one, and descriptive schematic sub-stages often function in the students’ texts to identify and order the specialist world of child development. In this excerpt the significant linguistic processes3 for learning through writing are those of naming, defining and taxonomising.

The process of naming and defining of a phenomenon is one means by which technicality is built up in the discourse. Wignell, Martin, and Eggins (1993) refer to technicality as the use of terms with a specialised field specific meaning. While many technical terms in the field of child development are indexical to that field, there are numerous terms which have a common, everyday meaning, such as nature, nurture, and play. The process of naming phenomena, and assigning the field specific meaning is intrinsic to establishing specialist taxonomies. According to Wignell et al. (1993), a taxonomy is ‘‘an ordered, systematic classification of some phenomena based on super-ordination or composition’’ (p. 137).

In the following text excerpt the student names, defines, and thereby assigns a specialist meaning to the everyday concept of play. The field specific terms are in bold. All text excerpts are unedited.

Excerpt 1 (June 1999) There are many different types of play in which a child engages in. These include dramatic play, imitation play and creative play.

Dramatic play also known as Imitation play involves the child ‘putting her/ himself into somebody else’s shoes.’ The experiences that the child has had will affect the role in which they choose to play. Some children like to play authority figures such as policemen or role models such as parents or teachers. This type of play later develops as the child grows older and then the drama is more structured and often has more complicated plots.

Creative play involves. .

Excerpt 1 unfolds by introducing a taxonomy of types of play in which a child engages. The grammatical resource used to introduce the taxonomy of play is an existential process, a process type which represents that something exists.

1. Existential process. There are many different types of play in which a child engages in.

The elements of the taxonomy are named in the following clause, realised grammatically as a relational process, a process type which functions to name, identify, define and describe experience. The anaphoric reference item these establishes a relation with the taxonomy of play introduced in the preceding clause. This naming of the elements of the taxonomy results in the technicalising of an everyday concept, play. The student then attempts to define the kinds of play. The definitions of these concepts occur through relational processes. In functional terms, that which is to be identified has the Participant role of Token and the explanation is the Value (Halliday, 1994).

2. Relational process. [Token] Dramatic play also known as Imitation play involves [Value] the child ‘putting her/himself into somebody else’s shoes.’

The rest of the excerpt elaborates on and exemplifies types of dramatic play, a form of description which functions to clarify the concept of dramatic play.

# 10. Knowledge telling and the constructedness of disciplinary knowledge

Text excerpt 2 presents an Argument (viewpoint) towards the Issue Language acquisition and its effects on cognition. Excerpt 2 can be similarly characterised as primarily description, or a form of ‘‘knowledge telling’’ or transferal (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987: 5). In one regard the student retells Chomsky’s perspective on language acquisition as reported in the textbook, and there appears to be little evaluation by the student of the theory or its significance. Like Excerpt 1, it introduces technical concepts (language acquisition device). Unlike Excerpt 1, however, the explanation of a theoretical concept is realised through a series of saying (verbal) and mental processes of perception and cognition with a specific human Participant (Chomsky, and He). The way in which the explanation is built up shares some similarities with the mature discourse community’s practice of drawing on the explanations of other authors, as well as giving authority to knowledge claims by referring to published research.

Excerpt 2 (June 1999) Nativist Noam Chomsky views language acquisition as completely biological. He believes humans are born with a language acquisition device (LAD) that is triggered by verbal imput. Within LAD is a universal grammar that stores the rules that apply to all human language. Cognition is not required to master language. It is acquired spontaneously through limited language exposure and maturation. ‘‘Chomsky argued that the child’s mastery of language and production of sentences go well beyond imitation of adult speech’’ (Jusczyk, 1997, p. 21). Also as language acquisition is unique to the human species it must be linked to human genes (Berk, 1997, p. 344).

The explaining of phenomena by reporting the beliefs and views of theorists in the field highlights the constructed nature of much disciplinary knowledge. The student’s choice of mental and verbal processes (views, believes, argued) allows for the possibility that these views and beliefs may not be the explanation that the student will ultimately accept or synthesise with another explanation. If the student had chosen a more ‘fact-like’ reporting process and generic participant, such as Research shows that language acquisition is completely biological, the reporting process would have reflected a more homogeneous and static perception of disciplinary knowledge, rather than one which encompasses competing perspectives. The form of knowledge telling as exemplified in Excerpt 2 appears to be an important precursor to undertaking critical analysis and critiquing theories.

# 11. Meshing description and critical analysis

Text excerpt 3 is from an essay on Vygotsky’s theory of cognitive development. This excerpt is seen as meshing description in the form of knowledge telling with critical analysis. The descriptive aspects of this paragraph are the student’s reporting on Vygotsky’s thinking and defining of phenomena. The more analytical elements of this paragraph are the student’s making a judgement about the salience of the theory and the inclusion of reasoning in the form of a causal explanation.

Excerpt 3 (Text 8, June 1999) This is where the zone of proximal/potential development is relevant. Vygotsky believed that it was necessary not only to record what a child can do independently but also to be aware of the potential of that child to achieve. The zone of proximal development is the measure of the ‘‘distance between the actual developmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance and under the direction of more capable peers’’ (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 78, cited in Barry & King, 1998, p. 24). The guidance or help in solving a problem is known as scaffolding. In order for development to occur the child must pass through the zone of proximal development by attempting a task which requires scaffolding at first but which eventually can be achieved unassisted. Any function in the child’s cultural development is originally external to the individual and gradually internalised (Groundswater-Smith, et al, 1998).

As in Excerpt 2 there is a ‘retelling’ or reporting of the theorist’s perception of one aspect of development realised grammatically as a mental process. Again, the choice of reporting verb (believed) allows the possibility of competing theoretical perspectives. A similarity with Excerpt 1 is the inclusion of definitions.

3. Reporting element realised as a mental process. Vygotsky believed it was necessary not only to record what a child can do independently but also to be aware of the potential of that child to achieve.

4. Defining elements realised as a relational process. [Token] The zone of proximal development [Process] is [Value] the measure of the ‘‘distance between the actual developmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance and under the direction of more capable peers’’ (reference)   
[Value] The guidance or help in solving a problem [Process] is known as [Token] scaffolding.

Excerpt 3 includes evaluative language. It is used to make a judgment about the saliency of the theory. The evaluation and judgment of knowledge claims is also an important dimension of published academic writing as texts are only successful when they employ the social and linguistic conventions that the discourse community finds convincing (Hyland, 1999). In the excerpt from the student’s text the evaluative language is given textual prominence by its position in the paragraph as hyper-Theme and in the clause as new information. That is, the new information is signalled to the reader by the tonic accent falling on relevant (Halliday, 1994). (The square brackets $[ [ \ ] ]$ indicate an embedded or rank-shifted element in the clause.)

5. Evaluative element in the embedded clause. This is [[where the zone of proximal /potential development is relevant]].

Another analytical aspect of this paragraph is the inclusion of reasoning. The student’s explanation includes why as well as how, which is realised through conjunctive adjuncts.

6. Explaining construed through conjunctive adjuncts. In order for development to occur the child must pass through the zone of proximal development by attempting a task which requires scaffolding at first but which eventually can be achieved unassisted.

It is necessary to point out that these more critical aspects of the student’s writing, such as evaluating and reasoning, may not necessarily reflect the mental processes of the student, rather they may echo the perspective of the textbook writer or the reasoning of the theorist. Only close examination of the source texts could clarify this. However, it remains that the inclusion of such processes by the student corresponds with valued writing practices specified in the Faculty guidelines.

# 12. Applying theory to practice: a form of critical analysis

The final excerpt for consideration has aspects of the previous texts, but its main function is to make recommendations. This excerpt has been selected as exemplifying another type of critical analysis as it attempts to apply and make judgements about abstract theoretical knowledge in the classroom context.

Excerpt 4 (Text 8, June 1999) Language is an important element of the classroom and Vygotsky’s theory clarifies the importance of it as a tool for development. Dialogue and instructions to students should be clear. While checking for understanding it would be appropriate to ask children to verbalise their answers in order for the cognitive process to take place. According to Vygotsky children use private speech to clarify and repeat the instructions they have heard given to them in regards to completing the task. A certain amount of talk is to be expected from the children and can be a sign that they are engaged with the task. Activities, which develop spoken language such as sharing learning experiences, should be encouraged in order to promote the students’ grasp of language, which is vital to communication and cognition.

Text 4 includes descriptive elements such as reporting, as well as elements of critical analysis such as evaluative aspects.

7. Reporting element realised as a circumstantial element of angle. According to Vygotsky. . .   
8. Evaluative element realised as an attribute. which is vital to communication and cognition   
9. Evaluative element realised inside a nominal group. Language is an important element of the classroom   
10. Evaluative element realised as a verbal process. Vygotsky’s theory clarifies the importance of it as a tool for development.   
11. Evaluative element realised by nominalisation. the importance of it as a tool for development

Excerpt 4 includes a number of things the teacher should do. As would be expected in an academic register these recommendations are expressed impersonally. That is, the source of the recommendations is not clear. Similarly the recommendations of obligation and necessity are modulated through should, or realised incongruently as an adjective (Martin, 1985). Meshed within these recommendations are reported aspects of the theory and causal explanations, which function to reinforce and give authority to the student’s recommendations.

12. Modulated expressions of obligation and necessity. Dialogue and instructions to students should be clear   
Activities which develop spoken language such as sharing learning experiences should be encouraged. . .   
13. Command construed incongruently as an adjective. While checking for understanding, it would be appropriate to ask children . . .   
14. Explanation construed through conjunctive adjuncts . . .it would be appropriate to ask children to verbalise their answers in order for the cognitive process to take place.   
Activities which develop spoken language . . . should be encouraged in order to

promote the students’ grasp of language. . .

# 13. Description and critical analysis: the role of both in disciplinary learning through writing

In the more detailed analysis of the four excerpts one concern was to establish the function of description for learning. In the field of primary teacher education, description plays an important role in naming, defining, and classifying. It also functions to explain phenomena by reporting the perceptions and beliefs of theorists in the field. In the more analytical excerpts 3 and 4, descriptive elements are still an intrinsic part of the texts.

The role of descriptive elements in academic writing is multi-faceted. Naming, defining and taxonomising introduce technical field specific terms to texts, a process which contributes to the construction of authoritative texts. The construction of accurate definitions and taxonomies in writing also allows the marker to monitor the student’s understanding. Yet the presence of descriptive elements such as definitions in the more analytic extracts suggests that the naming and defining of concepts is a necessary step for students in their own learning through writing. The definition may function to clarify to the student what the concept is before the student can proceed with the development of the argument or evaluation. The descriptive elements seem to be an important part of the student’s semiotic map of disciplinary knowledge, a map which also needs to incorporate competing views and explanations, as well as the student’s own interpretations, applications and so on.

# 14. Demystifying critical analysis: contextual and linguistic approaches

This paper has investigated the concept of critical analysis in writing in one academic discipline. By drawing on the perspectives of the subject specialists and published Faculty documents, the study has compiled a provisional account of critical analysis in the writing of undergraduate trainee teachers. This integrated approach to researching academic writing drawing on ethnographic data as well as textual analysis has provided the means of identifying how the somewhat non-transparent concept of critical analysis is realised in successful writing. The textual analysis was also a crucial component in discovering tensions between the subject specialists’ and Faculty accounts of critical analysis, and how it was realised in successful writing. The paper, however, makes no claims that this is how critical analysis is realised in all student writing, rather this paper suggests that an integrated method is a valid one for making available to students explanations of critical analysis in writing in their discipline of study.

While cognitive psychology and philosophy have been the traditional domains for discussions of critical analysis and critical thinking, it is the field of linguistics which can contribute to a closer understanding of how the cognitive processes of critical thinking are manifested in language, especially the written mode. For teaching and learning, greater understanding of the linguistic processes which reflect critical thinking could provide useful assistance to tertiary literacy teachers in demystifying for students how critical analysis is achieved in successful writing. Moreover, a functional linguistic approach can assist in elucidating the links between language and the types of learning occuring through description and critical analysis.

A linguistic perspective of critical analysis would be enhanced by foregrounding the relation between types of writing and the disciplinary context. This paper has argued that there are commonalities between the discursive practices of professional academic writers and the concept of critical analysis in students’ writing, for example the evaluation of theories and knowledge claims. The benefit of approaching critical analysis contextually is that it establishes links between the required literacy practices of student texts and the textual practices of the discourse community. A contextual perspective could also establish a link between the student texts and the cultural values of the university, in which critical analysis is understood as an educational ideal and desired outcome of a liberal education.

Appendix on next page

# Appendix. Results for schematic structure 1999 (March)

<html><body><table><tr><td>P.</td><td colspan="2">Text 1 DISCUSSION</td><td colspan="2">Text 2 DISCUSSION</td><td colspan="2">Text 3 DISCUSSION</td><td colspan="2">Text 4 DISCUSSION</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>MICRO</td><td>MACRO</td><td>MICRO</td><td>MACRO</td><td>MICRO</td><td>MACRO</td><td>MICRO</td><td>MACRO</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Issue Preview</td><td>ISSUE</td><td>Issue</td><td>ISSUE</td><td>Issue Orientation Implic. &amp; Issue</td><td>ISSUE</td><td>Issue Preview</td><td>ISSUE</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Point R. Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT + view</td><td>Definition</td><td></td><td>Point R. Elaboration Counter Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT + view ARGUMENT - view</td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT + &amp; -views</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>EMPIRICAL ACCOUNT Orientation</td><td>ARGUMENT Implicit + view</td><td>R. Point R. Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT + view</td><td>Point Elaboration Point</td><td>ARGUMENTI view</td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT -view</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>R. Experiment Rep. Findings Evaluation</td><td>ARGUMENT +</td><td>Point R. Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT + view</td><td>Point Elaboration Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT - view ARGUMENT view</td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT -view</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Counter Point</td><td>COUNTER ARGUMENT-</td><td>Point</td><td>&quot;ARGUMENT&quot; + view</td><td>Point Elaboration Point/ Elab. Recommend.</td><td>IMPLICATION FOR CLASSROOM PRACTICE</td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT -view</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>EMPIRICAL ACCOUNT Orientation</td><td>ARGUMENT Implicit- view</td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT + view</td><td>Summary Position Implications/</td><td>POSITION</td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT -view</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>Recount</td><td></td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT + view</td><td>Recommend.</td><td></td><td>Point</td><td>ARGUMENT</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>Recount</td><td></td><td>R. Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT</td><td></td><td></td><td>Elaboration R. Point</td><td>-view ARGUMENT</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>Recount</td><td></td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>view ARGUMENTI - view</td><td></td><td></td><td>R. Elaboration Point Elaboration</td><td>-view ARGUMENT -view</td></tr></table></body></html>

(continued on next page)

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">P.</td><td colspan="2">Text 1 DISCUSSION</td><td colspan="2">Text 2 DISCUSSION</td><td colspan="2">Text 3 DISCUSSION</td><td colspan="2">Text 4 DISCUSSION</td></tr><tr><td>MICRO</td><td>MACRO</td><td>MICRO</td><td>MACRO</td><td>MICRO</td><td>MACRO</td><td>MICRO</td><td>MACRO</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>Findings</td><td></td><td>Point</td><td>&quot;ARGUMENT&quot; - view</td><td></td><td></td><td>Point Elaboration Implication</td><td>ARGUMENT -view</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>Findings</td><td></td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT - view</td><td></td><td></td><td>Position Implications Recommend.</td><td>POSITION</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>Evaluation</td><td></td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT - view</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT - view</td><td>Point Elaboration</td><td>ARGUMENT + &amp; - view</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Point 14 Summary Position</td><td>POSITION</td><td>Implications</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td>Recommend.</td><td></td><td>Point Counter Point</td><td>ARGUMENT</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>16</td><td></td><td></td><td>Elaboration Elaboration</td><td>+ &amp; - view</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>17</td><td></td><td></td><td>&quot;Position&quot; Implications</td><td>&quot;POSITION&quot;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

$\mathrm { { P } } . =$ Paragraph the nmer in the lef colm rerto the paragraphs in the studets texts.  wre merd for the puro of rerrg.) R. Point $=$ Reported Point. "Argument' $=$ schematic stages in inverted commas signal that these schematic stages were inadequately realised in the students texts. For example in theaf a  the stge may nt haonnd  sttemet of ptio. Shmati stge f Mcr re n uppr  rit with sub stages in lower case. Micro-genres and their schematic stages are in bold script. $+ , - =$ indicates the different views in a Discussion text.

# References

man . (1992). rom iplinary participation: Living with powerful A. Herrington, & C. Moran (Eds.), Writing, teaching and learning in the disciplines (pp. 61–68). New York: Modern Languages Association of America.   
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Biggs, J. (1999). What the student does: Teaching for enhanced learning. Higher Education Research and Development, 18(1), 55–76.   
Bizzell, P. (1982). College composition: Initiation into the academic discourse community. Curriculum Inquiry, 12(2), 191–207.   
Bizzell, P. (1992). Academic discourse and critical consciousness. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.   
Christie, F. (1998). Science and apprenticeship: the pedagogic discourse. In J. R. Martin, & R. Veel (Eds.), Reading science (pp. 152–180). London: Routledge. Clanchy, J., & Ballard, B. (1981). Essay writing for students. Sydney: Longman Cheshire.   
Coffin, C. (1997). Constructing and giving value to the past: an investigation into secondary school history. In F. Christie, & J. R. Martin (Eds.), Genre and institutions (pp. 196–230). London: Cassell.   
Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs. (2000). Employer satisfaction with graduate skills. Research report 99/7. Canberra: DETYA.   
Eggins, D., & Slade, D. (1997). Analysing casual conversation. London: Cassell.   
Ennis, R. (1992). The degree to which critical thinking is subject specific: clarification and needed research. In S. Norris (Ed.), The generalizability of critical thinking: multiple perspectives on an educational ideal. New York: Teachers College Press.   
Farrell, H., James, B., Carmichael, E., & Scoufis, M. (1997). Critical practice and undergraduate students. In Z. Golebiowski (Ed.), Policy and practice of tertiary literacy. Proceedings of the First National Conference on Tertiary Literacy. Melbourne: Victoria University of Technology.   
Germov, J. (2000). Get great marks for your essays (2nd ed.). Sydney: Allen & Unwin.   
Hare, W. (1999). Critical thinking as an aim of education. In R. Marples (Ed.), The aims of education (pp. 85–99). London: Routledge.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar (2nd ed.). London: Arnold.   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Martin, J. R. (1993). Writing science: literacy and discursive power. London: Falmer Press.   
Heath, P. (2000). Education as citizenship: appropriating a new social space. Higher Education Research and Development, 19(1), 43–58.   
Hunston, S. (1994). Evaluation and organization in a sample of written academic discourse. In M. Coulthard (Ed.), Advances in written text analysis (pp. 191–218). London: Routledge.   
Hunston, S., & Thompson, G. (2000). Evaluation in text: authorial stance and the construction of discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Hyland, K. (1999). Disciplinary discourses: writer stance in research articles. In C. Candlin, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: texts, processes and practices (pp. 99–121). London: Longman.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interaction in academic writing. Harlow, England: Longman.   
James, B., Scoufis, M., Carmichael, E., Craigie, D., Driscoll, K., & Farrell, H. (1995). Critical analysis— what is it? (2nd ed.). Nepean, NSW: University of Western Sydney.   
Lea, M., & Street, B. (1999). Writing as academic literacies: understanding textual practices in higher education. In C. Candlin, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: texts, processes and practices (pp. 62–81). London: Longman.   
Love, A. (1993). Lexico-grammatical features of geology textbooks: process and product revisited. English for Specific Purposes, 12, 197–218.   
Macken-Horarik, M. (1996). Literacy and learning across the curriculum: towards a model of register for secondary school teachers. In R. Hasan, & G. Williams (Eds.), Literacy in society (pp. 232–278). London: Longman.   
Martin, J. R. (1985). Factual writing: exploring and challenging social reality. Deakin, Victoria: Deakin University, Victoria.   
Martin, J. R. (1991). Nominalization in science and humanities: distilling knowledge and scaffolding text. In E. Ventola (Ed.), Functional and systemic linguistics (pp. 307–337). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Martin, J. R. (1992). English text: system and structure. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Martin, J. R., Wignell, P., Eggins, S., & Rothery, J. (1991). Secret English: discourse technology in a junior secondary school. In B. Cope, & M. Kalantzis (Eds.), Genre approaches to literacy: theories and practices (pp. 43–76). Annandale, Sydney: Common Ground.   
National Board of Employment, Education and Training. (1992). Skills required of graduates: one test of quality in Australian higher education. Commissioned report No. 20. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.   
Norris, S. (Ed.). (1992). The generalizability of critical thinking: Multiple perspectives on an educational ideal. New York: Teachers College Press.   
N.S.W. Department Of School Education. (1996). Exploring literacy in school history. Sydney: Write it Right, Resources for Literacy and Learning, Disadvantaged Schools Program, Metropolitan East Region.   
Plum, G. (1998). Text and contextual conditioning in spoken English: A genre-based approach. Unpublished PhD. Department of Linguistics. The University of Sydney.   
Spinks, S. (1998). Relating marker feedback to teaching and learning in psychology. In C. Candlin, & G. Plum (Eds.), Researching academic literacies (pp. 211–288). Macquarie University: National Centre for English Language Teaching and Research (NCELTR)/Centre for Language in Social Life.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Taylor, G. (1994). Reshaping the Monash BA: knowledge and skills in first year Arts subjects. In K. Chanock (Ed.), Integrating the teaching of academic discourse into courses in the disciplines (pp. 26– 31). Proceedings of the conference held at La Trobe University, 21–22 November.   
Veel, R. (1997). Learning how to mean—scientifically speaking: apprenticeship into scientific discourse in the secondary school. In F. Christie, & J. R. Martin (Eds.), Genre and institutions (pp. 161–195). London: Cassell.   
Veel, R. (1998). The greening of school science: ecogenesis in secondary classrooms. In J. R. Martin, & R. Veel (Eds.), Reading science (pp. 114–151). London: Routledge.   
Veel, R., & Coffin, C. (1996). Learning to think like an historian: the language of secondary school history. In R. Hasan, & G. Williams (Eds.), Literacy in society (pp. 191–231). London: Longman.   
Wignell, P., Martin, J. R., & Eggins, S. (1993). The discourse of geography: ordering and explaining the experiential world. In M. A. K. Halliday, & J. R. Martin (Eds.), Writing science (pp. 136–165). London: The Falmer Press.