# ‘‘Maybe the communication between us was not enough’’: Inside a dysfunctional advisor/L2 advisee relationship

Ethan Krase -

Department of English, 309 Minne´ Hall, Winona State University, Winona, MN 55987, USA

# Abstract

Reporting findings from a 5-month qualitative study of an ESL graduate student as she worked on her master’s thesis with the assistance of her advisor, this study offers a detailed portrait of the complicated challenges ESL learners and their advisors may face as they attempt to negotiate working relationships with one another. The study examines the ways the advisor/advisee relationship impacted the ESL learner as she participated in the knowledge-making practices of her academic discipline. The study also aims to enrich our understanding of ESL graduate students and the professors who advise them by exploring how they are situated in socially, culturally, and politically complex academic relationships.

$©$ 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: ESL; Advisor; Thesis/dissertation; Relationship; Graduate supervision; English for academic purposes

# 1. Introduction

In an article reviewing research of ESL graduate students’ academic literacy acquisition, Braine (2002) finds that ‘‘a fundamental shortcoming of most [studies of socially situated academic literacy] is their focus on writing tasks alone’’ (p. 63). Reflecting on his own experiences as an ESL graduate student, Braine argues that researchers of second language (L2) learning must more fully recognize that academic literacy at the graduate level requires ‘‘more than the ability to read and write effectively’’ (p. 60). For, as Braine puts it, to experience success ESL graduate students must be able ‘‘to adapt smoothly to the linguistic and social milieu of their host environment and to the culture of their academic departments and institutions’’ (p. 60).

The linguistic and social adaptation Braine describes extends to virtually all areas of ESL graduate students’ academic participation and influences their capacity to succeed within the social, political, and cultural contexts that shape their graduate school experiences. Drawing on data from a larger qualitative investigation of ESL graduate students’ disciplinary enculturation experiences (see Krase, 2003), this article examines how one ESL graduate student’s academic experience was shaped by her relationship with her advisor. The study’s primary contribution rests in its exposition of the ways interpersonal and institutional interactions contributed to the ESL graduate student’s capacity to negotiate the literacy demands of her target academic discourse community.

# 2. Literature review

A significant body of work on the ways ESL graduate students and their advisors interact with one another precedes this study. Scott (2000) and Shaw (1991) examined L2 writers’ interactions with those who read their writing and found a strong connection between effective writing and supportive academic relationships between students and their advisors. However, in a study of ESL graduate students and their advisors co-authoring articles in an engineering department, Hemphill (1996) found that neither professors nor ESL graduate students fully recognized how cultural and linguistic differences impinged upon their textual production processes. Dong (1998) has found that one of the reasons some L2 writers struggle when working on extended pieces of individual scholarship is that they may be working without needed literacy support from outside of the advisor/advisee relationship.

Most illustrative of the particular difficulties that surface in relationships between advisors and ESL graduate students are qualitative studies that narrate the activities of L2 learners as they work on extended research projects. Examining the struggles of a 6th-year ESL doctoral student in physics attempting to write for publication with his advisor’s assistance, Blakeslee (1997) found that the L2 learner’s communicative difficulties in English thwarted his ability to meet his professor’s demands, resulting in an ultimately unsuccessful co-publication effort. In a study in a similar vein, Jenkins, Jordan, and Weiland (1993) found that advisors in an engineering department felt compelled to take over the writing of master’s theses from struggling L2 graduate students because the advisors did not know what to do to help the students bring their writing up to an acceptable level.

Belcher (1994) found that the nature of advisor/advisee relationships figured prominently into three ESL doctoral students’ ability to negotiate lengthy research writing projects. Interestingly, Belcher found that of the three students, the one who was the weakest writer had the most positive and successful experience as she wrote her dissertation, which Belcher attributes to that student’s collaborative, supportive, and largely egalitarian relationship with her advisor. Given that the formation and maintenance of such an egalitarian relationship requires both considerable sociolinguistic skill on the part of the learner as well as an advisor who is willing to break away from traditional, hierarchical advisor/advisee relationships, Belcher’s research suggests that a critical factor in high-level academic literacy activities is the quality and kind of relationships that L2 learners develop with their advisors.

In a later study, Belcher (1997) investigated the literacy activities of two female ESL graduate students working on extended pieces of scholarship, and found that both were successful because they had the linguistic and sociolinguistic ability to articulate their needs in an assertive and effective manner. As a result, both students’ advisors were willing to support their work on academic projects that diverged from conventional models.

This body of literature suggests that L2 learners’ relationships with their advisors dramatically impact their participation in academic literacy projects and, by extension, their attempts to gain admittance into target discourse communities. However, more remains to be learned about the ways L2 graduate learners define, form, and then function within relationships with their advisors, and also about how graduate students’ advisors’ and professors’ attitudes and practices shape L2 learners’ academic progress.

# 3. The study

Beginning with the notion that ESL graduate students’ relationships with their advisors factor prominently into their ability to participate accurately and effectively in their chosen fields, this study examines one ESL graduate student’s relationship with her native-English-speaking advisor. The study explores the impact of that relationship on the learner’s participation in the discursive activities of her target discourse community.

# 3.1. Methodology

This study used qualitative research methodologies to examine the ESL graduate student’s relationship with her advisor. The primary data gathering technique was the long interview (McCracken, 1988), a type of structured interview that allows for a focused inquiry into participant attitudes and experiences while remaining open to exploration of the unexpected or the unusual. The participant was interviewed four times between August and January of one academic year. A fifth interview was conducted 3 months later (once data analysis was complete) to allow the participant to check the researcher’s interpretations and offer feedback. Several days prior to this final interview the participant received a written summary of the analysis so that inaccuracies could be corrected in the final meeting.

Additionally, the participant and researcher kept up a bi-weekly e-mail correspondence, a forum that allowed the researcher to stay informed of developments in the participant’s academic activities and to ask clarification questions on topics that surfaced in interviews.1 Four months into the study and with the student participant’s permission, the student’s advisor was also interviewed. All interviews were transcribed by the researcher. All subsequent interviews probed in greater detail elements of the narrative that emerged in the first two interviews. Appendix A includes interview guides for the first two participant interviews and also the interview with the participant’s advisor.

# 3.2. Participants

The student participant, whom I will refer to as Yung-Li (a pseudonym), was selected from among ESL graduate students enrolled at a large state university in the United States. At the time of this study, she was in her third year of work on a master’s degree. She had no previous educational experience in the US prior to her enrollment at the university. The initial criterion under which Yung-Li was selected was that she was enrolled in a graduate program that required an original researched thesis at the master’s level. Consequently, she was likely to be involved in an established relationship with an advising professor, a necessary component to this study. It was also important that the participant be working in a department where writing comprised over half of the assessment measures in the graduate curriculum, a judgment that was made by analyzing online and in-print course descriptions for all required coursework. While writing was not the only literacy activity the study aimed to address, it was a useful criterion for determining which departments might contain eligible research participants because writing projects can be the axis around which other literacy activities (reading, speaking, building academic relationships, etc.) revolve. The student’s advisor, Dr. Denardo (a pseudonym), also agreed to be interviewed for this study. Neither Yung-Li nor Dr. Denardo were known to the researcher prior to this study.

# 3.2.1. The student: Yung-Li—third year master’s student in Human Studies

After earning a bachelor’s degree in British literature in her home country of South Korea, Yung-Li came to the university with her husband 3 years prior to the start of this study. For the first year of her residency in the US she stayed at home to care for the couple’s infant daughter while her husband worked on his Ph.D. After 1 year at home, she began work on a master’s degree in Human Studies.2 When I met her she was continuing work on a master’s thesis she had begun during her second year in the program.

In her early 30s, Yung-Li was soft-spoken and initially reticent about expressing her opinions, though once she felt comfortable being interviewed she displayed a dry, self-deprecating sense of humor and a keen sense of self-awareness. After she finished her master’s degree Yung-Li planned to pursue a Ph.D. in Human Studies so that eventually she could return to South Korea and become a professor.

Yung-Li’s description of her background learning English is important to note. As she explained it, ‘‘Like most of Korean students, I have spent so [much time working on] reading and writing. But not speaking. I’m still uncomfortable with speaking and listening or hearing.’’ Yung-Li placed a great deal of emphasis on the importance of strong speaking skills because she felt that oral fluency was the primary means by which a learner is accepted into a linguistically foreign environment, as she indicated in our first interview together: ‘‘Before coming here I heard that my husband’s professor told him that if you don’t speak English fluently you can never be a member of the society. My husband told me that and I think, yeah, that it is true.’’

As becomes clear in the narrative below, Yung-Li and her advisor struggled to build a productive working relationship with one another, something that Yung-Li in part attributed to her own difficulties with verbal interaction in English.

# 3.2.2. The advisor: Dr. Denardo

Dr. Denardo is a professor of Human Studies whose research centers on children and creativity. In her early 50s, she is assertive in her opinions and strives to be without academic pretense. Dr. Denardo had had positive experiences working with other L2 graduate learners, remarking that ‘‘they’re the cream of the crop’’ because ‘‘If you’ve left your native country to come here to study, you’re among the best that your country has to offer. And it’s up to us, as American professors, to tap into those resources.’’ At the time of this study, Yung-Li was one of four graduate students working under Dr. Denardo’s direction.

# 4. Analysis

To understand the way this advisor/advisee relationship impacted Yung-Li’s literacy activities, I looked for common ground (or interesting divergence) between Yung-Li’s and her advisor’s perspectives. The narrative that follows offers a view of a relationship that was largely dysfunctional.

# 4.1. Defining the advisor/advisee relationship

Yung-Li and Dr. Denardo entered into their interpersonal relationship with very different notions of how advisors and advisees should interact with one another. As one of Dr. Denardo’s advisees, Yung-Li expected Dr. Denardo to work closely with her to shape the direction and scope of her master’s thesis. Yung-Li explained that this expectation had come from her understanding of the ways professors advise students in South Korea: ‘‘In my country teacher is, actually advisors, are supposed to give ideas and not just helping but more directing students where to go. And I guess at first I expected the same way from her.’’ Further, and relevant for its contrast to her advisor’s ideas, Yung-Li said that she did not expect ‘‘any friendship or collaborate, that kind of stuff with a professor. I just think, ‘not close.’’’ Yung-Li’s ideas about what the relationship would be like suggest that she was anticipating a largely hierarchical relationship, one where her advisor would firmly guide her progress.

Dr. Denardo had a different conception of advisor/advisee relationships. She said she strove to cultivate ‘‘fairly informal relationships with graduate students,’’ wanting them to see her ‘‘as a fellow learner, as a collaborator, as a person with an inquiring mind like they have.’’ She said she entered into relationships with graduate students asking ‘‘What is your interest and how can we co-construct questions together and find ways to help you answer those questions?’’

In an effort to foster the sort of co-learner relationships she liked to have with her graduate students, Dr. Denardo gave Yung-Li freedom to design and carry out her project, wanting her to make ‘‘her own decisions and choose her own way of research.’’ Dr. Denardo said that when working with graduate students, particularly ones like Yung-Li, where there is ‘‘the whole cultural difference that you have to feel around to understand,’’ it was necessary to ‘‘do the ‘dance’ at first to understand what is it you need from me and what do you expect of me, what are your expectations, what are you looking for.’’ In Yung-Li’s case, this ‘‘dance’’ resulted in Dr. Denardo working to balance her desire for a relationship where ‘‘researchyis a partnership’’ with her belief in the necessity of graduate students controlling and owning their progress because, as she put it, ‘‘I’m not the kind of person that controls their timeframe. It’s their timeframe. It’s their life. They’re grownups.’’

The difficulties Yung-Li experienced in designing, researching, and writing her master’s thesis in part stemmed from the gap between her own expectations for how Dr. Denardo would direct her and how her advisor actually worked with her. However, the greater problem, as will become clear, was not so much that Yung-Li and Dr. Denardo had different expectations but that they never communicated these expectations to each other in a way that would allow the other to revise her approach to the relationship.

# 4.2. Locating an advisor

To understand fully Yung-Li’s relationship with Dr. Denardo, it is useful to back up slightly and examine the channels through which she came to be one of Dr. Denardo’s advisees. As it is for graduate students in many programs in the social sciences, in Human Studies it was Yung-Li’s responsibility to find an advisor who would oversee her work. The Human Studies department tried to help incoming graduate students find advisors by holding an information meeting at the start of the year for students to meet professors and learn about their research interests. Students could also use the faculty handbook, departmental website, or word-of-mouth to identify faculty research interests and, from there, potential advisors.

Yung-Li, however, did not follow this path to the advisor/advisee relationship. Due to a scheduling conflict on the day of the orientation, Yung-Li was across campus at a meeting pertaining to her graduate assistantship (which was to be carried out in another department on campus). Thus, she began her program without the benefit of this brief introduction to the faculty. Further, word-of-mouth does not appear to have been a channel through which Yung-Li learned about the intricacies of her department, primarily because, as she explained, she struggled to interact verbally with the other graduate students in Human Studies: ‘‘They speak a lot. At first, it was very scared to see that everybody talked very well. Like, ‘Oh, my god.’ They knew everything. They were everything. I don’t know. I was ignorant.’’ Yung-Li recognized that the other students in her program were benefiting from their interaction with one another, but she still felt unable to join into these peer relationships: ‘‘At first semester, many new student came together and they did not know everyone, like me. So, I didn’t feel that I was so different from them. But after that they could, they could just know more and more about people, system and everything. But I could not.’’

At the time of this study Yung-Li was one of three L2 students in Human Studies. She did not, however, turn to the other two L2 students for friendship or support, primarily because in her judgment neither of them needed extra help adjusting. As she explained, ‘‘One is Indiany but she speaks English very well because they speak English in college.’’ And the other, a woman from South Korea, ‘‘studies the same major in Korea and she actually had some experiences about teaching at college. So, she was comfortable with everything.’’ Although Yung-Li found her peers to be friendly, she did not enter into relationships with them. Reflecting on her entrance to the program, she said, ‘‘I felt that I’m an outsider. It was very hard for me. At class is okay. But really I couldn’t talk to a classmate very personally.’’

At least part of the reason for Yung-Li’s social isolation from her peers stemmed from her difficult transition to graduate school in the US. Before starting her studies she had had to return to South Korea to obtain a student visa. She traveled with her infant daughter and the two stayed away for 1 month. When they returned to the US, Yung-Li explained that her daughter ‘‘needed more time to readjust to her [daycare] life’’ and cried a lot, detracting from Yung-Li’s ability to focus on the difficulties of beginning her academic program. As a new mother whose husband was working long hours in a doctoral program, Yung-Li remembered that during the first year of her master’s program she ‘‘just cried every time’’ because she ‘‘needed to adjust to everything’’ and ‘‘didn’t have enough time to study and take care of my daughter and work [for my graduate assistantship] and everything. So, it has been very very hard for me.’’ Given these demands, it should not be surprising that Yung-Li did not reach out and form relationships with her peers, even though she saw that her peers were using their relationships to ‘‘know more and more about people, system and everything.’’

The question remains, then, as to exactly how Yung-Li came to work with Dr. Denardo,3 especially since she never did take a course from her future advisor. In fact, the first time they interacted at all was 2 years after Yung-Li began the program when she contacted Dr. Denardo via e-mail to ask her to direct her thesis. There are a number of reasons why Yung-Li waited so long to contact Dr. Denardo. First, having missed the orientation meeting the first year and chosen to skip it her second year, she had never met Dr. Denardo. Second, word-of-mouth was not a source of programmatic information for Yung-Li because she did not have friendships within her department. Third, Yung-Li’s actions during the first 2 years of her master’s program suggest that she believed it was her responsibility to generate a research topic by herself before contacting a potential advisor. However, being new to Human Studies (recall that her bachelor’s degree was in British Literature), Yung-Li had a difficult time coming up with a topic. As she described it, ‘‘in my case the hardest thing was having an idea about my research. Actually it took two years for me to have an idea. I didn’t know! I didn’t have enough knowledge to decided what I’m going to research.’’

The idea she finally came to concerned teachers’ beliefs about the utility of incorporating play in the early childhood classroom, a topic that grew out of her reading of an article in a class on child development that she took in another department during her first semester. Yung-Li spent the next 2 years trying to learn more about the topic by following threads of publications from the sources she uncovered on the topic. At the end of her second year in the program, she felt ready to approach Dr. Denardo, whom she chose because she was one of two faculty members in the department whose faculty webpage mentioned a research interest in ‘‘play.’’ Beyond that reference to a shared interest, Yung-Li really did not know Dr. Denardo at all, though she explained that it would not have mattered anyway because ‘‘Most of the professors in my department are studying adolescent or family matters. We had two [professors] interested in early childhood. So, [I had] no real choice.’’

Even as it points towards institutional shortcomings and interpersonal difficulties, Yung-Li’s path to finding an advisor is admirable: As a new student to her field, she came across a topic that captured her interest, pursued it critically, and then contacted a faculty member whose area of expertize was relevant. What was troubling to Yung-Li, however, is that she was unable to expedite the process. The master’s degree in Human Studies is a 2-year program, including time to write and defend a thesis, and Dr. Denardo explained that generally students begin working with an advisor on the thesis project at the end of the first year. Yung-Li, however, spent 2 years believing that she had to generate a workable thesis topic before approaching an advisor. Coming from an undergraduate background in British literature, Yung-Li understandably knew little about the sorts of critical conversations that are carried on in Human Studies. It seems likely that more careful mentoring of incoming graduate students would have helped Yung-Li understand that students often approach professors well before they have settled on research areas. Further, a formalized system of peer mentoring may have helped Yung-Li, especially since on her own she did not build relationships with her disciplinary peers. The timeframe issue is an important one for many graduate students, especially since graduate funding is not indefinite. Indeed, Yung-Li’s graduate assistantship ran out at the end of her second year, forcing her to borrow money for the third year of study that she required. Finally, a major shortcoming for Yung-Li was that the curriculum in Human Studies allowed her to complete her required coursework without taking a number of classes that focused on children, her primary interest. Yung-Li’s explanation for this was that in her 2 years of coursework the offered graduate courses focused on ‘‘adolescent or family matters, not children.’’

# 4.3. Negotiating a research topic

Yung-Li’s original idea for her thesis was to do a cross-cultural study of American and South Korean teachers’ beliefs about the validity of incorporating play into the elementary education classroom. Dr. Denardo told me that she knew from the very beginning that this idea was unworkable within the confines of a master’s thesis:

Oh she had it really big! She not only had us looking at the teachers’ beliefs and comparing that to what the teachers perceived their actions to be, but she had the other component where she was going to go in and observe what they all actually did. And then she was going to compare all three points.

Interestingly, Dr. Denardo never explicitly told Yung-Li the cross-cultural research idea was too big. Rather, as Yung-Li told it, Dr. Denardo ‘‘wanted me to study more about how other researchers studied about that, but I couldn’t find any.’’ In keeping with her desire to have Yung-Li ‘‘make her own decisions and choose her own way of research,’’ Dr. Denardo’s advice demonstrates her practice of having her graduate students take ownership of and responsibility for the project. Yung-Li, however, wanted more explicit direction: ‘‘I think I expected to hear her opiniony. If I said I was interested in play, in teachers’ beliefs, she might give me some suggestion about how I can study that, [but] she rather listen to my ideas and waited, a lot.y Until I have idea, she waited.’’

Charged by Dr. Denardo to keep reading other studies to find how others had approached her topic, Yung-Li struggled to find a significant body of literature on her topic. To try to get Dr. Denardo to give her more explicit directions for her research, Yung-Li began keeping a notebook of her thoughts and ideas. Each time she met with Dr. Denardo she would show her the notebook ‘‘so she could know the ideas.’’ However, as Yung-Li told it, Dr. Denardo never looked at the notebook. Rather, she continued to tell Yung-Li to keep reading, a piece of advice Yung-Li found increasingly frustrating: ‘‘We met so many times, but many of those meetings we didn’t do anything in them. I think she just said I need to study more and more.’’

Dr. Denardo’s remembrance of her early work with Yung-Li reveals that she did recognize that there were communication difficulties from the start: ‘‘Often she would leave and then come back a week later and just not have it quite the way it was. And I’d realize that she didn’t understand what I told her.’’ However, Dr. Denardo did not know quite what Yung-Li wanted her to do. That is, while she recognized that graduate students ‘‘need a professor that supports you and is behind what you’re doing,’’ when it came to working with Yung-Li, Dr. Denardo struggled to know how to proceed: ‘‘I sent her to different people to talk about certain things. And so, that’s been good, maybe. I don’t know. I don’t know what she expects of me.’’ As is evident, the difficulties understanding what was needed in this advisor/advisee relationship went both ways.

# 4.4. Conducting research

Eventually, Yung-Li found one book on her topic. After reading that book as well as the material in that book’s bibliography, Yung-Li forged ahead with the cross-cultural research design that she had originally described to Dr. Denardo. Unbeknownst to her advisor, Yung-Li made contact with an educational administrator in South Korea who had access to Yung-Li’s ideal research population and arranged to travel to South Korea over the summer to collect a South Korean data set. She planned to gather the requisite American data set during the coming fall semester.

Shortly before she was to leave for South Korea, Yung-Li asked Dr. Denardo if she thought it would be all right for her to gather a Korean data set even though she had not yet written and defended her thesis proposal and had not secured Human Subjects approval. Though gathering data before defending proposals is not unheard of in academia, Yung-Li was quite apprehensive about proceeding without permission from Human Subjects:

I asked my advisor if I can do that [gather the data] before Human Subjects approval. No, she said no. So, and I was really worried if I could still do that. And I talked to everybody and everybody, my friends and my family, said, ‘‘you can just do that. Just don’t tell your advisor.’’ And my Korean collaborator said just do that because they don’t need any approval for doing research in Korea. So, it is not, what is a good word, it is not wrong for me to do in Korea anyway.

Ultimately, Yung-Li went against Dr. Denardo’s directions and traveled to South Korea to collect the data without an accepted thesis proposal and without Human Subjects approval. When she returned shortly before the start of the fall semester, she had over half of the South Korean data with arrangements for the other half to be mailed as soon as it was collected.

During the first month of that fall semester Yung-Li assembled her thesis committee and wrote a proposal for the cross-cultural study. When the committee met to discuss the proposal, Yung-Li learned what Dr. Denardo had believed from the very beginning: the cross-cultural design was too large. Dr. Denardo reported that in the thesis proposal committee meeting the committee told Yung-Li they were ‘‘only going to let [her] do the American part’’ of the study. Dr. Denardo said they told Yung-Li to save the Korean comparison for a future ‘‘dissertation or maybe dissertation and two or three years of work at some university.’’

Once the committee meeting was over, Yung-Li was angry at her advisor for not telling her sooner that there were problems with the research design: ‘‘the scope of my research was getting bigger and bigger and [Dr. Denardo] didn’t exactly say it was very big research [or] ‘you cannot do that.’ So, I was not sure! I did not have any idea about the practical things!’’ In keeping with her perspective that advisors were ‘‘supposed to give ideas and not just helping but more directing students where to go,’’ Yung-Li had interpreted Dr. Denardo’s silence about the research design as tacit approval for the cross-cultural study: ‘‘I kept waiting for some feedback to help me.’’ She now realized that Dr. Denardo had ‘‘just watched until I decided and until I had an idea and everything and waited until the proposal [meeting]’’ to say what she had always believed: the cross-cultural project was not appropriate for a master’s thesis.

Yung-Li tried to salvage the research she gathered in South Korea even though it could not be used for her thesis. A month after the proposal meeting she told Dr. Denardo she had made contact with a collaborator in South Korea and gone ahead and collected her Korean data set through the mail to perhaps use in a future project. For her Human Subjects approval, Yung-Li changed the dates on the approval forms so that they would coincide with when she told Dr. Denardo she had collected the Korean data.

Dr. Denardo never found out that Yung-Li collected this data set prior to the proposal meeting. In fact, her overall assessment of Yung-Li demonstrated that she did not know her advisee as well as she suspected:

Researcher: You mentioned that in some of your courses you try to make people comfortable so that they will be willing to take risks. Is Yung-Li a risk taker? Dr. Denardo: She’s a risk taker in that she really has pushed for a much bigger and more involved piece of research than anybody on her committee thought she should do. That’s risky. But she’s not a risk taker with regard to wanting those parameters defined by which the system works. She wants to know that she’s doing the right thing, at the right time, in the right space. So she’s not going to step outside the lines of what’s appropriate for research. She’s going to do that by the book, by the numbers.

Ironically, Yung-Li had proceeded through much of the research without a clear indication from Dr. Denardo that she was in fact ‘‘doing the right thing, at the right time, in the right space.’’ Moreover, Yung-Li had stepped well outside of the boundaries for appropriate research by doctoring her forms for Human Subjects and going against her advisor’s wishes.

Surprisingly, in the Human Studies program, no research methods courses are required at master’s level, though one might have helped Yung-Li to understand what sorts of projects would work for a master’s thesis. Having had no formal training in designing a study, Yung-Li used a combination of three instruments that she found in published sources. Forced to start over on her research gathering as a result of her master’s proposal defense, Yung-Li worked with a collaborator provided by Dr. Denardo after the defense to locate a source for an American data set. She then worked with a friend of a friend who was ‘‘an expert in statistics’’ to help her run statistical analyses on the data.

What is striking is that Yung-Li’s case so vividly demonstrates that hard work and initiative are not guarantors of academic success. After all, by the time her thesis proposal was approved, Yung-Li had independently designed a dissertation-plus-sized study and traveled overseas to gather half of the data. Yet, in her advisor’s and committee’s eyes, she was just now ready to begin her project.

# 4.5. Writing without support

Once Yung-Li had finished gathering the American data set, she began the actual writing of her master’s thesis during the spring semester of her third year in the program. However, as with the other aspects of the project, Dr. Denardo and Yung-Li struggled to establish a working relationship in which communication lines were clear and expectations were understood. Dr. Denardo had told me the previous fall that she anticipated that once Yung-Li had her data she would ‘‘be bringing in printouts, and saying here’s what I think, what do you think, you know. And then we’ll say that, well, that looks good, but I think we need to run [the data] this way or we need to run it that way.’’ Dr. Denardo indicated that Yung-Li would be ‘‘working through her data on her own, but at the same time we should be having weekly meetings or even every couple of days when she gets a new run [on the data].’’

In actuality, throughout the semester when Yung-Li was trying to complete the thesis Dr. Denardo maintained a busy travel schedule and was frequently unavailable to meet, a situation that vexed Yung-Li considerably: ‘‘My advisor was really busy this semester. I think, through the spring semester, I could never meet her!’’

Yung-Li submitted five drafts of various sections of the thesis to Dr. Denardo over the semester. Yung-Li said that on two separate occasions Dr. Denardo actually lost the drafts; one other time she forgot that she was in possession of a draft and thus did not read what her advisee had given to her. With the remaining two drafts Yung-Li waited as long as 7 weeks before receiving comments. As the deadline for submitting completed theses to the graduate school approached, Yung-Li had comments on only a partial draft and had received minimal verbal feedback from Dr. Denardo.

With just 1 week remaining to complete the thesis before the deadline, Dr. Denardo and Yung-Li began meeting regularly. Describing the process through which they wrote the thesis, Yung-Li said, ‘‘We finished it just one week, from Monday to Friday. We met everyday. It was crazy for me.’’ Each meeting began at 8:00 a.m. and ended in the mid-morning, at which point Yung-Li would return home and make corrections until late into the night. The next day she would return to Dr. Denardo’s office and repeat the process. Although this collaboration did result in a thesis that met the committee’s approval, Yung-Li was upset because she was unable to submit a final copy to the graduate school before the deadline, resulting in her having to register and pay for additional graduate hours for the following semester.

It is interesting that the primary difficulty for Yung-Li in terms of writing the thesis does not appear to have been related to her writing ability. She had shown herself to be a competent writer in her master’s program, completing her coursework with a perfect 4.0 grade point average and obtaining high marks for her written work. Chronicling Yung-Li’s development from her thesis proposal to the actual thesis, Dr. Denardo stated that early on she had had to do ‘‘writing between the lines, you know, grammar, articles, and sometimes just reformulating what it was [Yung-Li] was trying to say. You could read kind of what she was trying to say but the words weren’t coming out right.’’ However, by the time Yung-Li was drafting the thesis, Dr. Denardo reported that ‘‘when [Yung-Li] writes it’s much more clear and concise.’’ Dr. Denardo also indicated that she had had students ‘‘whose writing was so poor’’ that she had sent them to the university’s writing center for help, but that Yung-Li did not need any extra help: ‘‘Yung-Li was not there [at the point of needing extra help]. She was okay.’’

In Yung-Li’s eyes, the problem with the project had less to do with her research skills or writing abilities than it did with her relationship with Dr. Denardo. Or, as she put it, ‘‘Maybe the communication between us was not enough. Other than my study, we didn’t really talk about personal stuff, you know. I mean, life.’’ She suspected that perhaps the problem was that, as she explained it, ‘‘I was too passive.’’ Yung-Li attributed the problems she experienced to her own lack of comfort with the advisor/advisee relationship: ‘‘I was not confident to ask something, ask what I wanted, what I expected, or what I wanted to get from my advisor. I just was not confident to say, ‘I wanted you to do this’ or ‘I need this from you.’’’ Consequently, Dr. Denardo’s practice of giving her advisees great control over their projects resulted in Yung-Li taking that control but not knowing how to put it to effective use.

As a result, she ended up with a thesis that did not have anything to do with her interest in early childhood education in her home country and a South Korean data set that had been gathered at considerable cost. Further, because her relationship with Dr. Denardo was largely dysfunctional, the lessons she learned while working on her thesis had more to do with how to persevere in a system that one does not entirely understand than how to begin contributing professionally to her chosen field. Moreover, as her concern for her own passivity suggests, she had come to suspect that she was to blame for the difficulty she experienced working with Dr. Denardo.

# 5. Discussion

My intention in the following discussion is to use this case study to reveal more clearly the issues that may impact L2 graduate students and their advisors as they attempt to mediate working relationships with one another.

# 5.1. Institutional contexts

Initially, it is important to pay attention to the institutional structure of Yung-Li’s graduate program. Studying in a department where the onus for finding an advisor and research area is on the student, Yung-Li entered into the advisee/advisor relationship through her own initiative, bringing with her a research topic she believed would help her get the sort of job she hoped to one day obtain. Forgetting for the moment the quality of the mentoring she actually received from Dr. Denardo, one of the clear problems for Yung-Li was that she was hampered by a lack of departmental support. That is, no one from the Human Studies program helped her understand that it is normal for students to begin working with advisors before they have a narrowly defined topic. Moreover, that Yung-Li never took a class from Dr. Denardo suggests that she did not know that an effective way for students to locate an advisor with whom they may work well is to take courses from professors whose interests are close to their own. Thus, while Yung-Li had the sociolinguistic acumen to get a professor she did not know to agree to direct her thesis, she did not detect until well into the process that she was working with someone whose advising style was at odds with her desire for more directive mentoring. Or, if she did detect it, she did not know what to do about it. Thus, the personal initiative Yung-Li showed in defining a research area and securing an advisor did not result in her receiving effective support. The salient point may be that without clear and open communication, international students may not be able to judge whether or not the advisor they select has the time, interest, and ability to work effectively with them. It is also noteworthy that Yung-Li never sought to find a new advisor, even though she grew increasingly frustrated with Dr. Denardo. Yung-Li seemed to feel powerless to do anything to change the tenor of this relationship let alone get out of it.

# 5.2. Hierarchical vs. egalitarian relationships

In general, this study affirms Belcher’s (1994) finding that effective advisor/ advisee relationships are integral to L2 learners’ success in graduate school. Though Belcher (1994) recognizes that there are many different types of advisor/advisee relationships that may be effective, she suggests that collaborative advisor/advisee pairs that share decision-making responsibilities may work together effectively.

Yung-Li was in a relationship with an advisor who said she wanted egalitarian relationships with her advisees so that they would see her ‘‘as a fellow learner, as a collaborator.’’ Yung-Li, however, felt uncomfortable in a relationship where student and professor were on such even ground, remarking that she never expected ‘‘any friendship or collaborate, that kind of stuff with a professor.’’ At least part of the problem was that both women entered the relationship influenced by cultural expectations for what their relationship would be like. That is, noting that in her experience ‘‘it’s difficult for foreign students to get to that place where they do see themselves as much more of a contributor to my learning,’’ Dr. Denardo said she tried to ‘‘understand and respect’’ the ‘‘cultural formalities and informalities’’ that separated her from her advisee. However, in actuality she appeared to define Yung-Li according to her past experiences working with students from Southeast Asia: ‘‘Chinese, Korean, Japanese students really have a difficult time with [my desire for an informal relationship]. They maintain the distance [from me]. I don’t.’’

Although Yung-Li did not believe that she could have a close relationship with Dr. Denardo, she never meant for her advisor to interpret this as an indication that she did not want to work closely with her. Yung-Li entered the relationship wanting Dr. Denardo to give her regular feedback while ‘‘directing [her] where to go.’’ In other words, Yung-Li appeared to want a hierarchical relationship with her advisor so that she could receive the full benefit of her advisor’s expertise. Yung-Li’s relationship with Dr. Denardo indicates, however, that cultural distance coupled with a lack of relational mediation between advisors and ESL advisees can hinder the formation of a functional partnership.

Further, Yung-Li’s experience suggests that one of the problems with egalitarian advisor/advisee relationships is that they may demand that the student have the academic and linguistic abilities to carry out research without close support as well as the interpersonal skills to maintain a working relationship with an advisor who may become too busy or distracted to offer close support. While Yung-Li seemingly had the interpersonal proficiency to understand her advisor and make herself understood, she clearly was not comfortable negotiating with Dr. Denardo for closer, more directive mentoring.

Part of the issue in this case was that while Dr. Denardo said she wanted to collaborate, in actuality she appeared unsure of how to actually make that collaboration work with

Yung-Li. The dearth of clear and open lines of communication suggests that Yung-Li’s assessment—‘‘Maybe the communication between us was not enough’’—was accurate.

# 6. Conclusion

This examination of the intersections between graduate research and academic relationships suggests that while academic literacy activities are enmeshed within advisor/advisee relationships, for L2 graduate students it is not always easy to discern the idiosyncrasies of how these relationships might function most effectively. It is also important to recognize that L2 graduate students’ academic experiences in their home countries contribute to their interpretive framework for negotiating relationships with advisors in English-language universities, as evidenced by Yung-Li’s belief that Dr. Denardo would necessarily ‘‘[direct] her where to go’’ because that was how professors in South Korea interacted with their advisees.

Effective academic support from a thesis or dissertation advisor can result in rich, steady progress in academic research communities. However, for this progress to occur, graduate students must master more than their content areas. They also must make connections with more experienced discourse community members who can help them develop the literacy behaviors they will need to participate in their target discourse communities. However, as Yung-Li’s experience with Dr. Denardo demonstrates, L2 learners may not always recognize when they have fallen into a dysfunctional advisor/advisee relationship. Moreover, even if they do recognize that the relationship is ineffective, they may not have the power to do much about it.

If individuals with power in English-language discourse communities view L2 graduate students as though they are the same as their L1 counterparts, or, perhaps more troubling, as though they are blank slates onto which the values and knowledge of a new discourse community can be easily written, they may add to the difficulties L2 learners already face when they begin graduate study in a language they do not speak natively in a culture they do not know intuitively. Given that L2 learners are invariably in relationship with others as part of their graduate study, it is incumbent upon those of us who teach and research within the field of applied linguistics to broaden our understanding of L2 graduate learners’ literacy activities, looking beyond individual academic tasks to include the ways that learners’ relationships with their advisors impact academic progress.

More particularly, those of us who with L2 graduate students might take away from Yung-Li and Dr. Denardo’s case a finer appreciation of the ways that academic literacy is necessarily imbricated in complicated social, cultural, rhetorical, and political fields, ones that both the student and the advisor need to see clearly if the relationship is to be productive. For advisors, part of this vision demands that we consciously and consistently monitor our students’ views of the advisor/advisee partnership, gauging their expectations with our own to co-construct a partnership whose parameters are well known to both parties. The precise shape and feel of an effective relationship can vary considerably along a continuum from hierarchical to egalitarian so long as both student and advisor understand and accept the terms under which their work is proceeding. Finally, those of us who teach L2 thesis or dissertation-writing seminars might add to them a sociolinguistic element that draws students’ attention to the importance of clearly, assertively, and respectfully articulating their needs within the context of the discursive and interpersonal negotiations that infuse graduate-level scholarship.

# Appendix A. Interview guides

Interview guide #1—Participant as writer

1. How do you feel about writing? In English? In your native language?   
2. How do you feel about yourself as a writer?   
3. Tell me about an important writing assignment you are currently working on or have recently finished. What was the project? How did it go? What was challenging about it? Was anything easy?   
4. How important is writing to your academic major?   
5. What are the different kinds of writing projects a person in your academic area has to know how to do? How well can you do them?   
6. What sorts of writing projects do you anticipate having to do in the future?   
7. What sorts of feedback have you received on your writing? From whom?   
8. Do you ever revise your writing? (If answer is ‘‘no,’’ ask why not.) How do you revise it? What comes of the revision?   
9. Does anyone ever help you with your writing? Has anyone helped you in the past?

# Interview Guide #2—Academic relationships Questions about advisor

1. Tell me about how you met your advisor.   
2. How would you characterize your relationship with your advisor?   
3. What sorts of things does your advisor do for you? How does she advise you?   
4. What do you expect out of your advisor?   
5. In the time you have known your advisor, has your relationship with her changed? If so how?

# Questions about peers

6. How do you get along with your peers?   
7. What sorts of interactions do you have with them?

# Question about others

8. Are there people you have not yet talked about who are important to your academic progress at the university? If so, who are they and how are they important?

Interview guide—Advisor interview

1. How long have you been at the university? How many graduate students are working under you? What are your responsibilities as far as the graduate program is concerned?   
2. How do you define your role when it comes to working with graduate students? What sort of relationships do you generally try to have with graduate students? How do you want them to see you?   
3. Describe the culture of your department. What’s it like?   
4. Turn attention to your work with insert research participant. When did you first meet student? What were your early impressions?   
5. How would you describe student? (Probe for general impressions.)   
6. What obstacles does participant face? Is there anything special you do to try to address them?   
7. What should graduate students coming out this program be able to do? How is participant doing so far?   
8. Academically speaking, in your opinion what does the future hold for student? What leads you to think this?

# References

Belcher, D. (1994). The apprenticeship approach to advanced academic literacy: Graduate students and their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13(1), 23–34.   
Belcher, D. (1997). An argument for nonadversarial argumentation: On the relevance of the feminist critique of academic discourse to L2 writing pedagogy. Journal of Second Language Writing, 6(1), 1–21.   
Blakeslee, A. M. (1997). Activity, context, interaction, and authority: Learning to write scientific papers in situ. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 11(2), 125–169.   
Braine, G. (2002). Academic literacy and the nonnative speaker graduate student. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1(1), 59–68.   
Dong, Y. R. (1998). Non-native graduate students’ thesis/dissertation writing in science: Self-reports by students and their advisors from two US institutions. English for Specific Purposes, 17(4), 369–390.   
Hemphill, L. S. (1996). How international graduate students and international professors collaboratively write technical journal articles. Master’s thesis, Utah State University, 1996. Master’s Abstracts International, 34(6), 2158.   
Jenkins, S., Jordan, M. K., & Weiland, P. O. (1993). The role of writing in graduate engineering education: A survey of faculty beliefs and practices. English for Specific Purposes, 12(1), 51–67.   
Krase, E. (2003). Socio-cultural interactions and ESL graduate student enculturation: A cross-sectional analysis. Doctoral dissertation, University of Tennessee, 2003. Retrieved from :4525/F/7E53FFQVNMVMY4UED41 PF9HUGGPQESFQE2L2M257DF72LJB1JQ-03042?func $=$ /service-media-exec&doc_library $=$ UTK60&doc_ number=001653432&media_index $= 0 0 0 0 1 \rangle$ .   
SMcCracken, G. (1988). The long interview. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   
Scott, G. V. (2000). Enculturating an ESL doctoral student in disciplinary writing: An apprenticeship process. Doctoral dissertation, Purdue University. Dissertation Abstracts International, 62(6), 2102A.   
Shaw, P. (1991). Science research students’ composing processes. English for Specific Purposes, 10(3), 189–206.