# Critical thinking in Japanese L2 writing: rethinking tired constructs

Paul Stapleton

Asian learners of English are often characterized by constructs which claim that they lack an individual voice and critical thinking skills. In addition, it is said that unlike their Western counterparts, because of collectivist and hierarchical tendencies, they hesitate to express adversarial views. These behavioural patterns are claimed to be reflected in the rhetorical styles of Japanese learners when writing in English. Contrary to these claims, in an attitude survey of 70 Japanese undergraduates, the present study found little hesitation to voice opinions counter to authority figures. Moreover, participants possessed a firm grasp of elements of critical thinking. These results suggest that traditional constructs describing Asian students may no longer be accurate. Furthermore, trends in education in Japan may point to a new type of Asian learner who has an individual voice.

Introduction: using cultural patterns in ELT

In recent years there has been extensive discussion about the need to consider the culture of the learner in order to improve teaching practices. These discussions often use the culture of Asian learners as a focus of comparison with Western culture. Constructs which characterize Asian learners as group-oriented, harmony-seeking, hierarchical, and noncritical thinking, are typically contrasted with the individualistic, adversarial, horizontal, and critically-thinking behavioral patterns of their Western counterparts (Atkinson 1997; Fox 1994; Ramanathan and Kaplan 1996).

These constructs are also often used to describe the rhetorical style of Japanese learners when they write in English. In the mode of traditional contrastive rhetoric, Hinds $( \mathrm { I } 9 ^ { 8 } 7 )$ examined organizational patterns in Japanese and English expository writing. Specifically, his study looked at whether patterns exist and how main points are presented. His findings revealed that in contrast to English, where the writer has the responsibility of conveying meaning, Japanese have a preference for an inductive style of writing in which the reader has more responsibility in deriving meaning. Hinds (ibid.: 151) goes on to say that this contrast should be pointed out to learners in an e¤ort to develop a ‘new way to conceptualize the writing process’.

Ramanathan and Kaplan (1996: 26) contend that presenting a strong voice is a Western notion that is not necessarily relevant in other cultures. This notion assumes that Asian cultures lay greater emphasis on participation and interpretation on the reader’s part. Likewise, Fox (1994) claims that the critical thinking which results in what is perceived as good writing is a product of U.S. culture. However, says Fox, very few cultures share this way of thinking. Atkinson (1997: 80) suggests that ‘the very notion of critical presupposes that individual conflict and dissensus are a social reality, if not a tool for achieving socially desirable ends, while thinking—at least in the Western context—assumes the locus of thought to be within the individual.’ Atkinson contends that such a supposition naturally conflicts with the sociocultural norms of certain cultures outside of the United States; he specifically discusses Japan as a contrast focus, stating that critical thought is more of a social practice than a teachable set of behaviors.

Since the 1980s, theoretical constructs about Asians and others have come under criticism by postmodernists who believe that these cultural patterns are simply essentializations created to hold power over nonWestern people. Various recent studies in L2 writing have pointed out problems in characterizing whole groups of people based on nationality or native tongue. For example, Kubota (1998), in a study of $4 ^ { 6 }$ Japanese university students learning English, found that the learners used various organizational patterns, and that there was no negative transfer of culturally unique rhetorical patterns. Further, Kubota found that the quality of L2 writing among her Japanese subjects depended more on the quality of their L1 writing, i.e. subjects who wrote well in Japanese tended to write well in English, whereas those who wrote poorly in their native tongue also fared poorly in English. Finally, Kubota advises that notions of sociocultural patterns regarding text structure, as in, for example, the inductive East vs. the deductive West, should be used with caution. She found in her study that students could even take on certain stereotypical beliefs about the superiority of English rhetoric over Japanese. Likewise, Sasaki and Hirose (1996), who rated the L2 expository writing, including persuasiveness and organization, of 70 Japanese university students, found that the key indicators determining writing quality, were L2 proficiency, L1 writing ability, and metaknowledge (about English expository writing). In other words, individual di¤erences played a larger role than notions of sociocultural patterns.

A recent study comparing Asian and European students’ attitudes has raised further doubt about prevailing constructs that portray Asian students as passive learners lacking in critical thinking skills. Littlewood (2000: 34) found that ‘Asian students do not, in fact, wish to be spoonfed with facts from an all-knowing “fount of knowledge”. They want to explore knowledge themselves and find their own answers’. Accordingly, these findings suggest that a new generation of Asian learners is not being depicted accurately by conventional constructs.

In order to further investigate whether Asian learners display elements of critical thinking and an individualized identity—which some researchers claim they lack—a questionnaire was issued to 70 secondyear students from five di¤erent faculties at a large university in northern Japan. The nine-item questionnaire, which was given out midway

through the semester in an English writing class, asked participants to score their degree of agreement with several aspects of critical thinking and voice, as displayed in their own writing. Some elements of critical thinking were adapted from Browne and Keeley (1994) who stress the importance of impartiality and multiple perspectives. Notions of voice were taken from Ramanathan and Kaplan (1996), and weaved into questions that probed students’ attitudes towards this issue.

Answers were scored on a 5-point scale, where ‘1’ corresponded to ‘agree’ and ‘5’ to ‘disagree’.

# QUESTIONNAIRE

When I write a report …

1 … it is important to state my opinion clearly, even if the topic is controversial. Mean 1.70 S.D. .75   
2 … it is important to agree with the teacher. Mean 4.17 S.D. 1.06   
3 … it is not important to support my ideas with reasons; my personal opinion is good enough. Mean 3.94 S.D. 1.31   
4 … it is not important to mention the opinion of those who disagree with me as long as I write my own opinion clearly. Mean 4.06 S.D. 1.20   
5 … it is not good to write with too much emotion. Mean 2.14 S.D. 1.15   
6 … if the issue is controversial, it is better to be vague. Mean 3.91 S.D. 1.13   
7 … being objective is better than being subjective. Mean 1.99 S.D. .99   
8 … my personal experience is as good as evidence from a research study or statistics. Mean 2.88 S.D. 1.12   
9 … if I support my opinion, it is okay to disagree with the teacher. Mean 1.68 S.D. .95

Although the questionnaire was written in the participant’s second language, English, some of the more diªcult words were glossed in Japanese. As a measure to determine whether participants fully comprehended the English in the questionnaire, two sets of questions with similar meaning, but di¤erent and reverse wordings were included, Questions 1 and 6, and Questions 2 and 9. The mean scores of these two sets of questions, (Question $\mathrm { I } = 3 { \cdot } 9 4$ and Question $6 = { \bf I . 7 }$ ; Question $^ { 2 } =$ 4.17 and Question $9 = \mathrm { I } . 6 8 \mathrm { : }$ ) when leveled to account for the reverse wording show strong convergence, indicating an acceptable level of

reliability. In addition, the wording in Number $^ 4$ included two negatives (‘not important’ and ‘disagree’), in other words, a rather less than transparent meaning. However, the responses to this question, discussed below, were consistent with the pattern established by the other questions indicating good comprehension.

Questions 1 and 6, which dealt with clarity, were included to see whether subjects would show tendencies towards avoiding strong positions on controversial matters. Contrary to Atkinson’s (1997) claims that Japanese seek to maintain harmony, participants’ scores reflect a belief in stating their views clearly whether they will upset harmony or not. Twenty-nine out of seventy participants scored ‘1’ (agree) on Question 1, while only one participant scored $^ { \circ } 4 ^ { \prime }$ , and no one scored ‘5’ (disagree). Likewise, on Question 6, which was worded roughly in reverse, 22 participants scored ‘5’, while only 3 participants scored ‘1’, indicating both concordance in meaning and a strong tendency towards clarity. These results stand in contrast to the ‘indirect’ and ‘inductive’ labels often associated with Japanese rhetorical patterns.

Questions 2 and 9 were also concerned with harmony. While less similarly worded than Questions 1 and 6, these two questions had a somewhat parallel meaning with reverse wording. Reliability was confirmed with the participants expressing their most fervent feelings in their responses to these two questions among the nine items in the questionnaire. Of all the participants, only three scored either ‘1’ or ‘2’ for Question 2. The same result appeared in reverse, with only three participants scoring ‘4’ or $\mathbf { \bar { 5 } } ^ { \prime }$ for Question 9. Again, contrary to claims that Japanese are empathy-seeking, and reluctant to break harmony, the questionnaire results reveal otherwise.

In order to display critical thinking skills, it is important to question the claims of others, as well as to go beyond simply duplicating what they have said (Browne and Keeley 1994: 8). To fulfil the requirements of such a process, the status of those making claims, while perhaps relevant to some degree, must not deter counter or alternative views. Ramanathan and Atkinson (1999), in citing studies performed on students from interdependent cultures (Chinese and Japanese are most often identified), claim that maintaining harmony and preserving face, as well as observing the norms of social hierarchy, result in the avoidance of criticism. This behavior is contrasted with individualistic mainstream American social practice. Two clear implications can be taken from Ramanathan and Atkinson (ibid.) and many of the works they cite. Firstly, they imply that in order to think critically, one must harbor an individual voice. Secondly, this voice should not be influenced by concerns of group cohesiveness, or the status of those making alternative claims. The first notion is shared by the thrust of this study. Based on the results of this study, however, the second notion, i.e. the idea that the Japanese, as collectivist and hierarchy-oriented people, are unable to overcome these cultural attributes to express their individual voices and think critically, may be open to question.

Results for Questions 1, 2, 6, and 9 are related to critical thinking in the sense that respondents reveal the degree to which they will, or will not be dissuaded from their views by factors that lie outside the issue at hand. Siegal (1997) claims that the critical thinker has to reject partiality, while seeking reasons and evidence. Any e¤ort to achieve harmony with one’s audience on a contentious issue, whether it is one’s teacher or not, compromises the product of what may be critical thought because it takes into account a factor (interpersonal relationships with one’s audience) which are extraneous to reasons and evidence. It is pertinent to note that participants’ responses were specifically focused on their writing product, as opposed to their thinking process.

Questions 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8 looked at more technical aspects of critical thinking and individual voice as displayed in writing. In all cases, respondents revealed tendencies towards a critical, identity-driven perspective. Questions 3 and 4 were both similarly worded, forcing respondents into a ‘disagree’ position if they were to take a position favorable towards critical thinking. Mean scores of 3.94 for Question 3 and 4.06 for Question 4 reflect a considerable tendency toward believing that the writing product should display support for opinions as well as a recognition of other viewpoints. Question 5 isolated participants’ attitudes on the use of emotion in writing, which can lead a writer into making ‘fallacies of pathos’ (Ramage and Bean 1999: 239) where the writer attempts to persuade the audience by appealing to emotional premises. Responses to this question (mean 2.14), showed a tendency to agree that too much emotion detracts from the thrust of one’s argument. Responses to Question 7, which asked for participants’ views on objectivity, failed to reflect the preference for subjectivity said to be common in Japanese communication. Instead, responses (mean 1.99) show a strong preference for objectivity. This preference, however, did not extend to more specific aspects of persuasion, as revealed by Question 8 where subjects scored close to a neutral reading (mean 2.88) when asked whether the evidence of their personal experience was as good as that of a research study or statistics.

In order to investigate these issues further 10 participants were randomly selected for follow-up interviews. Responses revealed that students’ opinions were shaped from a wide variety of sources, including the media, their teachers, and parents. When participants were asked whether they felt it important to agree with the teacher’s opinion, seven of the students replied with an absolute ‘no’, while three others qualified their ‘nos’. One participant in the education faculty qualified his negative response by saying, ‘Some students think it is a good idea to be for the teacher’s idea before a test because students often say to each other … please take care whether the teacher is left or right [politically] … ; otherwise we could fail’. The two others who qualified their responses implied that their approach depended on who the teacher was.

Participants conveyed less conviction, however, when asked whether they would hesitate to criticize the ideas of a well-known expert. Responses from nine of the ten participants could be roughly divided into three: those who would not hesitate, those who would hesitate a little, and those who would proceed more cautiously. One participant who stood out claimed that he enjoyed the challenge of disagreeing with authority.

Another interview question explored whether students seriously questioned their own beliefs—an essential aspect of critical thinking. Because such a question relies on the honesty as well as the reliability of the interviewee’s response, these could only serve as subjective indicators. While only one of the participants replied negatively to this question, three of the positive responses were tentative. The other six students claimed that they had seriously questioned their own beliefs. There were some concerns, however, about the reliability of the responses to this question, especially because the interviewer was the teacher of the participants. Participants might well have answered positively in order to appease the teacher, since their answers could reflect well or poorly on them as students in the teacher’s class.

# Conclusion

While the results from the questionnaire only shed light on students’ attitudes, and not their actual written production, they still cast doubt on the enduring stereotypes of passive, respectful, Asian students, and dovetail with the findings of other recent research, including Littlewood (2000). In Littlewood’s study, Asian learners replied to an attitude survey performed in eight Asian and three European countries in which students were questioned on their feelings towards the teacher as an authority figure. As in the present study, Littlewood found that the stereotype of the obedient and passive Asian student is only a surface phenomenon, which does not reflect the real desires of the students.

It is suggested that the responses to the questionnaire and interviews may reflect a change that is occurring in Japan, especially among young people. More specifically, in this case ‘change’ refers to a shift away from rhetorical patterns that are labeled ‘indirect’ (Kaplan 1966), inductive (Hinds 1987), or circular (Kamimura and Oi 1998), towards a multiplicity of rhetorical patterns. Kubota (1997: 470–1) suggests that the volume of works that have been translated into Japanese from other languages, particularly English, have served to instigate rhetorical changes, especially towards a deductive pattern. Recent access to the Internet may also be accelerating this process. In an analysis of essays which students wrote as part of the writing course in which the present study was conducted, it was noticed that many of the references used by participants were from English-language web sites. In some cases, the arguments used in the participants’ essays followed similar lines of reasoning as those found in the web sites they had cited. This suggests a similar type of influence to that proposed by Kubota (ibid.), where rhetorical patterns from another language can produce new ways of writing. Accordingly, it may be true that changes in the way research is performed, and greater exposure to web sites, is serving to modify Japanese rhetorical patterns towards the deductive rhetorical pattern often found in the texts on web sites that have particular agendas which are intended to persuade the reader.

Anecdotal evidence also points towards an increasingly horizontal and individualistic bearing in the Japanese education system. In 1999, at the university where the present study was conducted, for the first time students received evaluation forms, on which they were requested to assess the course they had just finished, on the final day of classes. While such opinion forms are common in Western universities, the introduction of these measures in Japan may reflect a growing move towards giving students the freedom to question and criticize their education. Other changes in Japan include a move towards essay-style questions on examinations, and the relaxation of the minimum age for university entrance. The former reflects a move away from rote-learning towards creative and critical writing, while the latter reveals an acceptance that students progress at di¤erent rates. All three of the recent changes mentioned here suggest a recognition of the learner as an individual. At a di¤erent level, this freedom may represent a shift towards a less vertical and collectivist education system. In other words, the act of giving a course evaluation form to learners serves as notice to them that they have a voice to be heard, a voice that until recently was not encouraged to ‘speak’. These changes, of course, are not confined only to course evaluations. Rather, they are giving notice to learners that they do indeed have an individual voice, which can be used when expressing their opinions in a variety of situations.

The results of the present study, in which participants appeared to believe that they displayed elements of critical thought, and an individual voice, may suggest that changes are taking place with regard to the social constructs described above. Specifically, because of changes in society which have recently been manifested in the education system, including access to the Internet, there may now exist a greater sense among a younger generation of Japanese learners that they are in a position to voice their ideas clearly, and to criticize the ideas of others regardless of their status. This suggests that teachers no longer need to hesitate to introduce critical thinking and deductive rhetorical writing styles to Japanese learners, or perhaps any other group of Asian learners who have been characterized as collectivist, non-critical thinkers.

Revised version received May 2001

# References

Atkinson, D. 1997. ‘A critical approach to critical thinking in TESOL’. TESOL Quarterly 31/1: 71–94. Browne, M. N. and S. M. Keeley. 1994. Asking the right questions. Englewood Cli¤s, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Fox, H. 1994. Listening to the World: Cultural issues in academic writing. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.   
Hinds, J. 1987. ‘Reader versus writer   
responsibility: A new typology’ in U. Connor and R. B. Kaplan (eds.). Writing across Languages:   
Analysis of L2 text. Reading MA: Addison-Wesley. Kaplan, R. 1966. ‘Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education’. Language Learning 16/1: 1–20.   
Kamimura, T. and K. Oi. 1998. ‘Argumentative strategies in American and Japanese English’. World Englishes 17/3: 307–23.   
Kubota, R. 1997. ‘A re-evaluation of the uniqueness of Japanese written discourse:   
Implications for contrastive rhetoric’. Written   
Communication 14/4: 460–80.   
Kubota, R. 1998. ‘An investigation of L1-L2   
transfer in writing among Japanese university students: Implications for contrastive rhetoric’. Journal of Second Language Writing 7/1: 69–100. Littlewood, W. 2000. ‘Do Asian students really want to listen and obey?’ ELT Journal 54/1: 31–6. Ramage, J. and J. C. Bean. 1999. Writing arguments. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.   
Ramanathan, V. and R. B. Kaplan. 1996. ‘Audience and voice in current composition texts: Some   
implications for ESL student writers’. Journal of Second Language Writing 5/1: 21–34.   
Ramanathan, V. and D. Atkinson. 1999.   
‘Individualism, academic writing, and ESL   
writers.’ Journal of Second Language Writing $8 / \mathrm { I }$ : $4 5 \mathrm { - } 7 5$ .

Sasaki, M. and K. Hirose. 1996. ‘Explanatory variables for EFL students’ expository writing’. Language Learning 46/1: 137–74. Siegal, H. 1997. Rationality Redeemed? New York: Routledge.

# The author

Paul Stapleton Ed.D, has taught English in Hong Kong, Macao, and Japan. He is currently Associate Professor at Hokkaido University in Sapporo, Japan.   
Email: paul@ilcs.hokudai.ac.jp