# ‘By-products’: The added value of academic writing instruction for higher education

Hadara Perpignana,-, Bella Rubinb , Helen Katznelsonc,d $\mathbf { a }$ English as a Foreign Language Department, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel b Division of Foreign Languages, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel c Department of English, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel d English Department, Beit Berl College, Kfar Saba, Israel

# Abstract

We previously defined the ‘by-products’ of academic writing instruction as ‘‘affective and social changes perceived by students, along with changes in their writing, reflected in interpersonal and intrapersonal behaviors carried over into other spheres of their lives’’ [Katznelson, Perpignan, & Rubin, 2001. What develops along with the development of second language writing? Exploring the ‘byproducts’. Journal of Second Language Writing, 10(3), 141–159]. The aim of the current study is (i) to explore students’ perceptions of non-writing outcomes of their academic writing courses—the ‘byproducts’—in a greater diversity of settings, and (ii) to understand the pedagogical sources and links which may lead to their emergence. The study, conducted in Israel, examines 20 groups of Hebrew and/or Arabic speaking students $N = 2 1 0$ ) from undergraduate and graduate writing programs taught by 11 different teachers. Analysis of the data collected through student self-reporting questionnaires revealed nine categories of by-products, several of which are relevant to long-range learning goals, such as lifelong learning. Content analysis of five-matched student–teacher interviews allowed us to reflect on the possible links between the emergence of by-products and some teaching practices. Our findings indicate that many by-products perceived by students as unplanned outcomes of writing courses reflect the same values that universities define as central to higher education. These findings suggest that a greater awareness of the by-products, and an understanding of how they may be yielded and enhanced, may assign designers and instructors of academic writing programs a larger educational role than is currently expected of them.

$©$ 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: By-products; Academic writing; Student-perceived learning outcomes; Lifelong learning; English for academic purposes

# 1. Introduction

Of course, there are many learnings that are little else but a mechanical skill, and in such cases, there well may be a best way [to learn]. But to become a different person because of something you have learned—to appropriate an insight, a concept, a vision, so that your world is altered—that is a different matter. (Postman, 1996, p. 3)

Students of English for Academic Purposes (EAP) are traditionally considered to be engaged in learning as a ‘mechanical skill’—the learning that will prepare them for the ‘real’ learning that will take place in the heart of the disciplines (Jordan, 1997). Indeed, academic writing, one of the study skills defined by academic institutions for EAP, has been seen as an essential, though merely instrumental, contributor to the academic success of nonnative speakers undertaking their studies in English. A course in academic writing is thus not expected to prepare an individual participant to ‘‘become a different person because of something [he has] learned’’ (Postman, 1996, p. 3).

Yet those of us who teach and research writing in EAP have recognized time and again that students seem to be gaining more from developing their writing than simply acquiring the ability to produce efficiently organized, accurately edited and skillfully presented papers; they are gaining what one student called an ‘added value’—a value that can lead to a meaningful change in their lives. Acknowledging this fact, in previous practitioner research (Katznelson, Perpignan, & Rubin, 2001; Pally, Katznelson, Perpignan, & Rubin, 2002; Rubin, Katznelson, & Perpignan, 2005), we explored a wide array of learning outcomes perceived by academic writing students, as being beyond the specific skills which the courses were intended to provide (e.g., ‘‘My expectations of myself increased.’’; ‘‘Most of all I realized how much I have to learny’’). We named these outcomes the ‘byproducts’ of academic writing courses and defined them as ‘‘any outcome of English as a Foreign Language writing courses, including a change in the students’ perceived attitudes or behaviors, which may have an impact on aspects of students’ lives other than their writing in English’’ (Katznelson et al., 2001, p. 142). We linked some of these changes to what Marton, Dall’Alba and Beatty (1989, p. 283), in their study of university student perceptions of their own learning experience, defined as the highest level of learning, ‘‘changing as a person.’’ Other researchers as well, such as Sommers (2003) and Leki (2001), in L1 and L2 writing, respectively, have listened to students’ voices in order to assess the gains obtained from learning to write.

In this work, we examine the attitudes of Israeli undergraduate and graduate students, speakers of Hebrew and/or Arabic, enrolled in L2 academic writing courses with a wide diversity of declared goals, taught by teachers of diverse backgrounds and training. We report on these students’ perceptions of their writing and of themselves. We then go one step further and explore the possible links of the non-writing outcomes, the by-products, to various teaching and learning approaches and practices.

# 2. Values/goals of higher education and social and affective factors in L1/L2 writing research

In an editorial on the current state of EAP, Hamp-Lyons and Hyland (2005, p.1) list as one weakness in the field ‘‘a reluctance to engage critically with the values of institutional goals and practices.’’ A brief exploration of these values and of the learning outcomes which are expected to reflect them is in order here.

There is currently a trend toward higher education for the masses which focuses on professional training, employability and the values and interests of business and industry. Some might see this orientation as part of a political agenda which is endangering the higher values and goals of higher education (Giroux, 1999). However, others see it as an opportunity for equipping large numbers of educators and learners with the necessary skills to promote these values and incorporate them into an orientation toward lifelong learning (Bill, 1998; Bolhuis, 2003; Cropley & Knapper, 1983).

Researchers interested in the realization of this approach in adult education recognize that the highest level of adult thinking related to educational outcomes is not the product of cognitive development alone, but is rather under the influence of an ethical framework, including emotions and affective factors (Carter, 1985; Goleman, 1998; Nuhfer & Pavelich, 2001). Thus, the inclusion of factors such as ‘‘getting along with others,’’ ‘‘persisting in the face of frustrating experiences,’’ and ‘‘understanding, balancing and managing our emotions,’’ into the definition of learning outcomes (Pfeiffer, 2001) is sometimes stated even in the most skills-oriented of training courses (e.g., Dwyer, 2001). Summing up his discussion of accountability in higher education, Frye (2000) points out that learning outcomes ‘‘encompass a wide range of attributes and abilities, both cognitive and affective, which are a measure of how [students’] college experiences have supported their development as individuals’’ (p. 6).

Significantly, Kress (1995) defined the values of higher education in terms not only of personal development but also of economic, social and political integration. In keeping with this view, specific universities take account of intrapersonal and interpersonal goals in their mission statements. For example, the mission statement of the Harvard College undergraduate program includes:

Education at Harvard should liberate students to explore, to create, to challenge, and to lead. The support the College provides to students is a foundation upon which self-reliance and habits of lifelong learning are built: Harvard expects that the scholarship and collegiality it fosters in its students will lead them in their later lives to advance knowledge, to promote understanding, and to serve society. (The mission of Harvard University, 1997)

Tel Aviv University’s Message from the President (Message from the president of Tel Aviv University, 2006) stresses the values of social responsibility as well as openness, freedom, creativity and individualism.

Thus the concern with an array of intrapersonal and interpersonal values, goals and outcomes for higher education is clear in the descriptions proposed by practitioners, administrators and researchers alike. At the same time, research into composing in L1 has evolved into showing that the high complexity of the writing process is due to the multiplicity of factors involved in its development, deriving from social and affective sources as well as from cognitive ones (Bizzell, 1992; Brand, 1987; Cumming, 1998; Daly, 1985; Daly & Miller, 1975; Flower & Hayes, 1981; Hayes, 1996; McLeod, 1987). In fact, Brand (1987) summarizes the history of composition in L1 in the following way:

Historically, the field of composition looked first at the what of writing, the product. Over the last two decades, it has added the how of the writing process. It follows that the field look next at the why of writing, affective content and motivation. Understanding the collaboration of emotions and cognition in writing is both fundamental and far-reaching. It is in cognition that ideas make sense. But it is in emotion that this sense finds value. (p. 442)

Researchers in second language acquisition have also given considerable attention to the social and affective factors involved in language learning success (Bailey, Daley, & Onwuegbuzie, 1999; Ehrman, 1996; Horwitz, Horwitz, & Cope, 1986). These factors contribute in a significant way to the process of learning to write in L2 (Carson, 2001; Silva, Leki, & Carson, 1997). Our assumption is that not only do these factors constitute significant input to the process of learning to write, but that similar factors can also be found as outcomes of this process, as we intend to show.

Cognitive outcomes, as related to the affective and social factors of the learning process, have been documented extensively in the literature on self-efficacy (Pajares & Johnson, 1994; Zimmerman & Bandura, 1994). However, the affective and social outcomes, along with their potential for changing lives beyond the borders of the classroom and academic success, have been less explored—and these are precisely the outcomes which contribute to the goals of lifelong learning promoted by so many educational institutions and international agencies today (Bolhuis, 2003). This research attempts to fill this gap by showing how students in academic writing courses perceive themselves as having acquired, often unwittingly, some of the very goals which universities declare as essential to higher education and that their academic writing teachers, also unwittingly, have contributed greatly to these goals.

The specific purpose of this study was to examine within the context of various L2 academic writing courses:

(1) student perceptions of their learning outcomes other than writing skills—their ‘byproducts’ and   
(2) student and teacher perceptions of the possible links between ‘by-products’ and teaching and learning processes.

# 3. Method

The data were collected through self-reporting questionnaires and interviews, and analyzed qualitatively. The qualitative approach allowed us to gain insights into student and teacher perceptions and their relationships.

# 3.1. The sample

Two hundred and ten undergraduate and graduate students, with English as L2 (for native Hebrew speakers) or L3 (for native speakers of Arabic, and a handful of other foreign languages, e.g., French, Spanish), taught by 11 teachers, over either one or two semesters, in 20 writing for academic purpose courses at seven higher education institutions in Israel, participated in this study (see Appendix A). The students belonged to one of the following groups:

(1) Undergraduates majoring in English Literature, enrolled in one of a series of required writing courses in the English Department $( n = 9 3$ ) at three universities; these students were primarily being trained to write papers about English Literature.

(2) Undergraduates in the Department of Education in two teacher training colleges $( n = 3 3$ ); for these students, the objective was clearly on improving their English language proficiency, with a focus on writing.   
(3) Graduate students enrolled in mixed discipline writing courses at four universities and one scientific research institute $( n = 8 4$ ). These students were learning to write texts about their own research (e.g., abstracts, literature reviews, research reports, grant proposals), in their respective fields.

Although the courses had one goal in common, which was to improve students’ ‘academic writing,’ the teachers’ course syllabi represented a wide range of teaching approaches and practices (e.g., use of genre models; group discussion of peer work; journal writing). In addition, there was great diversity among the students’ level of English language proficiency, both spoken and written (i.e., ranging from low intermediate to advanced level).

# 3.2. Instruments and procedures

# 3.2.1. Student questionnaire $( S Q )$

In order to explore the students’ perceived learning outcomes, we used the instrument which we had designed for our previous research, a student questionnaire (SQ) (Katznelson et al., 2001; Pally et al., 2002). It consisted of two open-ended questions stated in English:

(1) What areas of writing in English do you feel you have made progress in?   
(2) Are you aware of any other outcomes related to your participation in this course   
(aside from your development in writing in English)? YES/NO   
Whatever your response, please explain.

These questions were clarified in the students’ native language when necessary, and they had a choice of responding either in English or in Hebrew. The SQ was administered during class time at the close of the courses. There was no time limit, and all students completed the questionnaire within approximately $1 5 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ , generating texts ranging from one sentence to several paragraphs. All the students in the sample were consenting participants, although they were unaware of the exact purpose of the research.

# 3.2.2. Syllabi and teacher questionnaire

For information about the teachers’ basic teaching approaches and practices, we elicited their course syllabi and administered a teacher questionnaire.

# 3.2.3. Paired student-teacher interviews

To elicit students’ further reflection on changes they might have undergone along with the changes in writing, interviews were conducted with five student volunteers in the language of their choice, English or Hebrew. The students were selected on the basis of the researchers’ interest in their responses to the SQ questions relating to ‘other outcomes,’ and at the time of the interview were told of the purpose of the research. They represented the three groups previously identified: writing in English Literature (two students), writing in English Education (one student) and mixed discipline graduate writing (two students).

In order to tap the teachers’ point of view on the possible sources of the by-products, we conducted semi-structured interviews with the five teachers who had taught the five interviewed students, using matching questions (see Appendix B). All interviews were taperecorded, and later transcribed and translated where necessary.

# 3.3. Data analysis

Procedures in descriptive statistics were used for analyzing the responses to questions 1 and 2 of the SQ, where each declared outcome was considered one response unit (i.e., one sentence could contain more than one response unit, and one response unit could be expressed over sentence boundaries). For instance in Table 1, under the category ‘Awareness of the Meaning of Writing,’ example m is one sentence which contains three response units: (1) ‘‘I have learned to be aware of how I write and compose ideas’’; (2) ‘‘and aware of the difficulties existing in writing’’; and (3) ‘‘[aware of] the enjoyment of producing texts.’’ Content analysis was performed on the responses to the question about the by-products, in which the students were asked to elaborate on their answers (Whatever your answer, please explain).

Content analysis was also done on the student and teacher interviews. We paired each teacher’s interview data with those of her corresponding student, and analyzed both sets of data together in order to tease out any convergence and/or divergence of opinions between the dyads concerning the possible sources of the by-products. Each researcher examined one or two dyads; conclusions were pooled and discussed. The interpretation of the data was established by consensus among the three researchers.

# 4. Findings

We will report on the findings in two parts. The first part, based mainly on the data collected through the SQ, describes the nature of the perceived outcomes. The second part, mainly derived from the student and teacher interviews, attempts to make connections between these by-products and the pedagogical practices from which they emerged.

# 4.1. The nature of the perceived outcomes

Any reference to student writing processes would not be complete without at least brief mention of their progress in writing. Although we did not intend to focus on this aspect of the results in this study, we did ask the question: What areas of writing in English, if any, do you feel you have made progress in? This was primarily to emphasize for the students the contrast between learning outcomes related to writing and learning outcomes unrelated to writing. In fact, almost all the students $( 9 7 \% )$ reported progress (e.g., ‘‘improvement in writing style,’’ ‘‘vocabulary development,’’ ‘‘being able to develop an abstract idea into an organized paper,’’ ‘‘proper use of surface conventions’’). Interestingly though, some responses to this question anticipated the next question about by-products, and included descriptions of outcomes which we had not yet meant to elicit (e.g., ‘‘reading better through understanding text structure,’’ ‘‘a change in reading strategy,’’ ‘‘learning to love English’’); this showed that the distinction was still blurred, for some students. This is a meaningful finding, since our main claim is that there are outcomes other than learning-towrite, and some students seem to have discovered this on their own.

Table 1 Categories of ‘by-products’ and representative student responses   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Categories and no. of. response unitsa</td><td>Representative student responses</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Other skills (72) (28%)</td><td>(a)It helps me formulate problems that are related to reading also not only writing.&quot;</td></tr><tr><td>(b)&quot;My ability to communicate with people using English has improved. (c)&quot;The course helped me understand the news in English.&quot;.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Thinking skills (55) (19%)</td><td>Critical thinking: (d)&quot;I am more critical now about everything, especially things I read.&quot;.</td></tr><tr><td>(e)&quot;The courses give me more than just learning to write, it is opening the mind for greater thinking.</td></tr><tr><td>Thinking in English: (f)By learning to write in English I finally learned to think in English, which is for me my biggest achievement.&quot;</td></tr><tr><td>Organizing thoughts: (g)&quot;This course helped me in organizing my thoughts...&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Affective (20%) Positive (46) Negative (5)</td><td>(h)&quot;My expectations of myself increased.&quot;</td></tr><tr><td>(i)&quot;I&#x27;m less afraid of criticism, now that the worst critic of all has criticized me.&quot;</td></tr><tr><td>()&quot;I feel de-motivated to try writing again. I&#x27;m less confident in my abilities as a writer now.&quot; (k)&quot;I&#x27;m sorry but for me composition is a suffer, I don&#x27;t enjoy it, and as a result,</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m not very good at it. It&#x27;s frustrating, and it doesn&#x27;t reflect my knowledge in other English courses.&quot;</td></tr><tr><td>Awareness of the meaning of writing (30) (12%)</td><td>()&quot;I have learned to remember my audience as I write. Before it didn&#x27;t always occur to me that what&#x27;s so obvious for me, isn&#x27;t so for my audience.&quot; (m)&quot;I learnt to be aware of how I write and compose ideas, and aware of the difficulties existing in writing and the enjoyment of producing texts.</td></tr><tr><td>Broadening of knowledge base (25) (10%)</td><td>(n)&quot;I received some general knowledge about the world.&quot;.</td></tr><tr><td>Behavior in a professional context (20) (10%)</td><td>(o)I have learned a lot about the jungle rules&#x27; of all the academic press... how everything really works.&quot;. (p)&quot;Now I can explain to my pupils in school how to write a good paper.&quot;</td></tr><tr><td>Learning the meaning of. learning (14) (6%)</td><td>(q)Most of all I realized how much I have to learn on this subject. (r)&quot;The course improved my ability to be critical ...in everything; I pay.</td></tr><tr><td>Social interaction (14)</td><td>attention to all kinds of details that I was never aware of before.&quot; (s) &quot;I learned how to work in a team with others, to criticize others, to give</td></tr><tr><td>(4%) Creativity (6%)</td><td>support to others.&quot;. (t)&quot;The writing course allowed me to explore my creativity without having the</td></tr><tr><td>Gain (7) Loss (6)</td><td>fear of having written the wrong answer.&quot;. (u)&quot;This writing course...instills the notion that we should all write the same.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Total no. of students $= 2 1 0$ . Percentages refer to students responding per category. a Total number of response units $= 2 9 4$ .

# 4.1.1. Perception of by-products

To the question, Are you aware of any other outcomes related to your participation in this course (aside from your development in writing in English), $84 \%$ of the total number of students answered ‘‘yes.’’ This result emerged from all three groups, irrespective of the program in which the students were enrolled. This confirmed our expectation that most students perceived additional outcomes to those explicitly targeted by the syllabi of the different academic writing courses—outcomes which we have defined as by-products.

# 4.1.2. Nature of by-products

Analysis of the responses given to the follow-up to question 2 in the SQ, Whatever your response, please explain, yielded a total of 294 response units representing non-writing outcomes ranging from other cognitive skills to social and affective changes. These were clustered into nine categories of change. Table 1 lists the number of responses in each category and illustrates these categories with examples quoted or adapted from students’ original responses (some translated from Hebrew). It also shows the percentage of students out of the total of 210 represented in each of the nine categories. Although some of these categories seem unevenly represented quantitatively, we gave value to each one of them as representative of the diversity of individual students’ outcomes within parallel writing programs. In addition, the potential overlap of some of the components of our conceptual categories must be taken into account.

It is noteworthy that all categories had representative responses from more than one course or institution, and that all courses and institutions revealed a diversity of byproducts. The data point to possible patterns in by-products among some of the courses. Indeed, a preliminary comparative examination of responses from different groups does reveal differences among them, for example, a lower percentage of perceived by-products among the students of the natural and exact sciences $( 7 0 \% )$ , compared to those of the social sciences and humanities $( 8 9 \% )$ . It may be that students in the sciences, all PhD students in our case, focused more on the explicit goals of the courses, which answer an urgent need to publish; others seemed rather more open to acknowledging more personal gains, an interpretation supported by Marton (1984, p. 197):

ythe orientation toward meaning in the humanities and the social sciences implied a personal reinterpretation of the content of studies in terms of one’s experience of the world of people rather than of things.

Further research on this issue, focusing mainly on the group similarities and differences, would be definitely worthwhile. Our focus in this work, however, is the wide range of representation of the by-products in all groups.

# 4.1.3. Description of categories of by-products

As expected, the largest category of perceived by-products was ‘Other Skills’ (72 response units— $28 \%$ of the students), such as reading (see example a in Table 1), speaking (e.g., ‘‘Writing and speaking obviously go together!’’ and see example b) and listening comprehension (example c). Some students made note of somewhat less expected ‘other skills,’ such as coping with stressful situations.

The category we named ‘Thinking Skills’ (55 response units— $1 9 \%$ of the students) actually includes several aspects of this construct. The first is ‘Critical Thinking,’ an essential element in any educational enterprise (e.g., ‘‘I am more critical now about everything, especially things I read,’’ [example d] and see also example e). The second is ‘Thinking in English’ (e.g., ‘‘By learning to write in English I finally learned to think in English, which is for me my biggest achievement’’ [example f]); this is very meaningful in specific EFL settings where many students complain that their inability to think in English obliges them to perform several operations to produce even a first draft in English (see Section 4.2 below). The third is ‘Organizing Thoughts’ or creating order in their initially vague emerging ideas (example g).

We termed ‘Affective’ the outcomes perceived by $20 \%$ of the students (51 response units) which attested to the emotional factors in learning, particularly self-confidence and loss of it. Although most responses expressed gained confidence (e.g., ‘‘I’m less afraid of criticism, now that the worst critic of all has criticized me’’ [example i] and see also example h), the few who reported loss (5 students) gave very poignant testimony (e.g., ‘‘I feel de-motivated to try writing again. I’m less confident in my abilities as a writer now’’ [example j]). One desperate student even expressed suffering and frustration: ‘‘I’m sorry but for me composition is a suffering, I don’t enjoy it, and as a result, I am not very good at it. It’s frustrating, and it doesn’t reflect my knowledge in other English courses’’ (example k).

Perhaps the most exciting category of all was defined as ‘Awareness of the Meaning of Writing’ (30 response units— $12 \%$ of the students). It was remarkable because it also demonstrated the awareness among many students of the far-reaching consequences of learning to write on their academic lives, thus supporting a wider view of the role of writing for academic purposes (Hamp-Lyons & Hyland, 2005; Turner, 2004). Some responses in this category reflected students’ newly gained awareness of the importance of reader awareness (e.g., ‘‘The course emphasized how to say things as diplomatically as possible’’ and see example l). Others reflected not only awareness of the writing process but the enjoyment drawn from writing (e.g., ‘‘I learnt to be aware of how I write and compose ideas, and aware of the difficulties existing in writing and the enjoyment of producing texts,’’ example m). They also reflected on the value of the act of writing itself, (e.g., ‘‘A person can be helped by writing to express himself; sometimes it can be easier to express himself in writing than in speaking’’), as well as its potential for enhancing one’s outlook on other things (e.g., ‘‘I feel more focused and sharper ever since I’ve started taking English writing classes. I’m more aware of the meaning of things’’). Clearly, these responses reveal that many students have come to realize that the act of writing represents far more than good organization of ideas and correct grammar. In the last instance particularly, the student seemed to see writing as having a personal value, in addition to its communicative function. This is an important re-conceptualization because it reflects a view of ‘academic writing’ with implications for aspects of life beyond writing courses, contributing to the capacity of university students to begin their engagement with lifelong learning (Bill, 1998; Bolhuis, 2003; Cropley & Knapper, 1983).

‘Broadening of Knowledge Base’ (25 response units— $1 0 \%$ of the students) was expected, since most writing syllabi include input from sources outside the students’ immediate knowledge base. Interestingly though, it is often their peers and their peers’ interests that are the source of valuable information (e.g., ‘‘Since most of the students come from different disciplines, I was able to learn about research in different fields’’).

‘Behavior in a Professional Context’ (20 response units— $1 0 \%$ of the students) represented responses relating to, for example, gaining ‘behind the scenes’ information and skills valuable to students as future professionals. An example of this is ‘‘I have learned a lot about the ‘jungle rules’ of all the academic pressy how everything really works’’ (example o, and see also example p). One might have expected this by-product from a course in a scientific institution, where budding scientists are focused on publishing. But, in fact, these responses came from six different groups representing all affiliations, exact sciences, teacher trainees and literature students.

Another intriguing category was ‘Learning the Meaning of Learning’ (14 response units— $6 \%$ of the students). By this heading we meant to refer to metacognitive awareness in learning: the students’ perceptions that not only are they ‘learning to learn’ but they are also undergoing a meaningful process of change in the way they see learning itself and its consequences (e.g., ‘‘Most of all I realized how much I have to learn on this subject’’ [example q]). Their responses reveal that the writing courses might be affecting both how they learn and how they may apply this process of learning to other academic courses and to other aspects of their lives (e.g., ‘‘The course improved my ability to be criticaly in everything; I pay attention to all kinds of details that I was never aware before’’ [example r]). Responses such as these confirm the view promoted by Rawson (2000) that ‘learning to learn’ well may be ‘‘all about skills, but it is much more about the start of a lifelong process of personal development’’ (p. 11).

‘Social Interaction’ (14 response units— $4 \%$ of the students) is illustrated by responses such as ‘‘Learning to listen to others’ ideas’’ or ‘‘We criticize each other’s work, write notes and evaluations and learn how to approach [other] students’ work with no means to offend’’ (also see example s).

Finally, the category ‘Creativity’ (13 response units— $6 \%$ of the students) was expressed as both gain and loss. The gain was represented by very few responses, for example, ‘‘The writing course allowed me to explore my creativity without having the fear of having written the wrong answer’’ (example t). This is perhaps not surprising: academic writing is sometimes posited as the opposite of creative writing, despite the new voices calling for a more humanizing perspective on the genre, as well as an approach to its teaching which encourages novice writers to find their own voice (Ivanicˇ , 1998). In fact, the students in the academic writing courses, even within the Literature Department, often feel constrained in their creativity to the point of frustration (e.g., ‘‘This writing course instills the notion that we should all write the same. Originality is not a good quality. James Joyce would not pass here’’ [example u]).

Some of the recurring themes emerged from the data will now be examined in light of the additional data from the teacher and student interviews. Indeed, uncovering the possible sources of the by-products described above and the links among them may help us conduct courses which openly foster the occurrence of a diversity of by-products, providing that a broader definition of the aims of teaching academic writing is recognized.

# 4.2. Sources and links

This discussion will center around four themes derived from the by-products described in both questionnaires and interviews: development of ways of thinking, social interaction, self-confidence, and learning of professional behavior.

# 4.2.1. Development of ways of thinking

Teachers interviewed seem intent on helping their students develop a critical attitude when reading all kinds of texts, including their own. Pamela (all participants’ names are pseudonyms), a teacher in an Education program, puts it this way: ‘‘Being able to evaluate in some way, ah, what you read, I think, is important. Um, I think it also has some effect on them as individualsy’’ Her student Mary, a future teacher of English, confirms that examining models of good writing on the same topic as her own teaches her a lot: ‘‘To see things from many points of view. I know better how to organize my thoughts.’’

Similarly, in the context of graduate students learning to write scientific papers in English, one student says: ‘‘I learned to read articles more critically.’’ Sheila, her teacher, recognizes that this could very well be an outcome of the course. She says: ‘‘I don’t teach them critical reading; it’s not part of the syllabusy It’s something that they get as I teach them how to write papers.’’ She continues: ‘‘There are cases where one could talk about [developing] organized thinking that goes beyond the actual process of writing it down.’’ In this way, she herself defines the very idea of the by-product as we see it. In both cases, the development of critical reading is thus both an outcome of the courses and a catalyst to critical thinking.

Illustrating another aspect of development of thinking, one teacher, Cathy, used journalwriting as a way of getting her students ‘‘to explore and elaborate [their] thoughts in writing, to practice developing [their] ideas in English and to try out alternative styles and modes of writing’’ (from Cathy’s Course Description). She gives feedback on student journals but not grades. Melody, her student of English Literature, shows several facets of such development. Both she and her teacher declare in their separate interviews that it was journal-writing that stimulated learning to express oneself in English without the mediation of the native language. They both believe in the power of being given the freedom to write. Cathy says:

It depends on them [the students]y you can learn, you can make something more of yourself [by writing in a journal]y the feeling that [the teacher’s] words of empowerment are very nice but there is a power when you feel like you know what you’re aiming at, whether you get to the target or not.

She adds that the comments made by the teacher on the student journals relate mainly to the writer and not the writing. Therefore, she says:

I think over time there is a kind of dialog established, which is individual, with the student, between the student and whoever is reading the journaly and I think this is very much a way of encouraging students to think in English and to feel free to write in English and to reflect on their writing process and their reading processy (Cathy)

Melody confirms that journal-writing is a liberating factor, ‘‘because you don’t get a grade for it,’’ and ‘‘it’s free; you’re not afraid of saying something wrong.’’ So there is an enormous value given here to setting your own goals, appreciating non-judgmental readers, and understanding the importance of being set free to have your own ideas and express them, regardless of the language used. Whatever language it is, it becomes yours to think in. The liberating and motivating role that journal-writing plays in the development of writing in ESL has been confirmed in other research (see, e.g., Holmes & Moulton, 1997).

Melody also says that thinking in the new language was one of the goals that she had set for herself in the beginning of the course. Being a native speaker of French, she says she had already achieved this goal in Hebrew, so she thought she ‘‘should achieve this in English as well.’’ It is interesting that, although her teacher, Cathy, claims that her comments on the journals were mostly on content, and not on form, Melody seems to perceive that in conferences where she and Cathy met one-on-one, this was not so: her teacher made her aware of the mistakes that were due to thinking in another language and thus of the need to think in English. She illustrates how Cathy showed her how her other languages were getting in the way of speaking accurate English. She gives an example: ‘‘Because she [the teacher] misunderstood [when I translated from French or Hebrew], I began to think in English.’’ In other words, she made a conscious decision to learn to think in English, and her teacher had facilitated this decision, unknowingly.

Melody is fully aware that this by-product was far-reaching enough to lead to yet another realization: better reading and writing skills transferred to other activities outside the course, even outside the English Department. Excitedly she reports this wonderful discovery:

Once I knew that I was really thinking in English was in one of my seminars in Psychology. I had to read an article in English and for some reason I summed it up in English. Then I translated it into Hebrew!!! And I said: ‘‘I WROTE IN ENGLISH! I DIDN’T HAVE TO WRITE IN ENGLISH.’’ Then I knewy

One presumes that what she then knew was that English was one of the languages of her thoughts: she was capable of thinking in English about texts read in English, and she was writing about them in English without even realizing that she was doing so. This byproduct seems to be a function of both freedom of self-expression, fostered mainly by journal-writing, and a conscious determination to overcome difficulties in communication.

# 4.2.2. Social interaction

Even though few students actually declared that ‘social interaction’ represents one of the by-products, the theme is worth considering because several respondents declared that their interaction with others in their courses affected their feelings about themselves and mainly their self-confidence—a very strongly represented by-product to be discussed below.

Lily, a student in a PhD writing program, expresses this relationship very clearly. In her course, the teacher (Bernice) encouraged discussions, usually in small groups, among students of different disciplines, so that they got to know about the different perspectives of an issue. Lily notes that one by-product of the course was the benefit of commiserating with students in other fields ‘‘struggling for scholarships and for mentors.’’ First, the fact that these exchanges took place in English naturally encouraged the appearance of her second declared by-product’ of ‘improved speaking skills.’ But this exchange with other students also afforded her another perspective on her own work:

yyou never know how bad or good you are when you are aloney you can talk about subjects but you don’t know if other people think it’s interesting so it’s very good place to share those ideas to see what other people think about them.

Corroborating this declaration, the teacher’s opinion is that most of the by-products from the course are mainly ‘social’ and not connected to the students’ writing but to their interaction with each other, mediated by the teacher.

More tellingly still, in the case of Lily, another by-product was triggered: a perceived increase in self-confidence, which, being relatively well-represented in most of the responses, will be dealt with fully in the next Section 4.2.3. We will now look at a byproduct as a result of the social interactions fostered by the teacher, Bernice. She sees its origin in her own role in their writing process, which allows students to come to her, express themselves, and be released from the pressures of their Ph.D. studies. She defines herself as

ysomebody academic that you can tell everything to and I’m not really involved [as supervisor]. Everybody comes with trepidations of ‘‘I can’t write, I never write, and I can’t do it and don’t make me!’’ I spend a lot of time focusing on what they can do.

The social exchange that takes place in the classroom is seen by this teacher as fostering a ‘sense of proportion.’ The person may realize, from the interchange that goes on in class that she is not the only one who does not understand a point in grammar, for example. This sensitive and balanced attitude of the teacher toward the students’ insecurities, together with the exchanges with other students, can thus be the source of increased confidence, as revealed in Lily’s words ‘‘ywhen you finish the class and you have to speak for even two minutes in English and you had experience so you feel much better about yourself.’’

# 4.2.3. Self-confidence

The theme of self-confidence, the main by-product related to affect, is a recurring one, among all groups of participants: English literature majors, English teacher trainees and graduate students in diverse fields alike. From the teacher’s point of view, as in Bernice’s case, we have seen that self-confidence might be fostered by the type of role the teacher chooses to play. Another teacher, Cathy, actually refers directly to building confidence in writing as a means to achieve writing goals. Her course description says, ‘‘[discussion of ideas related to other academic subjects] gives you experience which I hope will increase your fluency and confidence in expressing yourself in English.’’ Both these teachers, Bernice and Cathy, see their role as fostering increased self-confidence within the framework of the course; students, and perhaps their teachers, perceive this confidence buildup as leading to more self-confidence in other areas of their lives as well.

Yet a third teacher, Sheila, seems to have become aware of the possibility of this byproduct only during the course of the interview. Students of hers mention in their own interviews that the course had given them the self-confidence to cope with ‘‘scientific writing generally, beyond language issues’’ (Stella) and even to ‘‘[express themselves] correctly also in Hebrew’’ (Hana). Sheila definitely did not mention any such goal in her syllabus; however, when informed of these students’ statements of self-confidence, she made a discovery: ‘‘There ought to be a matter of [increased] confidencey they may be feelingy especially when they have to write something as difficult as science, and they see that they can do it. It ought to make them more self-confident.’’ She believes that the very awareness of having coped with great difficulties has had a major role in increasing selfconfidence (Pajares & Johnson, 1994; Zimmerman & Bandura, 1994). No doubt, the student’s awareness of her own professional and academic specific expertise, as expressed in her writing, plays a part in the coping and the subsequent gain of confidence (Pally et al., 2002).

We have seen that in the context of a class of English literature majors, some degree of self-confidence might have been fostered by the teacher’s practice of being non-judgmental in her feedback (see Section 4.2.1). One student of academic writing for English Literature,

Susan, says she had no fear of writing the wrong answer in this course, as she had in her other courses, a fear which undercut her creativity. In her own words:

There is no other course that allows me to feel so fully expressivey I don’t feel that I have to have the right answer. I can focus on my writingy. I have the freedom to choose who [which secondary source] is interesting and is usefuly for what I think it is interesting so there is somehow this double freedom that I can explore. (Susan)

Like Cathy in a similar setting, Susan’s teacher, Annette, mentions the de-emphasis on grades and evaluation as a liberating factor, as well as the freedom of students to pursue their own topics and sources. She also believes that her feedback on students’ writing plays a major role in conveying this sense of freedom, as seen in this statement: ‘‘My questions were designed to give her [the student] the direction in which to fill out her argument rather than to tell her that it’s no use pursuing that topic.’’ In her interview, Susan shows much appreciation for her teacher’s non-evaluative and accepting comments, as well as those of a peer, who was paired with her for conferencing with their teacher. In this case then, the feedback given to this student on her work encouraged creativity. However, other students in this same class say that the course was ‘‘constraining and didn’t deal with their creative side.’’ In fact, two of the five responses relating to ‘creativity loss’ came from this class. Annette’s explanation is that such students come to the course mistakenly expecting to practice creative writing and are unable to overcome the existing constraints in order to benefit from the possibility of developing their creativity in academic writing. Still, since these responses came from a minority of students, the connection between type of feedback, self-confidence and creativity is definitely worth considering, all the same.

# 4.2.4. Learning of professional behavior

Another link of by-products to teaching approach is through what we have designated as the learning of behaviors fitting to professionals within their respective fields. Students in an English teacher training program seem to have taken their teacher as a model, and perceived their ‘professional behavior’ by-product as stemming from that source: ‘‘Now I can explain to my pupils in school how to write a good paper.’’

Among the graduate students in science, there were reports of having learned how to behave among their peers, in conference presentations, for example, and how to represent themselves and their work in front of others. This result had as much to do with behavior in a professional milieu as with presenting their writing, and it seems quite distinct from learning to write. Sheila, the teacher of one group of graduate students in science, spontaneously presents this perspective: ‘‘I don’t feel that scientific writing is a language course, so much as [a course in] understanding the process and organization of scientific writing.’’ In fact, in an informal conversation, she says that she had actually had her training as a scientist, not as a language teacher. She makes it clear that she considers herself first and foremost a scientist, and then a teacher of writing in English. This can explain her view that professional behavior is an integral part of writing about science. The case of a teacher being able to perform both as a professional in the students’ field and as an academic writing teacher is rare in our environment, due to institutional constraints, but such a situation can bring great benefit to the students in their professional lives. The recommendations coming from the field of EA $\mathrm { \bf P }$ to join the teaching of content with the teaching of language could well be implemented more often by choosing English language teachers who are also experts in the students’ fields of study, as was done in the case of

Sheila above, or otherwise content specialists who have been trained to teach and assess writing in their disciplines. Suggestions for such training are contained in a volume by Bean (1996), entitled Engaging Ideas. These issues have been extensively dealt with in the literature on writing across the curriculum, and are still very much in discussion, as testified in a pre-conference e-mail discussion initiated by the European Association of Teachers of Academic Writing, where several participants called for a ‘‘multi-skilled university lecturer with double competencies’’ (L. Olivier, L. Rienecker, et al., personal communication, 2005).

It might be premature to express as causal the connections we have made between perceived by-products, and teaching settings and practices in the areas of thinking, selfconfidence, professional behavior and social interaction. Still, we see suggestions of causality in our interview data. Other methods of research, including factors such as teacher personality, applied to a larger sample, could reveal new facets of this phenomenon.

# 5. Conclusion

Among the categories of by-products revealed by this research, several can be linked to the highest goals of education in diverse contexts. Much of higher education research is still predominantly concerned with cognitive, administrative and ideological issues, i.e., with the development of critical thinking, accessibility and accountability, lifelong learning, as well as learning skills (Barnett, 1994 quoted in Rawson; Carter, 1985; Cropley & Knapper, 1983). In practice, although many universities declare personal, social and even moral goals in their mission statements, these goals were not explicit in most of the academic writing course syllabi we examined, which were more pragmatic. Paradoxically, they were in fact quite explicit in the responses of the students in our study, who were asked about their perceptions of their non-writing outcomes. Thus, the goals representing the higher values of intrapersonal and interpersonal development seem to have been achieved by students engaged in learning to write, the one common element to all the academic writing courses studied. As we have seen, this result may be linked to the means by which these values are transmitted in diverse instructional settings with diverse teaching beliefs and practices. Specifically, the practices in the settings we have examined seem to foster the development of thinking, the freedom to explore language and content, the loss of fear of self-expression, and social interaction among participants in the learning situation—all outcomes which they carry over into their personal and professional lives.

Acknowledging the perceived by-products of academic writing courses has implications for both research and teaching. For researchers, valuing students’ and teachers’ perceptions of course outcomes can shed light on what the teaching and learning of academic writing really means. Collecting data from students of other disciplines might provide an opportunity to explore to what extent other courses impact their students similarly, through the teaching of other skills. For teachers, incorporating the notion of byproducts into the conceptualization of their courses can lead to planning and delivering EAP courses which will be recognized as having ‘added value’ and being much more than service providers. Thus, a greater awareness of by-products and an understanding of how they may be yielded and enhanced may foster the advancement of higher education in more ways than is currently expected by curriculum designers.

# Acknowledgement

We dedicate this work to the memory of our much loved friend and colleague, Talma Yzraely of Tel Aviv University, whose students shared with us perceptions of learning outcomes that could only have come from their teacher’s dedication and commitment to the value of writing and of the dialogue between student and teacher.

We also thank all the other teachers and students that participated in this study, generously contributing their time and insights. Special thanks to Itzhak Gilat for his input on the design of the study.

Appendix A. Demographics of subjects   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Group/teacher</td><td>Type of Institution</td><td>Department</td><td>Degree sought</td><td>n</td></tr><tr><td>Pamela</td><td>Teachers&#x27; College 1</td><td>English</td><td>B.Ed.</td><td>19</td></tr><tr><td>Bernice</td><td>University 1</td><td>Sciences</td><td>Ph.D.</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td>Bernice</td><td>University 1</td><td>Social Sci.</td><td>Ph.D.</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>Annette</td><td>University 1</td><td>English Lit.</td><td>B.A.</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>Tal</td><td>University 1</td><td>English Lit.</td><td>B.A.</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td>Tina</td><td>University 2</td><td>English Lit.</td><td>B.A.</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td>Laura</td><td>Research Institute</td><td>Sciences</td><td>M.A.</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>Katie</td><td>Teachers&#x27; College 2</td><td>English</td><td>B.Ed.</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>Sharon</td><td>Research Institute</td><td>Sciences</td><td>M.A., Ph.D.</td><td>27</td></tr><tr><td>Cathy</td><td>University 3</td><td>English Lit.</td><td>B.A.</td><td>17</td></tr><tr><td>Alex</td><td>University 4</td><td>Mixed</td><td>M.A.</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>Sandra</td><td>University 4</td><td>Soc.Sci + Hum</td><td>Ph.D.</td><td>5</td></tr></table></body></html>

Total: 20 groups, 11 teachers, 7 institutions, 210 students.

# Appendix B. Interview questions (semi-structured interviews)

# Guiding questions for interviewing students

- Do you have any idea what could have caused your ‘by-products’?   
$\bullet$ Did the conferences with the teacher have anything to do with it?   
$\bullet$ Did you come to conferences? How many?   
- Have you taken a specific writing course before?   
$\bullet$ Does the focus on writing have anything to do with the ‘by-products’?   
$\bullet$ Do you find a source of by-products in other English courses?   
$\bullet$ Do you have this kind of ‘by-products’ in any other course?   
$\bullet$ Is the amount you wrote a possible factor in the outcomes?   
$\bullet$ Did writing in class or writing at home have an influence on your ‘by-products’?   
$\bullet$ Does the topic you write about make a difference?   
- How does the fact that it is academic writing (as opposed to creative writing) a possible influence on your by-products?   
$\bullet$ Is there discussion of student-produced text in class? If so, does that influence the by-products? How?

- How does the feedback from the teacher influence the outcomes? $\bullet$ Do you revise your papers? If so, does the revising process influence your ‘by-products’? - How might the grading system in this course influence your outcomes, or not?

# Guiding questions for interviewing teachers

Introduction: We are looking into ‘by-products’ of writing courses: products of the courses that are not seen in the writing product of the students—their perception.

- Do you have any idea what could have caused these ‘by-products’?   
- Did the conferences with you have anything to do with it?   
$\bullet$ Did this particular student come to conferences? How many?   
- Has this kind of phenomenon ever been brought to your attention before?   
- Do you think the focus on writing has something to do with the ‘by-products’?   
- Do you think you might notice ‘by-products’ in other English courses you teach?   
- Do you think this kind of ‘by-product’ could be present in other courses the students take (outside of foreign language)?   
- Do you think the amount the students wrote is a possible factor in the outcomes?   
$\bullet$ Do you think writing in class or writing at home might have had an influence on students’ ‘by-products’?   
- Do you think the topic the students write about makes a difference?   
- How does the fact that it is academic writing (as opposed to creative writing) possibly influence the occurrence of ‘by-products’?   
- Is there discussion of student-produced text in class? If so, does that influence the ‘by-products’? How?   
- How does the feedback you give possibly influence the outcomes?   
$\bullet$ Do students revise their papers? If so, does the revising process influence the ‘by-products’?   
- How might the grading system in this course influence the ‘by-products’ or not?

# References

Bailey, P., Daley, C. E., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (1999). Foreign language anxiety and learning style. Foreign Language Annals, 32(1), 63–76.   
Bean, J. C. (1996). Engaging ideas: The professor’s guide to integrating writing, critical thinking, and active learning in the classroom. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.   
Bill, D. (1998). The Dearing inquiry into United Kingdom higher education and the role of lifelong learning in the learning society. Research in Post-Compulsory Education, 3(3), 279–296.   
Bizzell, P. (1992). Academic discourse and critical consciousness. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.   
Bolhuis, S. (2003). Towards process-oriented teaching for self-directed lifelong learning: A multidimensional perspective. Learning and Instruction, 13, 327–347.   
Brand, A. (1987). The why of cognition: Emotion and the writing process. College Composition and Communication, 38(4), 436–443.   
Carson, J. G. (2001). Second language writing and second language acquisition. In T. Silva, & P. K. Matsuda (Eds.), On second language writing (pp. 191–199). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Carter, R. (1985). A taxonomy of objectives for professional education. Studies in Higher Education, 10(2), 135–149.   
Cropley, A. J., & Knapper, C. K. (1983). Higher education and the promotion of lifelong learning. Studies in Higher Education, 8(1), 15–21.   
Cumming, A. (1998). Theoretical perspectives on writing. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 18, 61–78.   
Daly, J. A. (1985). Writing apprehension. In M. Rose (Ed.), When a writer can’t write (pp. 43–82). New York: Guilford Press.   
Daly, J. A., & Miller, M. D. (1975). The empirical development of an instrument of writing apprehension. Research in the Teaching of English, 9, 242–249.   
Dwyer, B. (2001). Successful training strategies for the twenty-first century: Using recent research on learning to provide effective training strategies. The International Journal of Educational Management, 15(6), 312–318.   
Ehrman, M. (1996). Understanding second language learning difficulties. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.   
Flower, L., & Hayes, J. R. (1981). A cognitive process theory of writing. College Composition and Communication, 32, 365–387.   
Frye, R. (2000). Assessment, accountability and student learning outcomes. Retrieved from http://www.ac. wwu.edu/dialogue/issue2.html   
Giroux, H. (1999). Impure acts: The practical politics of cultural studies. New York: Routledge.   
Goleman, D. (1998). What makes a leader? Harvard Business Review, November–December, 93–102.   
Hamp-Lyons, L., & Hyland, K. (2005). Editorial for 4,1: Some further thoughts on EAP and JEAP. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 4(1), 1–4.   
Hayes, J. (1996). A new framework for understanding cognition and affect in writing. In C. M. Levy, & S. Ransdell (Eds.), The science of writing: Theories, methods, individual differences, and applications (pp. 1–27). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Holmes, V. L., & Moulton, M. (1997). Dialogue journals as an ESL learning strategy. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 40(8), 616–621.   
Horwitz, E. K., Horwitz, M. B., & Cope, J. (1986). Foreign language classroom anxiety. The Modern Language Journal, 70(2), 125–131.   
Ivanicˇ , R. (1998). Writing and identity: The discoursal construction of identity in academic writing. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.   
Jordan, R. R. (1997). English for academic purposes: A guide and resource book for teachers. UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Katznelson, H., Perpignan, H., & Rubin, B. (2001). What develops along with the development of second language writing? Exploring the ‘by-products’. Journal of Second Language Writing, 10(3), 141–159.   
Kress, G. (1995). Writing the future: English and the making of a culture of innovation. Sheffield, England: National Association for the Teaching of English.   
Leki, I. (2001). Hearing voices: L2 students’ experiences in L2 writing courses. In T. Silva, & P. K. Matsuda (Eds.), On second language writing (pp. 17–28). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Marton, F. (1984). Review of the book: Understanding student learning. Studies in Higher Education, 9(2), 196–197.   
Marton, F., Dall’Alba, G., & Beaty, E. (1989). Conceptions of learning. International Journal of Educational Research, 19, 277–300.   
McLeod, S. (1987). Some thoughts about feelings: The affective domain and the writing process. College Composition and Communication, 38(4), 745–769.   
Message from the President of Tel Aviv University (2006). Retrieved from http://www.tau.ac.il/president/devar-e. html   
Nuhfer, E. B., & Pavelich, M. (2001). Nutshell notes. Retrieved from The University of Colorado at Denver Web site http://www.isu.edu/ctl/nutshells/old_nutshells9_4.html   
Pajares, F., & Johnson, M. J. (1994). Confidence and competence in writing: The role of self-efficacy, outcome expectancy, and apprehension. Research in the Teaching of English, 28, 313–331.   
Pally, M., Katznelson, H., Perpignan, H., & Rubin, B. (2002). What is learned in sustained-content writing classes along with writing? Journal of Basic Writing, 21(1), 90–115.   
Pfeiffer, S. I. (2001). Emotional intelligence: Popular but elusive construct. Roeper Review, 23(3), 138–142.   
Postman, N. (1996). The end of education. New York: Knopf.   
Rawson, M. (2000). Learning to learn: More than a skill set. Studies in Higher Education, 25(2), 228–238.   
Rubin, B., Katznelson, H., & Perpignan, H. (2005). Learning for life: the potential of academic writing courses for individual EFL learners. System, 33(1), 17–27.   
Silva, T., Leki, I., & Carson, J. (1997). Broadening the perspective of mainstream composition studies, some thoughts from the disciplinary margins. Written Communication, 14, 398–428.   
Sommers, N. (2003). The Harvard study of undergraduate writing. Paper presented at the European Association for the Teaching of Academic Writing and European Writing Center Association’s Second Joint Biennial Conference, Central European University, Budapest, Hungary.   
The mission of Harvard University (1997). Retrieved from http://www.harvard.edu/siteguide/faqs/faq110.html   
Turner, J. (2004). Language as academic purpose. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3(2), 95–109.   
Zimmerman, B. J., & Bandura, A. (1994). Impact of self-regulatory influences on writing course attainment. American Educational Research Journal, 31(4), 845–862.

Hadara Perpignan has taught and coordinated EAP courses in universities in Brazil and Israel. Her Ph.D. thesis focused on the effects of teacher-written feedback on EFL student academic writing and writers. Her current research interests include topics in academic writing about literature, genre analysis and curriculum design.

Bella Rubin is Senior Lecturer and Coordinator of the Executive MBA English program and of the Ph.D. and M.Sc Academic Writing courses at Tel Aviv University. Her research focuses on the links between academic writing and writing in the workplace, e-learning, and the cognitive, affective and social aspects of learning.

Helen Katznelson teaches academic writing in the Department of English and American Studies, Tel Aviv University, and is an EFL teacher trainer at Beit Berl College. Her major research interests include teacher feedback to writers, writers and writing apprehension, and the predicted and unpredicted learning outcomes of academic writing courses.