Book review

Research Genres Across Languages: Multilingual Communication Online, Carmen Perez-Llantada, Cambridge University Press, (2021), 251 pp., ISBN: 978-1-108-79259-2. \$US34.99, 26.99.

This richly documented book sees to bring our picture of research genre evolution up to date following the advent of Web 2.0 in 2004. It analyses and reflects on the profound impact of this new communicative context on the production and disemination of research and on theretical concetualizations of genre The second main im ofthe book is to ddres the implications of the linguistic diversity of present-day research setings and multilingual practices in research communication. While extending Swales (2004) account ofreearch genres both chronologically and theoretically, the book is also more limited in scope in several ways as spoken research genres, whether new or old, are not adressed, and the focus isrstricted to science, technology, engineering, mathematics and medical (TEMM) disciplines. A similar exploration of the evolution of the social sciences and humanities sSH) remains to be done. Moreover, multimodality, a prominent feature of many online genres, is touched on but not investigated in depth. These re. strictions in scope, neessary for reasons of space, are indicative of the unprecedented proliferation over the past decade of the genres and modes of research communication, which cannot all be encompassed within a single book.

Research Genres Acros Languages provides both food for thought and many empirical analyses f current scientific research genres using a mixed-methods design that comprises both an impressive review of the iterature and of various data resources, and the collection and analysis of small-cale specialized written corpora, complemented by a number of exploratory surveys. Carmen Perez. Llantada has published widely over the years on the topics covered by the book, and draws on her long and varied experience here.

The book comprises seven main chapters, a 29-page Reference section and an Index. The introductory chapter, Research Genres in Context, situates research genres in the current context of rapid technological and social change, in particular new media, researcher mobility and linguistic diversity. This leads into the Theories and Metaphors chapter in which recent conceptualizations of webmediated genres are reviewed and the metaphors of genre and language ecologies are used to explain the emergence and evolution of genres and genre assemblages on the web. Chapter 3 (Science, Genres and Socil Action) explores the dominant social structure, Web 2.0, as the driver of these changes. The second main aim of the book, the place of multilingualism in the dissemination of scientific knowledge, forms the core of chapter (Language Diversity in Genred Actvity), while multiliteracies are examined in chapter 5 (Genres and Multiliteracies) and pedagogical proposals to foster both plurilingualism and multiliteracy in novice STEMM researchers are put forward in chapter 6 Inovation and Change in Genre-Based Pedagogies).The book concludes with a shorter chapter on The Way Ahead.

As the author acknowledges in the concluding chapter, "global genre diversity in today's research world is very hard to capture' (p. 198). Wheres Swale analysis concened research settings and genres that werestil relatiely stable, the present extremely dynamic context in which research genres are evolving makes the analytical task much more complex. To address this complexity, the author takes a broad view, drawing on Giddens' structuration theory and his analysis of late modernity (Giddens, 1984, 1990) in which change i faster-paced and global in scope, and where new social structures have emerged. The new social structure that now dominates the dissemination of scientific knowledge and of research outut in general, and is therefore the focus f the book, is Web 2.0. Genres, as forms of social action, have evolved in response to these structural changes. This socio-structural perspective on research gere evolution gives this overview a greater explanatory depth, to use Maier and Engberg's (2019, p.133 term, than if the topic has been approached from, say, the angle of the technological afordances of the digital medium or altenatively a purely rhetrical angle - though neither of these aspects are nelected It also ensures coherence between the dfferent chaptersas similar dynamics are shown to be at work in both genre and language diversity in online scientific communication.

Another great strength of the book is the theoretical discusson proposed in Chapter 2 of current theorizations and debates on research genres. This is particularly timely in view of the almost bewildering profusion of terminologies and concepts that have emerged in response to the new media environment of Web 2.0. The new theorizations surveyed cover concepts such as genre webification and genre remediation, genre assemblages and generic hybrids, genre transmediality or the recontextualsation of scientific knowledge for the online audience in view of the polycontextuality or context collapse of the digital evironment, and the social exigences for greater trustaility and reproducibility of cientific methods and results in the wake of Open Aces and Open Science As this list itsef shows, the new media setig for scientifi communication has trigered a highly dynamic renewal of reflection in genre analysis, but one that is ifficult to capture in its entirety. In order to do so, the author proposes an illuminating holistic ecological conceptualization of digital genres. Again, a broad socio-structural view of the context is taken, in which the scientific community is envisaged as a complete ecosystem involving interaction between living organisms (researchers and other stakeholders) and abiotic or non-living features of the environment (social orders and structures in Giddens' terms). Like biological ecosystems, the scientific community works towards an equilibrium and stability as genre practices adapt to change, and exchanges with its environment through language and other modes. This ecological approach is also applied to the intertextual relations between genres on the web, which inear concepts such as genre chains cannot fully acount for. The intereconnectednessof many digital genres is exempliied by the genre ecology ofthe web-mediated reearch artice, an ehanced publication in which the core genre the research article) is linked to many peripheral genres, or ad-ons, such as graphical abstracts, video summaries, audioslides and hyperlinked articles. Concepts from literary criticism such as intertextuality and paratexts are also brought i by the author to interret this generic interdependence.

The concrete manifestations of this ecological metaphor and of the huge expansion in the research environment made available by Web 2.0 are explored in several empirical analyses of web-native and web-mediated genres, either collected by the author or reported in publications by other analysts. Reearch journal interfaces and two recent genres, vide methods articles and registered reports, ae picked out for more detailed analysis for this purpose. Some general language features (e.g., lexical density, syntactic complexity, ngrams) are analyzed using statistical tools but, given the coverage of the book, detailed rhetorical and linguistic analysis was clearly beyond its scope. Readers interested in finer-grained analyses are advised to consult the numerous individual studies ited in the references. The transformative practice that i evident in digital genres that go beyond exclusively scholarly communication is also explored through the analysis of crowdfunding projects.

Unlike generic diversity, the evidence for multilingual diversity in digital SMM gnres, the authors second main theme is for the moment les abundant and les conclusive. The author reviews thetheoretical arguments in favor of multilingualism in research genres and shows that the long-standing debate on the hegemony of English in research communication has led to a healthy critical view of this tyrannosaurus rex' of languages. Moreover, there has been a vast increase in recent decades in the contribution of authors worldwide from L1 backgrounds other than English to research publication. Nevertheles, it appears to be the case that the most highly-valued scientific genres in terms of researchers' careers and of knowledge construction (e.g. the research article) are stil predominantly produced in English in science, for reasons related to institutional policies (the obligation to publish internationally) and to the utilitarian advantage of a common language for science communication. Polylanguaging", as the author points out, \*is strongly ssociated with parascientifi genres targeting non-specialist, diversified audiences, both local and global (p. 11, while expert-to-expert communication continues to take place mainly in English. This leads the author to contend that \*Englishisation' on the web is increasingly circumscribed to only part of researchers activity. Adopting a non-normative stance towards the use of English by L2 writer from various backgrounds, the author proposes the term of Academic Englishes (by analogy with World Englishes) to qualfy these glocal variants, previously seen as problems and mismatches, arguing instead that they may introduce diversification in world views and discourse pragmatics. As with digital genres, the language dynamics of Web 2.0 are constantly evolving and it will be interesting to se if the preent (relaive) spialization of diffeent languag for dfrent communcative uroses and audee wil continue to hold.

The genre and language diversity documented in the book clearly imply that writing in today's research world requires authors to possess muliliteracies - gre, rhetorical, multimodal, digital, acdeic ad intecultural sklls- and various acquisition stratgies are reviewed. Based on these needs and using the digital genres analyzed in the previous chapters, the author rounds the book off with a pedagogically-oriented chapter in which she proposes four modules, each involving a set of tasks, adopting a consciousness-raising approach to guide postgraduate and early-career researchers. The necessary competences for Language for Academic Purposes (LAP) teachers are also outlined.

Research Genres Across Languages grapples with a multifceted and constantly evolving topic, so some minor shortcomings are to be expected. The focus on STEMM disciplines alone, while understandable for space reasons, nevertheles weakens, I fel, the arguments in favor of multilingualism in digital genres: more evidence of polylingual research production would probably have been found if the book had also covered spoken research genres and ssH disciplines, where languages other than English are more widely used for research communication. This is an area for further investigation. Another aspect not explored is the probable diffrences between STEMM disciplines in their uptake of the palette of digital genres. Previous research on print science genres has revealed considerable differences in thir genre repertire that may well subsist in the digitl environment, meaning that they cannot be treated as a homogenous block. Lastly, for a comfortable reading experience, a certain familiarity with current debates and conceptualizations of genre and web-mediated genres themselves is helpful, as the citation density in the book is high and a large number of concepts and terms are called upon to characterize the present research world. For those les familiar with certain aspects, the very comprehensive reference section provides all the necessary information, however.

These shortcomings are amplyoffset by the very considerable merits of the book. By continuing the Swalesian tradition, which has proved so frutful in genre analysis, updating and enlarging it to encompass digital genres and linguistic diversity online, the author makes a highly valuable contribution to the theoretical solidity of the feld by establishing a continuity between the pre- and post-Web 2.0 era of research dissemination. This book is essential reading for analys interested in current genre evolution and LAP since it offers in-depth reflction on the implications of the profound changes induced by the digital era on genrified activity. The ecological approach to the conceptualization of digital genres, and the empirical analysis of a wide range of digital genres, bring very welcome clarification and deepening of this complex subject. Whiledigital genres wil no doubt continue to evolve since, as Giltrow and Stein noted, \*genres expire when the situations expire' (2009, p. 4), a remark that supports the ecological metaphor proposed by Carmen Perez-Llantada, this book offers a comprehensive and thought-provoking \*stabilized-for-now (Schryer, 1994, p. 107) picture of the current scene.

# References

Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of society. Outline of the theory of structuration. Polity.   
Giddens, A. (1990). The consequences of modernity. Polity.   
Giltrow, J., & Stein, D. (Eds.). (2009). Genres in the Internet ssues in the theory of genre (Vol. 188). John Benjamins.   
Maier, C . ge . (2019 The mil bide t  ad titir in the d i is a t . Luzon, C. Perez-Llantada (Eds.), Science communication on the Internet: Old genres meet new genres (pp. 131-152). John Benjamins.   
Schyer, . 199 . t   a ., . 5-24)  .   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Exploration and applications. Cambridge University Press.