# Experiencer troubles: A reappraisal of the predicate-based asymmetry in child passives

Athulya Aravind & Loes Koring

To cite this article: Athulya Aravind & Loes Koring (2023) Experiencer troubles: A reappraisal of the predicate-based asymmetry in child passives, Language Acquisition, 30:1, 76-100, DOI: 10.1080/10489223.2022.2115373

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10489223.2022.2115373

# Experiencer troubles: A reappraisal of the predicate-based asymmetry in child passives

Athulya Aravind $\textcircled { 1 0 } ^ { \mathsf { a } }$ and Loes Koring $\textcircled { 1 0 } ^ { \mathsf { b } }$

a Massachusetts Institute of Technology; b Macquarie University

# ABSTRACT

Children’s understanding of passives of certain mental state predicates appears to lag behind passives of so-called actional predicates, an asymmetry that has posed a major empirical challenge for theories of passive acquisition. This paper argues against the dominant view in the literature that treats the predicate-based asymmetry as theoretically irrelevant. We instead propose a novel account that locates the problem in the syntax of experiencer constructions. Synthesizing theoretical and developmental evidence, we build a case for an early misanalysis of transitive subject-experiencer constructions as unaccusatives – structures that, by design, cannot passivize.

# ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 26 January 2022   
Accepted 11 August 2022

# 1. Introduction

The passive is one of the best studied constructions within research on syntactic development. Since seminal work in the 70s (Bever 1970, de Villiers & de Villiers 1973) that found in children poor comprehension of passive sentences relative to active counterparts, researchers from widely varying theoretical orientations have pursued the question of what children do and do not know about this construction (see Deen 2011 for overview). Despite this wealth of empirical research, there is to date no consensus as to whether passive syntax is delayed in acquisition, or till what age.

The earliest work found that young children misinterpret passive sentences, often assigning the role of agent to the NP in subject position. Subsequent work in the 80s (e.g., Maratsos et al. 1985) revealed that some passives are harder for children than others, depending on properties of the verb from which the passive participle is derived. English-acquiring children understand verbal passives involving an “actional” verb such as hug by around age 4-5, yet they do not display adult-level performance with verbal passives involving a “non-actional” verb such as love. Non-actional passives seem to come in only around or after age 6. The finding has been replicated in a variety of studies, using diverse experimental methodologies (e.g., Sudhalter & Braine 1985, Gordon & Chafetz 1990, Hirsch & Wexler 2006; see Nguyen & Pearl 2021 for a meta-analysis), making the predicate-based asymmetry one of the most well-documented aspects of passive acquisition.

What lies at the heart of this asymmetry? Is it a genuine one—that is, reflective of a stage in the child’s language development—or is it an artifact of experimental or other factors? Researchers have approached the problem from both angles, but to date no consensus has emerged. Some treat the asymmetry as genuine, but their accounts of it fail to go beyond stipulating lexical restrictions on child passives. In the other camp are those who assume that the asymmetry is a mere artifact. But here again, researchers disagree over what this artifact is masking: competence or the lack thereof.

In this paper, we offer a novel account of the predicate-based asymmetry. The empirical basis of our proposal comes from a recent meta-analysis by Nguyen & Pearl (2021), which helps localize the problem to passives of subject-experiencer predicates. We then argue that the predicate-based asymmetry should be explained in terms of difficulties with the syntax of experiencers, rather than in terms of restrictions on passivization. More specifically, we propose that children initially hypothesize an unaccusative syntax for subject experiencer constructions, which renders them unpassivizable.

We begin, in Section 2, by giving a characterization of the predicate-based asymmetry. In the second half of Section 2 as well as in Section 3, we critically review previously offered approaches to this asymmetry. We discuss accounts that stipulate lexical-semantic restrictions on children’s passives and why they fail to reach a level of explanatory adequacy needed to advance our understanding of the phenomenon. We then turn to various accounts of passive acquisition that do not take the asymmetry to be modulated by grammatical capacity, and point out empirical and theoretical shortcomings of each. In Section 4, we present the details of our proposal and spell out specific predictions that may be submitted to direct experimental testing in future work. Section 5 discusses a different account that also takes the asymmetry seriously, but proposes a semantic solution to the problem. While the account as it stands does not make the right predictions, we suggest a reinterpretation of their core insight that integrates well with our own proposal.

# 2. The actional/non-actional asymmetry

The asymmetry in children’s comprehension between ACTIONAL passives (i.e., passives with verbs that denote a (physical) action such as kick) and NON-ACTIONAL passives (i.e., passives with verbs that denote mental or perceptual states, such as love or see) was first observed in Maratsos et al. (1985), and has since been one of the most stable findings in the literature on passive acquisition. In brief, children’s comprehension of non-actional passives tends to lag behind their comprehension of actional passives by 2-3 years.

Maratsos et al. (1985) noted that there is considerable variation, both within and across languages, with respect to the types of predicates that allow passivization. In English, all transitive verbs that (in the active) have an agentive subject and a patientive direct object allow passivization. But for the class of transitives that do not follow this template, there are some that passivize (e.g., love) and some that do not (e.g., lack). Other languages may be more (e.g., Russian) or less (e.g., Gaelic) restrictive than English. Given the cross-linguistic variation and seemingly idiosyncratic restrictions within a single language, it makes sense to ask whether the learner starts out: (i) by analyzing passivization as a general rule that applies to all subject-object pairs, only later identifying the language-specific restrictions, or (ii) by being conservative, initially semantically restricting their passives to those that are nearuniversally passivizable (e.g., agent-patient verbs) and only later extending it to other passivizable verbs in the language.

Maratsos et al. (1985) used two experiments to test these possibilities. In their first experiment, children were shown some characters and then heard a sentence which was followed by the question who did it?. The sentence presented to the children included either an actional verb, or a non-actional verb, and was either in passive or active voice. The 4- and 5-year-old participants performed significantly better on actional than non-actional passives, with scores of 67 and $4 0 \%$ , respectively. Both of these scores are lower than scores on their active counterparts (91 and $8 8 \%$ , respectively), but the crucial result is the distinction between actional versus non-actional passives. The second experiment used a picture-selection task in which children were presented with two pictures and were asked to point to the picture that best matched the sentence. Again, children had trouble with passives derived from non-actional verbs, and these problems persisted even in 7-year-olds. This actional/nonactional asymmetry has since been replicated in various studies in English (e.g., Sudhalter & Braine 1985, Gordon & Chafetz 1990, Hirsch & Wexler 2006) and has been found to hold in other languages as well (e.g., Dutch [Verrips 1996], Japanese [Sano et al. 2001], and Russian [Babyonyshev & Brun 2004]).

These experimental results led Maratsos et al. (1985) to conclude that children’s passives are initially semantically constrained; children only permit passives of predicates of a certain semantic type, namely predicates of actional verbs (physical action verbs in their words). This happens to be the set of verbs that passivizes in every language that has a passive construction (Keenan & Dryer 2007).1 This account then takes the actional/non-actional distinction to reflect a genuine constraint in acquisition. More specifically, it ascribes children’s poor performance on non-actional (or mental/ perceptual state) passives to a semantic restriction on passivization. Maratsos et al. (1985), following Hopper & Thompson (1980), define this restriction in terms of a notion of semantic transitivity, a structural-semantic gradient composed of properties of the verb and its arguments such as kinesis, agency, and affectedness of the object. Actional verbs such as kick are on the high end of the scale, as they involve an action and an agent, whereas a verb such as love is low on the transitivity scale, as it is stative, not an action, and has no agent or affected object. Despite having passive syntax, the account goes, English-acquiring children fail on certain types of passives because they have yet to extend the set of passivizable verbs to those lower on the semantic transitivity scale.

Despite the intuitive appeal of notions such as semantic transitivity, it is difficult to use this gradient to define, in a non-circular manner, natural classes of verbs that show uniform syntactic or semantic behavior. The absence of precise characterizations of the relevant semantic features has given rise to two problems, one methodological and one conceptual. First, there is no consensus across acquisition studies as to which verbs count as “actional” or “non-actional”, which makes a comparison difficult.2 Second, it remains ill-understood what makes certain semantic features grammatically relevant. Why is it that certain sets of semantic features, but not others, modulate the syntactic property of “being passivizable”?3 Likewise, how does a learner figure out what features to look for when defining the necessary semantic restriction?

The first problem of terminological confusion is evident in the acquisition work that followed. A study by Demuth, Moloi and Machobane (2010), for instance, reports the absence of an actional/non-actional asymmetry in children’s passives in Sesotho. Their set of non-actional verbs, however, includes verbs such as help, look for, expel, and leave behind, which have markedly different syntactic and semantic properties from Maratsos et al.’s (1985) original set. For starters, they involve an agentive subject, unlike verbs such as love or remember whose subjects are experiencers. We can see this in the contrast between look for and love across two common tests of agentivity: (i) the acceptability of modifying an event with adverbs indicating volitionality in (1) (see, e.g., Roeper 1987, Talmy 1976), and (ii) the acceptability of imperative formation with the verb (2) (see discussion in Dik 1978, Lehmann 1993, K. Klein & Kutscher 2002).4

(1) a. Mary didn’t look for her clothes very carefully. b. #Mary didn’t love Dana very carefully.   
(2) a. Look for my clothes! b. #Love Dana!

A recent meta-analysis by Nguyen & Pearl (2021) helps resolve the terminological confusion. Their aim was to make precise which of the many lexical-semantic features that could characterize ‘nonactional’ predicates actually pose difficulties for children. They used a set of descriptive semantic notions (e.g., actional, stative, volitional, affected, agency) to annotate the verbs tested in the acquisition literature. This provided a set of five semantic profiles (in terms of combinations of these semantic features) for the verbs tested in the literature. In addition, they identified from the literature the age at which children succeed on each verb, which allowed them to estimate the age of acquisition for each of their semantic profiles. Using this method, they found that what sets apart the two latest-acquired profiles from all others is the $+ \mathrm { S U B J }$ -EXPERIENCER feature. That is, the latest-acquired verbs involve predicates whose subjects (in the active) are experiencers, such as love and remember. Recall that in the original Maratsos et al. 1985 study, the class of ‘non-actional’ items involved precisely such verbs. Unlike subject-experiencer verbs, non-actional predicates such as annoy or frighten, which involve experiencer objects, do not exhibit an acquisition delay.

Nguyen & Pearl’s (2021) own proposal is that passive-acquisition is modulated by specific conglomerates of semantic features. In a sense, then, their account is a restatement of Maratsos et al.’s (1985) hypothesis that children’s passives are semantically constrained. In fact, their semantic properties are similar to the semantic properties that make up a predicate’s transitivity as defined by Hopper & Thompson (1980). Their profile 1 verbs, which are acquired earliest, are agent-patient verbs that denote volitional actions with an affected object—that is, verbs that are high on Hopper & Thompson’s (1980) semantic transitivity scale. The crucial novelty is that they do not just find a binary opposition between physical action verbs and non-actional or psych verbs, but rather demonstrate a relationship between children’s performance and finer-grained semantic profiles.

At the same time, the semantic features invoked by Nguyen & Pearl (2021) fare no better than those in Maratsos et al. (1985) in helping us pick out classes of predicates that behave in a uniform way syntactically or semantically, distinct from other classes of predicates. In fact, it is not even clear to what extent some of the features are semantic in the first place. The proposed $+ S \mathrm { U B J }$ -EXPERIENCER feature, for instance, is an amalgam of a syntactic notion of subjecthood and a semantic notion of being an experiencer. What this means is that neither account—Maratsos et al.’s (1985) original one or Nguyen & Pearl’s refinement— helps us understand why these semantic features matter for child passives and not others. The predicates hug and love differ along as many dimensions as make hug and love distinct concepts, but why are syntactic processes sensitive to features such as affectedness, but not, for instance, physical contact (certainly an important cognitive concept)? For Nguyen & Pearl’s lexical-semantic profiles, it is further unexplained what unifies the particular semantic composites beyond the explanandum itself. There does not seem to be anything motivating fusing some of these features except the fact that children have difficulties with passive participles of verbs that have those features. What then is the nature of the semantic restriction in the language-acquiring child? How do children define the relevant semantic profiles, and as such, the set of passivizable verbs and how do they eventually go beyond the initial set? Even if we grant that semantic features such as actionality and affectedness are special (perhaps the child is predisposed to look for them), what evidence does the child need to extend her passives beyond the prototypical case?

Despite this criticism, we think that Nguyen & Pearl (2021) makes a crucial contribution in helping us arrive at a more precise descriptive characterization of the asymmetry: the delay is specific to subject-experiencer verbs, and this, we think, is an important clue towards the nature of the problem in acquisition as we will spell out in section 4. But before we do so, we consider accounts of passive acquisition that take the asymmetry between actional and non-actional verbs to be artifactual. We first discuss accounts that take performance on non-actional verbs to be the true indicator of children’s competence, and illustrate how they account for children’s good performance on passives of actional verbs. We will then turn to accounts that take performance on actional verbs to be the true indicator of children’s competence and explain how they account for children’s poor performance on passives of non-actional verbs. While these proposals don’t face the sort of conceptual problems that beset the semantic-restriction accounts, we will discuss other empirical and theoretical problems that arise in relation to the predicate-based asymmetry.

# 3. Explaining away the asymmetry

Unlike the proposals previously discussed, most previous accounts of passive acquisition take either the non-actionals or the actionals as the true indicator of competence and attempt to explain away the other. In the following sections, we discuss representative accounts that fall into each camp.

# 3.1. Performance on non-actionals reflect late maturation of passive syntax

Theories that take children’s performance on non-actional passives to reflect their true competence need to say something about what aspect of the passive poses difficulties for the language-acquiring child and how they move from a state of not having the grammatical knowledge to represent passives to a subsequent state in which they do. Most relevantly for our purposes, these accounts need to answer the question why children perform relatively well on passives of actional verbs, well before demonstrating good performance on non-actional passives.

The two accounts we consider are Wexler’s (2004) Universal Phase Requirement (UPR) and Orfitelli’s (2012) Argument Intervention Hypothesis (AIH), both of which locate the problem in the syntax of passives. On both accounts, the problem relates to the subject nominal of passive verbs occurring in a non-canonical position. Child grammar is restricted in such a way that movement of the subject of a passive verb from its original (object) position is blocked (for different reasons in the two theories).5 Furthermore, both accounts hypothesize that the capacity to represent passive syntax is in part driven by aspects of brain development that are not input-contingent. That is, children need to mature in order for the relevant syntactic means to become available, which does not happen before the ages of 6 or 7. Only when the required syntactic means are in place is the child able to perform well on passives.

Yet, children only under-perform on non-actional passives. They succeed on passives of actional verbs well before age 6, a fact that demands an explanation. Both UPR and AIH explain children’s success on actional passives in terms of the child relying on an alternative strategy in interpretation. That is, when confronted with an input string that would be analyzed by adults using a structure that is not available to the child, they analyze the input string using an alternative structure that is available. In the case of passives, this alternative structure is the adjectival passive, which is often surfaceidentical to verbal passives in English.6 Consider, for instance, (3a), which is ambiguous as to whether it represents a verbal passive (as in [3b]) or an adjectival one (as in [3c]).

(3a) Bettie is washed.   
(3b) Bettie is being washed by Bill.   
(3c) Bettie is still freshly washed.

Crucially, adjectival passives do not involve movement of the internal argument to subject position; rather, the surface subject is projected as an external argument. This structure, then, is predicted to be unproblematic for both syntactic accounts. Importantly, this strategy applies less successfully with non-actional passives, which are not well-formed in an adjectival structure (Borer & Wexler 1987). Contrast, for instance, the two examples in (4). Whereas the actional verb root break in (4a) makes a perfectly good adjectival passive participle, the verb root hear in (4b) is somewhat odd.

(4a) The car seems broken.   
(4b) ??Homer seems heard.

As a result, on both UPR and AIH, children’s comprehension of non-actional passives reveals their genuine inability to construct the relevant structure, whereas actional passive comprehension involves deducing and applying the adjectival strategy, which derives a roughly adult-like interpretation albeit through distinct syntactic means.

There are intrinsic conceptual disadvantages to explaining away, rather than explaining, a set of behavior, but this two-pronged approach faces certain empirical problems, as well, as the adjectival strategy does not straightforwardly account for the asymmetry. The main problem is that the inapplicability of the adjectival passive parse is not restricted to the relevant non-actional verbs. Activity predicates such as kick (5) also make for bad adjectival passives (Hirsch & Wexler 2006). One proposal about the oddness of $( 5 \mathsf { a } / \mathsf { b } )$ comes from Kratzer (2000) (further developed in Anagnostopoulou 2003 and Embick 2004), who postulates a principled limitation on productive adjectival passive formation: roots that do not imply a caused state of the internal argument do not support adjectival passive interpretations. Thus, broken, which implies that the present state of the object was caused by the breaking event, makes for a good adjectival passive. In contrast, kick, which does not imply any such new state, does not. Crucially and problematically, children perform well on passive sentences such as (5c), which, on this account, should not have a suitable adjectival parse.

(5) a. ??Bart seems kicked. b. ??The kicked boy. c. The boy was kicked by the horse.

Hirsch & Wexler (2006), which builds on Wexler (2004), recognize this problem, and make the empirical prediction that performance should vary per verb, depending on how good the corresponding adjectival passive of that verb is. They predict that children should not perform well on passives derived from actional verbs such as hold, as they do not imply a (resulting) target state. Furthermore, there are non-actional verbs, such as remember, that can imply a target state and these accounts make the additional prediction that children should perform relatively well on passives of such verbs. This empirical prediction, however, is not borne out. In fact, it is quite the opposite: held is among the earliest-acquired passives, whereas remembered is among the latest-acquired ones (Nguyen & Pearl 2021).

Thus, accounts explaining away the predicate-based asymmetry in terms of the adjectival strategy do not succeed. The adjectival strategy fails to make the right empirical cut.7 It incorrectly predicts poor performance on some actional passives, while at the same time incorrectly predicting good performance on some non-actional passives. Given that the adjectival strategy does not distinguish between actional and non-actional passives in the right way, we are back to the question we started out with: why do children perform better on actional than non-actional passives? Next, we turn to those accounts that take children’s success on actional passives to demonstrate command of passive syntax in children. As we will see, such accounts face their own set of problems.

# 3.2. Performance on non-actionals reflects extra-grammatical factors

Theories that take children’s adultlike performance on actional passives to reflect their overall passive competence also have to say something about the verb-based asymmetry. In contrast to explaining good performance on actional passives, however, these accounts have to explain why passives of certain non-actional verbs pose difficulties for the child. Here we discuss three kinds of explanations in the literature (though they are not incompatible with each other). One kind places the blame on the asymmetric depictability of non-actionals compared to actionals. Another argues that the problem has to do with pragmatic factors that again place an asymmetric burden on non-actionals. A third type of account suggests that a parsing bias to treat the first-encountered DP as an agent impedes comprehension. In the following section, we review representative work that falls into each of these categories.

Messenger et al. (2012) argue that picture-matching tasks, where children must process the sentence and distinguish between two very similar pictures, may pose asymmetric difficulties when it comes to subject-experiencer predicates. They write: “In concrete terms, it is relatively easy to distinguish a picture in which a penguin is hitting from a picture in which it is being hit; however, it may be much more difficult to distinguish a picture in which a penguin is seeing (matching an experiencer-theme verb passive such as “the pirate was seen by the penguin”) from a picture in which it is not seeing (but rather is being seen)” (Messenger et al. 2012:571).

If, indeed, adult interpretation of non-actional passive sentences was impeded by depictability issues that did not equally affect the actional passive sentences, methods that rely less on picture-based comprehension should reveal better performance. Messenger et al. (2012), therefore, use a structural priming method to probe children’s knowledge of passive syntax. Their logic is as follows: if passives of non-actional verbs successfully prime passives of actionals, children must have given the non-actional prime sentence a syntactic parse that can appropriately apply also to the actional passive. Across two experiments, they found similar rates of priming across verb types, with no effects or interactions of verb-type. The authors take these findings to corroborate their hypothesis that the verb-based asymmetry is an experimental artifact.

While Messenger et al. (2012) suggest a plausible alternative explanation for children’s failures with non-actional passives in picture-selection tasks, they have a minimal amount to offer that throws light on why the verb-based asymmetry should have emerged in Truth-Value Judgment Tasks (TVJT) (Gordon & Chafetz 1990, Fox & Grodzinsky 1998, Deen et al. 2018, Nguyen & Pearl 2021). This remains a big disincentive to accepting their broader conclusion. Furthermore, their own methods are not beyond criticism. At present, we cannot be sure that the priming effect was due to surface similarities between the subject-experiencer passive prime and the actional passives produced, like the presence of a by-phrase. There is in fact evidence that intransitive, active locatives (e.g., the foreigner was loitering by the broken traffic light) prime passives (Bock & Loebell 1990). What is missing then in Messenger et al.’s (2012) experiment is a crucial control, demonstrating lack of priming by partial structures in children, for instance by showing that non-passive sentences such as in (6), with a nominal-modifying by-phrase, fail to prime actional passives.

(6) Mary appreciated the smart move by the chess player.

A second issue has to do with the subject-experiencer prime sentences used in the experiment. Messenger et al.’s (2012) prime sentences were all in the progressive aspect, for example, (7a-b). However, a well-known property of subject-experiencer predicates such as love is that they are stative and thus incompatible with the progressive (see [8]).8 The sentence in (7b) would then be infelicitous, unless the mismatch between the verbal aktionsart and aspect is somehow repaired. One way to do so is to coerce an eventive reading for love, that is, treat it as denoting a loving-activity (e.g., in Messenger et al.’s [2012] stimuli, an act of hugging), of which a sheep is the agent. This entails that the passive in (7b) is not derived from a subject experiencer construction, but rather from an activity predicate which projects a transitive structure with an agent argument.9 , 10

(7) a. A girl is being hit by a sheep. b. A girl is being loved by a sheep.   
(8) #The mom is loving the baby.

Thus, while the methodological issues raised by Messenger et al. (2012) are reasonable, it is not clear to us that their own methods adequately demonstrate competence with these structures.

The second type of full competence account evokes pragmatic factors to explain away the asymmetry. Crain, Thornton & Murasugi (2009) and Crain & Fodor (1993) observed that long passives are pragmatically marked and appropriate only when the by-phrase is used to distinguish between one or more potential alternatives. Building on these observations, O’Brien, Grolla & Lillo-Martin (2006) argued that children’s poor performance on passives may have resulted from the use of experimental materials that did not meet the relevant felicity conditions. In their own study, they hypothesized that providing contexts that properly motivate the use of the by-phrase should lead to greater comprehension, even on non-actional verbs. Indeed, when three- and four-year-old children were presented with stories that made salient two potential agents/experiencers in a TVJT, they found that the actional/non-actional asymmetry was less pronounced. In their Experiment 1, for instance, 4-year-olds’ accuracy rates were $9 3 \%$ on actional long passives versus $8 3 \%$ on non-actional long passives.

Conversely, attempts to replicate O’Brien, Grolla & Lillo-Martin’s (2006) results have subsequently failed (Nguyen & Snyder 2017, Deen et al. 2018). Additionally, even if their findings were reliable, what remains underdeveloped on this pragmatic account is why this use condition on the passive byphrase—which crucially applies to all passives—has an amplified effect on non-actional passives. Put differently, even if a more felicitous experimental set-up improves performance, there still seems to be a verb-based asymmetry: infelicity only seems to be problematic in the comprehension of non-actional passives.11

(i) HOMERF was heard by Lisa.

Even if we put these theoretical issues aside, we hesitate to take Liter &Lidz’s (2021) findings as providing evidence in favor of a pragmatic explanation of the verb-based asymmetry, because their results are incomplete in crucial ways. First, there was no comparison with actional predicates, so we simply cannot tell whether children would have displayed a verb-based asymmetry.

A different explanation is offered by Y.T. Huang et al. (2013), who propose that difficulties with passives stem from a bias in incremental processing. The idea—a variation on an old idea proposed in Bever (1970)—is that children, and perhaps adults as well, first predict a canonical mapping between thematic roles and nominals; in other words, they hypothesize that the first nominal they encounter is an agent. Crucially, children are not able to revise this initial incorrect parse even as they get further evidence that the sentence they are hearing is a passive. Y.T. Huang et al.’s (2013) evidence comes from Chinese bei-passives, which differ in important ways from English verbal passives (see C.T.J. Huang 1999 for overview), but the parsing account has been endorsed for English by Deen et al. (2018). Deen et al. (2018) reasoned that if children’s difficulty with passives has to do with their prior expectations about thematic alignment, simply repeating the noncanonical sentence should give them a second chance to revise their expectations. They found that English 4-year-old children showed greater success on non-actional passives if the target sentence was repeated.12

The explanatory inadequacy of such processing accounts is discussed at length in Hirsch & Hartman (2006). We direct the reader to this work for details, while simply summarizing the thrust of their main argument. If non-canonical word orders lead to an insurmountable processing problem for children, we should find analogous difficulties in other structures involving movement, such as object wh-questions. This prediction is not borne out, for actionals or non-actionals. More generally, what holds for the pragmatic accounts holds for the processing accounts as well: why do these processing factors unevenly affect non-actional passives?

Thus, the various attempts that explain children’s poor performance on non-actional passives as stemming from extra-grammatical sources also fall short. Accounts that locate the issue in the lower imageability and thus comprehensibility of non-actionals fail to explain children’s difficulties with the same type of predicates in tasks that do not rely on picture selection. Pragmatic and processing accounts simply replace one question—why do children show asymmetric difficulties comprehending non-actional passives?—with another—why are children asymmetrically affected by pragmatic and processing factors with non-actional passives?

The state of the art, then, is one where existing proposals in both camps—those that take the asymmetry seriously and those that explain it away—are limited in empirical coverage or predictive power or both. This motivates the present proposal. We share the ambition with the lexical-semantic restriction accounts of accounting for the asymmetry in terms of the child’s linguistic development. However, like the maturational accounts, we maintain that the problem is syntactic in nature.

# 4. Proposal: A problem with syntax of subject-experiencer constructions

Due to Nguyen & Pearl’s (2021) meta-analysis, we have in hand a generalization about the predicatebased asymmetry in passive acquisition: children’s difficulties lie with passives of verbs with experiencer subjects (e.g., love, remember). Predicates with agentive or cause subjects, even when ‘nonactional’ in a general sense (e.g., scare, anger), are acquired earlier. Our proposal builds on this generalization. We propose that at the point where children reliably succeed on actional passives, they have command of passive syntax, but they may not have command of the syntax of experiencer constructions.13 In particular, we suggest that children initially misanalyze English subject-experiencer constructions—which project the experiencer as an external argument—as constructions involving an internally generated experiencer. As we describe in more detail in the following sections, experiencer verbs show variation across languages in the syntactic realization of the experiencer argument, such that expressions denoting identical concepts may appear with the experiencer projected externally (love in English) or internally (q’var ‘love’ in Georgian). Crucially, the latter configurations tend to be unaccusative structures, which systematically lack verbal passives (cf. \*the child is being fallen). If children initially assign an unaccusative syntax to English subject experiencer constructions, their unpassivizability directly follows.

We first spell out our theoretical assumptions about passive syntax. We assume a syntactic analysis on which the defining feature of verbal passives is existential closure of the external argument position (as opposed to saturation by a syntactically realized nominal, as in the active). This approach naturally captures the absence cross-linguistically of verbal passives of unaccusatives. We then turn to experiencer constructions and their typology, building on the tripartite classification proposed originally in Belletti & Rizzi (1998). Figuring out where the experiencer argument originates has been a major theoretical challenge for linguists, and we argue that it poses a challenge also to the learner. Our main suggestion is that learners may not initially get it right and their misanalysis manifests in the passivization problems previously described. We consider further consequences of such an early misanalysis and discuss the kinds of evidence that may help the child move toward the adult grammar.

# 4.1. Core assumptions about passive syntax

Following work in the tradition of Kratzer (1996), we assume that a functional head in the verbal projection, Voice, plays a crucial role in the active-passive alternation. This Voice head is responsible for the realization of the external argument (we use the cover term “initiator” here to encompass various external argument roles, including agents, causes and experiencers). Kratzerian Voice comes in different varieties, but most important for our purposes are Active and Passive Voice. Both active and passive Voice heads semantically introduce an initiator theta-role and relate it to the event variable provided by the verb. However, only the active Voice supports the syntactic realization of a nominal that saturates this argument slot, by selecting for a DP to be merged in its specifier. In contrast, the initiator argument slot is existentially closed in verbal passives.14 The passive Voice is further distinguished from unaccusative Voice, which lacks an initiator both syntactically and semantically; the latter thus has no semantic content and could be considered a sort of expletive Voice (Schäfer 2008).

On this perspective, the defining characteristic of a passive is that it suppresses the syntactic projection of an external argument, and facilitates existential closure of the relevant argument slot. All other properties, whether or not the internal argument is obligatorily promoted, whether or not the structure can appear with a by-phrase, whether or not unergatives can participate in the structure, are language-specific parameters. This view on passives helps explain an empirical generalization that plays a crucial role in our proposal, namely that across languages, unaccusatives do not passivize (Perlmutter & Postal 1984). Because the semantics of passive Voice makes explicit reference to an external argument role, it cannot appear with predicates that do not project such arguments.

Suppose that the inventory of Voice heads is available to the child, for instance, as part of her innate endowment. If so, a passive-acquiring child’s learning task is reduced to identifying the relevant morphology and the various idiosyncratic syntactic properties of her language. We are not suggesting that this makes the task trivial or quick. The English-acquiring child is confronted with a range of complications: ambiguous participial morphology (perfect vs. passive), syntactic homophones (e.g., adjectival passives), embedding verbal element (be vs. get) all make learning difficult. Moreover, in English, forming a passive still requires the syntactic means to promote the internal argument to subject position, which could take time to develop. However, given children’s success on passives with a variety of verb classes around ages 4-5, we believe that the syntax of verbal passives is in place by that stage, including knowledge of English-specific morphosyntactic properties. Unlike the syntax of passivization, however, children may have continued difficulties with the syntax of subjectexperiencer constructions, which in turn has consequences for their analysis of passives of such predicates. In the following section, we provide initial motivation for this idea by outlining the complexities surrounding experiencer constructions.

# (9) a. Class 1: Nominative experiencer, Accusative theme

(i) The baby likes/loves/hates cheese. [English]   
(ii) Sita Raaman-e premikk-unnu. [Malayalam] Sita.NOM Raman-ACC love-HAB ‘Sita loves Raman.’   
(iii) Gianni teme questo [Italian; Belletti & Rizzi 1988] Gianni.NOM fears this.ACC ‘Gianni fears this.’

# b. Class 2: Nominative theme, Accusative experiencer

(i) The show amused/delighted/irritated Mary. [English]   
(ii) Ta epipla ton hlun ton Petro.eno [Greek; Landau 2010] the furniture clitic.ACC bother the Peter ‘The furniture bothers Peter.’   
(iii) Wiadomość o ypadju przerazila Tomka [Polish, Biały 2005]q news.NOM about accident frighten Tom.ACC ‘The news about the accident frightened Tom’

# c. Class 3: Dative experiencer, Nominative theme

(i) The idea appealed to Mary. The solution occurred to the student. [English]   
(ii) Maria le gusta a Juan [Spanish, Landau 2010] Maria clitic.DAT like to Juan ‘Juan likes Maria’   
(iii) Ivane-s u-qvar-s Mariam-i [Georgian, Wier 2011] John-DAT PRV-love-3SG Mary-NOM ‘John loves Mary.

# 4.2. A cline of experiencer-predicates

Experiencer predicates—predicates that express psychological or perceptual states—pose well-known problems for the “linking” of syntactic positions to semantic or thematic roles. As implied by the nomenclature, these verbs typically involve an EXPERIENCER, the individual experiencing the mental state. Additionally, there is often a THEME argument, representing the content, cause or object of that mental state.15 Cross-linguistically and language-internally, psych verbs map these two roles onto different syntactic positions. Belletti & Rizzi (1998), and subsequent work, distinguish three main classes of experiencer-predicates, given in (9) along with examples from a range of languages:16

Class 1 predicates behave like regular transitives: the experiencer subject receives Nominative case, they readily passivize, and take the transitive have-auxiliary in languages that have auxiliary selection (Belletti & Rizzi 1998). Class 2 and Class 3 verbs, however, are associated with special syntactic properties. Across languages, Class 2 and Class 3 experiencer constructions tend to display unusual control and binding patterns, quirky case marking, restrictions on extraction, among other properties —so-called ‘psych effects’, which have been the subject of study for decades (see, e.g., Lakoff 1970, Kuno 1971, Pesetsky 1987, Belletti & Rizzi 1998, Kim & Larson 1989, Grimshaw 1990, Bouchard 1995, Pesetsky 1996, Reinhart 2016, McGinnis 2001, Landau 2010). A particularly elegant proposal by Landau (2010) derives the unusual grammatical behavior of these predicates from the underlying locative syntax of experiencer arguments. Building on earlier intuitions (Kuno 1971, Speas 1990) that experiencers are associated with mental locations, Landau (2010) argues that Class 2/3 experiencer arguments are generated within locative Prepositional Phrases (PPs) and assigned oblique case by the prepositional head, which can sometimes be null (e.g. in the Class 2 examples in [9]).

Class 2 and Class 3 verbs can be further distinguished on the basis of their transitivity. Class 2 verbs come in two types: eventive and stative. In English, Class 2 predicates such as depress are most natural as statives, as shown by their incompatibility with the progressive in (10a), but others such as scare in (10b) are compatible with an eventive reading and are quite acceptable in the progressive.

(10) a. ??Odd noises were continually depressing Mary. b. Odd noises were continually scaring Mary. (Pesetsky 1996)

Eventive Class 2 verbs are transitives, projecting an external argument, typically the cause of the mental state (and an internal experiencer argument). Stative Class 2 verbs and all Class 3 verbs, however, are unaccusative, wherein both the experiencer and the theme are base-generated internally, similarly to the internal arguments of double object constructions. These predicates pass classic unaccusativity diagnostics, including, crucially, the inability to passivize (Belletti & Rizzi 1998, Pesetsky 1996, Landau 2010).

(11) a. \*Mary was being depressed by the situation. (Grimshaw 1990) b. \*Mary was occurred to by the idea. (Pesetsky 1996)

(12) [Voice Voiceunacc [VP [PP P DP ] V’ V DP ] ]

Experiencer Theme

But there is language-level and predicate-level variation in which of the internal arguments surface as the sentential subject. In some languages, the experiencer may move overtly to the subject position, resulting in the famous so-called ‘quirky’ subject constructions that contain a subject that bears inherent, non-nominative case instead of canonical nominative case typically assigned to subjects. The subject Gianni in (13a) for instance, as well as Raman in (13c) bear non-canonical oblique rather than nominative case.

(13) a. Italian (Belletti & Rizzi 1988) A Gianni piace questo. to Gianni pleases this ‘Gianni likes this.’ b. Scottish Gaelic (Landau 2010) Tha i Catriona Padraiggaol a g air be.PRES love at Catriona on Padraig ‘Catriona loves Padraig’ c. Malayalam Raman-u ardham manassilaayi Raman- DAT meaning understood ‘Raman understood the meaning’

This option is restricted or unavailable altogether in some languages. For instance, whereas Icelandic, Faroese, and Greek allow both ACC and DAT experiencers to front, Italian, Spanish, and Dutch allow fronting only of dative experiencers. Finally, there are languages such as English and French that do not license non-nominative subjects at all.

In a number of cases, the availability of quirky subjects leads to ‘dual’ word orders, with the experiencer sometimes being realized as subject, but sometimes remaining in the base-generated internal argument position. Thus, the Italian (13a) alternates with (14), with the theme argument (questo ‘this’) surfacing as the subject. Notice that such permutability is not available for Class 1 predicates in Italian, whose experiencer argument is externally generated (15a-b).

(14) Questo piace a  Gianni This pleases to Gianni ‘Gianni likes this’.

(15) a. Gianni teme toques Gianni fears this b. \*Questo teme Gianni

Given that across languages, both Class 1 experiencers (externally-generated) and Class $2 / 3$ experiencers (internally-generated) can surface as subjects, a division of the class of psych-predicates into “subjectexperiencer” predicates and “object experiencer” predicates is too coarse and often fails to slice the pie in an illuminating way. Henceforth, we will use the Class 1/2/3 terminology whenever appropriate.

# 4.3. The learning challenge for the English-acquiring child

There is a general learning problem presented by experiencer predicates with the linking of argument roles and syntactic positions: the same argument roles (e.g., EXPERIENCER) can seemingly be merged in different syntactic positions with different classes of experiencer predicates. Belletti & Rizzi (1998), however, suggests that there is still systematicity: across the three classes in (9), the experiencer is uniformly merged above the theme, with the divergent surface orders being the result of movement. Variants of this idea have also been adopted by Pesetsky (1996) and Landau (2010). If this assumption is on the right track, then the task of the learner is simplified, as they would not, they do not need to identify item-by-item what the linking rules are.

If we accept this, then the main challenge a learner faces lies in distinguishing between transitive (Class 1) and unaccusative psych-predicates (Class 3 and stative Class 2 verbs). The crucial difference between the two lies in whether the experiencer is realized as an internal or external argument, and, indeed, whether there is any external argument at all. How might one determine which class a predicate will fall into? Principled semantic distinctions are hard to draw. Verbs denoting nearidentical concepts are mapped varyingly to Class 1, with the experiencer as an external argument, or Class $2 / 3$ , with the experiencer as an internal argument. Even more strikingly, sometimes one finds Class 1 and Class 3 alternations for the same verbs within the same language, with no obvious meaning change. We can observe this alternation in Faroese in (16), where the verb like appears in a transitive (Class 1) structure where the (experiencer) subject receives nominative case in (16a), yet in an unaccusative (Class 3) structure with a fronted dative subject in (16b).

(16) Faroese (Landau 2010, 56 [ex.116])

a. $E g$ dámi hasa bókina.væl I.NOM like well that book.ACC ‘I like that book very much.’ b. Mær hasa bókina.dámar væl Me.DAT like well that book.ACC

Given that it is not (always) possible to predict from meaning which configuration a predicate will appear in, how does the child figure out whether a given verb is associated with an internally or externally generated experiencer? Depending on the language, there may be morphosyntactic evidence that can guide the learner. For instance, in languages such as Faroese, the case morphology on the subject NP helps tell apart whether an experiencer subject is an internal (oblique case) or external (nominative case) argument. Other languages, such as Italian, distinguish unaccusative and transitive experiencer predicates in auxiliary selection (essere for the former and avere for the latter [Belletti & Rizzi 1998, Pesetsky 1996]). Word order evidence might also help: as demonstrated in (12)-(13), Italian distinguishes the two classes in the availability of word-order alternations, with Class 3, but not Class 1, permitting permutability of the two arguments (Belletti & Rizzi 1998).

No such transparent evidence exists in a language such as English, however. English fails to make distinctions in auxiliary selection. The language does mark case, but the distinctions are only visible in the pronominal paradigm and even there, there is rampant syncretism. Perhaps testament to its ‘poor’ case morphology, English-acquiring children take quite a while to figure out the case system of the language (Rispoli, 1998, 2005, Landau & Thornton 2011, Aravind 2022; cf. Schütze & Wexler 1996). As a result, even if case-morphology could in principle be informative, it is not clear that it would be informative to the young child who might still be trying to learn the ropes of that system.17

We believe that the task of distinguishing transitive versus unaccusative experiencer predicates is a cumbersome one in languages such as English, which lacks systematic and overt cues to the structure. We propose that a child lacking such cues initially defaults to an unaccusative structure, with an internally generated experiencer. That is, the child starts out from the simplest assumption: all experiencers are internal arguments.

# 4.4. Testing the predictions

If the child assigns an unaccusative structure to subject-experiencer predicates, those predicates are not passivizable as a result. While our account can thus account for the observed difficulty with passivization, it is important to consider what independent evidence could bear on its validity. For instance, there is evidence from both comprehension and production that subject-experiencer predicates pose difficulties for English-acquiring children. A study by Tinker, Beckwith & Dougherty (1989) showed that 4-year-old children systematically misinterpreted sentences such as Bugs Bunny feared Gumby as meaning Bugs Bunny frightened Gumby. That is, instead of assigning sentences with subject-experiencer verbs a transitive structure in which the subject is the (external) experiencer (Class 1), children seemed to assign a transitive structure in which the subject is the (externallygenerated) cause and the object is the experiencer (eventive Class 2), that is, a structure with an internally generated experiencer argument. More recent studies replicate this finding. Using a modified TVJT, Hartshorne, Pogue & Snedeker (2015) found that 4-year-olds were at-chance when evaluating sentences involving Class 1 subject-experiencer verbs such as fear, hate, love, and like when both arguments were animate (e.g., The lion feared the monkey). In contrast, they were systematically above-chance with Class 2 verbs such as frighten, scare, and surprise. While Hartshorne, Pogue & Snedeker’s (2015) explanation differs from our own—they cite “privileged links” between causal events and transitive structures that predict easier acquisition of frighten-type verbs—their results accord with our hypothesis that children struggle with the syntax of subject-experiencer verbs.18 In particular, the chance behavior receives an explanation if children treat these constructions as reversible— the subject can either be the (fronted) experiencer, or the theme argument—as is often the case with Class 3 and unaccusative Class 2 predicates. If so, word order alone is not sufficient for the child to identify the experiencer. Indeed, when animacy cues could help identify the experiencer (e.g., The giraffe loves the beach ball), children’s performance improved to above-chance rates.

This interpretation of the comprehension findings gains support from the fact that children also spontaneously produce reversed structures. A diary study by Bowerman (1990) had found production errors of the sort in (17), where subject-experiencer predicates appear in configurations with a clearly internally generated experiencer argument. No errors of overapplying subject-experiencer syntax to object-experiencer predicates were found.

(17) a. I saw a picture that enjoyed me. $( = \mathrm { I }$ saw a picture that I enjoyed; E, 6;6) b. How does 'Hurly Girl' fancy you? $\simeq$ How do you fancy/like ‘Hurly Girl’?; C; 9;0)

While these observations are in line with our hypothesis, they might not provide conclusive enough evidence that children, as a rule, take experiencers to be internally-generated. After all, the observed difficulties could be the result of item-specific problems. We have to look elsewhere for more direct evidence. In fact, our hypothesis predicts specific non-adult-like behaviors that could be submitted to future empirical testing.

One such prediction that follows from our hypothesis is that children will over-accept adultungrammatical word orders with subject-experiencer predicates, while failing to show comparable permissiveness with other transitives. As mentioned, English does not show word order reversibility with Class 3 verbs that we see in a language like Italian, yet there are structures where both arguments of unaccusative experiencer predicates can remain in-situ, that is, in internal argument position (Cheung and Larson 2014). More specifically, when the theme argument of an unaccusative Class 2 or Class 3 predicate is clausal, both arguments (theme and experiencer) can remain in their internally generated position and an expletive can appear as the sentential subject, as in (18).

(18) a. It annoyed/surprised/displeased Mary that her favorite candidate lost the election. b. It appealed/occurred to John that he might win the election.

This is not possible when the experiencer is an external argument, i.e., with subjects of Class 1 (subject-experiencer) verbs as in (19a),19 or agentive transitives as in (19b).

(19) a. \*It loved/hated/forgot Mary that it was raining. b. \*It said Mary that it was raining.

If a child treats verbs such as love as unaccusatives, however, those verbs should pattern with unaccusative Class 2 and 3 verbs, which means children should find sentences like (19a) as acceptable as those in (18) (while still rejecting sentences like (19b)).

A more subtle test would involve patterns of verbal-compound formation in English. Grimshaw (1990) first observed that the internal (theme) argument of Class 1 predicates can occur as the incorporated object of verbal compounds such as in (20a-b). The same does not hold for the internal experiencer argument of Class 2 or 3 predicates. The examples in (20c-d) show that the experiencer argument (worker and student resp.) cannot be incorporated with the verb.

(20) a. a god-fearing man (the man fears god) b. a fun-loving teenager (the teenager loves fun) c. \*a worker-appalling ruling (the ruling appalled the workers) d. \*a student-occurring solution (the solution occurred to the student)

Landau (2010), building on Baker (1997), argues that the restriction follows from the fact that (i) prepositions are disallowed in these compounds and (ii) all internally generated experiencers are headed by a preposition, overt or null. If this generalization is correct, and children take the experiencer argument of English subject-experiencer predicates as internally generated, they should find compounds such as (20a-b) ill-formed, much like (20c-d). Correlations between passivization difficulties and compound-formation difficulties with Class 1 predicates could thus also provide corroborating evidence for our hypothesis.

The empirical tests we suggest rely on collecting acceptability judgments from children. Acceptability judgments, while straightforwardly and reliably collected from adults (e.g., Sprouse, Schütze & Almeida 2013), have been proven to be more difficult to obtain from child participants before the age of 6 (Thornton 2021). Given that the difficulties with passivization of subject experiencer verbs seem to continue in 6-year-olds, and in some tasks even older children, acceptability judgments on expletive constructions and verbal compounds could potentially provide the right empirical support for our hypothesis.20

A more promising avenue that does not rely on acceptability judgments is to indirectly test the underlying structure by looking at online processing signatures. Friedmann et al. (2008), using the Cross Modal Priming Paradigm (CMPP), for example, found that unaccusative predicates give rise to a reactivation of their NP-argument sometime after the offset of the verb. Koring, Mak & Reuland (2012) and Koring et al. (2018) replicated and extended these findings using the Visual World Paradigm. The distinctive processing signature of unaccusative sentences gives us a way of probing whether children’s subject-experiencer constructions—in contrast to those of adults—are underlyingly unaccusative.

Finally, divergences in acquisition trajectories cross-linguistically could also bear on our proposal. As discussed in section 4.3, one reason English children might have an especially difficult time identifying the syntax of subject-experiencer predicates is that disambiguating evidence is hard to come by. But the situation may be less dire in other languages. For starters, there are many languages that have both Class 1 and Class 3 experiencer predicates, with reliable morphological and syntactic cues distinguishing the two. In principle, the learning task should be easier for children acquiring such languages. There is suggestive evidence pointing in this direction. Volpato, Verin & Cardinaletti (2016) tested 3-to-5-year-olds’ knowledge of Italian actional and subject-experiencer passives, and found that children successfully produced both kinds in an elicited production task. The force of this line of argument is mitigated by the small number of cross-linguistic studies that test the verb-type asymmetry and the fact that some of the existing studies do seem to replicate the asymmetry. Lower performance on subject-experiencer passives have been found in Spanish (Oliva & Wexler 2018) and European Portuguese (Agostinho 2020), two languages that do distinguish Class 1 and Class 3 experiencer predicates. A direct comparison between these studies cannot be made because whereas the Italian-speaking children were tested in an elicited production task, the Spanish- and EuropeanPortuguese speaking children performed a comprehension task. Still, one reason we might find a genuine difference in performance between Italian- versus Spanish- or European Portuguesespeaking children is a difference between the languages in the availability of surface cues for unaccusativity. Whereas Italian distinguishes between the verb types in terms of auxiliary selection (have vs. be), Spanish and European Portuguese do not. That is, there might be more surface evidence for unaccusativity available in Italian as compared to the other two languages. It is also worth noting that there were striking item effects in Agostinho’s (2020) study on European Portuguese. Two nonactional verbs were tested—ver ‘see’ and ouvir ‘hear’—but the verb-type asymmetry seems to be largely driven by poor performance on the latter. By age 5, there were no longer any significant differences between either of the two actional verbs tested (pentear ‘comb’ and pintar ‘paint’) and the perception verb ver. Perhaps item effects are exactly what one would expect in this situation: suppose the child’s initial hypothesis is that all experiencers are merged internally. Then, given the absence of any semantic cues that single out externally generated experiencers, the child would need to alter this hypothesis on an item-by-item basis for each subject experiencer verb. As such, we might expect that subject-experiencer verbs that are more frequent (in active voice) come in earlier. For these reasons, we hesitate to draw any firm conclusions for or against our proposal on the basis of cross-linguistic data at this point. A more detailed analysis of the languages to generate predictions, as well as more focused cross-linguistic empirical studies are necessary to state and test the predictions of our account.

# 4.5. Becoming adult-like

We have argued that English-acquiring children initially misanalyze Class 1 predicates as unaccusatives. We argued that this misanalysis stems from difficulties determining whether the experiencer argument is generated internally or externally: there are no obvious semantic correlates, and in a language such as English, syntactic evidence is limited. Still, eventually the English learner manages to retreat from their wrong hypothesis. How do they accomplish this and eventually become adult-like? We suggest that syntactic evidence, albeit sparse, might provide the necessary evidence over time to help the child eschew the unaccusative hypothesis.

One clear piece of evidence, of course, is the passive itself. Unaccusative structures do not passivize, so hearing a verb such as love in the passive should serve as evidence that the child’s assumption about the argument-structure of such predicates is wrong-headed. Though passivizability is strong evidence against the unaccusative hypothesis, the relevant data might be hard to come by in the input. Passives of subject-experiencer predicates are very rare. Gordon & Chafetz (1990) presented a study of the types of passives in children’s input and found that $9 3 \%$ of verbal passives were actional passives. The remaining $7 \%$ consists of both object and subject experiencer verbs (non-actional verbs), so only a subset of those are presumably subject experiencer verbs. Nguyen & Pearl (2018) state that subjectexperiencer passives are virtually non-existent in the input, finding only 2 instances (both with the verb love) out of 1636 uses of subject-experiencer verbs. The sparsity of such crucial evidence might explain the late acquisition of subject experiencer predicates. A handful of cases of subject-experiencer passives might be sufficient to rid the child’s grammar of the unaccusative analysis, provided the child analyzes the structure as such, but the child might have to wait quite a while to encounter one.21

A related piece of evidence could come from deverbal adjective formation with the morpheme -able: Class 1 experiencer-predicates form good bases for -able attachment (21a), whereas unaccusative Class 2/ 3 do not (21b) (Trips & Stein 2008, Alexiadou 2018).

(21) a. lovable, forgettable b. \*depressable, \*appealable, \*occurable

Many have observed a tight relationship between adjective formation with -able and passivization (Chapin 1967, Horn 1980, Williams 1981, Kayne 1984, Fabb 1984, Roeper & van Hout 1999, OltraMassuet 2013, Alexiadou 2018). The generalization, across languages, seems to be that those verbs that can feed passivization can serve as the base for -able adjectivization (\*arrivable, \*happenable vs. huggable, pullable). Oltra-Massuet (2013), building on earlier work (Chapin 1967, Kayne 1984, Williams 1981, Fabb 1984, Roeper & van Hout 1999), accounts for this link by taking the internal structure of -able-adjective to contain the passive. That is, the adjectivizer takes as its input a structure that contains a passive Voice head, which in turn implies an external argument slot (see, also, Alexiadou 2018). On this account, the examples in (20b) are ill-formed for the same reason the associated verbs cannot passivize: they are tied to an unaccusative structure without an external argument. A child who knows the restrictions on -able-adjectivization might hear expressions such as lovable and forgettable and use them to rule out the unaccusative hypothesis. At the same time, the evidence from -able adjective formation is even more limited than that from passivization. They are subject to further, often subtle, constraints (e.g., affectedness of object), and certain passivizable subject-experiencer verbs do not make good bases for -able (e.g., \*seeable).22

Thus, surface evidence ruling out an unaccusative analysis of subject-experiencer predicates exists, but is scarce. Beyond their low frequency, another issue with passives and -able-adjectivization is that the evidence may not be of practical help to a child whose grammar is constrained in a way that does not permit such constructions. In order for a subject experiencer passive to count as evidence against an unaccusative analysis, the child needs to analyze that passive as such. But can they do this? Many passive acquisition experiments indicate that children presented with subject experiencer passives seem to (incorrectly) analyze them as active sentences (i.e., Mommy is loved by the baby Mommy loved the baby). If the child does the same in the wild—that is, if the child simply reanalyzes subject experiencer passives (not permitted by their grammar) as actives (permitted by their grammar, but not informative about transitivity)—input sentences involving the passive would not constitute evidence against an unaccusative analysis.

A more systematic shift may be triggered by a better understanding of the case system of English, in particular the recognition that obliques never surface as subjects. If, following Landau (2010), internally generated experiencers are uniformly assigned oblique case by a (null or overt) preposition, and only as-yet caseless nominals can move to subject position in English, then it follows that an experiencer argument in subject position cannot in fact be internally generated. Once the child knows that obliques never surface as subjects in English then, every active sentence with a subject experiencer verb can function as evidence that these verbs project a transitive (Class 1) structure rather than an unaccusative one - extending the domain of positive evidence.23

We have offered a few suggestions of types of evidence the child might rely on in their journey toward reaching the adult grammar. We think, however, that before establishing the sufficient and necessary learning evidence, we have to pin down the nature of the learning problem by providing empirical support for the present account (see section 4.4).

# 5. An alternative account: An eventivity restriction?

The central claim in this paper is that the verb-based asymmetry in passivization should be explained not so much in terms of restrictions on passivization, but instead in terms of a misrepresentation of the syntax of subject experiencer verbs. At the point the child has full command of passive syntax, they still fail to passivize subject experiencer verbs because those have unaccusative syntax in their grammars, rendering them unpassivizable. That the asymmetry shows up in passive comprehension is thus epiphenomenal. Our account, like the lexical-semantic accounts discussed in section 2, takes the predicate-based asymmetry seriously rather than explaining it away. But like the maturational accounts discussed in section 3.1, we locate the problem in the syntactic derivation of certain constructions (albeit different ones from those accounts). Before concluding the paper, we contrast our proposal with a final set of accounts that also aims at providing a grammatical explanation for the verb-based asymmetry, but differs in the nature and scope of the explanation (Grillo 2008, Gehrke & Grillo 2009, Snyder & Hyams 2015). These proposals hypothesize that the derivation of non-actional passives requires an additional grammatical operation that is either not available to children until the age of 6 or 7 or for which the child does not have sufficient processing resources. Different from other grammatical accounts, and closer in spirit to our own, they do not take children’s grammar, after age 4-5, to differ from adults in terms of the availability of passive syntax itself.

These accounts start from a novel account of passive syntax/semantics (Gehrke & Grillo 2009), which treats passivization as an operation on event structure rather than argument structure. Functionally, passivation involves the “zooming in” on a consequent state subevent of a complex event. This is possible only for eventive predicates, such as achievements and accomplishments, whose internal argument undergoes a change of state and as a result becomes the bearer of a consequent state. Such predicates are taken to contain rich enough verbal structure to represent this transition. Specifically, a secondary verbal projection headed by a (silent) BECOME-operator occurs above the VP constituent denoting the consequent state. In the passive, the lower VP, which contains the internal argument and denotes the consequent state, is singled out and undergoes movement to the specifier of VoiceP.

Stative verbs (e.g., love) are simplex and lack the secondary verbal projection associated with BECOME. As such, Gehrke & Grillo’s (2009) analysis renders stative subject experiencer verbs unpassivizable. Yet, in a language such as English, such verbs do passivize. Gehrke & Grillo (2009) account for this by assuming that passivization in such cases is possible by shifting the state into an event (i.e., an achievement or accomplishment). The structure has to be enriched by adding a BECOME predicate and the associated verbal structure in order to enable passivization.

Gehrke & Grillo (2009) suggest that this additional step of semantically coercing the state into an achievement or accomplishment might exhaust children’s processing capacity, such that they fail to compute a passive derivation of stative verbs. In fact, they propose this to account for data from agrammatics who show the same actional/non-actional asymmetry in their comprehension of passives (Grodzinsky 1995). The idea is that the passive derivation, where movement of the relevant VP layer is triggered by a discourse feature, is burdensome in itself. Adding in the shifts required to enable passivization of stative verbs depletes the resources completely, causing the observed actional/non-actional asymmetry. This account, they note, can be extended to children to explain the same observed asymmetry. Snyder & Hyams (2015) adopt Gehrke & Grillo’s (2009) proposal wholesale, modulo certain technical adjustments,24 and propose that the crucial ability to coerce a stative predicate to an eventive one is a maturational change the child goes through in development around age 6.25

This account has several advantages over those already discussed. It aims to give a grammatical explanation for the predicate-based asymmetry and does so in a manner that makes testable predictions. It also helps make novel and interesting connections to the linguistic behavior of atypical populations. However, the account makes certain wrong predictions for both child and adult grammar. Eventivity, while relevant as we argue in the following section, is not the main determinant of children’s problems with non-actional passives. Children continue to fail, past age 4, on subjectexperiencer predicates such as forget, an achievement and thus eventive (Nguyen & Pearl 2021). In adult language, stative passives, including passives of stative experiencer predicates, retain their stativity in their passive form. This is contrary to what is predicted on Gehrke & Grillo’s (2009) theory, on which the only way to passivize a state is to coerce an eventive structure. In general, verbal passive formation has a minimal effect on a predicate’s stativity or eventivity, and, therefore, we are reluctant to endorse this theory.

We do, however, think that the insight that eventivity plays a role in children’s ability to passivize experiencer verbs is important and integrates well with our own account. Recall that Class 2 experiencer verbs come in two types, eventive and stative, and display a correlation between stativity and unaccusativity (e.g., Pesetsky 1996, Tenny 1998, Pylkkänen 2000b, Landau

2010). That is, stative Class 2 verbs are unaccusative, whereas eventive Class 2 verbs are transitive (i.e., project an external argument). This is not accidental. Eventivity in these pre dicates is a direct result of their transitivity. Eventive Class 2 experiencer predicates are causative: they involve a verbalizer head, which both introduces a causal event, and projects a CAUSE external argument.26

We suggest that the same stativity correlation holds for children’s experiencer verbs (including their misanalyzed subject experiencer verbs). Stative experiencer verbs are unaccusative and therefore do not passivize; eventive experiencer verbs project an external cause argument and do passivize. There are several pieces to knowing this correlation. The child has to know: (i) that causal events involve a causal verbalizing head bringing in eventivity, (ii) that cause arguments are systematically merged externally, and (iii) that a verbal passive implicates a Voice head associated with an external argument slot (see Section 4.1). Existing empirical evidence suggests that these pieces are in place by age 4-5. Children at that age succeed on passives of eventive Class 2 verbs such as frighten or scare (e.g., Nguyen & Pearl 2021).

Thus, eventivity does play an explanatory role, but in a different way than suggested. For adults, stative subject experiencer verbs passivize (without coercion), as the experiencer is an external argument. For children, however, stative subject experiencer verbs, having been misanalyzed as unaccusative, do not passivize.27 For both populations, passive formation is permitted with experiencer verbs if the non-experiencer argument can be interpreted as the causer argument. The constraint on children’s passives then, is the same as in adults: passive formation is only possible if there is an external argument slot that can be existentially closed. For children, external arguments are restricted to agents and causes, whereas for adults, some experiencer arguments project externally. Children thus differ from adults in assigning unaccusative syntax to all experiencer verbs that cannot be construed as having an external agent or cause argument, including subject experiencer verbs. This reduces the set of verbs that can be passivized in child language as compared to adult language.

# 6. Conclusion

This paper has been concerned with a well-attested asymmetry in the acquisition of passives: children have difficulties with passives of certain verbs at a stage when they succeed with others. Theories of the phenomenon crucially differ in whether they opt to explain away this asymmetry or take it as reflecting a theoretically important distinction. Within the former camp, there are accounts that try to minimize the significance of children’s success and others that do so with children’s failures. We pointed out problems with both types of approaches. We believe that theories that can explain the asymmetry have an inherent advantage over the ones that explain it away. At the same time, theories on the market that do take the asymmetry seriously have their own share of problems, either making incorrect predictions or relying on stipulative lexical-semantic restrictions. Our proposal aims to explain the asymmetry by locating the problem in children’s initial hypotheses about the syntax of subject-experiencer predicates. We argued that an early misanalysis of transitive subject-experiencer verbs as unaccusatives results in their non-passivizability as a corollary. This proposal accounts for the existing data and makes specific predictions for future empirical work.

# Disclosure Statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

# ORCID

Athulya Aravind $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9095-0680   
Loes Koring $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8564-7441

# References

Agostinho, Celina. 2020. The acquisition of the passive in European Portuguese. Barcelona: Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona dissertation.   
Alexiadou, Artemis. 2018. -Able adjectives and the syntax of psych verbs. Glossa: A Journal of General Linguistics 3(1): 74. 1–27.   
Alexiadou, Artemis, Elena Anagnostopoulou & Florian Schäfer. 2005. The fine structure of (anti-)causatives. In Proceedings of the North East Linguistic Society 36, October 28-30, 2007. Amherst, MA: Umass.   
Allen, Cynthia L. 1995. Case marking and reanalysis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Anagnostopoulou, Elena. 2003. Participles and voice. In A. Alexiadou, M. Rathert & A. von Stechow (eds.), Perfect explorations. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.   
Aravind, Athulya. 2022. Nominative in non-finite contexts in child language. Cambridge, MA: MIT.   
Babyonyshev, Maria & Dina Brun. 2004. The acquisition of perfective and imperfective passive constructions in Russian. University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics, 10(1).   
Baker, Mark. 1997. Thematic roles and syntactic structure. In Elements of grammar, 73–137. Dordrecht: Springer.   
Becker, Misha. 2015. Animacy and the acquisition of tough adjectives. Language Acquisition, 22(1), 68–103.   
Becker, Misha & Jeanneatte Schaeffer. 2013. Animacy, argument structure and unaccusatives. In M. Becker, J. Grinstead & J. Rothman (eds.). Generative linguistics and acquisition: Studies in honor of Nina M. Hyams, 13–54. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.   
Belletti, Adriana & Luigi Rizzi. 1998. Psych-verbs and θ-theory. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 6(3). 291–352.   
Bever, Thomas. 1970. The cognitive basis for linguistic structures. In J. R. Hayes (ed.), Cognition and the development of language, 279–362. New York: John Wiley & Sons.   
Biały, Adam. 2005. Polish psych predicates at the lexicon-syntax interface in cross-linguistic perspective. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.   
Bock, Kathryn & Helga Loebell. 1990. Framing sentences. Cognition 35. 1–39. doi:10.1016/0010-0277(90)90035-I.   
Borer, Hagit & Kenneth Wexler. 1987. The maturation of syntax. In T. Roeper & E. Williams (eds.), Parameter setting, 123–172. Dordrecht: Reidel.   
Bouchard, Denis. 1995. The semantics of syntax: A minimalist approach to grammar. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
Bowerman, Melissa. 1990. Mapping thematic roles onto syntactic functions: Are children helped by innate linking rules? Linguistics 28. 1253–1290.   
Bruening, Benjamin. 2013. By phrases in passives and nominals. Syntax 16(1). 1–41.   
Büring, Daniel. 2016. Intonation and meaning. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.   
Chapin, Paul. 1967. On the syntax of word-formation in English. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology dissertation.   
Cheung, Candice Chi Hang & Richard Larson. 2014. Psych verbs in English and Mandarin. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory, 33(1), 127–189.   
Chomsky, Noam. 1995. The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.   
Crain, Stephen & Janet Fodor. 1993. Competence and performance in child language. In E. Dromi (ed.), Language and cognition: A development perspective. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
Crain, Stephen, Rosalind Thornton & Keiko Murasugi. 2009. Capturing the evasive passive. Language Acquisition 16(2). 123–133.   
Deal, Amy Rose. 2009. The origin and content of expletives: Evidence from “selection”. Syntax 12(4). 285–323.   
Deen, Kamil Ud. 2011. The acquisition of the passive. In Jill de Villiers & Tom Roeper (eds.). Handbook of generative approaches to language acquisition, 155–187. Dordrecht: Springer.   
Deen, Kamil Ud, Ivan Bondoc, Amber Camp, Sharon Estioca, Haerim Hwang, Gyu-Ho Shin, Maho Takahashi, Fred Zenker & Jing Crystal Zhong. 2018. Repetition brings success: Revealing knowledge of the passive voice. In Language Development, 200–213. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.   
Demuth, Katherine, Francina Moloi & Malillo Machobane. 2010. 3-Year-olds’ comprehension, production, and generalization of Sesotho passives. Cognition 115(2). 238–251.   
De Swart, Henriette. 1998. “Aspect Shift and Coercion.” Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 16 (2): 347–85. doi:10. 1023/A:1005916004600   
de Villiers, Jill. G. & Peter A. de Villiers. 1973. Development of the use of word order in comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 2(4). 331–341.   
Dik, Simon C. 1978. Functional grammar. North Holland Linguistic Series 37. Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing   
Embick, David. 2004. On the structure of resultative participles in English. Linguistic Inquiry, 35(3). 355–392.   
Fabb, Nigel. 1984. Syntactic Affixation. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology dissertation.   
Fox, Danny & Yosef Grodzinsky. 1998. Children’s passive: A view from the by-phrase. Linguistic Inquiry 29(2). 311–332.   
Friedmann, Naama, Gina Taranto, Lewis P. Shapiro & David Swinney. 2008. The leaf fell (the leaf): The online processing of unaccusatives. Linguistic Inquiry 39(3). 355–377.   
Gavarró, Anna & Xavier Parramon. 2017. ”On the adjectival interpretation of passives in acquisition.” Lingua 185:11–24. doi: 10.1016/j.lingua.2016.07.003.   
Gehrke, Berit. 2012. Passive states. In V. Demonte and L. McNally (eds.), Telicity, change, and state: A cross-categorial view of event structure, 185–211, Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Gehrke, Berit & Nino Grillo. 2009. How to become passive. Explorations of phase theory: Features and arguments, 231–268. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.   
Gordon, Peter & Jill Chafetz. 1990. Verb-based versus class-based accounts of actionality effects in children’s comprehension of passives. Cognition 36(3). 227–254.   
Grillo, Nino. 2008. Generalized Minimality: Syntactic underspecification in Broca’s aphasia. Netherlands Graduate School of Linguistics: Utrecht University dissertation.   
Grimshaw, Jane. 1990. Argument structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Grodzinsky, Yosef. 1995. A restrictive theory of agrammatic comprehension. Brain and Language 50(1). 27–51.   
Harley, Heidi. 2013. External arguments and the Mirror Principle: On the distinctness of Voice and v. Lingua 125. 34–57.   
Hartshorne, Joshua, Amanda Pogue & Jesse Snedeker. 2015. Love is hard to understand: The relationship between transitivity and caused events in the acquisition of emotion verbs. Journal of Child Language 42(3). 467–504.   
Hirsch, Christopher & Jeremy Hartman. 2006. Some (wh-) questions concerning passive interactions. Proceedings of the Conference on Generative Approaches to Language Acquisition, 256–268. Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.   
Hirsch, Christopher & Kenneth Wexler. 2006. Children’s passives and their resulting interpretation. In Kamil Ud Deen, Jun Nomura, Barbara Schulz & Bonnie Schwartz (eds.), Proceedings of the Inaugural Conference on Generative Approaches to Language Acquisition–North America, University of Connecticut Occasional Papers in Linguistics 4, 125–136. Storrs, CT: University of Connecticut.   
Hopper, Paul J. & Sandra Thompson. 1980. Transitivity in grammar and discourse. Language 56(2). 251–299.   
Horgan, Dianne. 1978. The development of the full passive. Journal of Child Language 5. 65–80.   
Horn, Laurence. 1980. Affixation and the unaccusative hypothesis. In Robert A. Hendrick, Carrie S. Masek & Mary Frances Miller (eds.), Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistic Society, 17, 134–146.   
Huang, C. T. James. 1999. Chinese passives in comparative perspective. Tsing Hua Journal of Chinese Studies 29(4). 423–509.   
Huang, Yi Ting, Xiaobei Zheng, Xiangzhi Meng & Jesse Snedeker. 2013. Children’s assignment of grammatical roles in the online processing of Mandarin passive sentences. Journal of Memory and Language 69(4). 589–606.   
Israel, Michael, Christopher Johnson, and Patricia J. Brooks. 2000. From states to events: The acquisition of English passive participles. Cognitive Linguistics 11(1/2). 103–130.   
Kayne, Richard S. 1984. Connectedness and binary branching. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Foris.   
Keenan, Edward L. & Matthew Dryer. 2007. Passive in the world’s languages. In Timothy Shopen (ed.), Language typology and syntactic description, 325–361. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Kim, Young-joo & Richard Larson. 1989. Scope interpretation and the syntax of psych-verbs. Linguistic Inquiry 20(4). 681–688.   
Klein, Wolfgang. 1994. Time in language. London and New York: Routledge.   
Klein, Katarina & Silvia Kutscher. 2002. Psych-verbs and lexical economy. Arbeiten des Sonderforschungsbereichs 282 “Theorie des Lexikons” 122. Düsseldorf: SFB 282 Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf. http://www.phil-fak.uniduesseldorf.de/sfb282/working_papers/sfb122.pdf,12.15.2021.   
Koring, Loes, Pim Mak, Iris Mulders & Eric Reuland. 2018. Processing intransitive verbs: How do children differ from adults? Language Learning and Development 14(1). 72–94.   
Koring, Loes, Pim Mak & Eric Reuland. 2012. The time course of argument reactivation revealed: Using the visual world paradigm. Cognition 123(3). 361–379.   
Kratzer, Angelika. 1996. Severing the external argument from its verb. In Johan Rooryck & Laurie Zaring (eds.), Phrase structure and the lexicon, Studies in Natural Language and Linguistic Theory (SNLT, volume 33), 109–137. Dordrecht: Springer.   
Kratzer, Angelika. 2000. Building statives. Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society 26(1). 385–399.   
Kuno, Susumu. 1971. The position of locatives in existential sentences. Linguistic Inquiry 2(3). 333–378.   
Lakoff, George. 1970. Irregularity in syntax. New York: Holt, Reinhard and Wilson.   
Landau, Idan. 2010. The locative syntax of experiencers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Landau, Idan & Rosalind Thornton. 2011. Early child control. Lingua 121(5). 920–941.   
Legate, Julie Ann. 2014. Voice and v: Lessons from Acehnese (Vol. 69). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Legate, Julie Ann, Faruk Akkuş, Milena Šereikaitė & Don Ringe. (2020). On passives of passives. Language 96(4). 771–818.   
Lehmann, Christian. 1993. Predicate classes in Yucatec Maya. Función 13(14). 195–272.   
Liter, Adam & Jeff Lidz. 2021. Non-actional passives can be comprehended by 4-year-olds. In Danielle Dionne & LeeAnn Vidal Covas (eds.), Proceedings of the 45th annual Boston University conference on language development, vol. 2, 513–527. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.   
Marantz, Alec. 2001. Words. Cambridge, MA: MIT.   
Maratsos, Michael, Dana Fox, Judith Becher & Marie Ann Chalkley. (1985). Semantic Restrictions on children’s passives. Cognition 19. 167–191.   
McGinnis, Martha. 2001. Semantic and morphological restrictions in experiencer predicates. In T. Jensen & G. van Herk (eds.) Proceedings of the 2000 CLA Annual Conference, 245–256. Ottawa: University of Ottawa.   
Messenger, Kate, Holly Branigan, Janet McLean & Antonella Sorace. 2012. Is young children’s passive syntax semantically constrained? Evidence from syntactic priming. Journal of Memory and Language 66(4). 568–587.   
Nguyen, Emma & Lisa Pearl. 2018. Do you really mean it? Linking lexical semantic profiles and the age of acquisition for the English passive. In The Proceedings of the West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics (WCCFL 35), 288–295.   
Nguyen, Emma & Lisa Pearl. 2021. The link between lexical semantic features and children’s comprehension of English verbal be-passives. Language Acquisition 28(4). 433–450.   
Nguyen, Emma & William Snyder. 2017. The (non)-effects of pragmatics on children’s passives. In Maria LaMendola & Jennifer Scott (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st annual Boston University Conference on Language Development, 522–531. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.   
O’Brien, Karen, Elaine Grolla & Diane Lillo-Martin. 2006. Long passives are understood by young children. Proceedings of the 30th annual Boston University conference on language development Vol. 2, 441–451. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.   
Oliva, Jesús. & Kenneth Wexler. 2018. The acquisition of Spanish passives: The comparison between subject experiencer versus actional verbs and direct aspectual semantic evidence for the adjectival interpretation. On the Acquisition of the Syntax of Romance. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Oltra-Massuet, Isabel. 2013. Deverbal adjectives at the interface. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.   
Orfitelli, Robyn. 2012. Argument intervention in the acquisition of A-movement.Los Angeles, CA: UCLA dissertation.   
Perlmutter, David & Paul Postal. 1984. The 1-advancement exclusiveness law. Studies in Relational Grammar 2. 81–125.   
Pesetsky, David. 1987. Binding problems with experiencer verbs. Linguistic Inquiry 18(1). 126–140.   
Pesetsky, David. 1996. Zero syntax: Experiencers and cascades (No. 27). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Pylkkänen, Liina. 1999. Causation and external arguments. MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 35. 161–183.   
Pylkkänen, Liina. 2000a. What applicative heads apply to. University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics 7(1), 197–210.   
Pylkkänen, Liina. 2000b. On stativity and causation. In Carol L. Tenny & James Pustejovsky (eds.), Events as grammatical objects: The converging perspective of lexical semantics and syntax, 417–444. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.   
Pylkkänen, Liina. 2008. Introducing arguments (Vol. 49). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Reinhart, Tanya. 2016. Concepts, syntax, and their interface: The theta system (Vol. 72). MIT Press.   
Reinhart, Tanya. 2001. Experiencing derivations. In Rachel Hastings, Brendan Jackson & Zso´fia Zvolenszky (eds.), 11th Conference of Semantics and Linguistic Theory. Ithaca, NY: CLC Publications.   
Rispoli, Matthew. 1998. Patterns of pronoun case error. Journal of Child Language, 25(3), 533–554.   
Rispoli, Matthew. 2005. When children reach beyond their grasp: Why some children make pronoun case errors and others don’t. Journal of Child Language 32(1), 93–116.   
Roeper, Thomas. 1987. Implicit arguments and the head-complement relation. Linguistic Inquiry 18(2). 267–310.   
Roeper, Thomas & Angeliek van Hout. 1999. The impact of nominalization on passive, -able and middle: Burzio’s generalization and feature-movement in the lexicon. In Liina Pylkkänen, Angeliek van Hout & Heidi Harely (eds.), MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 35, 197–210. Cambridge, MA: MIT.   
Sano, Tetsuya, Mika Endo & Kyoko Yamakoshi. 2001. Developmental issues in the acquisition of Japanese unaccusatives and passives. In Anna H.-J. Do, Laura Domínguez & Aimee Johansen (eds.), Proceedings of the 25th Boston University Conference on Language Development, 668–683. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.   
Schäfer, Florian. 2008. The syntax of (anti-) causatives: External arguments in change-of-state contexts (Vol. 126). Philadelpha, PA: John Benjamins Publishing.   
Schütze, Carson & Kenneth Wexler. 1996. Subject case licensing and English root infinitives. In Andy Stringfellow, Dalia Cahana-Amitay, Elizabeth Hughes & Andrea Zukowski (eds.), Proceedings of the 20th annual Boston University conference on language development, Vol. 2, 670–681. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press   
Snyder, William & Nina Hyams. 2015. Minimality effects in children’s passives. In Elisa Di Domenico, Cornelia Hamann & Simona Matteini (eds.), Structures, strategies and beyond: Studies in honor of Adriana Belletti, 343–368. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/la.223.16sny   
Speas, Margaret. 1990. Phrase structure in natural language. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.   
Sprouse, Jon, Carson Schütze & Diogo Almeida. (2013). A comparison of informal and formal acceptability judgments using a random sample from Linguistic Inquiry 2001–2010. Lingua, 134. 219–248.   
Sudhalter, Vicki & Martin Braine. 1985. How does comprehension of passives develop? A comparison of actional and experiential verbs. Journal of Child Language 12(2). 455–470.   
Talmy, Leonard. 1976. Semantic causative types. In M. Shibatani (ed.), The grammar of causative constructions. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. doi: https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004368842 .   
Tenny, Carol. 1998. Psych verbs and verbal passives in Pittsburghese. Linguistics 36. 591–598.   
Thornton, Rosalind. 2021. Judgments of acceptability, truth, and felicity in child language. In G. Goodall (ed.), The Cambridge handbook of experimental syntax (Cambridge handbooks in language and linguistics), 394–420. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/9781108569620.016.   
Tinker, Erin, Robert Beckwith & Ray Dougherty. (1989). Markedness and the acquisition of emotion verbs. In Ken DeJong & Yongkyoon No (eds.), Proceedings of ESCOL, 252–263. Ohio State University.   
Trips, Carola & Achim Stein. 2008. Was English -able borrowable? In Richard Dury, Maurizio Gotti & Marina Dossena (eds.), English historical linguistics volume II: Lexical and semantic change, 217–239. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Verrips, Maaike. 1996. Potatoes must peel. The acquisition of the Dutch passive. Amsterdam, Netherlands: University of Amsterdam dissertation.   
Volpato, Francesco, Laura Verin & Anna Cardinaletti. 2016. The comprehension and production of verbal passives by Italian preschool-age children. Applied Psycholinguistics 37(4). 901–931.   
Wexler, Kenneth. 2004. Theory of phasal development: Perfection in child grammar. In A. Csirnaz, A. Gualmini & A. Nevins (eds.), Plato’s problems: Papers on language acquisition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press (MITWPL).   
Wier, Thomas R. 2011. Georgian morphosyntax and feature hierarchies in natural language. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago dissertation.   
Williams, Edwin. 1981. Argument structure and morphology. The Linguistic Review 1. 81–14.