Science for All: The Popularization of Science in Early Twentieth-Century Britain, by Peter J. Bowler. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, USA, 2009. xi $+ \ 3 3 9$ pp. ISBN 978-0-226-06863-3.

The periodic release of the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) report provides a regular opportunity for science educators and scientists alike to bemoan the sorry state of Americans’ basic knowledge of science. Americans, we are reminded, do not understand science and lag behind citizens of other industrialized countries. We hear the familiar calls for the United States to improve science education in order for the country to remain competitive in an increasingly global economy. Improving science education for all, the argument goes, promises economic stability.

Science educators have traditionally responded to these calls by suggesting reforms in the formal educational system. Yet, by focusing on school science, educators have tended to overlook other popular spaces where the public encounters science as often, if not more often: in books, in magazines, on television, and in other forms of popular media. In today’s socially and technologically networked and complex world, learning about science through such informal resources promises to increase in relevance. One need only look at the recent National Research Council (2009) report Learning Science in Informal Environments to see the increasing recognition of these spaces.

Such informal spaces for learning about science, however, are not new. In his latest book, Peter J. Bowler narrates the rich and complex history of popular science in a time much like ours of today: early 20th-century Britain. His work not only stands on its own as an excellent piece of historical scholarship, highly engaging and meticulously researched, but also promises to enrich science educators’ understanding of how the public comes to understand, interact, and learn about science as well as the ways in which economic, social, and national factors influence the production of this material. The book is especially timely, as today’s economic and social circumstances in many ways parallel those from a century ago: reduced costs of media production, increasing specialization of scientific knowledge, profusion of everyday technologies, and further networking of the global market. There seems to be a similar urgency now, as there was then, for increasing scientific understanding among the public.

Bowler’s book surveys science books, pamphlets, magazines, and newspapers written for the general public from the late 1890s through World War II. These media, each intended for a different audience, served a variety of political, pedagogical, and financial purposes. Bowler weaves, to a varying degree of success, each strand into his story. Most impressive about the book is the vast trove of media collected and the biographical register compiled at the end of the book. Unable to find many popular sources in libraries, Bowler has collected a myriad of pamphlets and self-help books, has sifted through daily newspapers and weekly magazines, and has even included some relevant archival material in order to point to the shifting ways in which publishers, scientists, and journalists negotiated with each other in presenting science to the public. The massive collection highlights how the idea of a single “public” is problematic, and how different authors, publishers, and audiences each held their own goals and aspirations.

Bowler begins by positioning his work within a rich literature, including Bernard Lightman’s (2007) book, Victorian Popularizers of Science, which examines popular science in Victorian Britain, and LaFollette’s (1990) Making Science Our Own, a study similar to his own but set in the American context. By examining the popularization of science in Britain during the first half of the 20th century, Bowler has not only filled in a geographic and temporal gap in the research literature but, more important, also challenged the myth of the “isolated scientist” as “a myth that obscures the true level of involvement by professional scientists in the effort to promote public interest in science” (p. 7). He carefully leads us through several decades of publication that show just the opposite: Scientists remained actively engaged in the production of a highly specialized body of self-help literature as well as nonspecialized publications such as newspapers, magazines, and even radio. Bowler highlights the tensions that arose between scientists and a newly emerging group of science journalists and brings into focus the active role of publishing companies and editors in the creation of such books, pamphlets, and magazines.

Throughout the book, the reader meets many colorful characters, some eager to further their careers, others looking to line their pockets. For example, there is “Professor” A. M. Low, an inventor, popular science writer, and founder of Armchair Science in 1929, who comes across as an opportunist. Low rubbed real professors and scientists the wrong way, representing “exactly the kind of individualistic, tinkering practical expertise that the professionals hoped to transcend in their bid for influence with government and industry. Low’s vision of a popular science magazine would inevitably leave out most of the scientists” (p. 177). We sense that not all involved in popularizing science held Low’s opportunitistic approach. In fact, for every Low, Bowler introduces a practicing scientist eager to write a self-help book or an encyclopedia entry. Julian Huxley serves as, perhaps, the most extreme example. Huxley, a prolific and well-respected scientist (even becoming a Fellow of the Royal Society), eventually abandoned his scientific career to pursue science writing full-time.

Bowler acknowledges Huxley to be an exception to the rule. For most professional scientists, writing for a popular audience, although not frowned upon, remained in tension with their research program and the expectations of their colleagues. Such writing also proved tricky and difficult for scientists accustomed to writing in technical and specialized journals. Some scientists, such as J. B. S. Haldane, wore their political affiliations on their sleeves. Haldane, like many scientists of the time, provided a social analysis and critique of science and technology from the political left. He lambasted the misappropriation of science and criticized the popular media’s tendency to sensationalize the work of scientists.

Three additional groups play a central role in Bowler’s story: professional science journalists, publishers, and the public. Bowler does a nice job of incorporating their interests into this story. For example, science correspondents, a new breed of journalists in 20th-century Britain, were few and far between. Unlike scientists, whose work was commissioned weeks if not months in advance, correspondents filled a niche for newspapers looking for a writer who could turn a story around in days and could write material for a wide and general audience often unfamiliar with specialized scientific knowledge.

Publishers of more specialized books and magazines, on the other hand, positioned their works to sell to a narrower segment of society. These publications varied widely: Some publishers cast a wide net, hoping to attract a wide but educated audience, one more limited than the newspapers. Yet others focused on even smaller and more specialized groups of readers. For Bowler, the cost of these books serves as a proxy for determining how wide a net the publishers cast and who their intended audience was. Finally, Bowler sketches for us the audience of these materials. He portrays the public as a set of groups, each with their own interests and needs, yet at the same time draws some generalizations about them. This public, Bowler asserts, is interested in self-help and self-education literature during a period of time with growing economic and educational opportunities in secondary and postsecondary schooling.

Bowler deftly weaves these narratives together and what emerges is a process through which the presentation of science to the public is neither straightforward nor linear. Instead, it is complex, shaped by financial constraints and aspirations, differing notions of science and its role in society, and rival egos and goals. One of the most important lessons from this book is Bowler’s assertion that the public shaped the final product, that through their interests in the free marketplace, scientists and publishers created specific products that would sell. It is at this very point, however, that Bowler’s book is weakest. For all of Bowler’s careful parsing of the types of popular works and his brief allusions to the socioeconomic status of different groups, we lack a sophisticated sense of “the public” and the range of their interests and activities. As Bowler notes, the public is purchasing and reading nonscientific literature as well as scientific literature. What draws some to scientific material over nonscientific material? How might different constituents of the public be reading science and interacting with it? Granted, such questions are difficult to tackle. But an analysis of letters to authors, to publishing companies, and to newspapers, material that Bowler cites sporadically, may provide additional clues into uncovering how the public came to read, interact, and understand science.

Overall, this book has much to offer anyone grappling with the perceived chasm that exists between the public understanding of science and professional scientific knowledge. Throughout, Bowler challenges his readers to recalibrate their understanding of how popular science comes to be produced. He shows the ways in which multiple interest groups operated within a complex network to produce an impressive amount of media. Although we today as science educators may bemoan the failure of the public to understand science, we would be well-served to use his incisive historical analysis to begin to untangle the overlapping and intersecting ways in which science moves from the world of scientists into the public sphere.

# REFERENCES

LaFollette, M. C. (1990). Making science our own: Public images of science, 1910 – 1955. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
Lightman, B. (2007). Victorian popularizers of science: Designing nature for new audiences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
National Research Council. (2009). Learning science in informal environments: People, places, and pursuits. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

DAVID MESHOULAM Department of Curriculum and Instruction 225 N. Mills Street University of Wisconsin–Madison Madison, WI 53706, USA DOI 10.1002/sce.20419 Published online 20 September 2010 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com).