# Hypothetical reported speech in business negotiations: A researcher commentary

Almut Koester

Institute for English Business Communication, WU (Vienna University of Economics and Business), Building D2, Entrance D, Welthandelsplatz 1, 1020 Vienna, Austria

# a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history: Available online 11 November 2023

Keywords   
negotiation   
Business English   
hypothetical reported speech

# a b s t r a c t

This commentary discusses Koester’s (2014) article ‘“We’d be prepared to do something, like if you say.” Hypothetical reported speech in business negotiations’. It begins by contextualizing the article within the field in terms of the research topic (negotiations) and Business English teaching. It then goes on to discuss the significance of the article, and the research gap it addressed, and reviews the basic findings. The final section discusses the influence the article has had in terms of research and pedagogy and finishes with a consideration of future directions.

$©$ 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Significance of the article (Koester, 2014)

Negotiation is not only a much-researched topic in organisational and management studies (drawing on work in psychology, anthropology, sociology and economics), but also one that has produced a plethora of popular handbooks on how to be a successful negotiator. The large number of recent practical guides on negotiating (e.g. Baber et al., 2020; Cordell, 2019; Reiter, 2022) attests to the popularity of this topic. A range of academic peer-reviewed journals are dedicated to different aspects of negotiation, such as the Journal of Strategic Contracting and Negotiation (published by Sage) and Group Decision and Negotiation (published by Springer), indicating that negotiating is a topic which is actively researched. It is also a key communication skill taught in Business English courses, as evident from a number of published textbooks or self-study books on negotiation (e.g. Mulholland, 2015; Powell, 2012) and the fact that almost all Business English course books from B2 level upward contain at least one dedicated chapter on the topic (e.g. Koester et al., 2012; Cenere et al., 2015).

Furthermore, negotiation is a relevant topic for applied linguists and discourse analysts doing research on business and workplace communication, and a number of studies have examined the language and discourse of real-life negotiations (Firth, 1995; Gimenez, 2001; Planken, 2005). However, as Gardani (2017) points out, compared to the overall output of publications on negotiations, there are still comparatively few studies that examine the linguistic and discursive aspects of negotiations. While there are plausible explanations for this (such as the difficulty of obtaining access to recordings of actual naturally-occurring negotiations), it is nevertheless remarkable that a core business activity which is performed through language and communication has not been researched extensively from a linguistic perspective.

Koester’s 2014 article represents one of a number of attempts to help fill this research gap. It focuses specifically on hypothetical reported speech (HRS) which involves an imagined rather than an actual speech report, as in the example used in the title of the article: ‘like if you say “Well look I’m pretty sure that we’re gonna be up to sixteen by by Christmas time . ”‘.1 Using a mixed methods approach drawing on both corpus linguistics and conversation analysis, the article shows how negotiators use imagined dialogue in the different phases of negotiations – information exchange, bargaining, agreement. An analysis of four naturally-occurring recorded negotiations from a corpus of business meetings showed that HRS was used strategically by negotiators at key stages, frequently in combination with ‘accounts’ and ‘formulations’ - interactive features that perform important functions in negotiations. For example, formulations (or ‘evaluative summaries’) of HRS enabled negotiators to summarise hypothetical utterances in ways favourable to their position and thus move the negotiation in a particular direction to achieve their goals. In summary, the featured article shows that hypothetical reported speech is an important persuasive device in strategic negotiating, especially within bargaining sequences in making proposals, counterproposals and rejecting proposals. As using HRS allows negotiators to perform such moves more indirectly, it also frequently performs a relationship-building function. While HRS had previously been studied in informal dialogue as well as in a handful of studies of professional contexts, including classroom discourse (Baynem, 1996) or therapy (Simmons and LeCouteur, 2011), the study was the first, to my knowledge, to examine this phenomenon in negotiations. I also did not find any empirical studies on HRS in negotiations since publication of the article in 2014.

# 2. Influence on the field

Assessing the influence of the article on the field in the last ten years is by no means straightforward. The most frequently used method of measuring the “impact” of articles on research is through citations of the article in subsequent publications. If we compare the citations of the featured article with other articles in the same issue, the impact appears to be modest, however, this is a purely quantitative measure, and means equating “impact” solely with frequency of citation.

A more qualitative assessment involves considering the breadth of influence, that is whether citations are also found in articles outside the immediate research field. Within the field of business discourse, there are citations in two major volumes reviewing business discourse and communication (Gardani, 2017; Nickerson and Planken, 2015) and in his chapter on business negotiations in the Handbook of Business Communication, Gardani devotes a sub-section to reviewing Koester (2014) in which he discusses HRS as one of five linguistic aspects of negotiation that have been researched. However, citations of the featured article are not limited to research on negotiation, which suggests that its impact extends beyond this research topic, including non-business contexts. It is cited in an article on (hypothetical) reported speech in gossip (Mohammed and Vasquéz, 2015) and in research on other types of professional discourse. In examining discourse on construction sites, Handford and Matous (2015) mention HRS as one of a number of discursive devices used in problem-solving. Whittle et al. (2021), explore this device in strategic change communication and show how members of a strategy team use HRS in backstage communication to imagine what a non-present audience might say and how they might react.

While citations provide some evidence for the impact of research, judging influence merely based on citations is questionable. The findings of the article were also disseminated in other ways, for example through conference presentations, invited talks or workshops and may therefore have found take-up by scholars and practitioners in ways that are difficult to measure. Assessing the impact of the article on pedagogy is even more difficult. The final part of the article discusses the implications of the study for teaching and makes some suggestions how the findings can be applied to teaching negotiation. However, it is difficult to know to what extent such suggestions have been taken up by Business English instructors. An interesting example (though not specifically in relation to negotiation) of research findings being implemented in the Business English classroom is Chan’s (2017) reported study of using authentic transcripts with Business English learners. Tadema’s (2023) practitioner’s commentary on Koester (2014) in this volume discusses possible teaching applications and suggests a number of tasks for teaching hypothetical reported speech.

Nevertheless, one obstacle that remains for the implementation of research in Business English teaching is that Business English teachers often do not have access to academic journal articles. While the situation has improved somewhat as articles are increasingly published with open access, there are still barriers for teachers wishing to implement research results in their teaching, not least the availability of time to read research articles alongside a heavy teaching load.

# 3. Future directions and gaps to be filled

The review above has shown that one major gap is the lack of research on hypothetical reported speech and other linguistic phenomena in negotiations Gardani (2017). Koester’s 2014 article contributed to qualitative research on the language and conversational patterns of negotiations, but there is clearly a need for further research in this area. Follow-up research on HRS in negotiations is needed to test the findings of the study on the functions of HRS in negotiations, particularly when considering that the analysis is based only on four negotiations, albeit from a range of contexts such as business sector and meeting type. More empirical evidence is needed not only on the functions of HRS in negotiating, but also on how it interfaces with negotiation style and the features of context. Further work is also needed to bridge the gap between research and practice when it comes to applying the findings of the article to teaching. Practical negotiation handbooks provide plenty of advice on negotiation strategies, but usually remain vague about which specific linguistic strategies to use (an exception is Mulholland, 2015). While many such books are written by experienced negotiators, the advice is often anecdotal and frequently not backed up by empirical research. As negotiating is performed through language and interaction, business practitioners need advice and awareness-raising of specific negotiating language, which can only be provided through real, concrete examples based on empirical research.

# References

Baber, W. W., & Fletcher-Chen, C. C. Y. (2020). Practical Business Negotiation. Routledge.   
Baynem, M. (1996). Direct speech: what’s it doing in non-narrative discourse? Journal of Pragmatics, 25, 61-81.   
Cenere, P., Gill, R., Lawson, C., & Lewis, M. (2015). Communication Skills for Business Professionals. Cambridge University Press.   
Chan, C. S. C. (2017). Investigating a research-informed teaching idea: the use of transcripts of authentic workplace talk in the teaching of spoken Business English. English for Specific Purposes, 46(1), 72-89.   
Cordell, A. (2019). The Negotiation Handbook. Routledge.   
Firth, A. (Ed.). (1995). The Discourse of Negotiation: Studies of Language in the Workplace. Oxford: Pergamon.   
Gardani, F. (2017). Business negotiations. In Handbook of Business Communication: Linguistic Approaches (pp. 91-110). De Gruyter Mouton.   
Gimenez, J. C. (2001). Ethnographic observations in cross-cultural business negotiations between non-native speakers of English: an exploratory study. English for Specific Purposes, 20(2), 169-193.   
Koester, A., & Handford, M. (2018). ‘It’s not good saying, “Well it it might do that or it might not”’: hypothetical reported speech in business meetings. Journal of Pragmatics, 130, 67-80.   
Koester, A. (2014). We’d be prepared to do something, like if you say.” hypothetical reported speech in business negotiations. English for Specific Purposes, 36(1), 35-46.   
Koester, A., Pitt, A., Handford, M., & Lisboa, M. (2012). Business Advantage Intermediate. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Mohammad, A., & Vásquez, C. (2015). ’Rachel’s not here’: constructed dialogue in gossip. Journal of SocioLinguistics, 19(3), 351-371.   
Mulholland. (2015 (first published 1991)). The Language of Negotiation: A Handbook of Practical Strategies for Improving Communication. London: Routledge.   
Nickerson, P., & Planken, B. (2015). Introducing Business English. London: Routledge.   
Planken, B. (2005). Managing rapport in lingua franca sales negotiations: a comparison of professional and aspiring negotiators. English for Specific Purposes, 24(4), 381-400.   
Powell, M. (2012). International Negotiations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Reiter, T. (2022). Managing Negotiations: A Handbook. London: Routledge.   
Simmons, K., & LeCouteur, A. (2011). ‘Hypothetical active-voicing’: therapists ‘modelling’ of clients’ future conversations in CBT interactions. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(13), 3177-3192.   
Tadema, U. (2023). Exploiting hypothetical reported speech in the business english classroom. English for Specific Purposes, 72(1), 16-19.   
Whittle, A., Gilchrist, A., Mueller, F., & Lenney, P. (2021). The art of stage-craft: a dramaturgical perspective on strategic change. Strategic Organization, 19(4), 636-666.

Almut Koester is Professor of English Business Communication at Vienna University of Economics and Business (WU), and, before that, was Senior Lecturer in English Language at the University of Birmingham in England. She is author of The Language of Work (2004), Investigating Workplace Discourse (2006), Workplace Discourse (2010) and Language and Creativity at Work (2024, with Michael Handford). Her research focuses on spoken workplace discourse and business corpora, and her publications have examined genre, modality, relational language, vague language, idioms, conflict talk and creativity. She is currently exploring the areas of creativity in professional contexts and is interested in applying research findings to teaching Business English.