# Epistemic modality in court judgments: A corpus-driven comparison of civil cases in Hong Kong and Scotland

Winnie Cheng a , Le Cheng b,⇑

a Faculty of Humanities, Research Centre for Professional Communication in English, Department of English, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hunghom,   
Hong Kong   
b Center for Legal Discourse and Translation, School of International Studies, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

# a r t i c l e i n f o

# a b s t r a c t

Article history: Available online 21 August 2013

Keywords:   
Epistemic modality   
Probability   
Principle of proof   
Court judgments   
Integrated framework of modality   
English for Legal Purposes (ELP)

Most previous studies of epistemic modality in legal settings discuss epistemic modality as performing an interpersonal engagement or a positioning function. Via a probability test, the present corpus-driven study examined the way in which epistemic modality is employed in civil judgments to construct legal facts and to indicate legal probability. The study compared how different types of epistemic modality are used in judicial practice in different jurisdictions, namely Hong Kong, which is a common law jurisdiction, and Scotland, which is a mixed jurisdiction. Specifically, we examined the variation in the orientation of epistemic modality, that is, whether implicit or explicit and whether subjective or objective, and the variation in the value of epistemic modality, that is, high, median, or low. The findings suggest that both subjective epistemic modality and objective epistemic modality are employed in adjudication where the judges decide the degree of probability, and the value distribution of epistemic modality indicates that the same standard, that is, the balance of probability, is adopted in Hong Kong and Scotland. We propose an integrated framework of principle of proof and discuss the continuum of probability in law. Based on the conclusions, we propose pedagogical implications for English for Legal Purposes.

$^ { © }$ 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

In Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL), modality is used where ‘‘the speaker associates with the thesis an indication of its status and validity in his own judgment’’ (Halliday, 1970, p. 335). The definition of modality is later modified in Halliday (1985 [1994]) as referring to ‘‘intermediate degrees, between the positive and negative poles’’ (p. 88) and realising ‘‘the speaker’s judgment of the probabilities, or the obligations, involved in what he is saying’’ (p. 75). Modality enacts the interpersonal metafunction of language. Modality is used in clauses and other linguistic units to function as ‘exchanges’ of propositions and proposals, whereby a proposition involves an exchange of ‘information,’ that is, statement and questions, and a proposal involves an exchange of ‘goods-&-services,’ that is, offers and commands (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004, p. 107; pp. 146–147).

The system of modality types consists of ‘‘modalization’’ (‘indicative’ type) and ‘‘modulation’’ (‘imperative’ type). Modalization refers to the scales of probability (e.g., ‘may be,’ ‘possibly,’ ‘probably,’ ‘certainly’) and usuality (e.g., ‘sometimes,’ ‘usually,’ ‘always’), and modulation refers to the scales of obligation (e.g., ‘is wanted to,’ ‘allowed to’) and inclination (e.g., ‘wants to,’ ‘willing to’) (p. 618). Probability is referred to as ‘‘epistemic modality’’ and obligation as ‘‘deontic modality’’ (p. 621). A third category, dynamic modality, meaning ability/potentiality, is on the fringe of the modality system, suggesting a general category of ‘‘readiness,’’ having ‘‘inclination’’ and ‘‘ability’’ as subcategories at each end of the scale (pp. 613–625).

The different modality types can be considered in terms of their orientation: implicit (e.g., ‘possibly,’ ‘probably’) vs. explicit (e.g., ‘may,’ ‘must’) and subjective (e.g., ‘I think,’ ‘I believe’) vs. objective (e.g., ‘it is likely,’ ‘it is possible’). They can also be considered in terms of the values of modality applied to the orientation variable; low versus median versus high (p. 621). For instance, the following example illustrates ‘‘transferring the negative from proposition to modality,’’ with the ‘‘switch between high and low’’ values:

direct negative transferred negative   
[high] I know Mary doesn’t know I can’t imagine Mary knows   
[median] I think Mary doesn’t know I don’t think Mary knows   
[low] I imagine Mary doesn’t know I don’t know that Mary knows (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004, p. 621)

Modality, namely epistemic modality, deontic modality and dynamic modality, has been investigated in text and discourse in different contexts of situation where it is used to reflect a writer’s or speaker’s attitude, confidence, belief, or engagement (e.g., Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004; Palmer, 2001; Portner, 2009; Spenader, 2004).

The use of modality is particularly important in legal settings. In such settings, epistemic modality deals with the evidential modals, that is, the reliability of witnesses, the admissibility of evidence, and the burden of proof. Deontic modality defines rights, privileges, obligations, and responsibilities. Dynamic modality is concerned with such mental states as willingness, physical ability, and legal capacity (Cheng & Sin, 2011, p.124).

In law, fact is not found but reconstructed based on the admissible evidence. Such evidence is not necessarily absolutely true but is regarded as true based on different levels of probabilities (or probabilistic tests). In civil law, if the evidence is more probably true than not (the balance of probabilities test), such evidence is regarded as true. In criminal law, if evidence is true beyond a reasonable doubt (beyond a reasonable doubt test), it is regarded as true. Therefore, it is important to study how legal fact is encoded by means of linguistic modality.

Previous studies have investigated deontic modality, that is, obligation, in English legal settings, particularly in English legislation (e.g., Diani, 2001; Garzone, 2001; Gotti, 2001; Williams, 2007). Gotti (2001), for example, examined the distribution percentage of ‘shall’ and ‘will’ in early modern English statutes and showed the preference for ‘shall’ over ‘will’ to indicate depersonalisation. Bondi and Diani also used corpora to investigate deontic modality. They compared deontic values in two parallel corpora of English and Italian contracts from a cross-cultural perspective and highlighted the cultural variants for deontic modality. They argued that their study had important pedagogical implications because of the central role modality plays in legal language. Therefore, the findings in their study can be turned into pedagogical materials that can be used in English for Legal Purposes (ELP) contexts.

Previous research on epistemic modality in legal settings has focused on the function of interpersonal engagement or positioning (e.g., Cheng & Sin, 2008, 2011; Kšrner, 2000; Laudan, 2006), and also standards of proof (e.g., Cheng & Cheng, 2010; Clermont, 2009; Clermont & Sherwin, 2002; Taruffo, 2003). The latter studies indicate that divergent approaches to standards of proof have been used by courts. Some studies investigated the probabilistic approach adopted in common law jurisdictions, such as those in the US and Hong Kong (e.g., Cheng & Cheng, 2010; Clermont, 2009; Taruffo, 2003). Others looked at the truth approach used in civil law jurisdictions, such as those in China and Germany (e.g., Cheng & Cheng, 2010; Clermont, 2009; Clermont & Sherwin, 2002). These studies found that in most common law jurisdictions the notion of ‘proof’ is conceived at two levels: proof on the balance of probabilities at the low level and proof beyond a reasonable doubt at the high level (Eggleston, 1983; Kaye, 1992; Wright, 2009). In another study, Cheng and Cheng (2010) observed that the notion of ‘proof’ on the balance of probabilities is related to likelihood or probability realised in objective expressions, such as ‘more likely than not’ and ‘more probably.’ Cheng and Cheng (2010) also found that the notion of ‘proof’ beyond a reasonable doubt is frequently related to such notions as the belief or certainty of a judge or a juror about reality manifested in subjective expressions, such as ‘I am sure’ and ‘I am convinced’ (Cheng & Cheng, 2010, p. 535). Civil law jurisdictions are different from common law jurisdictions in that proving the facts is dependent on the inner conviction of the judges. Here, research findings have confirmed the assumption that the frequency of modality that indicates uncertainty or probability is rather low (e.g., Cheng & Cheng, 2010; Clermont, 2009; Frowein, 1991; Kazazi, 1995; Merryman & Pérez-Perdomo, 2007; Reiner, 1994; Wright, 2009). On the other hand, the construction of legal facts by a probabilistic test is known to be an important function of legal discourse. However, few researchers have investigated this aspect of epistemic modality. Similarly, there has been limited research on dynamic modality, but as this is known to play only a minor role in legal discourse, it does not fall within the scope of the present study.

The present study is concerned with epistemic modality, as an indication of probability and possibility (e.g., Bach, 2011; Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004). In line with others (e.g., Palmer, 2001, 2003), epistemic modality in SFL is defined as related to conviction (Halliday, 1994) and can be expressed in different forms: modal verbs (e.g., ‘may,’ ‘might’ and ‘must’), adjectives (e.g., ‘possible,’ ‘probable,’ ‘necessary’), adverbs (e.g., ‘probably,’ ‘likely,’ ‘perhaps’), nouns (e.g., ‘possibility,’ ‘probability,’ ‘necessity’), and phrases (e.g., ‘in my opinion,’ ‘in all likelihood’) (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004, pp. 613–625). In addition, epistemic modality can also be realised via a projecting clause, with either a subjective (either explicit or implicit) orientation or an objective (either explicit or implicit) orientation (p. 615). For instance, the speaker’s projecting clause ‘I think’ ‘‘construes the proposition as a projection and encodes the subjectivity,’’ whereas ‘it is likely’ encodes ‘‘the objectivity’’ (p. 615). Probability can also be expressed implicitly either in a subjective form by means of modal verbs, such as ‘may’ and ‘must,’ or in an objective form by means of modal adjuncts, such as ‘probably’ and ‘possibly’ (pp. 619–622). Apart from orientation, epistemic modality can also be viewed from the variable of values, as introduced above. Halliday proposes a trichotomy of value, namely low as expressed by ‘possibly’ and ‘might’ to indicate possibility, medium as expressed by ‘probably’ or ‘will’ to indicate probability, and high as expressed by ‘necessarily’ or ‘must’ to indicate necessity (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004, p. 620).

The present study examines how epistemic modality functions in civil court judgments, which we explained above to be a relatively under-explored but important aspect of legal discourse. We investigate how particular types of epistemic modality are appropriately and effectively associated with a standard or principle of proof as encoded in the civil court judgments in Hong Kong and Scotland. By comparing a native speaker context with a non-native speaker context, we hope to reveal findings that have immediate pedagogical implications in ELP. The study also aims to provide a clear example of how corpus methods can be applied in English for Specific Purposes studies. This study is corpus-driven – it examines two corpora of real-life civil court judgments in Hong Kong and Scotland using Key-Word in Context (KWIC) observations as the primary method for analysis and interpretation. Each corpus is comprised of more than one million words, and we use the data to compare different types of epistemic modality, that is, orientation and value, with a view to finding how the degree of proof and the principle of proof are realised in civil cases in two different jurisdictions, with Hong Kong being a common law jurisdiction and Scotland a mixed jurisdiction (Baker, 2004; Tetley, 1999). By adopting a corpus-driven approach, we can provide evidence-based insights into the general lexico-grammatical profile as well as specific linguistic features of a particular type of discourse (Hunston, 2002; Sinclair, 1991).

In addition, this study combines corpus linguistics (Cheng, Greaves, Sinclair, & Warren, 2009) with contrastive rhetoric (Cheng, 2012; Cheng & Sin, 2011; Connor & Upton, 2004) to allow for the study of linguistic variation in epistemic modality across cultures in the same language (Cheng & Sin, 2011), in this case the English language, and demonstrates the advantages of integrating corpus and discourse perspectives in the textual analysis of a profession-specific genre to reveal professional practice and professional culture (Bhatia, Hernández, & Pérez-Paredes, 2011). By focusing on the analysis of epistemic modality in civil court judgments, we also hope to suggest some pedagogical implications for teaching and learning modality, specifically the discourse and generic variation of modality, in English for Legal Purposes (ELP).

The research questions of this study are:

1. What is the relative distribution of epistemic modality, in terms of the types (i.e., orientations and values), in the civil judgments of Hong Kong and Scotland, respectively?   
2. What are the co-selections of typical epistemic modality in the civil judgments of Hong Kong and Scotland, respectively?   
3. What are the similarities and differences, if any, in the distribution and co-selections of epistemic modality in the civil judgments of Hong Kong and Scotland, respectively?

# 2. Materials and methods

# 2.1. Civil judgments corpora

As the main purpose of this study is to examine the use of English epistemic modality in civil court judgments, only court judgments from the courts having jurisdictions over civil cases were selected. The data in this study were selected from the collection of civil judgments of both the Hong Kong Judiciary (http://www.judiciary.gov.hk/en/legal_ref/judgments.htm) and the Court of Session, Scotland (http://www.scotcourts.gov.uk/session/index.asp). From each website, cases were selected from each year of 2000–2010. Based on the list of cases on the websites, the first 15 cases in the entries of each year were selected until the total word count reached one million. The Hong Kong Judiciary Corpus (HKJC) comprised 150 judgments totalling 1,117,000 words and the Scottish Court of Session Corpus (SCSC) comprised 179 judgments totalling 1,083,000 words.

# 2.2. Methods

This study employed corpus linguistic methods and SFL to guide the analysis and interpretation of findings. Corpus linguistics is a bottom-up approach that looks at ‘‘the full evidence of the corpus’’ and ‘‘analyzes the evidence with the aim of finding probabilities, trends, patterns, co-occurrences of elements, and features or groupings of features’’ (Teubert & Krishnamurthy, 2007, p. 6). The corpus search and analysis methods employed in this study included word frequency profiles and co-selections of epistemic modality.

ConcGram 1.0 (Cheng et al., 2009; Greaves, 2009), a phraseological search program, was used to generate single word frequency lists from each corpus. Then, the word frequency lists were examined with reference to the framework of epistemic modality (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004). Next, modality indicating proof of evidence was identified, followed by examination of the co-text in relevant concordances generated by ConcGram 1.0. After that, the instances of modality were examined in terms of the variables of orientation and value. ConcGram 1.0 was then used to generate $n$ -gram lists (i.e., ‘‘patterns of contiguous words’’ (Cheng et al., 2009)) of the most frequent instances of epistemic modality. Finally, the concordances of selected instances of modality were generated and manually examined in order to determine the semantic and functional meanings of the co-selections of epistemic modality in legal settings. The results are accounted for with reference to the law and legal cultures specific to Hong Kong and Scotland.

# 3. Results

In response to the three research questions, the corresponding results and their interpretation are provided in Sections 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3.

3.1. Orientation of epistemic modality in HKJC and SCSC

Here, the relative distribution of the types of epistemic modality in the two civil judgments corpora, with a focus on orientation, is discussed.

# 3.1.1. Subjective implicit epistemic modality

In daily language, modals like ‘will’ and ‘would’ may be used as indicators of epistemic modality, and modals like ‘need’ and ‘ought to’ as indicators of deontic modality. In law, ‘may’ is often associated with permission, ‘must/shall’ with obligation, and ‘might’ with possibility; ‘must’ can also be used as an indicator even in legal settings (Cheng & Sin, 2011). The most frequent modals in law – ‘may,’ ‘must,’ and ‘might’ – were therefore examined in the present study. Table 1 presents the frequencies and tokens per million words (TPM) of ‘may,’ ‘must,’ and ‘might’ in the SCSC and in the HKJC.

Following an analysis of all cases of ‘may,’ ‘must,’ and ‘might’ in the corpora, only those that showed epistemic modality were extracted for further analysis.

Concordance analysis of ‘may,’ and ‘must in the two corpora shows that both are used to express epistemic modality as reported in earlier research (see Examples [1]–[4]).

[1] In my view Lord Hope’s analysis, quite apart from being very profound and perceptive, must be correct. (HKJC)   
[2] In any event counsel contended that there must be some doubt as to whether the words ‘‘the representative’’ were intended to appear in the singular or whether they appeared in the singular because of clerical error. (SCSC)   
[3] I do not see how the potential liability of the Fund which may or may not arise depending on the outcome of the recovery proceeding against the employer can be considered a relevant factor in the exercise of the discretion at this stage of the proceedings. (HKJC)   
[4] It may or may not be material, but there is no other relevant degree of legal error. (SCSC)

The examples [1] ‘Lord Hope’s analysis . . . must be correct’ (HKJC) and [2] ‘In any event counsel contended that there must be some doubt . . .’ (SCSC) are instances of subjective implicit epistemic modality of high-degree probability. Similarly, ‘may or may not (arise/be)’ in [3] and [4] are instances of subjective implicit epistemic modality of median-degree probability, in Hong Kong and Scotland.

Concordance analysis of ‘might’ shows that this modal verb is used in civil court judgments in the grammatical form ‘‘might $^ +$ present perfect tense’’ which is equal to ‘‘possibly $^ +$ past tense form of ‘be’’’ to indicate a possibility (lines 35–38, Appendix A) or a mere possibility in the counterfactual expression (line 39, Appendix A):

Based on the concordance analysis of the use and meaning of ‘may,’ ‘must,’ and ‘might embedded in the co-text, the frequencies of the words that are used as subjective implicit epistemic modality are compared to the raw frequencies (Table 2).

When epistemic meanings are compared, ‘may’ is found to be used more frequently than ‘must’ in both corpora: $4 7 . 9 \%$ for ‘may’ versus only $8 . 1 \%$ for ‘must’ in Hong Kong and $1 9 . 6 \%$ for ‘may’ versus only $3 . 2 \%$ for ‘must’ in Scotland. All the instances of ‘might’ $( 1 0 0 \% )$ in the corpora are used as epistemic modality to denote probability and possibility.

It is found that most instances of ‘must’ are not for indicating epistemic modality (see Example [5]), but some instances of ‘must’ used as epistemic modality can also be identified (see Example [6]):

[5] This is the highest level of observation at the State Hospital and involves a member of staff having responsibility for the patient only and the member of staff must be within touching distance of the patient at all times. (SCSC)   
[6] This must be true of a society – at least a civilised and organised society – such as we know to exist in East Germany. (HKJC)

Table 1 Frequencies and tokens per million words (TPM) of ‘may,’ ‘might,’ and ‘must’ in HKJC and SCSC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">May</td><td colspan="2">Must</td><td colspan="2">Might</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Frequency</td><td>TPM</td><td> Frequency</td><td>TPM</td><td>Frequency</td><td>TPM</td></tr><tr><td>HKJC</td><td>1781</td><td>1594</td><td>1254</td><td>1123</td><td>582</td><td>521</td></tr><tr><td>ScSc</td><td>3728</td><td>3442</td><td>2224</td><td>2054</td><td>1504</td><td>1389</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Relative distribution of ‘may,’ ‘might,’ and ‘must’ used as subjective implicit epistemic modality in HKJC and SCSC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">May</td><td colspan="2">Must</td><td colspan="2">Might</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Frequency</td><td>TPM</td><td>Frequency</td><td>TPM</td><td>Frequency</td><td>TPM</td></tr><tr><td>HKJC</td><td>853 (out of 1781, 47.9%)</td><td>764</td><td>101 (out of 1254, 8.1%)</td><td>90</td><td>582 (out of 582, 100%)</td><td> 521</td></tr><tr><td>ScSc</td><td>730 (out of 3728, 19.6%)</td><td>674</td><td>71 (out of 2224, 3.2%)</td><td>66</td><td>1504 (out of 1504, 100%)</td><td>1389</td></tr></table></body></html>

Example [5] involves the responsibility of a member of staff, so ‘the member of staff must be within touching distance of the patient at all times’ has a meaning similar to ‘the member of the staff is required to be within touching distance of the patient at all times,’ and it does not denote probability. Example [6], on the other hand, is a typical indication of epistemic modality. Similar patterns of using ‘must’ as indication of different types of modality can be found in line 646 in Appendix B and line 61 in Appendix C (as epistemic modality), and lines 647–650 of Appendix B and lines 62–65 of Appendix C (as deontic modality).

# 3.1.2. Subjective explicit epistemic modality

Following the same procedure as described in Section 3.1.1, the concordances of other epistemic proponents were closely examined to identify their meanings in the co-text. For example, as shown in Appendices D and E, nine out of 26 $( 3 4 . 6 \% )$ instances of ‘sure’ are in the form of ‘I am/feel sure (that). . .’ (lines 2–5, 11, 24–26, Appendix D) and are thus linguistic realisations of epistemic modality in an explicit way (Halliday, 1994; Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004). Similarly, 10 out of 16 $( 6 2 . 5 \% )$ instances of ‘convinced,’ are in the form of ‘I am (not) convinced (that)’ (lines 2–3, 6–10, 12–13, Appendix E) or ‘nor are we convinced’ (line 15 in Appendix E), are used to realise subjective explicit epistemic modality.

The orientation of epistemic modality was examined through the use of $n$ -grams. Table 3 shows a frequency ordered list of $n$ -grams used to express subjective explicit epistemic modality in court judgments to indicate probability in law.

Quantitative findings show that in the HKJC, the four most frequent $n$ -grams are ‘In my view’ $\mathrm { ( T P M } = 5 7 1$ ), ‘I think (that)’ $\begin{array} { r } { \left( \mathrm { T P M } = 1 1 5 \right) } \end{array}$ ), ‘I do not think’ $\left( \mathrm { T P M } = 7 5 \right.$ ), and ‘In my opinion’ $\left( \mathrm { T P M } = 5 6 \right.$ ). In the SCSC, the four most frequent $n$ -grams are ‘In our view,’ $( \mathrm { T P M } = 2 3 9$ ) ‘In my opinion,’ $\mathrm { ( T P M } = 2 3 3$ ) ‘In my view,’ $\mathrm { \Delta T P M } = 2 1 0 \mathrm { \Omega }$ ) and ‘In our opinion $\mathrm { \Delta T P M } = 1 9 9 \mathrm { \Omega }$ ).

Table 3 Frequencies and tokens per million words (TPM) of $n$ -grams of subjective explicit epistemic modality in HKJC and SCSC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Expressions</td><td>HKJC frequency</td><td>HKJC TPM</td><td>SCSC frequency</td><td>SCSC TPM</td></tr><tr><td>In my view</td><td>638</td><td>571</td><td>227</td><td>210</td></tr><tr><td>I think (that)</td><td>128</td><td>115</td><td>91</td><td>84</td></tr><tr><td>I do not think</td><td>84</td><td>75</td><td>13</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>In my opinion</td><td>62</td><td>56</td><td>252</td><td>233</td></tr><tr><td>In our view</td><td>39</td><td>35</td><td>259</td><td>239</td></tr><tr><td>I have no doubt (that)</td><td>29</td><td>26</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>We think (that)</td><td>19</td><td>17</td><td>42</td><td>39</td></tr><tr><td>We do not think</td><td>15</td><td>13</td><td>24</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>I doubt</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>10</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>I am not convinced</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>I am sure</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>In our opinion</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>215</td><td>199</td></tr><tr><td>I have little doubt</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>We doubt</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>I am not sure</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>I entertain(ed) no doubt</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>I entertain(ed) no doubt</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>I trust (that)</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>I am in no doubt</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>I do not doubt</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>I am in doubt</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>We have no doubt</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>I feel sure</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>We trust (that) I am convinced (that)</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>We are not convinced</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>I have some doubt We are in doubt</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>We are in no doubt</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>We have considerable doubt</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>We entertain some doubt.</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2 2</td><td>2 2</td></tr><tr><td>We have little doubt</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1061</td><td>950</td><td>1166</td><td>1077</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Frequencies and tokens per million words (TPM) of words of objective epistemic modality in HKJC and SCSC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Expressions</td><td>HKJC frequency</td><td>HKJC TPM</td><td> SCSC frequency</td><td> SCSC TPM</td></tr><tr><td>Possible</td><td>229</td><td>205</td><td>366</td><td>338</td></tr><tr><td>Likely</td><td>184</td><td>165</td><td>254</td><td>235</td></tr><tr><td> Possibility</td><td>135</td><td>121</td><td>140</td><td>129</td></tr><tr><td>Perhaps</td><td>115</td><td>103</td><td>117</td><td>108</td></tr><tr><td>Impossible</td><td>65</td><td>58</td><td>76</td><td>70</td></tr><tr><td> Possibly</td><td>58</td><td>52</td><td>41</td><td>38</td></tr><tr><td>Probably</td><td>55</td><td>49</td><td>28</td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td>Unlikely</td><td>54</td><td>48</td><td>49</td><td>45</td></tr><tr><td>Probabilities</td><td>30</td><td>27</td><td>19</td><td>18</td></tr><tr><td>Likelihood</td><td>26</td><td>23</td><td>37</td><td>34</td></tr><tr><td> Probability</td><td>21</td><td>19</td><td>19</td><td>18</td></tr><tr><td>Probable</td><td>19</td><td>17</td><td>21</td><td>19</td></tr><tr><td>Possibilities</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>15</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>Improbable</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Maybe</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td> Improbability</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td> Impossibility</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Improbabilities</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Likeliest</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1016</td><td>910</td><td>1198</td><td>1106</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.1.3. Objective epistemic modality

The words used to express objective epistemic modality (except for the usages of ‘certain’ as discussed below) are shown in Table 4.

In the HKJC, the most frequent words are ‘possible,’ ‘likely,’ ‘possibility,’ ‘perhaps,’ ‘impossible,’ ‘possibly,’ ‘probably,’ and ‘unlikely.’ In the SCSC, the top five most frequent words are in the same order, and the others show similar frequency patterns. However, the TPM values reveal that these words tend to occur slightly more frequently in the SCSC.

The word ‘certain,’ which can realise either an objective or a subjective orientation, was also examined. Although ‘certain’ occurs quite frequently in both corpora $( \mathrm { T P M } = 2 3 6$ in Hong Kong; $\mathrm { T P M } = 5 3 6$ in Scotland), concordance analysis of ‘certain’ shows that none of the instances is related to subjective explicit epistemic modality; there is no occurrence of such $n$ -grams as ‘I am certain that. . .’ and ‘we are certain that. . .’ that one would expect to find in other texts or discourses. Instead, in most of the cases, whether in the HKJC (lines 21–24, Appendix F) or in the SCSC (lines 21–24, Appendix G), ‘certain’ is used to denote ‘some.’ In only four instances (lines 117–119, 125, Appendix F) in the HKJC and three in the SCSC (lines 1, 29–30, Appendix G), ‘certain,’ as in ‘it is (not) certain (that). . .,’ is used to denote objective explicit epistemic modality.

The findings (Tables 2–4) indicate that there is no noticeable difference in terms of the orientation of epistemic modality between the HKJC and SCSC, whether for subjective implicit epistemic modality, for subjective explicit epistemic modality, or for objective epistemic modality. The reasons for this will be discussed later in the paper.

# 3.2. Value of epistemic modality in HKJC and SCSC

Following the theoretical framework of modality of SFL, we also compared the values of single words and $n$ -grams of epistemic modality in the HKJC and SCSC and classified the instances into high-value, median-value, and low-value epistemic modality (Tables 5–7).

Tables 5–7 show that the frequency values for high-, median-, and low-value epistemic modality in the HKJC and SCSC are also very close. Also, for both corpora, median-value epistemic modality has the highest overall frequency, low-value epistemic modality the second highest overall frequency, and high-value epistemic modality the lowest overall frequency. This indicates that a relatively low standard of proof, that is, the balance of probabilities, instead of a high standard of proof (which may be encoded in linguistic expressions such as ‘I am sure’ or ‘It is certain’), is employed in civil cases in both jurisdictions. Again, the findings show that the value distribution of epistemic modality between the HKJC and SCSC is very similar.

# 3.3. Concordance analysis of typical epistemic modality

The following section discusses the analyses of the concordances of typical expressions of probability and possibility (Eggleston, 1983; Elga, 2010; Merryman & Pérez-Perdomo, 2007; Wright, 2009) related to principle and standard of proof in civil judgments in the HKJC and SCSC, namely ‘probability,’ ‘probabilities,’ ‘likely,’ ‘possible,’ and ‘possibilities.’ The purpose is to find out the semantic and functional meanings associated with these words in legal settings. Tables 8–10 show the words that are co-selected with ‘likely,’ ‘possible,’ and ‘possibility.’

Table 5 Frequencies and tokens per million words (TPM) of expressions of high-value epistemic modality.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Expressions</td><td>HKJC frequency</td><td>HKJC TPM</td><td>SCSC frequency</td><td>SCSC TPM</td></tr><tr><td>Impossible</td><td>65</td><td>58</td><td>76</td><td>70</td></tr><tr><td> Unlikely</td><td>54</td><td>48</td><td>49</td><td>45</td></tr><tr><td>I have no doubt (that)</td><td>29</td><td>26</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>I am sure</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Improbable</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>It is certain</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>I have little doubt</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Improbability</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Impossibility</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>I trust (that)</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>I entertain(ed) no doubt</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>We have no doubt</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>I feel sure</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>I do not doubt</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>I am in no doubt</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>I am convinced (that)</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>We trust (that)</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Improbabilities</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>We are in no doubt</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>We have little doubt</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Unlikelihood Total</td><td>0 182</td><td>0 163</td><td>2 156</td><td>2 144</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6 Frequencies and tokens per million words (TPM) of expressions of median-value epistemic modality.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Expressions</td><td>HKJC frequency</td><td>HKJC TPM</td><td>SCSC frequency</td><td>SCSC TPM</td></tr><tr><td>In my view</td><td>638</td><td>571</td><td>227</td><td>210</td></tr><tr><td>Likely</td><td>184</td><td>165</td><td>254</td><td>235</td></tr><tr><td>I think (that)</td><td>128</td><td>115</td><td>91</td><td>84</td></tr><tr><td>I do not think</td><td>84</td><td>75</td><td>13</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>In my opinion</td><td>62</td><td>56</td><td>252</td><td>233</td></tr><tr><td>Probably</td><td>55</td><td>49</td><td>28</td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td>In our view</td><td>39</td><td>35</td><td>259</td><td>239</td></tr><tr><td>Probabilities</td><td>30</td><td>27</td><td>19</td><td>18</td></tr><tr><td>Likelihood</td><td>26</td><td>23</td><td>37</td><td>34</td></tr><tr><td> Probability</td><td>21</td><td>19</td><td>19</td><td>18</td></tr><tr><td>We think (that)</td><td>19</td><td>17</td><td>42</td><td>39</td></tr><tr><td>Probable</td><td>19</td><td>17</td><td>21</td><td>19</td></tr><tr><td>We do not think</td><td>15</td><td>13</td><td>24</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>In our opinion</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>215</td><td>199</td></tr><tr><td>Likeliest</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>1325</td><td>1186</td><td>1501</td><td>1386</td></tr></table></body></html>

A closer examination of the concordances of ‘probability’ and ‘probabilities’ (Appendices H–K) shows that in both jurisdictions, the principle adopted in civil cases by the courts in Hong Kong and Scotland is the standard of ‘the balance of probabilities,’ realised in different variants, including ‘on the balance of probabilities’ (lines 6, 8–9, 12, 15–17, 21, 26–27, Appendix I; lines 5–6, 8, 11–13, 15–19, Appendix K), ‘on a balance of probabilities’ (lines 1, 25, Appendix I; line 14, Appendix K), ‘on balance of probabilities’ (lines 7, 18, 20, Appendix I), ‘on the balance of probability’ (lines, 2, 19, Appendix H; line 11, Appendix J), ‘on a balance of probability’ (line 13, Appendix H; line 13, Appendix J), ‘a/the high probability’ (lines 14, 18, Appendix H; line 6, Appendix J), and ‘the preponderance of probability’ (line 11, Appendix H). This civil standard can be typically expressed as ‘more likely than not,’ as shown in Examples [7] and [8].

[7] The balance of probability standard means that a court is satisfied an event occurred if the court considers that, on the evidence, the occurrence of the event was more likely than not. (HKJC)   
[8] They need only prove this on the balance of probabilities. This means that the defence must show that it is more likely than not that he is unfit to stand trial. (SCSC)

Table 8 shows the adverbs that are co-selected with ‘likely’; Table 9 shows the words that are co-selected with ‘possible, and Table 10 shows the words that are co-selected with ‘possibility’ in the HKJC and SCSC.

Table 7 Frequencies and tokens per million words (TPM) of expressions of low-value epistemic modality.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Expressions</td><td>HKJC frequency</td><td>HKJC TPM</td><td> SCSC frequency</td><td>SCSC TPM</td></tr><tr><td>Possible</td><td>229</td><td>205</td><td>366</td><td>338</td></tr><tr><td> Possibility</td><td>135</td><td>121</td><td>140</td><td>129</td></tr><tr><td>Perhaps</td><td>115</td><td>103</td><td>117</td><td>108</td></tr><tr><td>Possibly</td><td>58</td><td>52</td><td>41</td><td>38</td></tr><tr><td>I doubt</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>10</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>I am not convinced</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Possibilities</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>15</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>Maybe</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>I am not sure</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>We doubt</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>It is (was) not certain</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>I am in doubt</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>We are not convinced</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>I have some doubt</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>We are in doubt</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>We have considerable doubt</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>We entertain some doubt</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>550</td><td>492</td><td>683</td><td>631</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 8 Adverb frequencies and tokens per million words (TPM) co-selecting ‘likely’ at $N - 1$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Adverb</td><td>HKJC frequency</td><td>HKJC TPM</td><td>SCSC frequency</td><td>SCSC TPM</td></tr><tr><td>More</td><td>12</td><td>11</td><td>7</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Less</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>8</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Most</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Very</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Not</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>8</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Equally</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td></td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Hardly</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Also</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Even</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Quite</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Least</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Not at all</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Highly</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Inherently</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Reasonably</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 9 Adverb frequencies and tokens per million words (TPM) co-selecting ‘possible’ at N - 1.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Adverb</td><td>HKJC frequency</td><td>HKJC TPM</td><td>SCSC frequency</td><td>SCSC TPM</td></tr><tr><td>Not</td><td>24</td><td></td><td>38</td><td>35</td></tr><tr><td>Only</td><td>6</td><td>5</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Reasonably</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Still</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Quite</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Perfectly</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Also</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Certainly</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Eminently</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Entirely</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Simply</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Widest</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 8 shows that ‘likely’ frequently co-selects adverbs at the $N - 1$ position that indicate the degree of probability, such as ‘more,’ ‘less,’ ‘most,’ and ‘very.’ The co-selections can be roughly divided into three levels within the continuum of probability, namely ‘most/more likely (than not),’ ‘equally likely,’ and ‘less likely than not.’ Any degree above the balance of probabilities, expressed as ‘very likely’ and ‘quite likely,’ should satisfy the civil standard, the balance of probabilities.

Table 10 Adverb frequencies and tokens per million words (TPM) co-selecting ‘possibility’ at $N - 1$ .   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Adverb</td><td>HKJC frequency</td><td>HKJC TPM</td><td>SCSC frequency</td><td>SCSC TPM</td></tr><tr><td>Real</td><td>17</td><td>15</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Remote</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Sensible</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Mere</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Realistic</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Reasonable</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Only</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Conceivable</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Definite</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Remotest</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Strong</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Worst</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Any</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td> Foreseeable</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>7</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Further</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>High</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Little</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Serious</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr></table></body></html>

In civil cases, it is also important to note that ‘probability’ is different to ‘possibility,’ because in law ‘probability’ is of a higher value than ‘possibility’ and that we should also investigate the degree of ‘possibility’ (see Example [9], which is demonstrated with the co-selection of ‘possibility’ and the word preceding).

[9] He also recognised, at p.197, that there might be exceptional cases where undue influence was not simply possible but was probable and advised that in such cases ‘the creditor to be safe will have to insist that the wife is separately advised.’ (SCSC)

As shown in Table 9, the adverb ‘not’ is the most frequently co-selected word with ‘possible’ at $N - 1$ position (the position immediately before the word ‘possible’) in both corpora. Another adverb, ‘real,’ is also found to co-select ‘possibility’ rather frequently (at $N - 1 )$ ) in the HKJC but not in the SCSC (Table 10).Concordance analyses of prevalent formal realisations of epistemic modality confirm that the degree of possibility also requires attention in civil proof.

# 4. Discussion

From the foregoing findings, it is observed that both objective and subjective orientations of epistemic modality are used as an evaluative mechanism of proof in the court judgments of Hong Kong and Scotland. This observation confirms that epistemic modality, whether subjective or objective, may be used to indicate probability, which is, after all, the subjective engagement of the evaluator (Wang, 1943), the judges, or the jurors in legal settings. In other words, different linguistic expressions, whether implicit or explicit and whether subjective or objective, are used to realise the same function (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004) in terms of proof evaluation. Also, the distribution in the orientation and value of epistemic modality between Hong Kong and Scotland is roughly the same (e.g., similar frequency distributions of high-, median, and low-value, epistemic modality). This means that in civil cases in both jurisdictions, the emphasis is more on probability and possibility than on certainty. The results also confirm that both jurisdictions use the probabilistic test, that is, the balance of probability (Clermont, 2009; Merryman & Pérez-Perdomo, 2007; Wright, 2009).

The results of our study reflect the practice that the law does not require the prosecution to prove its case with absolute certainty. In other words, both jurisdictions accept the widely held view in law that absolute certainty is unattainable and would entail excessive rigidity (see HKSAR v. Mach Sindy [2004] CACC 198). Hence it is understood that a prescription by law may inevitably involve some degree of vagueness and may require clarification by the courts, whether in substantive law or in the law of procedure. In civil cases, the court or the jury should be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that some statement is true rather than satisfied merely by the standard of probability or possibility. Indeed, Lord Kilbrandon himself said, at p 10:

[10] The pursuer has after all, only to satisfy the court of a probability, not to demonstrate an irrefragable chain of causa tion, which in a case of dermatitis, in the present state of medical knowledge, he could probably never do. (HKJC)

As shown in this study, the value distribution of epistemic modality in the court judgments of Hong Kong and Scotland (i.e., a lower frequency of high-value epistemic modality compared with low-value and median-value epistemic modality) is a pertinent demonstration of applying the civil standard of proof; and that is, the preponderance of probability and the typical linguistic form ‘more likely than not.’ Even though previous studies have examined the quantification of probabilities from a logical perspective (e.g., Elga, 2010; Gibbard, 2007), it seems that there have not been any consistent conclusions about the quantification beyond a reasonable doubt or other standards of proof. The exception is that it is commonly accepted that balance of probabilities means higher than 0.5 (see for example, Nicholls, 1996, pp. 586–587).

Table 11 An integrated framework for principle of proof.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Value</td><td>Degree of proof</td></tr><tr><td>Low</td><td>Remote/remotest Possibility</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Reasonable/conceivable/sensible possibility Real/realistic/definite/strong/only possibility</td></tr><tr><td>Median</td><td>Probability</td></tr><tr><td>High</td><td>A high probability</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Inherent probability</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>In all probability</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Highest</td><td> Improbability</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Impossibility</td></tr></table></body></html>

To date, no systemic study can be found as to the quantification of probability in principle of proof. In this study which identifies and examines epistemic modality in civil judgments in terms of orientation and value, it can be observed that quantification of probability is used. For instance, in the SCSC (lines 3–4, Appendix J), the epistemic modality ‘probability’ is preceded by ‘a,’ ‘all,’ ‘75 per cent,’ ‘equal,’ ‘a higher degree of,’ and so on. However, the results also show that quantification is not the preference of the judges. Instead, judges prefer to use epistemic modality of different orientations and values to express their belief in the proposition, to indicate probability in law, and to demonstrate the application of ‘the balance of probability’ (lines 9, 11–13, Appendix J) in civil adjudication.

Since there is no exact measurement of certainty, civil judgments are always somewhat subjective and are based on reasonable opinions of the judge and/or jury. Although the standards are quite stationary, the formulas to test such standards vary. The variation in the formulas is well-explicated (see, for example, Morris, 1956), as follows:

It is, I think, clear from the authorities that a difference of approach in civil cases has been recognized. Many judicial utterances show this. The phrase ‘balance of probabilities’ is often employed to express the basis upon which civil issues are decided. It may well be that no clear-cut logical reconciliation can be formulated in regard to the authorities on these topics. But perhaps they illustrate that ‘the life of the law is not logic but experience.’ (Morris, 1956, cited in Allan, 1996, p. 70).

Based on our analysis above, Table 11 describes an integrated framework of standard of proof, or principle of proof. It consists of two defining categories, namely value and degree of proof.

If we accept that epistemic modality associates the fact finders with an indication of the status and validity of a thesis in their own judgment (Halliday, 1970, p. 335), regardless of its orientation, we can say that any words or expressions with or above a high value can be regarded as qualified forms and that a proposition meets the standard of the balance of probabilities. As to the median level, the expression ‘more likely than not (true)’ or ‘more probable than not (true),’ as well as its adverbial equivalent ‘more probably than not,’ can denote the concept of balance of probabilities.

From a logic perspective, if we say ‘it is impossible that $p _ { \cdot }$ ,’ it can be interpreted as ‘it is necessary that not $p '$ ; similarly, ‘it is a remote possibility that p’ can be interpreted as ‘it is almost certain that not $p '$ (cf. Halliday, 1994; Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004). A probabilistic test is a continuum in which the degree of probability may vary from the negative pole of impossibility to the positive pole of certainty (Halliday, 1994, p. 88). The inclusion of standards of proof into epistemic modality (Table 11) helps to account for different expressions in proof, whether in the form of probability or possibility under the same umbrella, that is, the belief of judges or jurors as fact finders. Also, such an explanation can bridge the gap between legal and non-legal discourses.

# 5. Conclusion and implications

This study adopted a corpus approach to the analysis of English modality for professional purposes. It examined instances of epistemic modality in civil court judgments in Hong Kong and Scotland. The findings about the variation in the orientation of epistemic modality, that is, whether implicit or explicit and whether subjective or objective (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004), enrich our understanding of the use of different types of epistemic modality. The findings can also help researchers build an integrated framework for making sense of the meaning and function of the different types of epistemic modality in civil judgment cases.

Epistemic modality is about the speaker’s judgment of the status and validity of a thesis and reflects the subjectivity of the speaker (Wang, 1943). However, there are different orientations of epistemic modality, that is, subjective/objective and explicit/implicit (Halliday, 1994; Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004). Therefore, the two different perspectives in understanding the principle of proof, that is, the subjective appraisal of proof in terms of validity and the objective assessment of proof in terms of probability, can be integrated if a systemic-functional understanding of epistemic modality is adopted. Based on the analysis of the two sets of civil judgments (HKJC and SCSC), the study concludes that both subjective epistemic modality and objective epistemic modality are employed in adjudication wherein the judges decide the degree of probability. In addition, the value distribution of epistemic modality in civil adjudication in the two jurisdictions indicates that the same standard, that is, the balance of probability, is adopted in Hong Kong and Scotland. The results also suggest that legal discourse in Hong Kong reflects its strong roots in the UK legal system, and that (non-native) judges in Hong Kong show an understanding of the subtleties of epistemic modality perhaps above and beyond many native speakers of English outside of the legal profession. An investigation on the English training received by practicing judges in Hong Kong may be an interesting future study.

The finding that ‘must’ is mainly used in both jurisdictions to indicate epistemic modality concurs with the normal usage of ‘must’ in legislation (e.g., Gibbons, 1994; Tiersma, 1999). However, in the two corpora examined in this study, the frequencies of ‘may’ to indicate epistemic modality, in contrast with the normal usage of ‘may’ in legislation (e.g., Gibbons, 1994; Tiersma, 1999), draw our attention to the differences in the usage of the same words within different types of judgments, say, legislation versus court judgments, even in the same kind of professional discourse.

Based on the analysis of the two sets of court judgments, we conclude that at least four constraints should be considered when modality is conceptualised, namely syntactic constraint (e.g., ‘may do’ v. ‘may be’); semantic constraint (e.g., the different orientations of epistemic modality); discourse community constraint (e.g., the frequent use of ‘may’ or ‘must’ in legislation to respectively indicate permission and obligation), and generic constraint (e.g., the contrast of usages of ‘may’ in legislation and in court judgments).

With regard to pedagogical implications for English for Legal Purposes, the study shows the importance of modality in English civil judgments. When teaching modality, we can discuss the formal rules for the core modality in English, which is limited to the modal verbs in the traditional sense, followed by the semantic dimension of English modality. Specifically, after introducing the core modality and comparing different types of modality, we can introduce the classifications of the core modality, namely epistemic, deontic, and dynamic modality. At this point, we can point out that the same word can be classified into various types of modality in terms of the semantic dimension, suggesting that the meaning of modality should be understood when situated in a concrete legal context. In addition, the discussion of the semantic significance of modality needs to be extended to the pragmatic field to focus on both the orientation and the value of modality for students to see that some metaphorical realisations of modals can achieve the same speech function (e.g., Diani, 2001; Garzone, 2001).

Understanding the value of modality can be a rather difficult task even for native English speakers. However, we can explain and demonstrate the value of modality by contrasting different words and expressions and providing even a basic profile of value in English modality. In epistemic modality, examples of reported speech, such as ‘he said $p '$ and ‘it is said $p$ ,’ may be employed by the speaker functionally as judgment of the status of the proposition. The proposition ‘‘is, as it were, represented by being projected by somebody other than the speaker; the projection thus serves as a device enabling speakers to distance themselves from the proposition.’’ (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004, p. 629) However, epistemic modality cannot be decided in terms of ideational or interpersonal function (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004) unless when it is used in a speakeraddressee context. This is important when modality is learnt and taught in English for Legal Purposes.

Finally, some scholars (e.g., Gotti & Dossena, 2001; Portner, 2009) discuss the pragmatic significance of lexicogramatical features, including modality. This focus is especially useful because of the central role modality plays in legal language. The findings in this study can potentially contribute to the teaching and learning of epistemic modality in legal language by showing how particular linguistic devices and strategies are more appropriately and more effectively associated with specific legal genres than other devices and strategies (Candlin, Bhatia, & Jensen, 2002, p. 303).

# Appendix A. Supplementary material

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ j.esp.2013.07.006.

# References

Allan, C. (1996). Sourcebook on evidence. London: Cavendish.   
Bach, K. (2011). Perspectives on possibilities: Contextualism, relativism or what? In A. Egan & B. Weatherson (Eds.), Epistemic modality (pp. 19–59). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.   
Baker, J. H. (2004). An introduction to English legal history (4th ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.   
Bhatia, V. K., Hernández, P. S., & Pérez-Paredes, P. (2011). Researching specialized language. Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Candlin, C. N., Bhatia, V. K., & Jensen, C. H. (2002). Developing legal writing materials for English second language learners: Problems and perspectives. English for Specific Purposes, 21, 299–320.   
Cheng, L. (2012). Attribution and judicial control in Chinese court judgments: A corpus-based study. International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 19(1), 27–49.   
Cheng, L., & Cheng, W. (2010). Language modeling for legal proof. In X. G. Jin, Y. G. Liu, T. R. Li, & D. Ruan (Eds.). Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Knowledge Engineering (ISKE2010), Hangzhou, China, 15–16 November 2010 (pp. 533–537). Beijing: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.   
Cheng, W., Greaves, C., Sinclair, J. Mc. H., & Warren, M. (2009). Uncovering the extent of the phraseological tendency: Towards a systematic analysis of concgrams. Applied Linguistics, 30(2), 236–252. Cheng, L., & Sin, K. K. (2011). A sociosemiotic interpretation of linguistic modality in legal settings. Semiotica, 185, 123–146.   
Cheng, L., & Sin, K. K. (2008). A court judgment as dialogue. In Edda. Weigand (Ed.), Dialogue and rhetoric (pp. 267–281). Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Clermont, K. M. (2009). Standards of proof revisited. Vermont Law Review, 33, 469–487.   
Clermont, K. M., & Sherwin, E. (2002). A comparative view of standards of proof. The American Journal of Comparative Law, 50(2), 243–275.   
Connor, U., & Upton, T. A. (2004). Discourse in the professions: Perspectives from corpus. Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Diani, G. (2001). Modality and speech acts in English acts of parliament. In M. Gotti & M. Dossena (Eds.), Modality in specialized translation (pp. 175–191).   
Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.   
Eggleston, R. (1983). Evidence, proof and probability (2 ed.). London: G. Weidenfeld & Nicolson.   
Elga, A. (2010). Subjective probabilities should be sharp. Philosophers’ Imprint, 10(5), 1–11.   
Frowein, J. A. (1991). Fact-finding by the European commission of human rights. In R. Lillich (Ed.), Fact-finding by international tribunals (pp. 237–251). New York, NY: Transnational Publishers.   
Garzone, G. (2001). Deontic modality and performativity in English legal texts. In M. Gotti & M. Dossena (Eds.), Modality in specialized translation (pp. 153–170). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.   
Gibbard, A. (2007). Rational credence and the value of truth. In T. Szabo Gendler & J. Hawthorne (Eds.), Oxford studies in epistemology (Vol. 2) (pp. 143–164).   
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.   
Gibbons, J. (Ed.). (1994). Language and the law. London: Longman.   
Gotti, M., & Dossena, M. (2001). Modality in specialized translation. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.   
Gotti, M. (2001). Semantic and pragmatic values of shall and will in early modern English Statutes. In M. Gotti & M. Dossena (Eds.), Modality in specialized translation (pp. 89–111). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.   
Greaves, C. (2009). ConcGram 1.0. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1970). Functional diversity in language as seen from a consideration of modality and mood in English. Foundations of Language, 6, 322–361.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985 [1994]). An introduction to functional grammar (2nd ed.). London: Edward Arnold.   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, M. I. M. (2004). An introduction to functional grammar (3 ed.). New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press.   
Hunston, S. (2002). Corpora in applied linguistics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Kaye, D. H. (1992). Proof in law and science. Jurimetrics Journal, 32(3), 313–321.   
Kazazi, M. (1995). Burden of proof and related issues. The Hague: Kluwer Law International.   
Kšrner, H. (2000). Negotiating authority: The logogenesis of dialogue in common law judgments. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Linguistics Department, University of Sydney, Sydney.   
Laudan, L. (2006). Truth, error and criminal law: An essay in legal epistemology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Merryman, J. H., & Pérez-Perdomo, R. (2007). The civil law tradition: An introduction to the legal systems of Europe and Latin America. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.   
Morris, J. (1956). Hornal v. Neuberger Products Limited 9 [1956] 1 QB 247. London: QB.   
Nicholls, D. J. (1996). Re H (Minors) (Sexual abuse: Standard of proof) [1996] AC 563. London: Court of Appeal.   
Palmer, F. R. (2001). Mood and modality. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Palmer, F. R. (2003). Modality in English: Theoretical, descriptive, and typological issues. In R. Facchinnetti, M. Krug, & F. R. Palmer (Eds.), Modality in contemporary English (pp. 1–17). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Portner, P. (2009). Modality. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.   
Reiner, A. (1994). Burden and general standards of proof. Arbitration International, 10, 328–340.   
Sinclair, J. (1991). Corpus, concordance and collocation. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.   
Spenader, J. (2004). Modality realization as contrast in discourse. Journal of Semantics, 21, 112–131.   
Taruffo, M. (2003). Rethinking the standards of proof. The American Journal of Comparative Law, 51(3), 659–677.   
Tetley, W. (1999). Mixed Jurisdictions: Common law vs. civil law (codified and uncodified). Uniform Law Review, 4, 591–619.   
Teubert, W., & Krishnamurthy, R. (2007). Corpus linguistics (critical concepts in linguistics). London: Routledge.   
Tiersma, P. (1999). Legal language. Chicago, Il: University of Chicago Press.   
Wang, Li (1943). Modern Chinese grammar. Shanghai, China: Commercial Press. Rpt by Beijing: Commercial Press. 1985.   
Williams, C. (2007). Tradition and change in legal English: Verbal constructions in prescriptive texts (2nd ed.). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.   
Wright, R. W. (2009). Proving facts: Belief versus probability. In H. Koziol & B. C. Steininger (Eds.), European tort law 2008 (pp. 79–105). Berlin: Springer.

Winnie Cheng is Associate Dean, Faculty of Humanities, Professor of English and Director of the Research Centre for Professional Communication in English (RCPCE) in the Department of English at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Her research interests include ESP, intercultural business and professional communication, intercultural pragmatics, corpus linguistics, conversational analysis, discourse analysis, and discourse intonation.