Disciplinary Dialogues

# To grade is not to grade?: Exploring ungrading in the teaching of L2 writing

Soo Hyon Kim a,\* , Tanita Saenkhum b a University of New Hampshire, English Department, Hamilton Smith Hall 149N, Durham, NH 03824, USA b University of Tennessee, Department of English, 404 McClung Tower, Knoxville, TN 37996-0430, USA

Ungrading as an alternative assessment has gained attention in various educational settings in recent years, especially as writing teachers continue to fine-tune their assessment practices to better support student learning. Those who engage in ungrading applaud its equitable, formative, and student-centered nature and foundation (e.g., Stommel, 2023). Meanwhile, those who are new to ungrading may ask: Is there something wrong with assigning grades? Does it mean I should stop grading given that I have been fairly, ethically, and equitably assessing student writing using other assessment tools such as rubrics? These conversations and questions about ungrading reflect writing teachers’ care for their students, because assessment affects student success enormously (Saenkhum, 2020; Sundeen, 2014), and good writing assessment tools can improve both teachers’ instruction and students’ writing.

In the context of teaching second language (L2) writing, conversations about ungrading, however, seem relatively new. As L2 writing teachers and teacher trainers, our goal in this current issue of Disciplinary Dialogues is to draw attention to conversations about ungrading as we have found ourselves asking questions that might be shared by other writing teachers as well: What is ungrading? How do we go about doing it? Is it effective? How does it differ from other assessment approaches? How would assessment work if we don’t assign grades? What do our L2 students think about this assessment practice? Sparked by these many questions, we invited renowned writing assessment expert Deborah Crusan to explore the opportunities and challenges that ungrading brings to the teaching of L2 writing and the ways in which L2 writing instructors, researchers, program administrators, and students can effectively engage with the practice. We then solicited individual responses to Crusan’s focus paper from five other L2 writing scholars who addressed the topic based on their research and/or theoretical and pedagogical perspectives.

In her focus paper, Crusan walks us through different aspects of ungrading, including its multifaceted definitions, the many possible ways to perform ungrading, and its benefits and possible limitations. Through this careful examination and a discussion of her own ways of practicing ungrading, she offers her stance on ungrading, highlighting her belief that fair and equitable assessment should be designed to benefit students rather than penalize them. Crusan ends by reminding L2 writing teachers to keep reflecting on and examining their assessment practices to better address student needs.

In responding to Crusan, Sara Cushing argues that ungrading should be understood as a philosophy rather than a collection of predetermined practices, given that our teaching tends to be context-dependent. She then draws on her expertise on language assessment to propose we examine ungrading within the framework of the three classic principles of language testing: validity, reliability, and practicality. Next, Mikenna Modesto, based on her research on labor-based contract grading in university writing programs, brings our attention to the benefits and drawbacks of ungrading from multilingual students’ perspectives. A proponent of ungrading, she argues that ungrading can promote more transparent and equitable assessment practices, especially for multilingual students. Icy Lee, drawing from her decades-long research expertise in writing teacher feedback, asserts that the concepts of ungrading and feedback are inextricably linked, and that feedback should be implemented in a way that supports learner engagement and agency. She encourages teachers to be nimble and adaptable in their approaches to ungrading depending on their teaching contexts. Providing insight into critical stakeholder concerns from the lens of a WPA, Todd Ruecker closely examines the impact of ungrading on student learning, teacher workloads, and balancing institutional constraints. He points out the heavy demands of ungrading on instructors’ time and communication, urging us to consider our specific teaching contexts when making the decision to introduce ungrading. Finally, Atta Gebril, drawing from his research in Egyptian educational contexts as an example, shares with us a much-needed perspective on ungrading in EFL settings. Implementing ungrading could be challenging in these contexts due to students’ unfamiliarity with or negative perceptions of ungrading and the intensive labor involved when teaching large classes. While acknowledging these practical limitations, Gebril suggests that ungrading could be re-labeled and practiced as “learning-oriented feedback,” as a way to integrate it into instruction.

The papers curated in this issue of Disciplinary Dialogues reflect the continuous work we engage in as L2 writing teachers and researchers to assess and support our students’ writing in pedagogically and ethically sound, yet sustainable ways. Despite potential issues with confounding terminology used in the literature and the practical challenges of its implementation, these papers demonstrate a commitment to diligently reviewing what we consider current best practices and forging the way for change. As we close, we’d like to highlight that context plays a significant role when implementing ungrading as suggested by the papers in this collection. We invite further research and examination on ungrading’s impact in various other contexts and populations, including teacher training and K-12 settings.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Soo Hyon Kim: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Tanita Saenkhum: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

# Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

# References

Saenkhum, T. (2020). Preparing writing teachers to use assessment rubrics. NYS TESOL Journal, 7(2), 7–25.   
Stommel, J. (2023). Undoing the grade: Why we grade, and how to stop. Hybrid Pedagogy Inc.   
Sundeen, T. H. (2014). Instructional rubrics: Effects of presentation options on writing quality. Assessing Writing, 21, 74–88.

Soo Hyon Kim is an Associate Professor of English and TESOL coordinator at the University of New Hampshire. Her work appears in TESOL Quarterly, ELT Journal, Across the Disciplines, and others. She is coeditor of Graduate Writing across the Disciplines: Identifying, Teaching, and Supporting and has contributed to several edited collections.