# BALEAP News October for November 2021

This issue of the BALEAP news is the first in the academic year 2021–22 and looks forward to a gradual resumption of face-to-face activity both in classrooms across the sector and, we hope, in some of the events such as Professional Issues Meetings (PIMs) that we hold over the course of the year. In particular, given that 2022 marks the 50th anniversary of BALEAP's inception, we hope that there will be opportunities to celebrate this both online and in face-to-face meetings.

Our first event of the academic year, the November 2021 PIM on ‘Ownership in EAP – Integrity, argumentation and authorial voice’ will, however, be online. One aspect of ownership and integrity that will be focused on is the increasing dominance of essays mills and sophisticated machine translation tools. This turns out to be especially topical with the government proposal in the Skills and Post-16 Education Bill to make essay mills illegal. The PIM is organised and hosted by colleagues at the University of York and resources from the event will be made available on the BALEAP website following the event.

The first PIM in 2022 will, we hope, provide an opportunity for our first face-to-face event for more than a year. Planning is still underway but more information about this event will follow and will be publicised on the website. Having said that, there has been overwhelming support for online events and the whole of the BALEAP community has welcomed the opportunities these events have afforded in terms of inclusivity and global reach. The community of practitioners/professionals is of course scattered across continents and in very diverse working contexts and it has been a great enrichment in terms of dialogue and sharing knowledge and experiences to have been able to meet colleagues for whom face-to-face events are not an option and to feel genuinely part of the wider sphere in which EAP teaching takes place. Going forward, it is important that these opportunities are not lost and online (or blended) events will continue to be organised both centrally by members of the Executive Committee and by the Special Interest Groups (SIGs).

The affordances of online interaction have also been recognised by the BALEAP Accreditation Scheme committee which has carried out accreditation visits to institutions almost exclusively online this year with the occasional short face-to-face visit. Although this is likely to change once EAP courses revert to more standard classroom delivery, the possibility of carrying out accreditation remotely or partially remotely extends the reach of the scheme. Work has continued on the new set of criteria to be ready for 2022 and this too should facilitate the continuing growth of the scheme both within and beyond the UK.

This month (November) sees the launch of a new series of the Research Training Event Series (ResTES) led by the BALEAP Research and Publications Officers but based on ideas and suggestions put forward by members. (Please do get in touch with any further requests for future meetings – research@baleap.org). The aims of the ResTES are to:

encourage and support scholarship for the BALEAP membership and the wider EAP community • create resources for independent professional development (on the BALEAP website and a dedicated WordPress site) • foster inter-institutions and international scholarship collaborations

The new dedicated website is due to be launched in the next few weeks.

As in the last couple of issues of the News, I would like to finish by giving an update on the BALEAP Special Interest Groups and the ongoing events planning and initiatives in this very vibrant area of membership-led activity. Notable in the calendar of events that SIGs host is the variety of meetings including workshops, reading clubs, speakeasys, world caf´e meetings, coffee clubs/mornings as well as more standard themed meetings. Most events are held by individual SIGs but some are held jointly with other SIGs and all are open to BALEAP members and non-members. SIGs are also producing blog posts, setting up websites and building resources within their areas of interest. The Social Justice group reports that it is hoping to launch two working groups in the upcoming months, one focusing on Sanctuary in EAP and the other on Decolonising the EAP Curriculum. Related to the former is a new scheme – RefugEAP – which will provide online EAP classes to refugee-background students waiting to access HE but as yet unable to access a formal presessional programme. SIGs provide an annual report to the BALEAP Executive Committee and fuller details of all activities will become available in the coming months.