# Editorial

English today dominates the world of knowledge. This English, used for the dissemination and ratification of knowledge, is distinct in that participants have to develop an understanding of advanced academic literacy which allows them to “engage with the academy” (Canagarajah, 2002, p. 41) and persuade the world of research through “community-recognised ways of adopting a position and expressing a stance” (Hyland, 2000, p. 11).

This special issue of JEAP explores various aspects of advanced academic literacy (henceforth AAL), which is seen broadly as the means by which individuals participate in their chosen academic communities of practice. AAL is marked by an increasingly sophisticated awareness of the social and cognitive frameworks, and rhetorical and linguistic tools, through which academic communities make new knowledge. AAL entails extended interaction with a specific set of research process genres (such as research articles, conference presentations, doctoral theses and the like) by a particular set of people (e.g., graduate students, novice and expert academics in the discipline) and an ability to situate these interactions within various disciplinary networks.

The five papers in this issue give us an indication of the intricacies inherent in AAL. Although each paper examines a different aspect of AAL in a distinct context, they share a common focus on specific trajectories of participation and how such participation is negotiated. These situated descriptions of AAL also show us that participation in communities of practice “are multiple, varied, more or less engaged” (Wenger, 1999, pp. 35–36) and that the “complexly layered” communicative purposes (Askehave & Swales, 2001) in research process genres require recognition of issues beyond the conventional surface features of texts to a deeper rhetorical awareness.

The first two papers focus on how we textualise research into knowledge. The paper, “Introducing a conference paper: getting interpersonal with your audience” by Susan Hood and Gail Forey look at a comparatively less-researched aspect of AAL—the spoken text in academic conferences. Hood and Forey provide a multi-layered analysis of the setup stage of conference presentations of plenary speakers in Hong Kong. Using Systemic Functional tools they show us how experts, in order to create a sense of solidarity with their audience, deploy rhetorical resources consisting of (i) interpersonal aspects of language that, among other things, indicate shared attitude and values as well as (ii) gestures that align with the language. Then Paul Thompson’s paper, “Points of focus and position: Intertextual reference in PhD theses”, deals with the ways in which written texts are shaped to take a position. He analyses a corpus of eight theses from Agricultural Botany completed in a British university as well as interviews with supervisors. The paper shows us the inherent problems in discussing the genre of the PhD thesis as texts “produced under the name of thesis are usually the result of a negotiation of practice, convention and expectations between the writer, the supervisor and other readers of the text in its formative stages”.

The next two papers discuss how individuals grapple with the social and cognitive factors that are multifacetedly linked with the rhetorical and linguistic tools in AAL. Christine Tardy’s paper entitled “It’s like a story: Rhetorical knowledge development in advanced academic literacy” focuses on the ways in which two L2 writers in a US university develop an awareness of the rhetorical shaping of research texts. Drawing on interviews and text analysis over a period of 1–2 years, Tardy shows us how the two writers, through their experiences of writing high stakes texts, such as thesis and research papers, learnt to see writing as complex rhetorical construction going beyond community values and conventions. The fourth paper entitled “EFL writers’ social networks: Impact on advanced academic literacy development” by Orna Ferenz presents the stories of six graduate students completing M.A. or Ph.D. degrees in an Israeli university. Based on interviews, Ferenz demonstrates how academic socialization, intrinsically tied to an individual’s personal agenda, identity and goals, is likely to influence AAL acquisition.

The last paper, “Towards a ‘pedagogy of connection’ in critical research education: A REAL story” by Kate Cadman, moves the empirically-based discussions so far to a narrative of an AAL course. With descriptions and vignettes from a course entitled Research English as an Additional Language (REAL) in an Australian university, Cadman demonstrates her pedagogical philosophy of connection and enables readers to ‘connect’ with this pedagogy by discussing key classroom issues in AAL such as teacher and student roles, negotiation of curriculum as well as cultural differences.

The purpose of this issue is not to create a bounded or essentially limited definition of AAL. The goal is to unravel the idea and start a dialogue on what constitutes advanced academic literacy. Until such time that we understand the nature of AAL, and we are able and willing to be informed by this understanding, we may not recognize the central issues in learning to become adequately literate in order to contribute to the world of knowledge.

In getting this issue ready, I have had help from numerous sources. I would like to thank the editors of JEAP, Liz Hamp-Lyons and Ken Hyland, for believing in me and mentoring me through the process. I am also very grateful for the selfless and constant assistance of Kathy Leung. For editorial assistance I thank Ayesha Mallik. The authors of the paper deserve a mention here for their cooperation and support. Most importantly, I wish to acknowledge colleagues and friends who have reviewed the papers: Betty Samraj, George Braine, David Bunton, Icy Lee, Svetlana Tchigaeva, Liz Hamp-Lyons, Gail Forey, Robyn Woodward-Kron, Sue Thompson and Desmond Allison. Lastly, I would like to thank the participants in the colloquium presentation at AAAL 2004 that helped take the first step towards planning this issue.

# References

Askehave, I., & Swales, J. M. (2001). Genre identification and communicative purpose: A problem and a possible solution. Applied Linguistics, 22(2), 195–212.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Multilingual writers and the academic community: Towards a critical relationship. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1(1), 29–44.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. London: Longman.   
Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of practice. Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.