The early months of 2021 have been busy with the election of new members to the BALEAP Executive Committee and preparations for the 2021 conferences and other events.

At the AGM in April, both the Testing Officer, John Slaght, and the Events Officer, Kerry Tavakoli, will be standing down and Fiona Orel and Fiona Wallace have been elected to these roles. The elections this year also included the office of Incoming Chair and the successful nomination was Conrad Heyns who is currently Chair of the BALEAP Accreditation Scheme.

The Professional Issues Meeting (PIM) planned for March 2020 which had to be postponed will now take place on 27 March, hosted online by Northumbria University on the theme of ‘Integration’. This will be followed by the Glasgow Biennial Conference on ‘Exploring pedagogical approaches in EAP teaching’. Building on the 2019 conference theme (the practitioner), the organisers aim to provide a forum to explore pedagogies for teaching EAP in different contexts, at different levels, face to face and online, and for EAP teacher development. The conference will feature a range of events including those for the new BALEAP SIGs, distinguished international plenary speakers, panel discussions and symposia, individual paper and poster presentations, workshops, lightning talks, BALEAP’s signature Pecha Kucha session and other informal networking events. Details can be found on the conference website: BALEAP Conference 2021 (https://www.gla.ac.uk/schools/mlc/eas/about% 20us/ouractivities/events/)

The Glasgow conference will be followed by the joint CEAPA-BALEAP conference in Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University Suzhou, China. We join with the China EAP Association for this event (which will again be hosted online) from 28 to 30 May. The conference focus is ‘EAP as a glocal language’ with the aim of “looking at the way traditional English for Academic Purposes (EAP) teaching, which happens mostly in Anglophone settings, struggles to meet the needs of students who are studying in nonAnglophone contexts. Meanwhile, English language teaching in higher education in EFL settings is also undergoing a transition from English for general purposes to English for Academic Purposes. This change can be seen particularly in China, where many universities are undertaking a change from College English Teaching (CET) to EAP teaching. These two strands can perhaps merge at some juncture, where EAP becomes a Glocal language.” More information on the conference can be found on the conference website. (https://www.xjtlu.edu.cn/en/conference/ceapa-baleap-2021-conference/call-for-papers)

On a local level, the BALEAP funded research being carried out to document the impact of Covid 19 on EAP delivery in the UK during 2020 is nearing completion. The researchers have collected both survey and interview data and will be publishing their report later this spring.

Also well underway is the JEAP special issue marking two important anniversaries falling in 2022 e BALEAP’s 50th anniversary and the 20th anniversary of the first issue of JEAP. The papers will focus on tracing the interactions between practice, scholarship and research across the lifetime of BALEAP, reinforcing the key role of theory in EAP practice and pointing the way to future directions.

It is exciting to see that there is so much planned for 2021 and the opportunities that the online events will provide in creating platforms for BALEAP members to interact with colleagues across the world. There is the hope also, of course, that we will begin to be able to plan for more face to face activity as the year progresses but that ultimately our conferences and events will combine both modes of interaction, continuing to enrich and extend connections across the global EAP community.