# A rhetorical function and phraseological analysis of commentaries on visuals

Jincheng Wu a , Cecilia Guanfang Zhao a , Xiaofei Lu b , Tan Jin c,\*

a Department of English, Faculty of Arts and Humanities, University of Macau, Macau, China b Department of Applied Linguistics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA c School of Foreign Studies, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China

# a r t i c l e i n f o

# a b s t r a c t

Article history: Available online 27 September 2023

Keywords:   
Commentaries on visuals   
Rhetorical functions   
Phrase-frames

Visuals (e.g., figures) are prevalent in academic writing across disciplines, and they are usually accompanied by commentaries that summarize and/or interpret the information they contain. Commentaries on visuals have not yet been studied in terms of their rhetorical and phraseological features, and insights into these features could help novice academic writers integrate such commentaries more effectively. To address the gap, this study examined and reported on frequently employed rhetorical functions and phraseframes for commentaries on visuals, based on a corpus of such commentaries extracted from 100 social science research reports. Specifically, the corpus was first manually annotated using a rhetorical function framework developed based on previous studies. Fiveto seven-gram phrase-frames were also automatically extracted based on corpus statistics and then manually scrutinized to generate a pedagogically useful list. The finalized 169 phrase-frames were then linked to the rhetorical functions based on their occurrences and sorted accordingly in the final list. Under each rhetorical function, the phrase-frames were further categorized into specialized, semi-specialized, and non-specialized types, following previous studies. Pedagogical and empirical implications of the phrase-frame list for English for specific purposes programs are discussed.

$\circledcirc$ 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Visuals, such as figures and graphs, appear frequently in academic discourse (Du et al., 2021; Hyland, 2006; Johns, 1998). While all visuals serve specific functions (e.g., ontological, argumentative, or epistemological, see Section 2.1 for detailed explanations) in the discourse (Moghaddasi et al., 2019), they usually do not stand alone but are accompanied by written commentaries that, for example, summarize and/or interpret the information they contain. Commentaries on visuals (CoVs) is therefore important for novice writers and has been included in some English for academic/specific purposes (EAP/ESP) programs and textbooks (e.g., Sales, 2006; Swales & Feak, 2012). Despite the importance of CoVs, students still acquire relevant skills in a disjointed and implicit way (Guinda, 2012). In many English as a foreign language (EFL) contexts, students learn how to decode and interpret trends and percentages displayed in simple line graphs and pie charts during the secondary education. However, in higher education, especially at the graduate level, they are usually required to comment on visuals with extensive and complex information in discipline-specific research articles. The lack of explicit instruction on CoVs may result in novice writers having differential and often inaccurate understandings of them, possibly giving rise to writing challenges (Guinda, 2012).

Novice writers usually understand CoVs as simply a matter of information transfer, in which visual information is simply repeated in a verbal account (Guinda, 2012). While this information-transfer approach to handling visuals in research writing is not uncommon, it might be “premised upon an uncritical and under-interpretative verbalization of” visual data (Swales & Feak, 1997, p. 85). Relatively more advanced writers may do more than simply repeat the same information twice in one text (Swales & Feak, 1997). Instead, they may opt for a more “selective and interpretative commentary” (Swales & Feak, 1997, p. 67), in which they may reorganize the information presented in the visual, highlight and explain key information for the target audience, and discuss its implications considering the context (Guinda, 2012; Swales & Feak, 1997, 2012).

Novice writers’ misconceptions of CoVs and the scarcity of explicit instruction on how to comment on visuals in EFL contexts could be partly attributed to the lack of studies on CoVs, especially their rhetorical and linguistic features. Given the staged nature of CoVs and its functional elements that have been observed by previous studies (e.g., Guinda, 2012; Moghaddasi et al., 2019; Swales & Feak, 1997, 2012), rhetorical function analysis appears to be a useful approach to investigate CoVs. However, despite the increasing research interest in the analysis of rhetorical functions in general (e.g., Holmes, 1997; Hu & Liu, 2018; Lu et al., 2021; Me-zek & Swales, 2016), few studies have examined the rhetorical features of CoVs (e.g., Moghaddasi et al., 2019; Swales, 2016), and even fewer studies have looked into the linguistic features used to realize the rhetorical functions of CoVs. Further investigations into the rhetorical and linguistic features of CoVs could generate useful insights to help novice writers produce effective commentaries in research writing (Guinda, 2012). Such work can also inform materials development for teaching CoVs in EAP writing courses. As a partial response to the call for further research on multimodal devices in academic texts (e.g., Hyland, 2006; Johns, 1998, 2012; Tardy & Swales, 2014), we annotated CoVs from 100 social science reports in terms of rhetorical functions and then identified language segments that could be used to realize these functions.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Analysis of rhetorical functions and commentaries on visuals

Rhetorical functions refer to the specific communicative purposes served by different chunks of text (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990). Motivated by applied concerns of language teaching, various texts have been analyzed in terms of rhetorical functions with a view towards informing both teachers and students the communicative purposes of different texts and functions of their constituent linguistic segments (Bhatia, 1993). For example, operationalizing rhetorical function as rhetorical moves, Swales (1990) proposed the move analysis approach to analyze the rhetorical functions of texts in different genres. This approach has been applied to various genres such as conference/thesis presentations (e.g., Hu and Liu, 2018; Me-zek & Swales, 2016), reports (e.g., Parkinson, 2017), research articles (e.g., Nwogu,1997; Shi & Wannaruk, 2014) and sub-sections of research articles (e.g., Holmes, 1997; Lim, 2006; Omidian et al., 2018; Samraj, 2002). While CoVs are indispensable elements of almost all of these genres, few studies have been conducted specifically on CoVs to investigate their functional features.

Some scholars have pioneered the exploration of the functional structure of CoVs. Swales & Feak (2012), for example, delineated the structure in their academic writing guidebook. Based on their analysis of graduate students’ successful writing across disciplines, they suggested that there are three key elements of “data commentary” (as they name it), including summary statements with reference to the visual, highlights of specific information in the visual, and discussions on meanings and implications of the highlighted information. While the identified three elements associated with “data commentary” are informative, especially for new graduate students, the structure is limited to only one specific type of visual (i.e., data). Swales (2016) later empirically examined one-page verbal accounts of 30 artworks. He found that the structure of verbal accounts of a single image usually pointed at a part of the image first, and then the extra-image historical context. The pattern was repeated until the whole image was introduced. The discovery of the “oscillating pattern” offered a sketch for rhetorical organizations of artwork descriptions. However, due to the specific focus on artwork accounts, the pattern identified by the study cannot be generalized to CoVs in research articles.

Also analyzing 30 texts from the perspective of rhetorical functions, Moghaddasi et al. (2019) investigated visuals and relevant verbal accounts in mathematics research articles. In the study, they identified three functions of visuals. First, visuals, performing an ontological function, help to make abstract concepts or objects “present and tangible” (Moghaddasi et al., 2019, p. 56) to materialize the fundamental objects studied in the research. Second, executing an argumentative function, visuals can be integrated into argument construction, serving as evidence to, for example, support the argument that some supportive findings/results exist. Third, visuals can have an epistemological function. Visuals fulfilling this function usually facilitate the generation of new knowledge or the enhancement of our comprehension of the researched objects. As for relevant verbal accounts for the visuals, four main functions were identified, including establishing presumptions, announcing results, proof, and discussion. Using a sample of research articles, Moghaddasi et al.’s (2019) study touched upon the rhetorical functions of sentences pointing to visuals. While they described the rhetorical functions of visuals and the sentences that explicitly refer to them (e.g., a sentence containing see figure 1), they did not include sentences that further highlight, interpret, or discuss the key information presented in visuals in their analysis. In addition, only mathematics research articles were examined, which constrained its generalizability to research writing instruction. Therefore, a more comprehensive analysis of the rhetorical features of CoVs in research writing is still needed. Findings from such an analysis could help address novice writers’ struggles with commenting on visuals.

In summary, while some studies have examined the rhetorical organizations of CoVs, their analyses were limited in scope, focusing either on the functions of visuals themselves or on the few sentences making immediate reference to the visuals, often also a singular kind (i.e., data visuals, as in Swales & Feak, 2012). Therefore, there is a need for further studies analyzing the functional structure of commentaries on different types of visuals occurring in a text. In addition, language segments that could be used to realize the functions are also worth exploring.

# 2.2. Phraseological expressions and their connection with rhetorical functions

In the ESP community, there has been a rapid development of studies on phraseology (e.g., Liu & Chen, 2022; SimpsonVlach & Ellis, 2010) in response to the perspective that language is stored as blocks and chunks in our minds (e.g., Kim & Kim, 2012). Traditionally, studies of phraseology focused on linguistic patterns that have meanings different from their word-by-word meanings. Recently, a fair number of studies have adopted a “distributional approach” (Le & Harrington, 2015, p. 46) to identify phraseological expressions (e.g., collocation, lexical bundles) based on distributional features in a corpus, such as frequency and range. Because of the well-documented benefits of learning phraseological expressions (e.g., Conklin & Schmitt, 2012; Ellis et al., 2008; Northbrook & Conklin, 2019), various lists have been compiled, such as the Academic Formulas List (Simpson-Vlach and Ellis, 2010), Academic Collocation List (Ackermann & Chen, 2013), and the PHRASE List (Martinez & Schmitt, 2012). However, both formulas and collocations are continuous phraseological expressions; discontinuous phraseological expressions, on the other hand, have been relatively less examined, even though they are underscored by many scholars for their importance in written discourse (e.g., Biber, 2009) and fostering writers’ agency and creativity (e.g., Lu et al., 2021).

As one type of discontinuous phraseological expression, phrase-frames (p-frames) are now considered a pedagogically useful resource that can complement various existing lists of continuous expressions (Cunningham, 2017; Durrant, 2009; Larsson et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2018). P-frames refer to concurrently used combinations of words with a variable slot (Lu et al., 2018), such as table # $^ *$ the results of. The asterisk is the variable slot that could be filled by different variants (summarizes or presents in this example), leading to expressions with different meanings and functions. Existing studies have examined p-frames in different genres. For example, Cunningham (2017) identified five- and six-gram (a gram here refers to a word or a variable slot) p-frames based on a corpus of 128 mathematical research articles from eight journals. Each p-frame appeared at least 20 times per million words (PMW) across at least six journals. Also focusing on five- and six-gram p-frames, Lu et al.’s (2018) corpus comprises introductions of 600 social science research articles across six disciplines. In their study, five- and six-gram p-frames occurred, at least, 16 and 12 times PMW with two variants in three texts across two disciplines. The different criteria for extraction were decided based on the size and the composition of the corpus. Meanwhile, the pedagogical and practical value of the final list should also be taken into consideration (Lu et al., 2021).

While there is increasing research interest in the phraseological investigation of language in various genres, the majority of existing studies have simply presented various lists containing only phraseological expressions as a final result. In these lists, the expressions are isolated from their rhetorical functions in writing. Instruction on phraseological expressions without regard to function may lead to a situation in which, despite knowing a number of phraseological expressions, novice writers may still struggle to use them, due to the lack of knowledge about the functions in a specific writing genre. Many scholars have realized that the pedagogical value of isolated phraseological expressions might be limited, and hence sought to map phraseological expressions onto rhetorical functions (e.g., Cortes, 2013; Mizumoto et al., 2017; Omidian et al., 2018). Cortes (2013), for example, extracted four- to nine-word lexical bundles from introductions in research articles across 13 disciplines. She then identified moves in which the bundles occurred, believing that such investigations would offer “a complete picture of the tendencies used in the organizational and lexicogrammatical patterns used to build discourse” (p. 36). Inspired by Cortes’s (2013) study, Mizumoto et al. (2017) and Omidian et al. (2018) also tried to connect lexical bundles with rhetorical moves, with a specific focus on research articles in applied linguistics and conference abstracts across six disciplines. However, such corpus-driven genre analysis studies scarcely take discontinuous phraseological expressions into consideration. Lu et al.’s (2021) study is the first that tried to match p-frames with rhetorical moves. Their study focused on the introduction section of 600 social science research articles in a corpus they compiled. After the annotation of rhetorical moves using a framework adapted from the CARS model (Swales, 2004) and the extraction of five- and six-gram p-frames, Lu et al. (2021) mapped p-frames to the rhetorical moves of the sentences these p-frames occurred in.

The above review of literature reveals two research gaps. Despite their apparent importance and prevalence in academic writing, CoVs have not been examined in terms of rhetorical functions. Furthermore, no study has tried to generate a list of phraseological expressions that could be used to realize different rhetorical functions in CoVs. This lack of research highlights the need for further investigation. Such an investigation would not only contribute to academic writing pedagogy, but also open up a multimodal orientation to corpus-driven genre analysis studies. Thus, the current study aims to annotate CoVs in terms of rhetorical functions and identify frequently occurring p-frames that can be mapped to these rhetorical functions. Specifically, this study is guided by the following two research questions:

1. What rhetorical functions are employed to comment on visuals and how are they distributed?   
2. What p-frames are often associated with the realization of these rhetorical functions and how are they distributed?

# 3. Research methods

# 3.1. The corpus

The corpus used in the current study consisted of CoVs in 100 social science reports published in Science from 2012 to 2019. Reports were expected to present “a major, novel, and original result that is of strong interdisciplinary interest” (Science, n.d.b), although this specific article type was recently discontinued by Science. The journal Science was selected because of its high impact, reputation, and “recognition [among] the wider scientific community and general public” (Science, n.d.a). The wider the target audience is, the more important that CoVs engage and benefit readers, particularly those outside of a specific discipline. From a pedagogical perspective, the number of disciplines involved in the analysis should be neither too large nor too small. As different disciplines may have different rhetorical organizations and use different phraseological expressions when commenting on visuals, examining a variety of disciplines might lead to less prominent results. On the other hand, if a study focuses only on one discipline, the generalizability of findings would suffer. We therefore decided to focus on social science reports published in Science. Based on the disciplinary categorizations provided in Science, the 100 reports were randomly selected from five specific disciplines, with 30 from anthropology, 30 from psychology, 21 from sociology, 15 from economics, and 4 from education. The unbalanced distribution of reports among the five disciplines in the corpus also reflected the differential proportions of reports from these disciplines published in Science, serving as a compromise between the sample selection and corpus design.

Each report in the corpus contained three sections, namely, introduction, data, and discussion, with the description of method and presentation of results integrated in the data section. CoVs were extracted from each report automatically using keywords, such as “Fig.”, “Figure”, and “Table”. Once a keyword was identified, the whole paragraph would be automatically extracted for further annotation. Keyword identification approach was employed because when commenting on a visual, we almost always need to locate the visual first (Swales & Feak, 2012). Sentences that appeared in the paragraphs but did not contribute to the commentaries were filtered out at the annotation stage. For example, in Text #10, while commenting on the regression analysis results presented in a line chart, the researchers explained the meaning of some statistics and interpreted the results. After discussing key information, the researchers stated, “further discussion of this decade $\times$ condition interaction can be found in supplementary text 5.” As this sentence was merely a reference for interested readers, it was considered irrelevant to the commentary and excluded from the corpus. With such sentences filtered, the corpus in the current study had 112,492 words (see Table 1 for details). While the token count may appear low, it should be noted that this is a highly specialized corpus consisting of paragraphs containing commentaries on visuals in each report only. Furthermore, as the first attempt to examine CoVs and its constituent elements, we found it sensible to follow Stubbs’ (2007) suggestion that “the only realistic strategy is to start small: to use a restricted sample to generate hypotheses which can be tested on larger samples” (p. 92).

Table 1 Composition of the corpus of automatically extracted CoVs in social science reports.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Discipline</td><td>Texts</td><td>Total words</td><td>Mean words</td><td>Word range</td></tr><tr><td>Anthropology</td><td>30</td><td>38,025</td><td>1,267.50</td><td> 563-2,245</td></tr><tr><td> Psychology</td><td>30</td><td>29,197</td><td>973.23</td><td> 302-2,245</td></tr><tr><td> Sociology</td><td>21</td><td>24,832</td><td>1,182.48</td><td>729-1,660</td></tr><tr><td>Economics</td><td>15</td><td>17,080</td><td>1,138.67</td><td>535-1,851</td></tr><tr><td> Education</td><td>4</td><td>3,358</td><td>839.50</td><td>649-1,025</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>100</td><td>112,492</td><td>1,124.92</td><td>302-2,245</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.2. Annotation of the corpus

The first stage of the current study was to annotate the corpus in terms of rhetorical functions. Four annotators were recruited. At the time of the study, one annotator had obtained his MA degree in applied linguistics and the other three were Ph.D. students in the same field. All annotators were familiar with the annotation process due to their relevant research experiences. The annotation of the functional structure was conducted following Tardy & Swales’s (2014) two-stage procedure with the first stage developing preliminary functional structure and the second applying the codes of functions to the corpus. To begin, the first author closely read the CoVs in ten reports randomly selected from the corpus and read through them iteratively. Based on existing studies (Cotos et al., 2015; Moghaddasi et al., 2019; Swales & Feak, 2012), a preliminary rhetorical function framework of CoVs emerged during the iterative reading process. The second stage comprised annotator training, norming, and annotation sessions. Through the process of annotator training and norming, potential issues of the preliminary framework regarding its validity, applicability, and interpretability were identified and addressed, which helped validate or further refine the annotation framework. The finalized framework (see Table 2) was applied during the annotation session. It is worth noting that in addition to the nine functions, there was an “NA” label for the annotators to filter out sentences irrelevant to CoVs.

Table 2 Functional framework for CoVs.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Section</td><td>Function</td><td>Label</td><td>Example sentence</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td> Providing background</td><td>Intro-Background</td><td>The Amazon Basin, an area approximately the size of the continental United States, is an important reservoir of biodiversity.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Stating the presumptions</td><td>Intro-Presumptions</td><td>The computation of letter identities and their relative. positions is referred to as orthographic processing, and there is a large consensus today that such processing represents the first &quot;language-specific&quot; stage of the reading process that follows the operations involved in the control of eye movements (bringing words into the focus of central</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Connecting to the current study</td><td>Intro-Connection</td><td>extraction; Figure 1A) (1-4). In this study, we tracked 2966 science and engineering faculty from 14 universities from time of hire to the time</td></tr><tr><td>Data</td><td>Describing/rationalizing experiments</td><td>Data-Settings</td><td>they left the university. We designed a puzzlebox (Figure 1) that could be solved at three stages of difficulty, with success at stage 2 building on</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Presenting results</td><td>Data-Results</td><td>stage 1 and success at stage 3 building on stage 2. At baseline, there was no difference in parenting between treatment and control groups (Table S.1).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Interpreting results</td><td>Data-Interpretation</td><td>The results are robust to accounting for the number of hypothesis tests conducted, allowing youth outcomes to be correlated within schools and using a nonlinear.</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>Summarizing the present study</td><td>Disc-Summary</td><td>specification for count data. The second conclusion of this study concerns the role played by 5HT.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Comparing findings with other studies</td><td>Disc-Comparison</td><td>It has been proposed that color naming systems in the world&#x27;s languages reflect partitions of perceptual color space that are near-optimally informative (58), and recent analyses support this view (6), including an analysis of</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Explaining or consolidating findings</td><td>Disc-Explanation</td><td>lightness terms (59) that relies on a variant of the communication game in Figure 1. The claim that these sociocognitive processes, rather than other effects, were directly responsible for the pattern of cumulative cultural learning observed in the children is supported by the positive relationships found between the stage reached and the amount of teaching, verbal instruction, and prosocial acts received, as well as between</td></tr></table></body></html>

As CoVs in this research were dependent on the rhetorical structure of reports, we operationalized them as verbal accounts directly relevant to a visual and/or that led to or maintained a commentary. This conceptualization was reflected in the finalized functional framework. Sentences in CoVs in the Introduction section usually had three functions, namely, providing background (i.e., providing background information about the visual and/or research), stating presumptions (i.e., stating rationales of the research, presumptions, and hypothesis, as well as research questions), and connecting to the current study (i.e., carrying on the presumption and transit to the method/results of the research). In the Data section, the rhetorical functions of sentences in CoVs included describing/rationalizing experiments (including research procedures), presenting results of the research, and interpreting the results in terms of their meanings and possible sources. CoVs in the Discussion section also had three functions, namely, summarizing the research findings, comparing the research findings to previous studies, and explaining differences from previous studies or consolidating the research findings.

During the training session, the concept of rhetorical function and the preliminary annotation framework were introduced to the four annotators. Each rhetorical function in the framework was explained with examples that were identified in the corpus by the first author. Next, the four annotators independently annotated the same commentaries as part of the training. Following the practice of several previous studies (e.g., Cotos et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2021), we adopted the sentence as the unit of annotation. The annotators were informed that each sentence should be annotated based on its most prominent rhetorical function (Moreno & Swales, 2018). In addition, all annotators were asked to take note of any difficulties they encountered in applying the framework and of segments that did not fit the preliminary framework. The annotators then met with the first author as a group to collectively resolve the challenges they encountered during the annotating process and revise the preliminary framework.

Upon completion of the training session, during the norming session the four annotators independently annotated in two phases another 20 reports (ten per phase) using the revised framework. The annotations were then cross-checked, and discrepancies were resolved in a series of group meetings. Percent agreement and Cohen’s Kappa reached $8 0 . 3 3 \%$ and 0.70 $9 5 \% \mathrm { C I }$ [0.11, 1.29]) in the first phase and $8 5 . 3 0 \%$ and 0.79 $9 5 \%$ CI [0.24, 2.04]) in the second phase, which are moderate but acceptable (McHugh, 2012), especially considering that there were nine functions. After each phase, the annotators reflected on issues related to their application of the framework and the validity of the framework. These issues were discussed and addressed during the group meetings, and the framework was revised accordingly. For example, in the preliminary framework, the three functions in the Data Section were “describing and rationalizing experiments,” “providing captions and supplementary knowledge,” and “reporting results.” However, during the norming session, the annotators found that supplementary knowledge was usually provided to describe or rationalize experiments. In addition, after reporting results, some authors also offered their interpretations to facilitate the readers’ understanding of the visuals. Therefore, the first two functions were integrated and “interpreting results” was added to the finalized annotation framework. The revised framework was finalized after a review by an expert scholar in the field of EAP, based on his extensive experience with the actual practice of writing CoVs.

The four annotators then worked in pairs and applied the finalized framework to the remaining 70 commentaries. The annotations from the training session were also adjusted based on the finalized framework. It is worth noting that every commentary was first annotated by one annotator and then cross-checked by the other. In rare cases where the two annotators in the same pair could not reach a consensus, all four annotators worked together to resolve the discrepancies. For example, Example 1 below is excerpted from a paragraph in Text #95 commenting on a line chart presenting the relationship between predicted morality (log scale) and total spending. There are three lines in the chart, representing decedents (backfilled), decedents (unadjusted) and survivors, respectively.

# Example 1.

However, Figure 4B also shows that, even for individuals with the same predicted mortality probability, spending is higher for those who subsequently die, particularly for individuals with the lowest predicted mortality.

This sentence was annotated as “Data-Results” by one annotator, who believed that the sentence merely reported some information about the results in the figure, as signaled by “Figure 4B also shows that.” However, the other annotator assigned “Data-Interpretation” to the sentence on the basis that the author did not simply repeat the visual information in the sentence but was trying to reorganize and compare the information presented in different lines of the line chart. After group discussion, the sentence was annotated as “Data-Interpretation.”

# 3.3. Identification of $p$ -frames

P-frames were identified first through automatic extraction, followed by manual scrutiny. Before the automatic extraction, a pilot was performed to extract four- to eight-gram p-frames. The results suggested that the majority of four-gram p-frames only had function words (e.g., the \* of the, and in the \* of) and incomplete semantic meanings, making them less pedagogically valuable. In addition, no eight-gram p-frames were identified. Therefore, in this study, five- to seven-gram p-frames were retrieved. To extract $\mathsf { p } \cdot$ -frames automatically, a series of extraction criteria were set, including frequency, number of variants, and range. To determine the ideal cut-off frequency for extraction, after reviewing previous studies (e.g., Cortes, 2013; Lu et al., 2021; Simpson-Vlach & Ellis, 2010), we piloted different cut-off frequency thresholds. The pilot started from relatively relaxed frequency thresholds, which were ten times PMW for five-gram p-frames and eight times PMW for six- and seven-gram p-frames as adopted by Cortes (2013), and then moved towards more conservative ones, which were 20 times for five-gram p-frames and 16 times for six- and seven-gram p-frames. Based on the pilot results, five-, six- and seven-gram pframes that occurred at least 20, 16, and 16 times PMW would be extracted. All candidate p-frames had at least two variants and appeared in at least two texts. Based on these criteria, a script was written in Python 3.6 to automatically extract the pframes along with their occurrences in each rhetorical function, their variants, and the number of reports they occurred in.

The extracted p-frames were further scrutinized by the first author and a research assistant to exclude false and nonpedagogically useful $\mathsf { p }$ -frames. The former mainly includes bundle-like items (e.g., it has been suggested that \*) and crossclause-boundary and incomplete p-frames (e.g., to that \* by the). The latter mainly refers to p-frames that consisted of only function words (e.g., as well as \* the, where the variants are between, in, and by) or that only had unmeaningful variants (e.g., figure \* shows that for, where the variants are 5d, 1a, 1). In addition, if a p-frame was part of a longer p-frame, the shorter one was excluded (e.g., \* are shown in table was excluded as there is \* are shown in table #). The list was also reviewed in terms of its pedagogical value by a teacher with extensive experience teaching academic English. The final list contained 128 fivegram p-frames, 37 six-gram p-frames, and 4 seven-gram p-frames.

# 3.4. Linking $p$ -frames to rhetorical functions

The finalized p-frames were linked to the nine rhetorical functions at the last stage of the analysis. The Python script that extracted the candidate p-frames also recorded the rhetorical function of each sentence in which each candidate occurred.

This information allowed us to efficiently map the p-frames onto the nine rhetorical functions. With many p-frames appearing in more than one rhetorical functions, we classified the p-frames into three types following previous research (Lu et al., 2021) to make the list potentially more useful to academic writing learners and teachers. A p-frame that occurred in only one function was considered to be strongly associated with that function and categorized as a specialized p-frame. A pframe that occurred primarily in one function (i.e., with at least two thirds of its occurrences) was considered to be moderately associated with that function and categorized as a semi-specialized p-frame. Finally, a p-frame that occurred in multiple functions with no clear association with any specific function was categorized as a non-specialized p-frame.

# 4. Results

# 4.1. The annotated rhetorical functions and the distribution of $p$ -frames

Through the process of annotating the corpus, we finalized and validated a functional framework for CoVs. The framework suggested that different functions would appear while commenting on visuals in different sections. As shown in Table 3, among the three sections of social science reports, CoVs appeared most frequently in the Data section. The most prevalent type of function for commenting on visuals is “presenting results” (Data-Results), which comprises almost half of the corpus. Other prevalent types of functions include “describing/rationalizing experiments” (Data-Settings) and “interpreting results” (Data-Interpretation), which accounted for $2 5 . 5 0 \%$ and $1 6 . 0 7 \%$ of the total words, respectively.

Table 3 Descriptive statistics of rhetorical functions.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Section</td><td>Functions</td><td>Total words</td><td>Percent</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Introduction</td><td> Providing background</td><td>2,065</td><td>2.06%</td></tr><tr><td>Stating the presumptions</td><td>1,567</td><td>1.56%</td></tr><tr><td>Connecting to the current study</td><td>1,354</td><td>1.35%</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Data</td><td>Describing/rationalizing experiments</td><td>25,590</td><td>25.50%</td></tr><tr><td>Presenting results</td><td>48,607</td><td>48.44%</td></tr><tr><td>Interpreting results</td><td>16,121</td><td>16.07%</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Discussion</td><td>Summarizing the present study</td><td>862</td><td>0.86%</td></tr><tr><td>Comparing findings with other studies</td><td>1859.</td><td>1.85%</td></tr><tr><td>Explaining or consolidating findings</td><td>2,314</td><td>2.31%</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Total</td><td>100,339</td><td>100%</td></tr></table></body></html>

After manual scrutiny, 169 p-frames were included in the final list (see Appendix A for the complete list of p-frames grouped by rhetorical functions and $\mathsf { p }$ -frame types). Their distribution across different rhetorical functions is presented in Table 4. Note that if a p-frame was identified as associated with a function, it was counted toward the number of $\mathsf { p }$ -frames associated with that function, which explains why the sum of $\mathsf { p }$ -frames is larger than 169. As shown in Table 4, the majority of p-frames occurred in the Data section $8 6 . 2 0 \%$ in total), with the Introduction and Discussion sections containing similar number of p-frames. “Data-Results” contained the largest number of $\mathsf { p } \cdot$ -frames, followed by “Data-Settings” and “DataInterpretation,” and “Disc-Summary” contained the least p-frames. Of all the identified $\mathsf { p }$ -frames, 65 were specialized, 54 semi-specialized, and 50 non-specialized. All of the specialized p-frames occurred in the Data section, with the majority of them associated with the “Data-Results” function.

Table 4 Distribution of p-frames across the rhetorical functions.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Functional Label</td><td>Specialized P-frames</td><td>Semi-specialized P-frames</td><td>Non-specialized P-frames</td><td>Sum</td></tr><tr><td> Intro-Background</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>7</td><td>10 (3.07%)</td></tr><tr><td> Intro-Presumptions</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>6</td><td>6 (1.84%)</td></tr><tr><td>Intro-Connection</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>6</td><td>7 (2.15%)</td></tr><tr><td>Sum-Intro</td><td></td><td>4</td><td>19</td><td>23 (7.06%)</td></tr><tr><td>Data-Settings</td><td>8.</td><td>33</td><td>38</td><td>79 (24.23%)</td></tr><tr><td>Data-Results</td><td>52</td><td>44</td><td>42</td><td>138 (42.33%)</td></tr><tr><td>Data-Interpretation</td><td>5</td><td>24</td><td>35</td><td>64 (19.63%)</td></tr><tr><td>Sum-Data</td><td>65</td><td>101</td><td>115</td><td>281 (86.20%)</td></tr><tr><td>Disc-Summary</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>1 (0.31%)</td></tr><tr><td>Disc-Comparison</td><td>0</td><td>4</td><td>8</td><td>12 (3.68%)</td></tr><tr><td>Disc-Explanation</td><td>0</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>9 (2.76%)</td></tr><tr><td>Sum-Disc</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>17.</td><td>22 (6.75%)</td></tr><tr><td>Sum</td><td> 65</td><td>110</td><td>151</td><td>326</td></tr></table></body></html>

4.2. P-frames used to comment on visuals in the Introduction and Discussion sections

To answer the second research question, we explored the distribution of p-frames across sections and functions. Among the 54 identified semi-specialized p-frames, only one (i.e., is an important \* of) occurred primarily in the Introduction section, which was also the only semi-specialized p-frame that did not occur in the Data section. Specifically, is an important \* of occurred twice in the “Intro-Background” function, and once in the “Disc-Comparison” function, being consistent with its semantic meaning that is highlighting the significance of studied objects. Used in the Introduction section, this p-frame could help highlight the significance of the research focus. For example, in Text #33, where the research focus is human habitation in Western Amazonia, the researchers presented a map of Amazonia in the Introduction section (see McMichael et al., 2012). In the map, some areas were directly pointed out using rectangles and words indicating the sites investigated by previous studies and their study. Such a map in the Introduction section materialized the conceptual impression of the Amazon Basin concrete and tangible for the readers. However, while readers in the field may immediately ascertain the focus of the study by reading the map, those lacking sufficient background knowledge may not understand why the Amazon Basin is worth investigating. Therefore, in commentaries on this visual, the researchers first introduced the size and importance of the area. They stated, “The Amazon Basin, an area approximately the size of the continental United States, is an important reservoir of biodiversity. A major recent question is the degree to which humans settled and modified Amazonian landscapes before European contact” [Intro-Background]. Using is an important \* of, the authors clearly pointed out the significance of the Amazon Basin in terms of biodiversity to all readers and thus highlighted the importance of the research. The following sentence introduced an important issue in the field, i.e., the influence of human activities on the landscape of the area. Previous studies on the influence were subsequently introduced and discussed to identify the research gap. Data of these studies were presented using circles in different colors and outlines in the map.

Meanwhile, is an important \* of could also be used to discuss one’s results as it could also be used to foreground the significance of findings. For example, Text $\# 8 5$ investigated the effect of a policy on personality traits of individuals. In the Discussion section, the researchers presented a table displaying the proportion of children born before or after the policy who were employed in risky occupations. In commenting on the table, the researchers did not refer to the table at the beginning of the commentary. Instead, they first connected the willingness to take risks with previous studies, such as those focued on prosocial behavior, to foreground the importance of their findings in the field. The researchers then clearly stated that the willingness to take risks “is an important component of entrepreneurship,” aiming to articulate the contribution of their findings in a more specific way. Finally, the researchers referred to the table directly and summarized their findings that show a decrease in the willingness to take risks. In this narrowed-down narrative approach, the p-frame is an important $^ *$ of served as a linguistic device to bridge the broad research field and the specific research finding to highlight the importance of the finding and the contribution of the study.

Similarly, only one semi-specialized p-frame primarily occurred in the Discussion section, i.e., \* results are robust to. This pframe occurred twice in “Disc-Comparison” and once in “Data-Interpretation.” In Text $\# 7 0$ , the researchers first presented several robustness checks in three tables, and then commented on the tables using the p-frame to emphasize the robustness of their study and compare that with other existing studies (see Example 2).

Example 2. [main, our] results are robust to   
Several robustness checks (Tables S3–S5) confirm that our main results are robust to (i) adding more individual-level controls . Finally, in Table S6 we show that our results are robust to using the Freedom House index as an alternative way of identifying democratic periods. [Disc-Comparison]

This p-frame could also be used to realize the rhetorical function “interpreting results.” In Text #89, after presenting in a figure their results that summer jobs could help reduce the number of violent crimes committed by youth, the researchers interpreted the visual information to help readers understand the meaning of the figure. They stated, “The results are robust to accounting for the number of hypothesis tests conducted, allowing youth outcomes to be correlated within schools and using a nonlinear specification for count data.” In the text, the figure presented numerical results visually. After describing key information in the figure, the researchers interpreted the data, convincing the readers that these results are adequately robust. Such a demathematization could help readers, particularly outsiders to the field, understand the meanings of the numbers in the study.

Among the 35 non-specialized p-frames, it has been \* that occurred six times across four functions. Although not categorized as a semi-specialized p-frame, this p-frame primarily occurred in the Introduction section in our corpus, with two occurrences in each of the following two functions: “Intro-Background” and “Intro-Presumptions.” In the “Intro-Background” function, the p-frame was used to comment on previous findings presented in the figure, followed by introducing presumptions or research gaps beyond the findings, as demonstrated in Example 3a. In the “Intro-Presumptions” function, while the p-frame was also used to introduce previous findings, the findings were exactly the focus of the study to examine and extend, as demonstrated in Example 3b. Meanwhile this p-frame was also occasionally used to realize the rhetorical functions of “Disc-Comparison” and “Data-Setting.”

a. Diffusion rate, however, is not a reliable indicator of social transmission. Furthermore, it has been suggested that lobtail feeding is a specialization related to foraging on sand lance, because it is spatially concentrated on Stellwagen Bank (Figure 1A) . [Intro-Background]. Because such factors are a common influence on innovation and social learning, these hypotheses are not necessarily mutually exclusive, but it is difficult to measure the relative influence of social and ecological factors on the spread of behavior . [Intro-Presumption]. We used NBDA to analyze . [Intro-Connection] (#12)   
b. During the early Middle Preclassic period (1000–700 BCE), sedentary communities using ceramics began to appear in the Maya lowlands (Figures 1 and 2) . [Intro-Background]. The subsequent Gulf Coast center of La Venta, in contrast, exhibited a highly formalized arrangement of a pyramid, platforms, and plazas, and it has been suggested that this architectural template developed there spread to the Maya lowlands and other parts of southern Mesoamerica. [IntroPresumptions]. Here we describe excavations at the Maya center of Ceibal that provide evidence of earlier architecture and thus imply a more complex process. [Intro-Connection] (#41)

These non-specialized $\mathsf { p }$ -frames are not clearly associated with one rhetorical function in CoVs but allow writers to use them in relatively flexible ways to realize different rhetorical functions with semantically diverse variants. For example, after learning the p-frame with the $^ *$ of the, writers could use the variant “analysis” to present the results and the variant “location” to describe the settings of the research.

# 4.3. P-frames used in the data section

As demonstrated in Table 4, marginally over $8 6 \%$ of p-frames, including all specialized ones, occurred in the Data section. The most frequently used specialized $\mathsf { p } \cdot$ -frame was $^ *$ were randomly assigned to, which occurred six times in our corpus, each time to describe decisions or actions of randomly assigning something to groups and categories in the research design in the “Data-Setting” function. Eighty percent of the specialized p-frames (52 out of 65) were associated with the function “presenting results” (Data-Results). Among them, the most frequently used were there is no significant \*, there was a significant \*, and there was no \* between. The associations of these p-frames with the function “Data-Results” were partly reflected in the pframes’ semantic meanings and their demathematization function. All of the three p-frames were usually used to describe statistical relationships (e.g., between different variables), effects (e.g., of some variables on others), or differences (e.g., between different groups) while presenting data or interpreting results. In Text $\# 8 6$ , the researchers investigated the effects of childhood skill intervention on children’s skill development in developing countries. The researchers adopted a longitudinal approach, and therefore, before presenting specific data of their results, they declared that “At baseline, there was no difference in parenting between treatment and control groups (Table S.1)” [Data-Results]. The table provided the results of the treatment and control groups in a series of line charts. In the commentary, through using the p-frame there was no difference \*, the researchers demathematize the numbers in the table to come to a conclusion accessible to all, including non-specialist, readers. In addition, the $\mathsf { p }$ -frame also signals a claim, which is further supported by the following sentences in the report.

As mentioned in the literature review, while commenting on visuals, the writer usually needs to highlight or refer to the visual being commented on (Swales & Feak, 2012). The highlighting function could also be realized by p-frames, such as \* are shown in table # and the first \* in fig. #. These p-frames, specifically associated with the function “Data-Results,” could help to attract readers’ attention to the information transformation from the visual to the written commentary. After reading such pframes, readers would know the specific location of the information commented on in the following verbal accounts, making it easier for them to understand the visuals, the commentary, and the research in general. Corresponding to the highlighting function, we observed that \* are shown in Table # always occurred in the first sentence of the function “Data-Results” (as illustrated in Example 4), seemingly functioning as the signal for a function shift. P-frames demonstrating the same pattern include figure # shows the \*, table # \* the results of, and table # shows the \* of (all specifically associated with the function “Data-Results”).

Example 4. [models, hypotheses] are shown in Table #

a. Predicting MOOC participation as a function of neighborhood SES allowed us to interpret these differences in terms of participation likelihood. [Data-Settings]. The results of logistic regression models are shown in Table 1, where the odds of participation are estimated in terms of a one–standard deviation change in the predictor. [Data-Results] (#72) b. Hypothesis 1 was, “One-time grants have no long-term effect on firm survival.” If a one-time grant merely speeds convergence to a firm’s optimal steady-state size as predicted by neoclassical theory, any effect should be temporary, and we should see no effect on firm survival. [Data-Setting]. Results testing this hypothesis are shown in Table 1. We rejected the hypothesis for males. [Data-Results] (#84)

However, some other p-frames (e.g., the first \* in fig. # and \* are presented in table #) that also directly point to visuals did not always occur in the first sentence of the function “Data-Results.” For example, in Text $\# 6 8$ , when presenting results (Data

Results) after describing and rationalizing the settings (Dat-Settings), the researchers first summarized that “there is a strong relationship between the results of a study and whether it was published, a pattern indicative of publication bias.” After the summary, the table presenting relevant information was pointed to directly. They stated, “The main findings are presented in Table 3, which is a cross-tabulation of publication status against strength of results.”

As for semi-specialized p-frames, except for the two primarily associated with “Intro-Background” and “Disc-Comparison” presented in the last section, the others primarily occurred in the Data section, with 15 mainly associated with “Data-Settings,” 31 with “Data-Results,” and 6 with “Data-Interpretation.” Some semi-specialized p-frames are semantically associated with the functions they occurred in. For example, the p-frame can be used to [estimate, predict, infer, assess] denotes a possible function of an instrument, model, etc., consistent with its primary use in “Data-Settings” to describe or rationalize the research design demonstrated visually. Similar examples include consistent with \* evidence for and these \* suggest that the, both of which were primarily associated with the function “Data-Interpretation”, and we restricted our \* to, which primarily occurred in “Data-Settings.” Nevertheless, the semantic meanings of some p-frames did not directly point to a specific function. For example, it is \* that the appeared to lack a specific meaning but this $\mathsf { p }$ -frame occurred primarily in “DataInterpretation.” There are also p-frames whose semantic meanings seemed inconsistent with the function they occurred in, such as can be [defined, interpreted] as the. Semantically, it appeared more likely to be used in describing settings or interpreting results. However, this p-frame was primarily used to report results in “Data-Results” in our corpus, as demonstrated in Example 5.

Example 5. can be [defined, interpreted] as the

a. The seventh rule indicates that a new relation ${ \bf { C } } ( \cdot , \cdot )$ can be defined as the relative product of two existing relations. For example, Figure 2C defines grandmother(\$,\$) as the relative product of mother(\$,\$) and PARENT(\$,\$). [Data-Results] (#5) b. The PCA enabled the representation of the variables (Figure 4A) and experimental groups (Figure 4B) on two orthogonal axes (supplementary materials, PCA). The first component (Figure 4, x axis) can be interpreted as the anxiety level. [Data-Results] (#14)

The variants indicated that the p-frame can be \* as the is semantically relevant to describing the setting or interpreting results. However, a close examination of Example 5 demonstrated that it could also be used to report results. In Example 5b, the researchers used principal component analysis (PCA) to analyze their data. However, this method requires the researchers to define principal components based on the data clustering. Therefore, the p-frame can be \* as the was used to refer to the first component identified by the PCA. The researchers stated that “the first component can be interpreted as the anxiety level” to demathematize the visual data for the wider readership.

# 5. Discussion

To address students’ possible misunderstandings of CoVs and respond to the call for studies to take into consideration multimodal devices, especially visuals (e.g., Johns, 1998, 2012; Tardy & Swales, 2014), the current study investigated CoVs in terms of the rhetorical functions and p-frames. Specifically, we annotated CoVs in 100 social science reports in terms of nine rhetorical functions, identified frequently used p-frames in such commentaries, and mapped them onto the functions. Moghaddasi et al. (2019) suggested that visuals in different sections have different rhetorical functions. The finalized annotation framework in this study supports such an argument. Visuals in the Introduction section usually serve to offer information about what has already been found in the field. CoVs in the Introduction section have three major rhetorical functions, namely, “providing background,” “stating the presumptions,” and “connecting to the current study.” Visuals in the Data section usually help the writer to describe and interpret the research design and results, or serve as evidence to support argument construction. To integrate such visuals in the text and engage readers in “the wider scientific community and general public” (Science, n.d.a), CoVs in this section fulfill three major functions, i.e., “describing or rationalizing experiments,” “presenting results” and “interpreting results.” Visuals in the Discussion section of a study are usually used to connect the findings of the study with relevant previous studies to demonstrate how significant the findings are and how the findings would advance our understandings. To comment on such visuals, writers in our corpus usually choose to “summarize the present study” first, followed by “comparing [the] findings with other studies,” and then “explaining or consolidating findings.” As the number of reports in economics and education are relatively fewer than those in anthropology, psychology, and sociology, the functional structure should be applied with caution to the analysis of CoVs in economics and education. Future studies could also compile a relatively more balanced corpus to validate the functional structure identified by the current study.

The results of our rhetorical function annotation and analysis, unsurprisingly, align with our intuition that visuals in academic writing are usually used to present results. Indeed, some EAP textbooks (e.g., Swales & Feak, 2012) almost exclusively use the term “visuals” to refer to visuals for data presentation. Instruction on CoVs therefore includes, for example, how to comment from general to specific, how to compare quantitative differences, and how to describe trends demonstrated in visuals. Focusing specifically on visuals for data presentation is to some extent a reasonable and effective approach. As demonstrated in Table 3, the majority of CoVs appear in the Data section, commenting on visuals containing data and supporting evidence. However, there are still a fair number of visuals in the Introduction and Discussion sections helping materialize abstract objects to engage readers with different background knowledge, and compare with relevant studies to demonstrate the importance of findings (Moghaddasi et al., 2019). As we described in Section 4.2, the authors of Text #33 used a map in the Introduction of their report, making the Amazon Basin tangible to readers at the beginning of their text. As the Amazon Basin is the focal area of the research, they also commented on the visual to articulate the significance of their research and engage readers lacking sufficient background knowledge. Therefore, instruction on CoVs should not be solely limited to those related to data presentation, given the multi-functions of visuals in academic writing (e.g., Moghaddasi et al., 2019).

In addition to the functional structure of CoVs, the current study also identified 169 p-frames and their variants used to realize the functions in the corpus. Some p-frames could be used to highlight or directly point to a visual, such as \* are shown in table #, figure # shows the \*, table # \* the results of, and table # shows the \* of. Notably, these p-frames always appeared in the first sentence of a rhetorical function and contributed to functional shifts (see Example 4). Such $\mathsf { p }$ -frames resemble what Cortes (2013) called triggers, namely lexical bundles that always appeared at the beginning of the first sentence of a function. However, it should be noted that not all p-frames that signaled functional shifts were triggers, as some of these p-frames did not appear at the beginning of the first sentence to initiate a function. This difference aside, the identification of p-frames that signal functional shifts helps unravel the relationship between rhetorical functions and phraseological expressions, the insights into which could in turn benefit genre-based academic writing instruction. Given the limited size of the corpus in this study, it is still inconclusive to generalize this phenomenon to all CoVs in reports. Future studies could collect more CoVs to validate such findings. In addition, studies on other genres could attend to not only triggers, but also contributors to functional shift in general to benefit genre-based academic writing instruction.

Notably, some p-frames associated with the Results section were found to serve a demathematization function, in which the visuals and commentaries together contributed to the argument construction. As mentioned earlier, these p-frames include \* results are robust to, there is no significant \*, there was a significant \*, there was no \* between, and can be \* as. When writing a research article, researchers frequently need to incorporate visuals to present their statistical analysis and results in a convincing way as evidence to support their argument and to convince the readers (logos). However, with the increasing prevalence of interdisciplinary academic journals (e.g., Science), readers may lack the relevant knowledge needed to decode or interpret the visuals successfully and accurately. To address the readers’ needs, writers could use the listed p-frames as a means to demathematize the visuals in verbal commentaries to captivate the readers’ interest (pathos) in engaging with the research, thereby enhancing its impact. Nevertheless, while capturing readers’ interest is crucial, the authors should also ensure that their demathematization strategy and verbal commentaries are credible (ethos), which is essential for effective persuasiveness. In regard to the rhetorical triangle of logos, pathos and ethos, the $\mathsf { p }$ -frames listed above could serve as useful devices for bridging visuals and CoVs, thereby creating a convincing argument. However, it should be noted that such pframes were only identified in the Result section in the current research. Future studies could collect more multimodal data, especially those including linguistic and visual modes, to identify such devices relevant to argumentation. Moreover, the interplay between various modes and their collective impact in crafting a compelling argument merits further investigation.

Some p-frames identified in this research, such as it has been \* that, have already been identified by previous studies on other genres. Cortes (2013) identified the lexical bundle it has been suggested that as a trigger in her corpus of introductions. She also observed that it was specifically associated with the function “reviewing items of previous literature” (Cortes, 2013, p. 39). Lu et al. (2021) identified the p-frame it has been \* that with suggested as one of the variants. In their corpus, while the pframe was primarily associated with the rhetorical function “making generalizations about research area,” it also appeared in some other functions. In addition, the p-frame appeared more often in the middle of a function rather than at the beginning. As demonstrated in Example 4, the current study supports Lu et al.’s (2021) call for cautious identification and interpretation of signaling phrases such as triggers. Moreover, occurring six times across four functions, it has been \* that was categorized as a non-specialized p-frame in the current study rather than a semi-specialized $\mathsf { p }$ -frame identified by Lu et al. (2021). This difference indicates that the function of a phraseological expression may vary across different genres. Therefore, the link between phraseological expressions and rhetorical functions should be interpreted with the specific genre in mind in genrebased academic writing instruction. Future studies could also investigate to what extent and how the link between language forms and functions may vary across genres, especially those referring to multimodal devices.

Pedagogical implications are mainly twofold. First, the functional structure of CoVs could show novice writers and EAP instructors how published writers comment on visuals in different sections of a research report. Taking commenting on data visuals as an example, instructors could first highlight that such visuals usually serve as evidence for findings (Moghaddasi et al., 2019) before assigning sample commentaries and the corresponding visuals to students as pre-instructional tasks (Cheng, 2015). Students may work in groups to identify how authors comment on the visuals step by step to integrate visual data meaningfully into their writing. During explicit instruction, instructors could analyze exemplary texts with students, demonstrating how published writers in a discourse community might first describe and justify their experiments, then present key information in the visuals, and eventually interpret such information and its significance in relation to argument construction.

In addition, the finalized p-frame list sorted according to rhetorical functions could also be pedagogically useful, as it provides an explicit connection between rhetorical functions and linguistic realizations of such functions (e.g., Cortes, 2013; Lu et al., 2021). To continue our example above, after an analysis of rhetorical functions, instructors could guide students to identify the linguistic expressions used in the sample texts to realize the different rhetorical functions. Specialized p-frames and their variants from the list could then be highlighted to show, for example, how p-frames such as figure # shows the \* is used to “present results,” whereas tend not to be \* is used to “interpret results.” Practice tasks could then be provided to help students apply and internalize such basic conventions of commenting on visuals in actual writing practices (Swales, 1990). While these conventions are important, they should not constrain students’ creativity and innovation. Therefore, teachers should also encourage students to go beyond and seek for creative but acceptable expressions in CoVs (Bhatia, 2014). Semiand non-specialized p-frames and their variants could also be offered as supplementary resources to facilitate students’ writing practices. In this process, students would develop an awareness of the multi-functional nature of visuals and the ways that p-frames can be used to comment on visuals to realize different communicative functions. However, as this study focused specifically on CoVs in social science reports, instructors should avoid generalizing the functional structure and p-frames identified in this study to other disciplines.

# 6. Conclusion

Adopting a rhetorical function analysis, this study investigated the functional structure of CoVs and compiled a p-frame list that could be used to realize the various functions. Results suggested that visuals in different sections have different functions and thus CoVs have different rhetorical function structures across different sections. In total, nine functions across the three sections were identified. In addition, this study identified 169 p-frames, including 65 specialized p-frames, 54 semispecialized $\mathsf { p } \cdot$ -frames and 50 non-specialized p-frames. The identified functional structure of CoVs and the $\mathsf { p }$ -frames used to realize the various functions could not only raise novice writers’ awareness of the various functions of CoVs but also offer pedagogically useful resources for the teaching and learning of the skills needed to write such commentaries. Given the relatively small size of our corpus and the limited disciplines included, to extend and validate our findings, future studies may consider collecting more samples from different disciplines. In addition, researchers could also investigate interdisciplinary variations of CoVs in terms of phraseological expressions or structure of rhetorical functions. As this study analyzed various CoVs and identified pedagogically useful p-frames, future studies could further investigate how different types of visuals (e.g., line charts, maps, and process charts) are commented on. The language and visuals could also be analyzed multimodally to offer a more detailed picture of the relationship between language and various components in visuals, and how these different multimodal components may collectively contribute to the communicative functions of visuals.

# Declarations of interest

None.

# Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.09.001.

# References

Ackermann, K., & Chen, Y. H. (2013). Developing the academic collocation list (ACL)–A corpus-driven and expert-judged approach. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 12(4), 235-247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2013.08.002.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analysing Genre: Language Use in Professional Settings. Routledge.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2014). Analysing genre: Language use in professional settings. Routledge.   
Biber, D. (2009). A corpus-driven approach to formulaic language in English: multi-word patterns in speech and writing. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 14(3), 275-311. https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.14.3.08bib.   
Cheng, A. (2015). Genre analysis as a pre-instructional, instructional, and teacher development framework. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 19, 125- 136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2015.02.003.   
Conklin, K., & Schmitt, N. (2012). The processing of formulaic language. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 32, 45-61. https://doi.org/10.1017/ S0267190512000074.   
Cortes, V. (2013). The purpose of this study is to: connecting lexical bundles and moves in research article introductions. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 12(1), 33-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2012.11.002.   
Cotos, E., Huffman, S., & Link, S. (2015). Furthering and applying move/step constructs: Technology-driven marshalling of Swalesian genre theory for EAP pedagogy. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 19, 52-72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2015.05.004.   
Cotos, E., Huffman, S., & Link, S. (2017). A move/step model for methods sections: demonstrating rigour and credibility. English for Specific Purposes, 46, 90- 106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.01.001.   
Cunningham, K. J. (2017). A phraseological exploration of recent mathematics research articles through key phrase frames. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 25, 71-83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.11.005.   
Du, Z., Jiang, F., & Liu, L. (2021). Profiling figure legends in scientific research articles: a corpus-driven approach. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 54, 101054. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.101054.   
Durrant, P. (2009). Investigating the viability of a collocation list for students of English for academic purposes. English for Specific Purposes, 28(3), 157-169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2009.02.002.   
Ellis, N. C., Simpson-Vlach, R. I. T. A., & Maynard, C. (2008). Formulaic language in native and second language speakers: psycholinguistics, corpus linguistics, and TESOL. Tesol Quarterly, 42(3), 375-396. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1545-7249.2008.tb00137.x.   
Guinda, C. S. (2012). Proximal positioning in students’ graph commentaries. In K. Hyland, & C. S. Guinda (Eds.), Stance and Voice in Written Academic Genres (pp. 166-183). Palgrave Macmillan.   
Holmes, R. (1997). Genre analysis, and the social sciences: an investigation of the structure of research article discussion sections in three disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 16(4), 321-337. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(96)00038-5.   
Hu, G., & Liu, Y. (2018). Three-minute thesis presentations as an academic genre: a cross-disciplinary study of genre moves. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 35, 16-30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.06.004.   
Hyland, K. (2006). English for Academic Purposes: an Advanced Resource Book. Routledge.   
Johns, A. M. (1998). The visual and the verbal: a case study in macroeconomics. English for Specific Purposes, 17(2), 183-197. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889- 4906(97)00010-0.   
Johns, A. M. (2012). The history of English for specific purposes research. The handbook of English for specific purposes (pp. 5-30).   
Kim, S. H., & Kim, J. H. (2012). Frequency effects in L2 multiword unit processing: evidence from self-paced reading. Tesol Quarterly, 46(4), 831-841. https:// doi.org/10.1002/tesq.66.   
Larsson, T., Reppen, R., & Dixon, T. (2022). A phraseological study of highlighting strategies in novice and expert writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 60, 101179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101179.   
Le, T. N. P., & Harrington, M. (2015). Phraseology used to comment on results in the discussion section of applied linguistics quantitative research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 39, 45-61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2015.03.003.   
Lim, J. M.-H. (2006). Method sections of management research articles: a pedagogically motivated qualitative study. English for Specific Purposes, 25, 282- 309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2005.07.001.   
Liu, C. Y., & Chen, H. J. H. (2022). A phraseological exploration of university lectures through phrase frames. Journal of English for Academic Purposes. 101135https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101135.   
Lu, X., Yoon, J., & Kisselev, O. (2018). A phrase-frame list for social science research article introductions. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 36, 76-85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.09.004.   
Lu, X., Yoon, J., & Kisselev, O. (2021). Matching phrase-frames to rhetorical moves in social science research article introductions. English for Specific Purposes, 61, 63-83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2020.10.001.   
Martinez, R., & Schmitt, N. (2012). A phrasal expressions list. Applied Linguistics, 33(3), 299-320. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/ams010.   
McHugh, M. L. (2012). Interrater reliability: the Kappa statistic. Biochemia Medica, 22(3), 276-282.   
McMichael, C. H., Piperno, D. R., Bush, M. B., Silman, M. R., Zimmerman, A. R., Raczka, M. F., & Lobato, L. C. (2012). Sparse pre-Columbian human habitation in western Amazonia. Science, 336(6087), 1429-1431.   
Me-zek, -S., & Swales, J. (2016). PhD defences and vivas. In K. Hyland, & P. Shaw (Eds.), The Routledge Handbook of English for Academic Purposes (pp. 361-375). London: Routledge.   
Mizumoto, A., Hamatani, S., & Imao, Y. (2017). Applying the bundle–move connection approach to the development of an online writing support tool for research articles. Language Learning, 67(4), 885-921. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12250.   
Moghaddasi, S., Graves, H. A., Graves, R., & Gutierrez, X. (2019). “See Figure 1”: visual moves in discrete mathematics research articles. English for Specific Purposes, 56, 50-67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2019.08.001.   
Moreno, A. I., & Swales, J. M. (2018). Strengthening move analysis methodology towards bridging the function-form gap. English for Specific Purposes, 50, 40- 63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.11.006.   
Northbrook, J., & Conklin, K. (2019). Is what you put in what you get out?dtextbook-derived lexical bundle processing in beginner English learners. Applied Linguistics, 40(5), 816-833. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amy027.   
Nwogu, K. N. (1997). The medical research paper: structure and functions. English for Specific Purposes, 16, 119-138. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(97) 85388-4.   
Omidian, T., Shahriari, H., & Siyanova-Chanturia, A. (2018). A cross-disciplinary investigation of multi-word expressions in the moves of research article abstracts. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 36, 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.08.002.   
Parkinson, J. (2017). The student laboratory report genre: a genre analysis. English for Specific Purposes, 45, 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2016.08.001.   
Sales, H. (2006). Professional Communication in Engineering. Springer.   
Samraj, B. (2002). Introductions in research articles: variations across disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 21(1), 1-17. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889- 4906(00)00023-5.   
Science. (n.d.a). Mission and Scope. https://www.science.org/content/page/mission-and-scope.   
Science. (n.d.b). Instruction for Reviewers of Reports. https://www.science.org/pb-assets/PDF/Information%20for%20reviewers/Instructions%20for% 20Reviewers%20of%20Reports-1630080682.pdf.   
Shi, H., & Wannaruk, A. (2014). Rhetorical structure of research articles in agricultural science. English Language Teaching, 7, 1-13. https://doi.org/10.5539/elt. v7n8p1.   
Simpson-Vlach, R., & Ellis, N. C. (2010). An academic formulas list: new methods in phraseology research. Applied Linguistics, 31(4), 487-512. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/applin/amp058.   
Stubbs, M. (2007). An example of frequent English phraseology: distributions, structures and functions. In R. Facchinetti (Ed.), Corpus Linguistics 25 Years on (pp. 87-105). Brill.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research Genres: Explorations and Applications. Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2016). Configuring image and context: writing ‘about’ pictures. English for Specific Purposes, 41, 22-35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2015.08. 003.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (1997). From information transfer to data commentary. In T. Miller (Ed.), Functional Approaches to Written Text: Classroom Applications (pp. 64-76). United States Information Agency.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2012). Academic Writing for Graduate Students: Essential Tasks and Skills $3 ^ { \mathrm { r d } }$ ed.). University of Michigan Press.   
Tardy, C. M., & Swales, J. M. (2014). Genre analysis. In K. P. Schneider, & A. Barron (Eds.), Pragmatics of Discourse (pp. 165-187). De Gruyter.

Mr. Jincheng Wu is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of English, Faculty of Arts and Humanities, University of Macau. His research interests are in areas of second language writing, corpus-based approaches to writing research, and language teaching and learning.

Dr. Cecilia Guanfang Zhao is Associate Professor in the Department of English, Faculty of Arts and Humanities, University of Macau. Her research interests include language assessment, second language writing, English for academic purposes, and second language teaching and learning.

Xiaofei Lu is Professor of Applied Linguistics and Asian Studies at The Pennsylvania State University. His research interests are primarily in corpus linguistics, English for Academic Purposes, second language writing, and intelligent computer-assisted language learning. He is the author of Corpus Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition: Perspectives, Issues, and Findings (2023, Routledge).

Tan Jin is a Professor in the School of Foreign Studies at South China Normal University in China. His research interests include corpus linguistics, language testing and assessment as well as computer assisted language learning. He has published extensively in journals such as Journal of English for Academic Purposes, Language Learning $\varepsilon { _ { \sigma } }$ Technology, Language Testing, Modern Language Journal and TESOL Quarterly.