# Task requirements, task representation, and self-reported citation functions: An exploratory study of a successful L2 student’s writing

Bojana Petric\*, Nigel Harwood 1

Department of Language & Linguistics, University of Essex, Colchester CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom

Keywords:   
Citation functions   
Source use   
Written task   
Task representation   
L2 writing   
EAP

# a b s t r a c t

This mixed-method study investigates the citation behaviour of a successful L2 postgraduate management student, Sofie, in two pieces of writing, written in response to two assignment tasks in two management modules. The tasks belonged to the same assignment type, but differed in the level of direction provided: one was a directed task, accompanied by lecturer guidance on readings, while the other was an open task, allowing students to select their own topic. The discourse-based interview approach (Odell, Goswami, & Harrington, 1983) was used to elicit Sofie’s perceived citation functions, followed by quantifying the qualitative codings to allow for comparison. The findings show that some of the citation functions Sofie described were the same in both assignments, while others were task specific. Sofie used citations in both assignments to define terms and support her arguments. However, it was only in her assignment for the open task that she used citations to show the relevance of her chosen topic. Conversely, she frequently used citations to apply citees’ concepts to her own analysis in the directed task, but not in the open task. We conclude by discussing the implications of our findings for L2 writing instruction.

$©$ 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Most of the existing research on L2 students’ writing from sources has focused on problems such as plagiarism, over-citing, and inadequate paraphrasing (e.g., Abasi, Akbari, & Graves, 2006; Angélil-Carter, 2000; Borg, 2000; Campbell, 1990; Pecorari, 2003, 2006; Shi, 2004, 2010). Fewer studies have investigated the citing behaviour of successful L2 students (although see Ädel & Garretson, 2006; Petric, 2007, 2012; Harwood & Petric, 2012; Lee, 2010), which is what this study aims to do. Understanding how successful students use citation can contribute to the design of appropriate materials and tasks for teaching citation and source use. In this study we define successful student writers as those who consistently receive high marks for their written assignments from their subject lecturers. This definition relies on subject lecturers’ judgements because disciplinary insiders are able to evaluate the extent to which student writing conforms to disciplinary conventions in terms of form, content, anddof particular interest in this studydsource use and citing.

Our focus is on the functions of citations, i.e., the rhetorical purposes writers intend them to perform in their texts, such as to support their claims. In contrast to the large body of research on the functions of citations in published writing (for overviews see Harwood, 2009; White, 2004), much less is known about the purposes for which students use citations. And, as Petric (2007) has argued, it cannot be assumed that citation functions in expert writing will be the same as those in student writing, since students are required to write different genres, for different purposes and audiences. Indeed, studies focussing wholly or in part on the functions of citations in student writing (Abasi et al., 2006; Borg, 2000; Harwood & Petric, 2012; Mansourizadeh & Ahmad, 2011; Oppenheim & Smith, 2001; Petric, 2007; Thompson, 2001) report some citation patterns specific to students, such as their tendency to use citations primarily for knowledge display. Other functions of citations common in expert writing (e.g., to support the writer’s own claims) are found less often in student writing. This is particularly evident in the writing of lower achieving L2 students, who exploit a narrower range of citation functions in comparison to their more successful peers (Petric, 2007). Successful L2 students also cite to perform more complex functions, such as to identify links between different bodies of literature (Mansourizadeh & Ahmad, 2011; Petric, 2007).

Previous research investigated citation functions in various student-produced genres at different levels of study; more specifically, in undergraduate students’ essays (Lee, 2010); master’s students’ essays (Borg, 2000), research papers (Mansourizadeh & Ahmad, 2011), dissertations (Petric, 2007), and PhD theses (Thompson, 2001; Thompson & Tribble, 2001; however, these latter two studies examine L1 English). This research often involves comparison of citations, such as in different disciplines (Thompson, 2001), in the writing of L1 and L2 speakers of English (Borg, 2000), in the writing of master’s students and experts (Mansourizadeh & Ahmad, 2011), and in high- and low-rated texts (Lee, 2010; Petric, 2007). Our study continues this line of investigation by comparing citation functions in the writing of the same student in different types of texts. There is some evidence that students cite differently in different assignments or different genre parts. For instance, Beaufort’s (2004) longitudinal study of Tim, an L1 history undergraduate, revealed a range of citation practices in his assignments, from using no citations at all to citing too densely. However, there was no pattern in this variation, leading Beaufort to conclude that Tim’s inconsistent citing behaviour reflected his lack of genre awareness. In contrast, L2 master’s students in Petric’s (2007) study, who also cited for different purposes in different parts of their master’s dissertations i.e., different genre parts, tended to do so more systematically. For instance, they used citations to establish links between sources (e.g., to indicate agreement among authors) in their introductory chapters but not in their conclusions. However, neither study specifically investigated the relationship between task type and students’ citing behaviour, which is the focus of our study.

More specifically, in this exploratory study we will examine the functions of citations in two different assignment tasks completed by the same student writer, in order to determine whether there are any differences in the student’s self-reported citing behaviour when completing assignments in response to different tasks. As surveys of written university assignment tasks have shown (e.g., Cooper & Bikowski, 2007; Horowitz, 1986; Zhu, 2004), students are required to complete a variety of task types, including general academic writing tasks (e.g., library research papers), and discipline specific tasks (e.g., business proposals in management studies). Certain task types, such as the ‘essay’, are defined differently in different disciplines and even in different courses within the same programme (Shaver, 2007), suggesting that task requirements may also vary within the same task types.

Task requirements have been shown to have a strong impact on students’ writing both in testing situations (Asención Delaney, 2008; Plakans, 2010) and in natural settings, e.g., when students complete take-home assignments set by their lecturers in disciplinary courses (e.g., Nelson, 1990). However, students’ writing is not only influenced by task requirements but also by task representation, i.e., ‘the manner in which students interpret an assignment task, and therefore, the type of paper they produce’ (Ruiz-Funes, 2001, p. 226). Studies of L1 and L2 student writers’ task representation processes (e.g., Flower et al., 1990; Nelson, 1990; Ruiz-Funes, 2001) show that students construct a task representation using cues from the social and rhetorical context (e.g., task instructions, relevant discussions in and out of class), and by drawing on their previous experiences of assignment writing and their own assumptions about what is required. While some students diverge from their lecturers’ interpretations of tasks, others are more successful in constructing an appropriate task representation.

There is some evidence that task type and task representation affect students’ citing behaviour; however, the overall findings of the research conducted thus far are inconclusive. For instance, Shi (2004) compared the effects of task type on source use in the writing of L1 and L2 students in lab conditions, and found that a summary task resulted in more textual borrowing from the two set sources than an opinion essay task. Greene’s (1993) findings reveal a different picture. He asked one group of L1 students to write a report and another to write a problem-based essay, as take-home assignments, drawing on the same set of six sources. Although the two groups differed in their ideas about the extent to which they should draw on the sources and their own opinions, textual analysis showed no such differences in their writing. Both groups therefore exhibited similar citation behaviour, using citations primarily as sources of information rather than to support an argument. Thus, while Shi (2004) showed that task type affected the extent to which students relied on sources in their writing, Greene (1993) found that task type had an effect on students’ interpretation of the extent to which they should rely on sources but did not result in differences in their actual source use and citation behaviour. Clearly, there is a need for further research in this area, particularly in authentic settings, where students select sources for their assignments themselves.

Our aim, then, is to investigate a successful L2 master’s student’s perspective on her citing behaviour in two different assignments written in response to tasks set by subject lecturers in the student’s field of study, in order to explore the relationship between task requirements, task representation and self-reported citation functions in these texts.

# 2. Methodology

# 2.1. Participant: a successful L2 student writer

The study focuses on a successful master’s student, Sofie,2 who responded to our call for participants in the project, which was circulated with the help of a lecturer in the management studies department3 at a UK university. To ensure that only successful students were recruited, we asked the lecturer to approach those students who had received distinction grades for all or most of their assignments written during the academic year.4

Sofie received distinction grades for eight out of ten assignments and was one of the best students in her programme. She had previously completed a BA degree in management in her native country, in north-western Europe, and studied for a year in the United States. Prior to coming to the UK to study for her master’s degree, Sofie had not had much experience of assignment writing since assessment in her previous studies was mostly based on presentations and project work in groups.

# 2.2. Selection of assignments

The assignments Sofie wrote during the academic year included eight library research papers (‘a paper that incorporates and synthesizes information from multiple bibliographic sources,’ Cooper & Bikowski, 2007, p. 212), a report, and a proposal.5 Having decided to focus on the library research paper as the most representative task type assigned to students in our participant’s programme and at the postgraduate level of study in general (Cooper & Bikowski, 2007; Horowitz, 1986), we selected two assignment tasks set within two closely related management modules, both of which were compulsory modules taught during the first term of Sofie’s master’s programme. The two tasks differed considerably in terms of the explicitness of guidelines and the level of direction provided, which made them suitable for our study.

One was a directed task, with detailed and explicit instructions requiring students to critically explore two of the eight management topics covered in the module, drawing on examples from a film. Assignment requirements were explained in a 10- page module handbook (see Appendix A), which included a list of ten films students could choose from, and a reading list for each of the eight topics, divided into basic and advanced sources. The instructions emphasised that students should not ‘merely describe the plot of the film’ but were expected ‘to identify and critically discuss the organisational aspects that the film deals with,’ drawing on the relevant management literature. The lecturers clarified the requirements in class, by describing features of a good/poor essay and explaining how films can be analysed from a management perspective (see Appendix A).

The second task was an open task, allowing students to select any topic relevant to the theme of the module. The lecturers provided examples of possible topics in classes, encouraging students to be creative and go beyond the topics covered in the module. A general list of readings was provided; however, students were required to identify sources relevant to their chosen topic independently. Since each student’s topic was different, task requirements could only be discussed in class at a general level, although the lecturers offered advice in individual meetings.

Length requirements also differed, with the directed task being a 3000-word assignment, and the open task a 5000-word assignment.

# 2.3. The interview method and procedures

Since our aim was to elicit the student’s own account of her citing behaviour without imposing pre-determined categories, we employed the in-depth semi-structured interview, a method which allows interviewees to express their opinions and experiences (e.g. Cohen, Manion, & Morrison, 2007) and which is thus particularly suitable for exploring the private and subjective purposes which lie behind citation choices (Cronin, 1984, 2005). To aid recall and help ground elicitation in specific instances of textual behaviour, we included a discourse-based component (Odell, Goswami, & Harrington, 1983), as described below.

We conducted two interviews with Sofie, lasting 105 and 135 min respectively, each focussing on one of her assignments. In both interviews, questions about the assignment followed the same format,6 covering issues such as the assignment task type, the lecturers’ guidelines, and sources of information she consulted while completing the assignment. The main, discourse-based, part of both interviews focused on the citations in the two assignments. Prior to the interviews, we highlighted all citations7 in the two assignments and any mention of citation and referencing in the markers’ comments and assessment criteria. In the interview, we asked Sofie to account for the purpose of each of the citations in her assignments (‘Could you tell me what this citation is helping you do?’ or ‘What did you hope this citation would do?’), one by one, to elicit Sofie’s perceived functions of the citations in her assignments. This was followed by additional questions about selected instances of her citation use, also prepared in advance of the interview and based on our reading of Sofie’s texts (e.g., ‘I noticed you didn’t refer to specific sources when citing Weber on page 4. Could you say something about that?’).

We planned to briefly interview Sofie’s lecturers to obtain their accounts of the task requirements and their expectations relating to the two assignments, particularly in terms of students’ source use and citation. While we were able to interview the two lecturers responsible for setting and marking the directed task (Maggie and Kelly), the lecturers responsible for the open task were not available for an interview. The interviews with Maggie and Kelly covered the following issues: the rationale for and the requirements of the assignment task, the guidelines on assignment writing and advice on citing/source use they provided to students, their own and their department’s expectations of students in terms of citing, and students’ difficulties with citation. Although we do not discuss these data in detail, we report the findings where helpful for a fuller understanding of Sofie’s account.

All interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed.

# 2.4. Data analysis

Data analysis integrated elements of both qualitative and quantitative approaches, and consisted of two stages: (i) qualitative coding of interview transcripts and (ii) quantifying the qualitative codings (see Chi, 1997; Teddlie & Tashakkori, 2009) to compare the citation functions in the two assignments.

In the first stage of qualitative analysis we coded the interview transcripts independently. The unit of analysis was an interview segment about a single citation in Sofie’s writing. Unit boundaries were easily identifiable as they were clearly marked by either the interviewer’s question about the next citation in the assignment, or Sofie’s signalling of her shift to the next citation (‘and the next one.’). Interview segments varied in length from a single turn to several exchanges between the interviewer and Sofie. Based on Sofie’s account, we assigned each citation one or more codes reflecting the functions she described (e.g., to support an idea). After comparing and discussing our initial independent codings, we developed a start list of codes (Miles & Huberman, 1994). We then re-coded the transcripts independently using the same list of codes. Finally, we compared our codings, resolving any disagreements by discussion.

This iterative process yielded eight citation functions, as outlined in Table 1. In most cases the terms we use reflect Sofie’s own words (e.g., ‘disagree’), while in others we use terms that summarise as closely as possible Sofie’s explanation of what a particular citation is intended to do (see interview excerpts in Table 1). At this point we wish to clarify the difference between topic relevance and supporting citations. Although at first sight it could be argued that topic relevance citations can be regarded as a type of supporting citation, since both are used to support/justify the writer’s choices, the examples in Table 1 show that the function of supporting citations is to support/justify a specific claim or idea, whereas topic relevance citations, as will be shown later, are used to support, more broadly, the writer’s choice of a particular topic. Since this difference is directly related to task requirements, we found it important to treat these functions as separate categories.

Two issues need to be explained at this point: the scope and transparency of citation functions. As can be seen from the examples in Table 1, the scope of citation functions, i.e., the amount of text covered by a citation function, varies: while in some cases Sofie referred to the citing clause to explain the function of the citation (e.g., the defining citation in Table 1), in other cases (e.g., supporting citations) the scope of the citation function, as described by Sofie, extended over several sentences in her text.

Transparency refers to the extent to which the citation function Sofie reported is visible in the text, i.e., whether there are linguistic cues surrounding the citation that straightforwardly convey the intended purpose of the citation. In some examples in the table, Sofie’s text clearly signals the reported citation function (e.g., the ‘as’ phrase signalling agreement in the agreement citation), while in others (e.g., the topic relevance citation), the text does not make the function explicit. In such cases, we relied on Sofie’s account unless the link between her self-reported citation function and the text surrounding the citation was ambiguous. There were five instances of ambiguous citations, which we discuss in some detail to illustrate our approach.

The five ambiguous citations referenced the same study, and were located in the same paragraph of Sofie’s paper written in response to the open task, for which she chose the topic of bullying. The paragraph with ambiguous citations was part of a section entitled ‘Consequences of bullying’, which started by topic announcement (‘After explaining the importance of work circumstances on an individual’s life, it is important to reflect the consequences that bullying can have.’), and was followed by a series of seven citations to various studies on the topic (e.g., ‘De Langue (2006) suggests that bullying has several consequences for the individual and the organization.’). In the interview Sofie explained that these seven citations were simultaneously presenting the views of other authors (position citations) and showing the importance of her topic (topic relevance citations). The five ambiguous citations that followed seemed to have the same function, judging by textual evidence (e.g., ‘These researchers state that when victims are being bullied, this will have a major influence on their mental health and can lead to diagnoses as ‘depression and anxiety’’) and by how Sofie described the functions of the citations immediately preceding them.

However, Sophie commented that ‘these researchers back up my argument that [bullying] causes a lot of arguments when people are being bullied’. According to her account, then, these were supporting citations (‘back up my argument’); however, what she referred to as her ‘argument’ was not explicitly stated in the paper. In this light, Sofie’s comment on the five citations as supporting her argument can be interpreted as a slip of the tongue or as a belief that these citations were supporting an argument that she expressed implicitly by citing other authors. Following Chi’s (1997, p. 397) recommendation that unlike discrepancies in coding, which should be resolved, ambiguities in the data should only be reported, we decided to exclude these instances from analysis. We also excluded nine instances where Sofie either failed to assign a specific function or her account was not clear enough to enable straightforward coding.8 With only $1 0 \%$ of citations excluded from analysis, the interviews yielded substantial data on Sofie’s citation behaviour.

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Table 1 Citation functions in Sofie&#x27;s assignments.</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4"></td></tr><tr><td>Citation function Position</td><td>Definition To present an author&#x27;s viewpoints and/or</td><td>Example from Sofie&#x27;s assignments De Lange suggests that bullying has several consequences for the individual and the organization.</td><td>Interview excerpt I&#x27;m just trying to show, like, what can the consequences be. And she helps me to do that. To show it.</td></tr><tr><td>Defining</td><td>findings To help define or explain a concept or approach</td><td>According to Jackson and Carter (2007: 94), emphasis in original) power is to describe as follows: &quot;In an organisation context power is the ability to get someone to do something that they do not particularly want to.&quot;</td><td>And then the Jackson and Carter is to describe power, to describe &#x27;ok, there are views of power, but what is power, what do Jackson and Carter view that power is?&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td>Supporting</td><td>To help justify the writer&#x27;s claim or idea</td><td>The literature does not make a distinction concerning the managers that are responsible for solving the problem. I feel there is a major difference in for example the sex of a manager. A female manager will respond differently to complaints concerning bullying than a male manager, just because of their own background. Male managers are said to be &quot;rational, objective, Linstead et al. is doing, backing up my tough and unemotional&quot; and female managers focus more on &quot;dialogue, reflection and the</td><td>They don&#x27;t look at [gender], the mainstream literature. And I just say Linstead et al., they explain that male managers are often very different to female managers so how can you not distinguish between them, because they will both deal with the problem very differently. So basically that&#x27;s what the argument that the literature should make a distinction.</td></tr><tr><td>Application</td><td>To apply a concept, approach or theory to the writer&#x27;s own analysis</td><td>development of community&quot; (Linstead et al., 2004). Of course, this is a generalisation, but there may be no doubt that male and female managers will react differently on this situation. Gene Kranz [the protagonist in Apollo 13, the film Sofie chose for her assignment] is a transformational leader (Knights and Willmott, 2007: 281), because he is able to inspire and motivate his staff to solve problems and improvise on problems that never occurred before. In this example, Sofie erroneously cites the European Commission as the author instead of the two co-authors whose paper she is</td><td>I point out the leadership style and I do this by using Knights and Willmott to describe the leader here in the movie, his name is Gene Kranz, so I just say &#x27;ok, he&#x27;s a transformational leader, which can be found in Knights and Willmott&#x27;.</td></tr><tr><td>Topic relevance</td><td>To help justify the writer&#x27;s choice of topic</td><td>the authors in the reference list in the same entry (&quot;European Commission (Latour, A. and Steegmans, N.), and cites both in her assignment. When asked about this in the interview, she responded: &quot;I don&#x27;t know if that is the official way to do it&quot;, which shows her uncertainty about referencing this type of source. The European Commission is worried about the consequences of bullying as well.</td><td>Yeah the European Commission, so, I&#x27;m not the only one that&#x27;s worried about [bullying]. So that&#x27;s why I&#x27;m writing the paper but all</td></tr><tr><td>Disagreement idea</td><td>To express the writer&#x27;s disagreement with an</td><td>Not only is there a gap in the literature, there are Yeah Salin, Zapf and Gross, Hubert and also assumptions being made that I don&#x27;t agree with. Several studies (Salin, 2001; Zapf and Gross, in the same book. But they say that bullying</td><td>these authors that I&#x27;ve already referenced to, and even the European Commission, they are also worried about the consequence of bullying. So that&#x27;s basically yeah, back up my reason to write this paper. van Veldhoven, this was all in the same, 2001; Huber and van Veldhoven, 2001; Liefooghe can be measured, because the book was about like &#x27;how can we measure bullying&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">method is the use of questionnaires. I wonder how one can measure bullying when reading (short and closed) answers from a piece of paper. bullying by using questionnaires, so it&#x27;s Acknowledgement To acknowledge the author When we look at the classical approach, of an idea or term we can see that the symptomatic meaning (Bell, 2008: 14) can be applied here. (...) Here, we can recognise the explicit and the implicit meaning of the film (Bell, 2008: 14).</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 1 (continued )   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Citation function</td><td>Definition</td><td>Example from Sofie&#x27;s assignments</td><td>Interview excerpt</td></tr><tr><td>Agreement</td><td>To express the writer&#x27;s agreement with an idea.</td><td>And, as Bell (2008: 169) states: &quot;What is more, work is accorded a central importance... because. it is suggested to provide a route to individual self-fulfilment and a means of producing, discovering and experiencing ourselves.&quot;.</td><td>Bell, the next one It&#x27;s also like that work provides you a route to individual self-fulfilment so it&#x27;s not only salary but also growing, personal development. So yeah, that&#x27;s- I show, I show that I read and that I agree with that and that yeah. So that it is important for people to work, but also to be happy at their work,.</td></tr></table></body></html>

In 31 cases altogether, Sofie identified more than one function for a single citation. Following previous research (Harwood, 2009; Petric, 2007; Wang & White, 1999), we decided to take into account all reported functions; therefore, the number of citations in Sofie’s assignments does not match the number of reported citation functions.

In addition to describing what purposes she intended her citations to fulfil in her text, which we refer to as citation functions, Sofie also reported specific motivations to cite (see Appendix B). The difference between citation functions and motivations to cite is subtle yet important. While citation functions refer to the rhetorical roles citations perform in the text in which they are located, (e.g., to define a term used in the text or to support an idea expressed in the text), motivations tend to have a wider scope and refer to reasons for including a particular source in general (e.g., to show the student has read a particular source). These reasons may be related to the writer’s interpersonal goals such as a desire to create a particular impression on the reader (e.g., to show familiarity with a source mentioned in classes). Motivations are therefore more opaque than citation functions since they may refer to factors outside the writer’s text. Although our interest lies primarily in citation functions, we will also report findings about Sofie’s most frequent motivations to cite when discussing how Sofie interpreted the two tasks. This is because understanding Sofie’s motivations to cite may help us understand whether the impression she wanted to create on the reader via citing differed in the two assignments, which, in turn, may provide an insight into her task representation. It needs to be acknowledged, however, that Sofie reported motivations to cite for only about a third $( 3 0 \% )$ of her citations.

Once the stage of qualitative coding was completed, we quantified the interview codings so that we could compare Sofie’s citation behaviour in the two assignments. We counted the frequencies of each citation function code and calculated the proportions of citations performing each of the functions out of the total number of citations in both assignments taken together and in each assignment separately.

We also counted the raw frequencies of citations in Sofie’s assignments and calculated citation and source density per 1000 words.

# 3. Results

# 3.1. Sofie’s representation of the two tasks

Sofie classified the two tasks in the focus of this study as belonging to the same task type, the library research paper. Although she perceived certain similarities between them (e.g., both tasks required her to engage in similar reading and writing processes; both required her to be critical of the mainstream literature), she viewed them as fundamentally different types of library research paper. In this section we highlight those aspects of Sofie’s interpretation of the two tasks that specifically relate to source use and citation.

# 3.1.1. Directed task

Sofie described the directed task as a set of specific instructions consisting of clear and straightforward steps (note the imperative forms she uses when representing the lecturers’ guidelines):

It was really about ‘Ok, you look at this movie and you pick two topics that we have talked about and just discuss the mainstream and the critical literature about it.’ Basically that was it.

Although she affirms that ‘there was not really a lot of flexibility’, she found this task easier to complete ‘because it had more directions’. Following the instructions in the module handbook (see Appendix A), Sofie understood that the sources recommended by the lecturers, particularly those labelled as core sources, needed to feature in her assignment:

draw on those two for sure and then search for yourself for other ones but if they’re not included, those two, then you can never get a good grade, because those are the two main books that we have suggested you read.

Yet Sofie made sure she cited not only the core and advanced sources provided by the lecturers but also sources that she had located herself, in order to secure a high mark. The most frequent motivation behind her citations in this assignment was her desire to show her knowledge of key figures and concepts in the literature on the topic (see Appendix B). For instance, Sofie explained that she cited Knights and Willmot, one of the core sources, in order ‘to show that I know what the key three thinkers were from the classical management approach’. She also cited in order to show the extent of her reading, to demonstrate that she had read the recommended core and advanced readings, to cite sources she believed the lecturers required, to cite ideas covered in class, and because the source she cited was authoritative. Most of these motivations are related to knowledge display, showing that Sofie perceived the task as primarily requiring her to show her knowledge. This is in line with the lecturers’ expectations, which they had made explicit both in the module handbook and in classes. For instance, their description of ‘a good essay’ included features such as ‘is grounded in reading around the topic’ and ‘shows knowledge of the literature’ (see handout in Appendix A). Similarly, our interviews with the lecturers confirmed that they expected students to demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of the literature, and, for a higher mark, show that they read advanced sources and sources ‘beyond the module literature’ (Maggie). There is, clearly, a close match between Sofie’s task representation and the lecturers’ account of their requirements regarding the direct task.

# 3.1.2. Open task

In contrast to the narrowly focussed directed task, Sofie described the open task as consisting of two broad requirements only, i.e. that the topic should be about management and aligned with the critical perspective:

And the second [task] was ‘Ok you have to write a coursework, it has to be critical. It has to be about management. And then go.’ $( \ldots ) ^ { 9 }$ You could choose whatever you wanted.

Sofie reported that she initially found the freedom to choose any management topic for the assignment confusing and difficult. In interpreting the task, she translated the minimal requirements into a set of conditions to be satisfied, a process quite different from following a set of instructions in the directed task: ‘I have to pick a topic, it has to do with management, it has to be critical, it has to be relevant, I have to be interested in it’. She also felt she had to choose a topic not covered in the module in order to show her ability to make a creative topic choice, and thus to receive a high mark.

Sofie’s definition of the task as requiring a thorough overview of a novel topic led her to invest a great amount of effort in extensive reading beyond the recommended literature. It is not surprising, then, that her most frequent motivation to cite in this assignment was her desire to show the extent of her reading (‘I just want to show that I read a lot’). She also cited to show that she was critical of the mainstream literature, both in order to conform to what she perceived as her lecturers’ expectations10 and out of genuine conviction (‘that’s partly because I know I have to be critical, and partly because I really disagree with some things’). These motivations show that Sofie understood the task as requiring extensive reading, as in the directed task, but also requiring a critical perspective, which did not feature among her motivations to cite in the directed task. This is surprising, given her earlier statement that both tasks required her to be critical. A possible explanation why this citing motivation occurred frequently in the open task only may be that being critical was the only specific requirement of this task (other than the more general requirement that the chosen topic needed to be related to management), in contrast to the large number of specific requirements she needed to satisfy in the directed task (e.g., choose two topics, show mainstream and critical perspectives on both topics, relate instances from the chosen film to the literature). When asked whether she was less critical in the directed task, Sofie explains:

That could be because [the directed task] was also a shorter coursework, only three thousand words. We had to discuss a lot of topics. Like a lot of mainstream literature and then also critical but didn’t have enough, a lot of space to be as critical as I could be in [the open] one.

Thus we see a mixture of motivations to cite reflecting Sofie’s understanding of the task, her concerns to show the amount of work she invested, and her desire to fulfil what she believed the lecturers expected in order to obtain a high mark.

3.2. Sofie’s citing behaviour in the two assignments: an overview

We identified a total of 136 citations in Sofie’s two assignments, 47 of which were found in the assignment written in response to the directed task (A1) and 89 in the assignment written in response to the open task (A2). As can be seen in

Table 2 Citation density and numbers of sources in Sofie’s two assignments.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Assignment</td><td>Length</td><td>Number of citations</td><td>Number of citations per 1000 words</td><td>Number of sources used</td><td>Number of sources used per 1000 words</td></tr><tr><td>Directed</td><td>3221</td><td>47</td><td>14.6</td><td>33</td><td>10.2</td></tr><tr><td>Open</td><td>5777</td><td>89</td><td>15.4</td><td>58</td><td>10.0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>8998</td><td>136</td><td>15.1</td><td>91</td><td>10.1</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2, citation density in the two assignments is quite similar, at 14.6 and 15.4 citations per 1000 words in the directed and open assignment, respectively. Similarly, the number of sources Sofie used to write each assignment is almost identical when normalised per 1000 words (10.2 and 10 respectively). This high degree of consistency is in line with her understanding of both tasks as library research papers, requiring extensive reading and referencing.

However, there are noticeable differences in the distribution of citation functions in the two assignments. As shown in Table 3, although both assignments feature some of the same citation functions, three out of the total of eight functions Sofie reported occur in one of the two assignments only. Further, these task-specific functions of citations represent some of the dominant rhetorical functions of citations in the assignment where they occur. For instance, the topic relevance function, which only occurs in the open task, is the second most frequent function of all citations in that assignment, while acknowledgement, a citation function specific to the directed task, is the third most common reported function of citations in that assignment.

Differences are also evident in the proportions of citation functions. For instance, while $3 6 \%$ of citations in A1 are application citations, this citation function occurs only once in A2. Conversely, position citations, which constitute over $4 0 \%$ of all citation functions in A2, constitute less than $1 0 \%$ of citations in A1.

In what follows we illustrate each of these functions by way of Sofie’s writing and extracts from the interview data. We first discuss the most frequent citation functions occurring in both assignments, followed by a discussion of task-specific citation functions.

# 3.3. Frequent citation functions in both assignments

As shown in Table 3, two citation functions, defining and supporting citations, were used with more than $1 0 \%$ of citations in both assignments.

# 3.3.1. Defining citations

In both assignments Sofie used citations to define a term or explain a concept from the literature, as in the following example from her assignment on bullying:

‘Bullying may be characterised as offensive, intimidating, malicious or insulting behaviour, an abuse or misuse of power through means intended to undermine, humiliate, denigrate or injure the recipient.’ (Labour Research Department, 2005:29, emphasis in original)

She comments on this citation:

The next one is just to give a definition of bullying, that the reader really understands ‘ok this is bullying’ so to make it clear to somebody who may not know what bullying is.

This citation function is crucial for knowledge display, allowing students to demonstrate their familiarity with major concepts in their fields of study. Hence it is not surprising that the frequency of this citation function is not affected by task requirements, and that Sofie’s motivation to cite in order ‘to show that I know what it means’ occurs in her accounts of defining citations in both assignments.

Table 3 The functions of citations in Sofie’s two assignments.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Citation function</td><td>Total</td><td>% of All citation functions in A1 and A2</td><td>A1</td><td>% of All citation functions in A1</td><td>A2</td><td>% of All citation functions in A2</td></tr><tr><td> Position</td><td>45</td><td>30%</td><td>4</td><td>8%</td><td>41</td><td>41%</td></tr><tr><td>Defining</td><td>28</td><td>18%</td><td>13</td><td>25%</td><td>15</td><td>15%</td></tr><tr><td>Supporting</td><td>25</td><td>16%</td><td>9</td><td>17%</td><td>16</td><td>16%</td></tr><tr><td>Application</td><td>20</td><td>13%</td><td>19</td><td>36%</td><td>1</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Topic relevance</td><td>19</td><td>13%</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>19</td><td>19%</td></tr><tr><td>Disagreement</td><td>7</td><td>5%</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>7</td><td>7%</td></tr><tr><td>Acknowledgement</td><td>6</td><td>4%</td><td>6</td><td>11%</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Agreement</td><td>2</td><td>1%</td><td>1</td><td>2%</td><td>1</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>152</td><td>100%</td><td>52</td><td>100%</td><td>100</td><td>100%</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.3.2. Supporting citations

Another common function of citations in Sofie’s assignments is to support her claims, which is one of the most widely reported functions of citations in previous research on the writing of experts (e.g., Harwood, 2009; Shadish, Tolliver, Gray, & Sen Gupta, 1995).

In the following example from A1, Sofie critiques approaches to management she described in the previous section of her assignment. To support her criticism, she cites two authors:

However, as we will see later in this paper, these approaches are not always the best to use in organizations. I will demonstrate this with examples of the film and by quoting some writers next. Braverman (cited in Bell, 2008: 164) for example, argues that ‘scientific management will result in deskilling of all jobs, not just manual ones, predicting that white-collar work as well as industrial labour will eventually become proletarianized, made repetitive, monotonous, and increasingly devoid of mental effort.’ Another critique can be found in the words of Grint (cited in Bell, 2008: 173), who ‘blames the scientific management principle of breaking a task into its component parts for leading to excessive fragmentation and a blurring of accountability, where no one individual was able to see the whole of a task in its entity’. These critiques show us that this type of management is not beneficial to the knowledge, motivation and commitment of the employees.

As we can see, Sofie cites two authors (Braverman and Grint, both cited in Bell, a core source) to support her initial, rather general critique. After citing two critical sources, she closes with a more specific critical evaluation of the approaches to management she had discussed earlier. She explains her use of citation as follows:

Here I start by saying However, these approaches are not always the best to use in organisations (.). And then I use this Braverman as he supports this argument by saying blah blah blah, and then the same with Grint. She blames the scientific management so I use those to show that this scientific management is not always the best.

# 3.4. Functions of citations specific to the directed task

Sofie reported a total of six different functions of the citations in A1 (see Table 4), of which two task-specific functions occur with more than $1 0 \%$ of citations: application and acknowledgement of the originator citations.

# 3.4.1. Application citations

Application citations are those that use a citee’s concept, term, approach or theory and apply it to the writer’s analysis of a specific case. In the context of Sofie’s film analysis task, application citations are used to explain an event, character or situation in a film by reference to the literature. Citing for this purpose enables Sofie to demonstrate her understanding of the literature and her ability to use conceptual tools in interpreting real-life situations, skills shown to be highly valued by lecturers in management studies (Zhu, 2004). Indeed, one of the markers of Sofie’s assignment wrote ‘great link’ next to the following application citation in A1:

Jackson and Carter (2007: 44) discuss the influence of job enrichment strategies in job satisfaction. In the film, the employees are given more responsibility than they normally have because the problems that occur ask for improvisation. It clearly shows that they are more motivated, come up with creative solutions, are more satisfied with their job and more committed to the organization.

Sofie explains:

So this goes more and more to the critical approaches and that management is not the only one who know something, but also employees are also quite smart. So I give here an example that the employees are given more responsibility and this has something to do with job enrichment strategies and job satisfaction, and Jackson and Carter mention that. They talk about these strategies, so I talk about it and then I give an example of the movie, where I can see this job enrichment strategy. (.) They are using a word and I think ‘yeah, I would recognise that in the movie’, and I give an example.

Table 4 Functions of citations in the assignment written in response to the directed task (A1).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Citation function</td><td>Frequency of citations</td><td>% of All citation functions in A1</td></tr><tr><td>Application</td><td>19</td><td>36%</td></tr><tr><td>Defining</td><td>13</td><td>25%</td></tr><tr><td>Supporting</td><td>9</td><td>17%</td></tr><tr><td>Acknowledgement</td><td>6</td><td>11%</td></tr><tr><td>Position</td><td>4</td><td>8%</td></tr><tr><td>Agreement</td><td>1</td><td>2%</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>52</td><td>100%</td></tr></table></body></html>

While in this example Sofie applies a concept (‘job enrichment strategies’) to her analysis of the film, in the following example she relates an argument from the literature to a situation in the film:

Trust is very important while creating a high-commitment environment which is important in knowledge-worker organizations and where employees have to cooperate frequently. This is exactly what Kranz [the protagonist in Apollo 13, the film Sofie chose for her assignment] creates (Linstead et al., 2004: 311).

Although in this example the citation erroneously indicates that Linstead et al. made a statement about Kranz, the leader in he film, rather than Sofie, it is clear from the following account that this is another instance of the application citation, used to elate an argument from the literature (i.e., about the importance of trust in organisations) to a situation in the film:

So here I show that Linstead, on page 311, he talks about Trust is also very important and I mention this because Kranz creates it so I recognise that in the movie. So I just relate that to the movie.

The application citation function is central to task achievement in this assignment since the task explicitly requires students to identify and discuss elements in the film that relate to the theoretical concepts from the literature. This, then, explains why application citations are by far the most common in this assignment, accounting for more than a third of all citation functions Sofie reported (see Table 4).

# 3.4.2. Acknowledgement of the originator

Sofie used more than $1 0 \%$ of the citations in A1 to acknowledge the originator of an idea or a term, as in the following example:

When we look at the classical approach, we can see that the symptomatic meaning (Bell, 2008: 14) can be applied her

In the following excerpt the interviewer asks Sofie about the term ‘symptomatic meaning’, attributed to Bell:

I: So this is her jargon? S: Yeah. She came up with those four meanings.

This citation function is often combined with another function, as in the following example, where Sofie both acknowledges the originators of the term ‘organic type of organisation’ and relates the term to the film:

If we turn to the contingency approach, the film shows aspects of the organic type of an organization, formulated by Burns and Stalker (cited in Linstead et al., 2004: 141).

Sofie comments:

S: I now turn to the contingency approach and I’m just showing that there’s also aspects of this approach in the movie with an example of Burns and Stalker (.) [application function]   
I: So this Burns and Stalker, is that, again, is that their term, this ‘organic type’?   
S: Yes, Yes.   
I: And so presumably you’ve got to say who invented the term.   
S: Yes. Because I say formulated by Burns and Stalker. [acknowledgement of the originator function]

This example also illustrates the fact that this function frequently occurs with secondary citations. Since Sofie’s main sources were textbooks, she often learnt about the originators of concepts and terms from secondary rather than original works. In the example above Sofie clearly distinguishes the originators of the term (Burns and Stalker) from the source where she learnt about it (Linstead et al.), a citation practice that tends to be associated with more successful student writing (see Petric, 2012). This citation practice is also appreciated by Sofie’s lecturers: ‘that points out good scholarship, you know, in terms of acknowledging where your work starts and where it finishes’ (Kelly). At master’s level, as Kelly explains, ‘[lecturers] are not expecting [students] to read the original but are expecting them to know that they’re key works’. Effective use of this citation function, then, helps Sofie display her knowledge of the originators of important terms and concepts in the field, and demonstrate her awareness of the need to clearly distinguish between the sources she had read and those she had read about, which signals careful citing practices.

# 3.5. Functions of citations specific to the open task

As shown in Table 5, Sofie reported a total of seven citation functions in her assignment written in response to the open task, of which position and topic relevance citations are the most frequent.

# 3.5.1. Position citations

osition citations present viewpoints and/or report findings of other authors, as in the following example from A2:

De Lange suggests that bullying has several consequences for the individual and the organization.

Table 5 Functions of citations in the assignment written in response to the open task (A2).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Citation functione</td><td>A2</td><td>% of All citation functions in A2</td></tr><tr><td> Position</td><td>41</td><td>41%</td></tr><tr><td>Topic relevancee</td><td>19</td><td>19%</td></tr><tr><td>Defining</td><td>15</td><td>15%</td></tr><tr><td>Supporting</td><td>16</td><td>16%</td></tr><tr><td>Disagreement</td><td>7</td><td>7%</td></tr><tr><td>Agreement</td><td>1</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Application</td><td>1</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>100</td><td>100%</td></tr></table></body></html>

As Sofie explains:

I just want to put it forward, I don’t want to say that I agree because I don’t know anything about it, so I don’t have any experience with it. I’m just trying to show, like, what can the consequences be. And she helps me to do that. To show it

Her assignment abounds in similar statements, where integral citations are used with non-factive reporting verbs (Hyland, 2000, p. 28), i.e., verbs that do not signal the writer’s stance towards the reported statement. The interviews reveal that in some instances Sofie shares the cited views while in others she disagrees with them. More importantly, using position citations enables Sofie to show her ability to select authors and positions relevant to the topic. Selecting relevant positions from the literature, in turn, helps her show both her knowledge of the topic and her ability to construct a coherent argument.

# 3.5.2. Topic relevance citations

Although students had almost complete freedom when choosing a topic for the open task, they had to demonstrate that their chosen topic was related to the theme of the module and relevant to management studies. Hence many of Sofie’s citations in this assignment perform the function of justifying the relevance of her chosen topic, bullying, to management studies. Throughout her assignment, she shows the relevance of bullying in various ways, such as by discussing how much attention bullying has received in the literature, by citing work that shows how widespread it is, and how serious the consequences can be for individuals and organisations. Here is an example from the introduction to her assignment:

This problem [bullying] occurs very often, according to McAvoy and Murtagh (2003): [followed by a direct quotation].

Sofie explains:

Well the first quotation is just showing that it’s a problem that happens a lot. So it’s just to introduce my topic and to say that, ok, I’m going to write about something that is relevant because it happens. That’s what it does.

At a later point in the assignment, Sofie writes: ‘The European Commission is worried about the consequences of bullying as well’. Commenting on this example, Sofie explicitly identifies ‘backing up [her] reason to write this paper’ as the purpose of the citation:

Yeah the European Commission, so, I’m not the only one that’s worried about [bullying]. So that’s why I’m writing the paper but all these authors that I’ve already referenced to, and even the European Commission, they are also worried about the consequence of bullying. So that’s basically yeah, back up my reason to write this paper.

The high frequency of this citation function is thus not only related to the task requirement to develop a relevant topic, but also to Sofie’s representation of the task. As noted earlier, Sofie was aware that identifying a good topic was in itself a feature of the task that would be evaluated; therefore, she used citations to show that the topic she had chosen was indeed of central importance to her field.

# 4. Discussion and conclusions

# 4.1. Task effects on source use and citation functions

The study has revealed several interesting findings about the relationship between task requirements and task representation on the one hand and source use and citation functions in Sofie’s writing on the other. As shown, certain aspects of Sofie’s citation behaviour were not affected by the difference in task requirements. She used roughly the same numbers of sources and citations in both assignments. She also often cited for the same purposes, most notably to define terms and concepts and to support her ideas. The fact that defining and supporting citations were not affected by task requirements leads to an interesting question about whether these citation functions reflect essential requirements of the library research paper task, regardless of the variation within this task type. To answer this question, further research, involving large numbers of students, is needed.

Our findings also show that differences in task requirements within the same task type encouraged Sofie to cite for different purposes. The directed film analysis task led Sofie to relate concepts and approaches to her analysis via application citations, and to acknowledge the originators of the terms and concepts she used, while the open task encouraged citing in order to justify the choice of the topic, and to present authors’ views on its different aspects. Task requirements also restricted Sofie’s use of certain citation functions, as in the case of topic relevance citations, which do not occur in the directed task, or application citations, which occur only once in the open task. Their absence is not due to any lack of ability on Sofie’s part to use them; their frequent occurrence in the directed task indicates that this is clearly not the case. Rather, their absence is more likely to be attributable to Sofie’s perceptions of which citation functions are relevant to task requirements as she understood them. In other words, task requirements and task representation encouraged Sofie to cite for the purposes she believed were useful for task achievement, and, conversely, discouraged the use of citation functions she did not feel matched task requirements.

# 4.2. Citation functions in student writing

Sofie’s citation practices are both similar to and different from those of other master’s students reported in previous research. The already mentioned tendency in student writing to cite in order to display knowledge was also evident in Sofie’s account of her citation practices. Her use of defining, position and acknowledgement citations, in particular, helped her show her knowledge and understanding of major concepts, key authors’ viewpoints, and originators of major terms in the field, respectively. Our findings showed that demonstrating knowledge was indeed an important requirement of the two tasks, suggesting that Sofie’s high marks were partly due to her effective knowledge display via citing.

Sofie used some of the functions identified in previous research on students’ citing patterns, such as supporting and application citations. However, she did not employ citations for further reference, possibly because this citation function is more appropriate in publishable research papers (Mansourizadeh & Ahmad, 2011) and dissertations (Petric, 2007) than in short assignments.

Sofie also shared some citation functions with expert writers in Harwood (2009), specifically position and supporting citations. However, her range of citation functions was narrower than that of experts, with some functions, such as disagreement or acknowledgement, occurring less commonly, and others, such as signposting (further reference), completely absent from Sofie’s writing. This is in line with Mansourizadeh and Ahmad’s (2011) comparison of master’s students’ and experts’ citation use, showing that the citing behaviour of students, even successful ones, is less complex and less sophisticated. While such differences between student and expert writing are understandable and expected, identifying them contributes to creating a realistic picture of students’ citing practices.

# 4.3. Pedagogical implications and further research

Sofie was an exceptional student; therefore, her awareness of her citing and her ability to vary her citation behaviour in response to task requirements should not be considered common knowledge among master’s students. Her case suggests that students need to learn to cite for a range of purposes in order to successfully respond to different types of assignment tasks and to different requirements within the same task type. This, as we have argued elsewhere (see Harwood, 2010; Petric, 2007), can be achieved by explicit teaching of citation functions in EAP courses. One of the ways to raise students’ awareness about the purposes of citations is to involve them in investigating the intentions that lie behind citation practices in writing. Excerpts from interviews with Sofie, together with examples from her assignments, can be used in classroom discussions about whether and to what extent Sofie’s intentions, expressed in her interview account, are appropriate and effective in her assignments. For instance, the examples we provide for application citations include an excerpt where Sofie effectively provided a link between the film and the literature via citing, but the placement of the citation was not appropriate. EAP teachers can also engage students in similar ‘interviews’ about citation functions in students’ own writing, which should help them reflect on their own and their peers’ citing behaviour and thus raise their metacognitive awareness of citing.

One of the directions for further research with potential pedagogical benefits concerns the possibility of core citation functions in assignment task types, as was the case with defining and supporting citations in Sofie’s library research papers. Identifying core citations in different task types would allow for the teaching of citation functions to be sequenced in line with the students’ writing needs in content courses. It is, however, possible that even the same task types may feature different core citation functions in different disciplines. For instance, it may be the case that defining citations are more important in disciplines characterised by contrasting paradigms, where basic terms can be contested, as seems to be the case in management studies (e.g., the mainstream and critical perspectives), while in some other disciplines there may be more agreement on definitions of the main terms, which are thus more likely to be part of the common knowledge domain.11 Clearly, more research on this issue is needed to inform effective teaching.

The fact that we explored the citation behaviour of a single student is an obvious limitation of our research. Nevertheless, we believe our initial findings about the impact of task requirements and task representation on students’ citing behaviour are worth exploring further, with student writers from different disciplinary backgrounds, writing in response to different types of assignment tasks, and achieving different levels of academic success. Longitudinal studies following students’ citing development in relation to the new task types they encounter as they move through the university system are needed to extend our knowledge about how students’ citing behaviour and their awareness of it changes over time.

# Appendix A. Directed task: extracts from the module handbook and lecture slides

Module texts (module handbook, pp. 4–5) Knights, D. and H. Willmott (eds.) (2007) Introducing Organizational Behaviour & Management. London: Thomson. \*Key text\* Linstead, S., L. Fulop and S. Lilley (eds.) (2004) Management and Organization: A Critical Text. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. - Jackson, N. and P. Carter (2007) Rethinking Organisational Behaviour: a Poststructuralist Framework. London: Prentice Hall. \*Advanced Text\* Bell, E. (2008) Reading Management and Organisation in Film. Basingstoke: Palgrave.

We have also tried to ensure that you are getting access to some of the cutting-edge research that is emerging within Management Studies, some of which has yet to be published in books. Therefore, for some lectures, you may also be required to read either a journal article or a conference paper. [Details about availability omitted.] For your assessment, you may also be expected to look beyond the basic readings that are recommended. In order to do this, we recommend you become familiar with academic periodicals and e-journals (.) at the earliest possible stage of your degree (.). Some of the journals that may be relevant for this module are: (six journal titles are provided).

Module Assignment (module handbook p. 6).

The assignment for the module consists of an essay of 3000 words. You are expected to critically explore and synthesise several of the topics on management and organisation that we cover during the module. The assignment will give you the opportunity to apply an alternative approach to analysing organisational life in that it will involve watching a film onwhich to base your essay on.

At the start of the module you will be provided with a list of films, the plots of which deal with some aspect/s of management and organisations. You are expected to pick one film from the list to watch, and to use as a resource to analyse the management topics you find that the film portrays. The films will be available to borrow from the library. Make sure you do not leave it to the last minute to try to get hold of your chosen film.

It is not sufficient to merely describe the plot of the film. Instead, you are expected to draw upon relevant academic texts and the theories discussed throughout the module, or any relevant supplementary texts you wish to include, to identify and critically discuss the organisational aspects that the film deals with. Please remember that whilst we encourage you to be creative and thoughtprovoking within your assignment, your essay would be grounded in a sound knowledge of academic debate and critique.

Week 3: Organisational structure (module handbook pp. 6–7)

This week, we will look at the formalised ways people are organised at work. After critiquing the Weberian logic of bureaucratic structures, and the broader assumptions made about responsibility and accountability, we will look at alternative models of organisations within the panacea of ‘new forms of work’.

Basic reading

Linstead et al. Chapter 4.   
Knights & Willmot. Chapter 13 (you may also find Chapter 6 in this book useful). Advanced reading   
Jackson & Carter. Chapter 3.

Coursework (lecture slide)

‘In every management phenomena we encounter, we often find that behind the rhetoric espoused by managers or organizational bodies is a complex web of assumption, ideologies and values about how organizations should operate.’

Drawing on examples from a film of your choice (from the list below), critically evaluate the above statement. Your essay should draw extensively on the academic and theoretical arguments presented throughout the course and you should discuss at least two of the themes introduced during the module.

Management and organisation in film (1) (lecture slide) We will be using films as a way of analysing organisational life - The film is seen as a text, which tells us something about management and organisations Films are made in a social and historical context Management and organisation in film (2) (lecture slide) There are several levels of meaning to explore (Bell, 2008: 14): referential meaning, explicit meaning, implicit meaning, symptomatic meaning Every film also has a plot/storyline (but merely describing it is not an analysis!) Instead, you need to show understanding of the organisational concepts which we discuss int eh module, as they are portrayed in the film you choose Management and organisation in film (3) (lecture slide) The main point is not to assess whether the film can be said to ‘accurately portray reality’ - There is no single ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ analysis – but there are degrees of sophistication

For example, which actions and what type of characters appear in the film? How are they presented? Are people and actions clear-cut or ambiguous?

A good essay (lecture slide)   
Is clearly structured (e.g. an introduction outlining what they intend to do, clear paragraphs etc)   
Addresses the question set   
Provides an analysis of the theoretical arguments   
Is grounded in reading around the topic   
Engages with current academic debates   
Shows knowledge of the literature   
References correctly and includes a list of references at the back

Appendix B. Motivations to cite in Sofie’s two assignments   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Motivation to cite.</td><td>Total (A1 and A2)</td><td>% of All motivations to cite</td><td>A1</td><td>% of All motivations to cite in A1</td><td>A2</td><td>% of All motivationse to cite in A2</td></tr><tr><td>To show the extent of one&#x27;s reading</td><td>10</td><td>18.9%</td><td>2</td><td>9.5%</td><td>8</td><td>25%</td></tr><tr><td>To show the knowledge of key figures/concepts.</td><td>:</td><td>15%</td><td>7</td><td>33.3%</td><td>1</td><td>3.1%</td></tr><tr><td>Being critical to conform to lecturer&#x27;s expectations</td><td>7</td><td>13.2%</td><td>1</td><td>4.8%</td><td>6</td><td>18.8%</td></tr><tr><td>To cite a source student believes lecturer requires, considers important or likes</td><td>6</td><td>11.3%</td><td>2</td><td>9.5%</td><td>4</td><td>12.5%</td></tr><tr><td>Being critical out of conviction</td><td>4</td><td>7.5%</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>4</td><td>12.5%</td></tr><tr><td>To include core/advanced reading</td><td>4</td><td>7.5%</td><td>2</td><td>9.5%</td><td>2</td><td>6.3%</td></tr><tr><td>To show learning from another module</td><td>3</td><td>5.7%</td><td></td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>9.8%</td></tr><tr><td>Citee is famous/authoritative</td><td>3</td><td>5.7%</td><td>?</td><td>9.5%</td><td>1</td><td>3.1%</td></tr><tr><td>To cite an idea covered in class</td><td>2</td><td>3.8%</td><td>2</td><td>9.5%</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Citee is the lecturer/a friend of the lecturer</td><td>2</td><td>3.8%</td><td>1</td><td>4.8%</td><td>1</td><td>3.1%</td></tr><tr><td>Source is relevant to module and topic.</td><td>2</td><td>3.8%</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>6.3%</td></tr><tr><td>To mention an interesting point</td><td>1</td><td>1.9%</td><td>1</td><td>4.8%</td><td></td><td>0 </td></tr><tr><td>To prevent accusation of plagiarism</td><td>1</td><td>1.9%</td><td>1</td><td>4.8%</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>53</td><td>100%</td><td>21</td><td>100%</td><td>32</td><td>100.1%a</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Total does not equal $1 0 0 \%$ because of rounding.

# References

Abasi, A. R., Akbari, N., & Graves, B. (2006). Discourse appropriation, construction of identities, and the complex issue of plagiarism: ESL students writing in graduate school. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15, 102–117.   
Ädel, A., & Garretson, G. (2006). Citation practices across the disciplines: the case of proficient student writing. In Proceedings of the 5th international AELFE conference (pp. 271–280). Zaragoza: Prensas Universitarias de Zaragoza. http://www.unizar.es/aelfe2006/ALEFE06/1.discourse/38.pdf Accessed 12.11.11.   
Angélil-Carter, S. (2000). Stolen language? Plagiarism in writing. Harlow: Longman.   
Asención Delaney, Y. (2008). Investigating the reading-to-write construct. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 7, 140–150.   
Beaufort, A. (2004). Developmental gains of a history major: a case for building a theory of disciplinary writing expertise. Research in the Teaching of English, 39, 136–185.   
Borg, E. (2000). Citation practices in academic writing. In P. Thompson (Ed.), Patterns and perspectives: Insights into EAP writing practice (pp. 26–44). Reading: Centre for Applied Language Studies, University of Reading.   
Campbell, C. (1990). Writing with others’ words: using background reading text in academic compositions. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 211–230). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Chi, M. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: a practical guide. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6, 271–315.   
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. R. (2007). Research methods in education (6th ed.). London: Routledge Falmer.   
Cooper, A., & Bikowski, D. (2007). Writing at the graduate level: what tasks do professors actually require? Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6, 206–221.   
Cronin, B. (1984). The citation process: The role and significance of citations in scientific communication. London: Taylor Graham.   
Cronin, B. (2005). The hand of science: Academic writing and its rewards. Lanham, MA: Scarecrow Press.   
Flower, L., Stein, V., Ackerman, J., Kantz, M. J., McCormick, K., & Peck, W. C. (Eds.), (1990). Reading-to-write: Exploring a cognitive and social process. New York: Oxford University Press.   
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York: Anchor Books.   
Greene, S. (1993). The role of task in the development of academic thinking through reading and writing in a college history course. Research in the Teaching of English, 27, 46–75.   
Harwood, N. (2009). An interview-based study of the functions of citations in academic writing across two disciplines. Journal of Pragmatics, 41, 497–518.   
Harwood, N. (2010). Research-based materials to demystify academic citation for postgraduates. In N. Harwood (Ed.), English language teaching materials: Theory and practice (pp. 301–321). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Harwood, N., & Petric, B. (2012). Performance in the citing behaviour of two student writers. Written Communication, 29, 55–103.   
Horowitz, D. M. (1986). What professors actually require: academic tasks for the ESL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 20, 445–462.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. Harlow: Longman.   
Lee, S. H. (2010). Attribution in high- and low-graded persuasive essays. Functions of Language, 17, 181–206.   
Mansourizadeh, K., & Ahmad, U. K. (2011). Citation practices among non-native expert and novice scientific writers. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 10, 152–161.   
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage.   
Nelson, J. (1990). This was an easy assignment: examining how students interpret academic writing tasks. Research in the Teaching of English, 24, 362–396.   
Odell, L., Goswami, D., & Harrington, A. (1983). The discourse-based interview: a procedure for exploring the tacit knowledge of writers in nonacademic settings. In P. Mosenthal, L. Tamor, & S. A. Walmsley (Eds.), Research on writing: Principles and methods (pp. 221–236). New York: Longman.   
Oppenheim, C., & Smith, R. (2001). Student citation practices in an Information Science Department. Education for Information, 19, 299–323.   
Pecorari, D. (2003). Good and original: plagiarism and patchwriting in academic second- language writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 317–345.   
Pecorari, D. (2006). Visible and occluded citation features in postgraduate second-language writing. English for Specific Purposes, 25, 4–29.   
Petric, B. (2007). Rhetorical functions of citations in high- and low-rated master’s theses. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6, 238–253.   
Petric, B. (2012). Legitimate textual borrowing: direct quotation in L2 students’ writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 21, 102–117.   
Plakans, L. (2010). Independent vs. integrated writing tasks: a comparison of task representation. TESOL Quarterly, 44, 185–194.   
Ruiz-Funes, M. (2001). Task representation in foreign language reading-to-write. Foreign Language Annals, 34, 226–234.   
Shadish, W. R., Tolliver, D., Gray, M., & Sen Gupta, S. K. (1995). Author judgements about works they cite: three studies from psychology journals. Social Studies of Science, 25, 477–498.   
Shaver, L. (2007). Eliminating the shell game: using writing-assignment names to integrate disciplinary learning. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 21, 74–90.   
Shi, L. (2004). Textual borrowing in second-language writing. Written Communication, 21, 171–200.   
Shi, L. (2010). Textual appropriation and citing behaviors of university undergraduates. Applied Linguistics, 31, 1–24.   
Teddlie, C., & Tashakkori, A. (2009). Foundations of mixed methods research. Integrating quantitative and qualitative approaches in the social and behavioural sciences. London: Sage.   
Thompson, P. (2001). A pedagogically-motivated corpus-based examination of PhD theses: Macrostructure, citation practices and uses of modal verbs. Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Reading.   
Thompson, P., & Tribble, C. (2001). Looking at citations: using corpora in English for academic purposes. Language Learning $\varepsilon { _ { \sigma } }$ Technology, 5, 91–105.   
Wang, P., & White, M. D. (1999). A cognitive model of document use during a research project. Study II. Decisions at the reading and citing stages. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 50, 98–114.   
White, H. D. (2004). Citation analysis and discourse analysis revisited. Applied Linguistics, 25, 89–116.   
Zhu, W. (2004). Writing in business courses: an analysis of assignment types, their characteristics, and required skills. English for Specific Purposes, 23, 111–135.

Bojana Petric is a lecturer at the University of Essex, United Kingdom. She has published papers on student writers’ citation practices, plagiarism, students’ conceptions of voice in academic writing and student writer identity, and on diachronic developments in book reviews in Serbian. Her main research interests are in the area of academic writing.

Nigel Harwood is a senior lecturer at the University of Essex, United Kingdom. He has published papers on how personal pronouns are used in research articles and in student writing and on critical pedagogy, and recently edited a book on teaching materials published by Cambridge University Press. His main research interests are in the areas of academic writing and English for Academic Purposes.