# From abstracts to $\ " 6 0 \cdot$ second science" podcasts: Reformulation of scientific discourse

Yunping Ye

School of Foreign Languages, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords: Genre analysis Scientific discourse Science popularization Generic structure Rhetorical strategy Linguistic feature

This paper examines Scientific American's 60-Second Science podcasts from a genre perspective to identify structural and linguistic strategies for reformulating scientific discourse for diversified audiences. Move analysis of 110 representative texts revealed a dominant structural pattern consisting of an engaging Orientation, a foregrounded Claim followed by the establishment of its Credibility, the conventional Introduction-Methods-Results-Discussion, and a distinctive Termination often flavored with witty humor. This pattern contains the essential components of academic abstracts, research presentations, and science news reports. However, despite some overlapping moves, 60-Second Science differs from any of these similar genres in terms of communicative purposes, target audiences, move sequences, and even types of move signals. Apart from common linguistic devices used in typical academic genres, other notable move signals include topic shifters, rhetorical questions, and voice shifts between the podcasters and re. searchers. Meanwhile, weaving researchers' voices into the podcasters', frequent use of engagement devices such as inclusive pronouns, reader pronouns, self-mentions, questions, and hedges result in a highly dialogic and interactional style. These structural and linguistic features may make 60-Second Science podcasts an authentic listening resource suitable for EFL students to acquire a basic awareness of academic spoken discourse and strengthen the interface between general and academic English.

# 1. Introduction

Genres of discourse are \*inherently dynamic structures that can be manipulated according to the conditions of use (Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995, p.6). They can be exploited to respond to \*novel rhetorical contexts" (Bhatia, 2004, p. 29), leading to the evolution of established genres and creation of new genres. Scientific discourse has evolved into a range of genres which can be represented as a continuum of technicality levels according to the intended readership, with the research article (RA) at one end and the science popularization artice atthe ther, rereseting the highly tecnical geres and popular geres repectively (Capuscio, 203; Varttala, 1999).

Highly technical and professional genres such as RA and RA abstracts have received widespread attention from researchers. For example, the astract either s n obligatory component of the RA or as a self-sustained academic genre has been studied from various perspectives. Some of these studies (e.g., Bondi & Lores, 2014; dos Santos, 1996; Lores, 2004; Mart'n, 2003; Salager-Meyer, 1990, Samraj, 2002) focus on the functions and rhetorical tructures of the abstract. Others focus on the linguistic realization of its functions (e.g., Hyland & Tse, 2005; Pho, 2008; Salager-Meyer, 1992). There are also studies particularly interested in the metadiscourse features to enhance interaction and cohesion of the astract (e.g., Gilaerts & Van de Velde, 2010; Hu & Cao, 2011; Jiang & Hyland, 2017).

Given that the \*principal criterial feature that turns a collection of communicative events into a genre is some shared set of communicative purposes (Swales, 1990, p. 46), highly technical and professional genres as specialist-to-specialist communications often have clearly definable communicative purposes and discourse communities. Their communicative purposes are achieved through a sequence of rhetorical moves as recognizable rhetorical patterns that conform to the convention of specific discourse communities.

In contrast, popular genres are targeted for diversified audiences with varying degree of background knowledge, and writers need to resort to various structural and linguistic strategies in response to complex and dynamic contexts. Numerous studies (e.g, Garces-Conejos & Sanchez-Macarro, 1998; Hilgartner, 1990; Hyland & Zou, 2020; Moshtaghi, 2012; Myers, 1989; Varttala, 1999, Zou & Hyland, 2019) have demonstrated the strategie to achieve communicative purposes of science popularizations. These studies often investigate long established genres such as science news reports in special columns of broadsheet newspapers or in science popularization magazines such as Scientific American, American Scientist, and New Scientist.

However, science news reporting is not the only popularization genre; there is a range of popularization genres with blurred boundaries, resulting in the "ambiguities" about their scope and the "flexibility' about their labeling (Hilgartner, 1990, p. 528) Hyland (2009, p. 154) distinguishes between two ends ofa cline: celebrated cience and masscience" with the former targeted for the well-educated elite and the later the general public. In between there could be a number of other genres labeled semi-popularizations (Ciapuscio, 2003; Munoz, 2015), journal editorials (Giannoni, 2008), and opinion articles (Fu & Hyland, 2014).

With the advent of the Intenet ea, some researchers have turned their attention to new forms f science popularization accessible online such as science blogs (Hyland & Zou, 2020; Luzon, 2013; Zou & Hyland, 2019), TED talks (Chang & Huang, 2015; Jiang, 2017; Kedrowicz & Taylor, 2016; Li & Li, 2021; Wingrove, 2017), and 3-minute thesis presentations (Hu & Liu, 2018)

The new popularization form that this paper is interested in is Scientic American's 60-Second Science podcasts which were frst available online in 2006. The podcasts are likely to have been created in response to the new context of the information era when scientific communication has become faster, and people are increasingly thirst for new information to improve their live or shape their thinking and decision-making. Due to the increased tempo of people's lives, 60-Second Science podcasters originally ensured the audience that 'It wl only take you a minute", although it has been lengthened up to 3 minutes since around 2016 (htps://ww. scientificamerican.com/podcasts/). In some EFL contexts, 60-Second Science podcasts have been included as online learning materials (e.g.,htps://www.chinavoa.com/60_second science/; http://www.kekenet.com/broadcast/science/; http://www.bigar.cn/) and recommended as oral inputs for undergraduate science and engineering students (Ye, 2020a, 2020b).

Yet, few studies have ben devoted to systematic analyses of the rhetorical and linguistc strategies in 60-Second Science podcasts for the reformulation of scientifi discourse. This paper is intended to ill this gap in the light of existing conceptions about science popularization (Calsamiglia & Van Dijk, 2004; Hyland, 2009, 2010; Myers, 2003) within the framework of genre studies (Swales, 1990, 2004; Bhatia, 2004) It is ssumed that 60-Second Scienceas a "dynamic and inovative" form of discourse (Bhatia, 2004, p.87) is a social processivolving recontextualization to disseminate scientific knowledge for the public at large (Ciapuscio, 2003; Calsa miglia & Van Dijk, 2004). Through genre analysis of a corpus of 110 representative 60-Second Science podcasts published in the most recent months, this paper aims to answer three questions:

i) What generic features can be identified in 60-Second Science podcasts in terms of move types, move sequences, and recurrent move patterns?   
ii) What rhetorical functions are the moves intended to achieve and how are they achieved?   
ii) What distinctive linguistic strategies are employed to reformulate scientific discourse for diversified audiences?

# 2. Literature review

Closely relevant to 60-Second Science is science news reporting which conforms to the conventional news schema consisting of five major hierarchically ordered categories: a general summary, the main events, historical and contextual background, consequences, and comments (van Dijk, 1988). Unlike RAs or research reports characterized by tentativeness of scientific exploration, science news reports are concerned about the novelty and journalistic immediacy" (Hyland, 2009, p. 154) as wellas the media's need toatract public attention and dramatize the impact of research findings. For this purpose, the main claim is usually foregrounded (Nwogu, 1991) while hedging, modality and qualifications are removed to confer greater certainty on the reported findings.

However, removing these features would inevitably change or distort information, misleading the audience to make incorrect judgments and even get into ideological disputes (Fahnestock, 1986). Singer (1990) also warns that science news reports may over. generalize findings, provide inaccurate information, and change the emphasis of the research. Science news report writers are also likely to treat speculations as facts or endow facts with authority to enhance the impact (Myers, 1994; Singer, 1990)

While the audience members of science news reports are assumed to be laypersons, semi-popularizations are aimed at semilaypersons (Ciapuscio, 2003), \*making scientific understandings available to an educated elite eager for prestige knowledge' beyond their own research fields (Hyland, 2009, p. 154). This explains why qualifications, hedges, pronouns, and passive structures-often linked to high-level per communication-are also frequentl used in semi-popularization artce. As Myers (1989) explains in pragmatic terms, featres such as hedging in popularizations are politeness devices toavoid insulting the readers and \*make them feel like part of the discourse communty, whereas n professional texts heging is a politenesstraty when  claim is made as being tentative and provisional, and inclusive pronouns or passive structures are politenes devices to avoid antagonizing other researchers

when a criticism is made of their research (Myers, 1989, p. 28).

In the same vein, Varttala (199) finds from a comparative study that hedging in popularizations i as common as in RAs and it serves both communicative textual and communicative interpersonal functions. Varttala explains that various rhetorical contexts account for the versatility of hedging in popularizations. For example, there are contexts where precise numerical expressions are unobtainable or a high degree of exactitude is unnecessary to the audience. In addition, hedging is a stylistic choice to expres the writers \*interpersonal positive politeness", demonstrate their respect for the readers ability to evaluate information for themselves, and "create a scientific atmosphere . in the eyes of the lay audience' in spit of various structural changes made during the popularization process (Varttala, 1999, p. 192).

The structural changes during the popularization process were demonstrated earlier by Nwogu (1991) who found that journalistic reported versions of RAs constitute nine moves in which the research outcome i foregrounded while most other moves follow similar sequences as RAs.

From an interpersonal perspective, popularization articles involve interaction as well as information, \*persons and identities as well as messages" (Myers, 2003, p. 273). Some studies (Fu & Hyland, 2014; Hyland, 2010; Zou & Hyland, 2019) are particularly concerned with the interactional features of popularization artice. Fu and Hyland (2014), for example, have identified in popular science and opinion artices an array of divers, audience-oriented features that enhance the interaction of the text, directly engage with the readers and even initiate a "pseudo dialogue between the writer and the reader' (Fu & Hyland, 2014, p. 129)

Apart from traditional popular cience genres, researchers have also become interested in relatively new genres acessible online such as science blogs. For example, Luzon (2013) has identified a number f trategies such as elaboration of terms, paraphrases, and comparisons i cience blogs to tailor information and adjust t the readers knowledge. Inclusive pronouns, references to the reader, questions, and humor are also deployed to create intimacy and proximity" with the reader while engaging in critical analysis of the recontextualized research' (Luzon, 2013, p. 428).

Science bloggers also resort to interactive trategies to help the reader follow information structures. For example, they use more frame markers than RA writers to present complex research material to an unpredictable and diverse readership who may have insufficient disciplinary knowledge (Hyland & Zou, 2020). As writer of other popularization geres, science blogers need to address a number of challenges and determine what kinds of devices should be used according to \*the particular configuration of writers and readers involved"' (Myers, 1989, p. 30).

It is equally challenging for speakers in oral presentations to ases the communicative contexts like the stting of the presentation, the speaker-listener roles and relations, and the listeners' background knowledge of the research topics. Numerous studies are available about the features and strategies in spoken academic genres such as conference presentations (Rowley-Jolivet & Carter-Thomas, 2005), academic lctures (Lee, 2009, 2016; Le & Subtirelu, 2015; Thompson, 1994), TED talks (Chang & Huang, 2015; Jiang, 2017; Kedrowicz & Taylor, 2016; Li & Li, 2021; Wingrove, 2017), graduate students' academic presentations (Raisanen, 2002; Swales, 2004; Weissberg, 1993; Zareva, 2009, 2013), and 3-minute thesis presentations (Hu & Liu, 2018).

To emphasize the importance of developing students' ability to present their research naturally, Weissberg (1993) consulted professors about what they would expect from students' presentations. It was found that the professors saw presentations as an independent spoken genre to communicate directly with an audience rather than a memorized or read-aloud paper. Therefore, they would prefer the \*audience friendly", \*extemporaneous, conversational style" and discourage reading directly from a paper (p. 27) Unfortunatel, there was a noticeable gap between the professors' expectations and students actual performance, typically among non-native peaker graduate students who use ittleor no audience-oriented metadiscourse, few transition signals or conversational asides' (p. 28), which raised important pedagogical issues for EFL students.

In recent years, many universities have introduced 3-minute thesis presentation contests to improve their graduate students research presentation skill. Three-minute thesis presentations are similar to science popularizations in that the judges/audience are from a variety of disciplines and may have insufficient background knowledge of the speakers' research topics. Speakers need to employ interpersonal strategies to facilitate interaction and impress the judges, which accounts for the three opening movesOrientation, Rationale, and Framework-to establish the rapport with the judges, contextualize the research, and set up the framework (Hu & Liu, 2018).

There are other attempts to improve students' oral presentation skills For example, Chang and Huang (2015) attempted to incorporate TED talks into instructional materials to inform learners of the basic move structures used by TED speakers and the flexibility in their use of moves. The stabilit-flexibility paradigm in TED talks has also been identified by Jiang (2017) and Li and Li (2021). Acording to Jiang (2017), the three obligatory moves (Idea Announcement, Elaboration, and Termination) and seven optional moves (Listener Orientation, Speaker Presentation, Idea Orientation, Contextualization, Results Reporting, and Implication) in TED talks are flexibly configured in various sequences to achieve the speakers' particular communicative purposes.

Research has also suggested that the characteristics of "electronic eloquence such as enthusiasm, passion, and connection of TED speakers could help enhance the audience's ability to maintain attention and retain information (Kedrowicz & Taylor, 2016, p. 368)

Therefore, it i no surprise that TED talks have also been explored as a potential pedagogical resource for teaching listening skills as well, since listening ability is \*vital to spoken interactions" (Dudley-Evans & St. John, 1998, p. 106). For example, Takaesu (2013) suggests that well-talored listening activitie ased on TED talks can improve EFL students' listening sils, enhance their motivation, and make them accustomed to variet f English ccents. Lopez-Carril e al. (2020) propose that online resource ike TED talks could be used as efective pedagogical resources when the educational sector is afected by unexpected events like the coviD-19 pandemic.

Another type of potential pedagogical resource online is popular science podcasts such as 60-Second Science podcasts that have been introduced into an EFL context as astarter genre for undergraduate-level EAP courses (Ye, 2020b). Ye (2020a) has also proposed that the hybridity feature of 60-Second Science podcasts be employed to develop students awarenessof spoken academic genres in

China's mainland where AP is tradtionally concerned about reearch writing for graduate students (Cargil et a., 012; Cheng, 2016; Ye, 2019). However, litle is known about the deining features of 60-Second Science podcasts in terms of move types, move patterns, move functions, and the linguistic realizations. Either for the purpose of increasing our knowledge of genre formulation or for the purpose of meeting pedagogical needs, any underexplored genre is worth investigating.

# 3. Methods

# 3.1. Corpus construction

The earliest available 60-Second Science podcasts published in 2006 were around 200 words long and typicall took 1-2 minutes. About a decade later, the podcasters started to weave researchers' voices into their own, lengthening most of the podcasts to 2-3 minutes. For the present study, transcripts of sample podcasts produced in the most recent months, covering the period betwen January 2019 and February 2020, were randomly collected to build a sizeable and representative corpus.

The transcript of every second podcast was downloaded from the wesite https://ww.scientificamerican.com/podcasts/ totaling 128 texts, but 18 of them were excluded because they were either \*Science News Briefs from around the World (headines of the latest developments in science and technology) or "Science Talks" (lengthy interviews with leading scientists at the time). The final corpus consists of 110 texts, averaging 366 words each, about the length of 3-minute thesis presentations.

# 3.2. Analysis procedure

The analysis procedure took two major steps: pilot coding and corpus analysis. Fourteen texts (over $1 2 \%$ of the texts from the corpus) were used for the pilot coding to "develop coding protocol with clear definitions and examples of move types" (Biber et al., 2007, p. 34). Sample texts for the pilot coding were segmented based on both linguistic signals and rhetorical functions (Swales 1990). RA abstracts as the source of the podcasts were consulted to check the accuracy of the information.

Move types were first categorized and tentative working definitions were given mostly based on the move categories of 3-minute presentations in Hu and Liu (2018). The definitions were then tested and fine-tuned until they were clear enough to be applied to the present corpus. The fine-tuning involves the merging of the nitial separate categorization of Rationale, Purpose, and Problem moves into an overarching Introduction move, and the merging of the Explanation and Implication moves into Discusson in order t fit neatly into the IMRD macro pattern. The "Framework" move in 3-minute presentations (Hu & Liu, 2018) seldom appears in the present corpus, so it is excluded from the move types.

Table 1 Working definitions of the moves in 60-Second Science.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move</td><td>Definition</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation</td><td>Preparing the audience for understanding the report. It consists of listener orientation and content orientation..</td><td>This is Scientific American--60-Second Science. I&#x27;m Susanne Bard. [Listener orientation] Anyone who commutes by car knows that traffic jams are an inevitable</td></tr><tr><td>Claim</td><td>Drawing a conclusion from the results of a new study..</td><td>part of life. [Content orientation] But humans are not alone in facing potential backups. Ants also commute-between their nest and sources of food. The survival of their</td></tr><tr><td>Credibility</td><td>Convincing the audience of the reliability of the claim by quoting the researcher and providing his/her identity.</td><td>colonies depends on doing this efficiently. &quot;The more there are, the more food they&#x27;re going to bring back. But at the same time, they might end up with traffic jams because there are too many of them.&quot; Arizona State University mathematician Sebastien</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>Stating the purpose of the study, or explaining the rationale, motivation, or a problem to be solved.</td><td>Motsch. When humans commute, there&#x27;s a point at which cars become dense enough to slow down the flow of traffic, causing gridlock. Motsch and his colleagues wanted to know if ants on the move could also get</td></tr><tr><td>Methods</td><td>Describing research methods such as theoretical model, framework, materials, or experimental procedure.</td><td>clogged. So they manipulated traffic density by constructing bridges of various widths between a colony of Argentine ants and a source of food. Then they waited and watched ...</td></tr><tr><td>Results</td><td>Describing the specific outcome produced from the research. The outcome can usually be directly observed or measured.</td><td>&quot;They always managed to avoid traffic jams.&#x27; The flow of ants did increase initially as ants started to fill the bridge and then leveled off at high densities. But it never slowed down, even when the bridge was nearly saturated with ants ... Motsch and his team found that when ants sense overcrowding, they adjust their speeds and avoid entering high-</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>Interpreting or commenting on the results from the researcher&#x27;s viewpoint, including the reasons for the results, the importance or value of the results, or implications from the study.</td><td>density areas, which prevents congestion. These behaviors may be facilitated by pheromones, chemicals that tell other ants where a trail is. The ants also manage to avoid colliding with each other at high densities, which could really slow them down ... Can ants help us solve our own traffic problems? Not likely, says Motsch. That&#x27;s because when it comes to getting from point A to point B as fast as possible, human drivers put their own goals first. Individual ants</td></tr><tr><td>Termination</td><td>Bringing the report to an end by providing the reporter&#x27;s personal and additional comments or recommendations, which link the study with real life.</td><td>have to be more cooperative in order to feed the colony. But the research could be useful in optimizing traffic flow for self- driving cars, which can be designed to be less like selfish humans--and more like ants. Thanks for listening. For Scientific American-60-Second Science, I&#x27;m Susanne Bard. [From &quot;Ant Colonies Avoid Traffic Jams&quot;, reported on November 7, 2019]</td></tr></table></body></html>

In addition, quotation of researchers' authentic voices was initially categorized as a potential separate move which provides the source of information, but hardy any regularities could be identified about this move because it can occur anywhere in a podcast. To avoid confusion, a researcher's voice would be regarded as a separate move to establish Credibility only when it is quoted along with the introduction of his/her name and affiliation. Reearchers voices were otherwise merged into different moves such as Introduction, Methods, Results, and Discussion corresponding to their functions.

The working definitions of the final move types worked out from the pilot analysis are presented in Table 1.

Based on Table 1, all the texts were segmented and categorized repeatedly at diffrent points in time by the same coder until complete intra-coder consistency was achieved, similar to the method used in Petric (2007) and Lim (2014) In the present study, three rounds of coding were conducted, with each new round being over three months from the previous one. A few discrepancies occurred between the results of the first two rounds of coding, mostly due to the lack of lingustic signals for certain move boundaries or the incorporation of one move into another without linguistic signals. For example:

(1) [Orientation] Let's play a word game. What word can be put in front of the words "stick," \*maker," and \*point to make three new compound words? Again..stick, maker, and point. Ready for the answer? Matc." If you didn't get it right away, don't worry, neither did I. [Claim] Maybe you had music playing as you thought about the words. [From "Background Music Might Stifle Creativity" reported on March 4, 2019.]

In this example, the Claim Maybe you had music playing as you thought about the words i not signaled by linguistic devices but buried in the "cause-fect logical relation: \*you didn't get it right away' because \*you had music playing as you thought about the words." Such implicit claims as this escaped the coder in the first coding. The problematic texts where discrepancies occurred were recoded and inconsistency resolved. Allthe texts were then coded a third time when no discrepancies occurred.

# 4. Results and discussion

# 4.1. Rhetorical moves and structural patterns

The move structure of each text is isted in the Appendix, and the move frequencies of the corpus are presented in Table 2.

Usually, cutoff frequencies are arbitrrily established to clssify moves into obligatory or optional types (Biber at el., 2007; Swales, 2004), but all the eight moves in the present corpus occur in over $9 0 \%$ of the texts (see Table 2), therefore, they could all be considered conventional, typical, and stable moves.

Altogether 84 texts $( 7 6 \% )$ contain all the eight moves, and 76 of them follow the same sequence: Orientation-Claim-CredibilityIntroduction-Methods-Result-Discussin-Termination (shown in Table 3). In other texts, Credibility may follow Orientation or Introduction, resulting inslight variations in move sequences as "Orientation-Credibility-Claim-Introduction .I or "OrientationClaim-Introduction-Credibility ..."' respectively.

The inevitable \*recycling of move patterns i academic genres (Swales, 1990, p. 140; 2004, p. 230) can also be found in 60-Second Science. As shown in (2), Results and Discussion can occur in two cyces, i., Result-Discussion-Result-Discussion2, but as both cycles occur after Methods, they do not affect the overall move sequence of the text.

(2) [Result] \*Well, the key findings from this study show that when we maintain insufficient short sleep schedules during a typical work or school week, we find that this leads people to eat more than they need and this leads to weight gain." [Discussion] So i seems a los of sleep leads to a spike in snacking .. [Result] \*We found that afer the weekend .. that their liver and their muscle insulin sensitivity or blood sugar regulation was reduced. [Discussion] So it's possible that, yes, this is a worsening of the body's ability to regulate blood sugar for those pecific issues fter the weekend. [From \*Weekday-Weekend Sleep Imbalance Bad for Blood Sugar Regulation' reported on March 11, 2019.]

It is unclear why a dominant pattern in 60-Second Science has emerged. It is likely that the podcasters are required to follow strict guidelines regarding the content, structure, and style of the podcasts. Such guidelines are most likely to be occluded \*dministrative" documents (Hyland, 2009, p. 55) that are not available to outsiders.

Several texts clearly deviate from the typical pattern. Table 4 presents an example which drasticall differs from others in that it is devoid of Methods and Results but characteristic of lengthy Orientation, a delayed Clam, and a focus on the Discussion about the new theoretical model for the Moon's formation.

Yet, it has so far become evident that 60-Second Science exhibits a more conventionalized pattern than TED talks which \*seem to demonstrate more variation .. than conventionality in move structures", with \*a range of non-obligatory moves" (Chang & Huang,

Table 2 Frequencies of the moves in 60-Second Science podcasts $( \mathtt { n } = 1 1 0 )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>Occurrence</td><td>110</td><td>110</td><td>105</td><td>99.</td><td>108</td><td>108</td><td>110</td><td>99</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage</td><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td>95%</td><td>90%</td><td>98%</td><td>98%</td><td>100%</td><td>90%</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Structural patterns in 60-Second Science.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Pattern</td><td>Occurrence</td><td>Percentage</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Claim-Credibility-Introduction-Methods-Results-Discussion-Termination</td><td>76</td><td>69%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Credibility-Claim-Introduction-Methods-Results-Discussion-Termination</td><td>7</td><td>6%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Claim-Introduction-Credibility-Methods-Results-Discussion-Termination</td><td>1</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Claim-Credibility-Methods-Results-Discussion-Termination</td><td>8</td><td>7%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Claim-Credibility-Introduction-Methods-Results-Discussion</td><td>8</td><td>7%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Claim-Introduction-Methods-Results-Discussion-Termination</td><td>3</td><td>3%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Claim-Methods-Results-Discussion-Termination</td><td>2</td><td>2%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Claim-Introduction-Credibility-Methods-Results-Discussion</td><td>1</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Credibility-Claim-Introduction-Methods-Results-Discussion</td><td>1</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Credibility-Introduction-Claim-Discussion-Termination</td><td>1</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Introduction-Credibility-Claim-Discussion-Termination</td><td>1</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation-Claim-Credibility-Methods-Results-Discussion</td><td>1</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>110</td><td>100%</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Example of deviation from the typical move pattern.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">New Model Aims to Solve Mystery of the Moon&#x27;s Formation</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation</td><td>On July 20th, 1969, humankind fiall se fot on the surface f the moon. ift years later abig mystery remains: how theheck the moon got there in the first plac. For deades, the thinking has n hat four and  half illin rs g Mar-id prooplanet mashd into the arth.</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>When the dust settled, our moon remained, forged from the debris of Earth and the other object. The problem is as scientis have taken more and more precis sotopic measurements of the Moon they&#x27;ve found that it&#x27; nearly identical in composition to the Earth-not some other object.</td></tr><tr><td>Credibility Claim</td><td>&quot;A problem I&#x27;ve been advertising as an isotopic crisis.&quot; Jay Melosh studies planetary impacts at Purdue University. Now, he ss,  hry in th jorecie may t les oint to way t fthat isc crissfth moon&#x27;s chmil spes so</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion</td><td>closely resembling Earth&#x27;s. Here&#x27;s the idea. The authors writ that maybe in those early days fth olar ystem, the Earth was sloshing with oceans of magma. Then, when the Mars-sizd bject slammd in hose molten seas, their model redict aot more rth-drived matrial  ectd into orbit in the formof scorching vaors. mates of  f thusas of d. d o hat xands at ses tht ce he ae elocit fthe arh, and in that way it inects material into orbit around the arth. That materal rapdy oleses, and ingo, yo&#x27;ve got  moon. Melosh says there are il a few kinks to work out in the scenario. Still, he says, it&#x27;s a step forward.</td></tr><tr><td>Termination</td><td>Think of it as major cue in a murder mystry or something like tht. It could e a tue clue toward the answer or it could be a deeption-we don&#x27;t know yet.&quot; So it could be that when astronaus strted walking on the moon a half-century ago, they were reall leaving footrints on the remains of the primordial Earth. Thanks for istening. For Scientific American60-Second Science, I&#x27;m Christopher Intaglia. Reported on April 30, 2019.]</td></tr></table></body></html>

2015, p. 43), flexible move sequences (Jiang, 2017), and \*personal flexility of move choice" (Li & Li, 2021, p.173). With regard to move types, the "speaker presentation"\* move in TED talks by introducing oneself and establishing authority (Chang & Huang, 2015, p. 43) is in contrast to introducing someone else-the researcher of the study being reportedin 60-Second Science to establish Credibility (see Table 5).

From a pedagogical viewpoint, the flexible and persuasive strategies used by TED speakers may affect lower proficiency students listening comprehension and require necessary \*scaffolding activities" to help them tackl a number of barrer (Takaesu, 2013, p. 150). By contrast, the more stable pattern of 60-Second Science podcasts would increase predictabilit of the types of information, which should facilitate students' listening comprehension.

As seen in Table 5, 60-Second Science appears to have similar move types as research presentations and journalistc science reports, but it dffers from them in move sequences, communicative purpose, and target audiences. Unlike 3-minute thesis presentations, which follow the research convention to foreground the rationale and explain it immediately after Orientation, 60-Second Science tends to foreground the Claim. Itis similar to jounalistic science reports in terms of foregrounding the Claim to highlight novelty, but journalistic science reports seldom open with an engaging Orientation or terminate with humor.

Table 5 Structural patterns in 60-Second Science in comparison to similar genres.   

<html><body><table><tr><td> Journalist science report (Nwogu, 1991)</td><td>TED talks (Chang &amp; Huang, 2015)</td><td>3-min Thesis (Hu &amp; Liu, 2018)</td><td> 60-Second Science</td></tr><tr><td>1. Background information</td><td>1. Listener orientation</td><td>1. Orientation</td><td>1. Orientation</td></tr><tr><td>2. Overall research outcome</td><td>2. Topic introduction</td><td>2. Rationale</td><td>2. Claim</td></tr><tr><td>3. Review of related research</td><td>3. Speaker presentation</td><td>3. Framework</td><td>3. Credibility</td></tr><tr><td>4. New research</td><td>4. Topic developmente</td><td>4. Purpose</td><td>4. Introduction</td></tr><tr><td>5. Consistent observations</td><td>5. Closure</td><td>5. Methods</td><td>5. Methods</td></tr><tr><td>6. Data collection procedure</td><td>6. Concluding messages</td><td>6. Results</td><td>6. Results</td></tr><tr><td>7. Experimental procedure</td><td>7. Acknowledgments/gratitude</td><td>7. Implication</td><td>7. Discussion</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">8. Explanation of research outcome 9. Research conclusion</td><td>8. Termination</td><td>8. Termination</td></tr></table></body></html>

The structural differences between these similar geres reflect their different communicative purposes. Three-minute thesis pre sentations are communicative events on universt campuses targeted for audiences interested or involved in reearch as well s judges for the contests. Science news reports communicate scientific information in the public sphere and target unpredictable audiences with diverse backgrounds and interests, aiming to achieve commercial, educational, or entertainment purposes (Coter & Pumfrey, 1994) TED talks are intended to spread ideas with powerful alks, ofen via "electronic eloquence' (Kedrowicz & Taylor, 2016, p. 368) 60-Second Science podcasts can cater for audiences who are inclined to use new media to get information, or audiences who are too busy to spare much time for science reports in traditional media.

# 4.2. Rhetorical functions of the moves

The Orientation move aims to atract the audience's attention and prepare them for the upcoming new Claim. Orientation can be a commonplace factal statment, an interesting anedote, an ngaging question, the referenceto a historical figure or legndary story, a music clip, or even a scenario from a popular movie.

In (3), Orientation is a common-sense factual statement about sleeping late on weekends. It prepares for the new Claim that weekend recovery sleep may lead to serious health issues rather than improve health. The linguistic signal for the Claim is the transitional device but after Orientation, indicating that the new Claim is different from what is generally known.

(3) [Orientation] Few things are more satisfying than sleeping late on weekends. [Claim] But though the extra z's may improve your mood, they do not appear to improve your health. Because a new study shows that so-called \*recovery sleep" cannot reset the body's metabolic clock .. and may actually lead to some serious health sues. From \*Weekday-Weekend Sleep Imbalance Bad for Blood Sugar Regulation' reported on March 11, 2019.]

In (4), the Orientation move is a reference to the historical figure Marie Antoinette whose hair is said to have turned white overnight. It prepares for the Claim, signaled by a new study, that stress may cause gray hair.

(4) [Orientation] They say that Marie Antoinette's hair turned white the night before she lost her head to the guillotine. But can stress really have such a dramatic effect on hair color? [Claim] A new study in mice concludes that it can and credits overactive nerves with stripping the color from the animals' locks--and possibly ours. From \*Fight-or-Flight Nerves Make Mice

Go Gray" reported on February 15, 2020.]

Similar ignals to highlight the novelty of a claim include but according to a recent study, now researchers have found; a new study shows; now scientists have found; now a new study indicate; but the truth is that now researchers have created evidence; but a new study suggests; a new study concludes, n scientists have fiured out t now rearchers have deeloped  nw way, but it tuns out, now we leam

These signals contain high frequency vocabulary included in the Academic Word List (Coxhead, 2000. It follows that, on the one hand, a good command of these words would help the listener recognize move signals and follow the tructure of the reports. On the other hand, texts that contain these words might be effective material for the teaching of target language features.

As shown in(5), the Credibility move immediately afer the Claim is typicallysignaled by a shift to the researcher's voice (in this ase, Pain is both  sensory and emotional experience"), along wth the inroduction of the reearchers identity, Greory Scherr, a pain expert at Stanford University.

(5) [Orientation] Pain. Its unpleasant. But what if pain could be rendered less .. painful .. emotionally speaking? Such uncoupling might not be entirely farfetched. [Claim] Because researchers have located aset of neurons that seem to encode the feelings of hurt that accompany pain. [Credibility] "Pain is both a sensory and emotional experience." Gregory Scherrer, a pain expert at Stanford Universty. [From \*Targeting Certain Brain Cells Can Switch Off Pain' reported on February 4, 2019.]

Therefore, the first three moves (Orientation, Clam, and Credibility) combined could be considered the newsworthy part of the :eport. This part is followed by an account of the research story itself, including the Introduction, Methods, and Results.

Linguistic devices asociated with these moves in typical research genres are also common in 60-Second Science. For example, researchers were exploring and they were interested in, shown in (6), are often found in Introduction. A series of verbs in the past ten. se- parsed data collected, the survey asessed, it included a question aboutto descrie a particular procedure are typically used in Methods, and what we were able to demonstrate was often signals the Results.

(6) [Introduction] The researchers were exploring the advantages of scholarly culture. In particular, they were interested in a curious observation that some call the "radiation effect." ..

[Methods] She (Joanna Sikora) and her colleagues parsed data collected between 2011 and 2015 ... The survey asessed the literacy, numeracy and technological competency of more than 160,000 adults .., and it included a question about how many books participants had in their homes during adolescence. [Results] \*What we were able to demonstrate was that people who grew up around books had better literacy, numeracy and digital problem-solving skill than people who had fewer books ..' [From "Unread Books at Home Still Spark Literacy Habits' reported on May 16, 2019.]

The Discussion move aims to interpret or comment on the reults, often from the researcher's perspective, whereas the Termination move shifts to the reporter's perspective, ending the report with additional comments, interpretation, or recommendation, often in a humorous way to amuse the listener. The difference between the two moves is shown in (7), in which the Discussion is the reearcher's suggestion to listen to clasical music which is e disruptive than pop music. The Termination is the rporters additional suggestion, signaled by though, that istening to the sound of silence is even bettr than classcal music. The witt humor isderived from the oxymoron in The Sound of Silence", the name of a famous song.

(7) [Discussion] Stil, if you do insist on listening to music while working, you might try something alittle more low-key than Lady Gaga, says Threadgold's colleague John Marsh. "So if you .. compare a modern pop song with some classcal music you'd expect lessdisruption from the classcal music." [Termination] Even better, though, would be The Sound of Silence" (music clip) .. [From "Background Music Might Stifle Creativity' reported on March 4, 2019.]

The same difference is shown in (8), and the humor \*stil pain, but alsogain is derived from the reporter's play with the idiom no pain, no gain'.

(8) [Discussion] So this indicated that there's a particular type f cll in a given region of the brain that seemed to specifically encode the percept of pain." .. [Termination] A future part of treating pain therefore could be to target these particular neurons. You'd stillhave the physical part of the pain. But the negative perception of the pain could be diminished. Which means: stillpain, but also gain. [From Targeting Certain Brain Cells Can Switch Off Pain' reported on February 4, 2019.]

In example (9), the researcher seriously explains why mere exposure to books can lead to intellectual enrichment, whereas the odcaster makes fun of our inability to spell common words correctly.

(9) [Discussion] Now, how might mere exposure lead to intellctual enrichment? So if we grow up in a house, in a home where parents enjoy books, where books are given as birthday presents and cherished and valued, this is something that becomes a part of our identity and gives us this lifelong incentive to be literacy oriented, to always kind of steer towards books and read more than we would otherwise."

[Termination] So keep those helves stacked with books. Your kids wil not only be grateful, theyll be more likely to be able to spell 'grateful" correctly as well. From \*Unread Books at Home Stil Spark Literacy Habits reported on May 16, 2019.]

The signals now and so for Discussion and Termination in (9) are what Hyland and Zou (2020) call \*topic shifters'. Topic shifters occur 6.25 times per 1000 words in 60-Second Science (shown in Table 6) far more frequently than in research blogs (which is 0.04 times per 1000 words) or in journal articles (with 2.27 times per 1000 words) (Hyland & Zou, 2020).

Move boundaries are also signaled by questions and shfts between the reporter's and researcher's voices, shown in (10), producing the effect of directly engaging the audience.

(10) [Discussion] But does that mean the cats know they are being called by name? \*There is no evidence that cats have the ability to recognize themselves, like us. [Termination] Could this knowledge mean that humans could eventually train cats to respond to voice commands, the way dogs do? Purr-haps. From "Cats Recognize Their Names--but May Not Respond'" reported on April 29, 2019.]

As shown i (10, whn the reearchers voice is not introduced by rorting lause she say/xplains/rort . th efet f face-to ace conversation is created and dialogic interaction enhanced.

Awareness of various move signals as wellas move functions would help EFL students recognize discourse structure, which in tun facilitates their listening comprehension. Meanwhile, constant exposure to different voices and accents would help EFL students ac. quire the ability to understand spoken academic discourse in international educational settings.

# 4.3. Linguistic strategies to engage the audience

The most distinctive linguistic strategy in 60-Second Science to engage the audience is the use of engagement devices, including inclusive pronouns we, our, and us; reader pronouns you and your; self-mentions I and me; questions; and hedges. As shown in Table 7, these types of devices are more frequently used in 60-Second Science than in conventional popular science texts.

For example, the use of reader pronouns you and your, as \*the clearest way to acknowledge the presence of the audience and one of "the most explicit ways of achieving proximity" with the audience (Hyland, 2010, p. 125), ishighly prominent in 60-Second Science. Questions arealso frequently used as "a key strategy of dialogic involvement' to build connections with the audience (Hyland, 2010, p. 125). Hedges are far more frequent than in ther popular science texts most likely beause of the direct involvement of researchers who tend to hedge their remarks.

# 4.4. Adaptation of linguistic style

As in science blogs (Luzon, 2013), adaptation of linguistic style at the lexical and grammatical levels is another distinctive strategy to reformulate scientific discourse in 60-Second Science. Firstly, technical terms are replaced with general vocabulary. As shown in Table 8, the technical term eusocial insect in the titl of the abstract is replaced by ants in the title of the podcast.

Table 6 Topic shifters used as move signals in 60-Second Science.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Topic shifter</td><td>Occurrence</td><td>Per text</td><td>Per 1000 words</td></tr><tr><td>So</td><td>162</td><td>1.47</td><td>4.02</td></tr><tr><td>now</td><td>62</td><td>0.56</td><td>1.54</td></tr><tr><td>well</td><td>14</td><td>0.13</td><td>0.35</td></tr><tr><td>Yet</td><td>14</td><td>0.13</td><td>0.35</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>252</td><td>2.29</td><td>6.25</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 Distinctive features to engage the audience.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">60-Second Science</td><td>Popular science (Fu &amp; Hyland, 2014)</td></tr><tr><td>Feature</td><td>Occurrence</td><td>Per</td><td>Per 1000</td><td>Per 1000 words</td></tr><tr><td>Inclusive pronouns: we, our, us.</td><td>322</td><td>text 2.9</td><td>words 7.99</td><td>2.7</td></tr><tr><td>Reader pronouns: your, you</td><td>341</td><td>3.1</td><td>8.48</td><td>0.4</td></tr><tr><td>Self-mentions: I, me</td><td>371</td><td>3.37</td><td>9.21</td><td>4.5</td></tr><tr><td>Questions</td><td>95</td><td>0.86</td><td>2.36</td><td>1.1</td></tr><tr><td>Hedges: can, could, may, might, would, should, appear, seem, likely, possible, probable, perhaps</td><td>640</td><td>5.82</td><td>15.88</td><td>4.8</td></tr></table></body></html>

Secondly, multi-syllable words or formal expressions typical of written academic English are replaced with collquial expressions. For exame, dre eson ndigt thffect f d  soc gous arelawth d diserke ieases at bay in the podcast; social network plasticity is simply referred to as change behavior.

Thirdly, paraphrasing skill are employed to explain specialized expressions. For example, pathogen exposure is paraphrased as getting exposed to diseases and pathogen-triggered response as reaction to the presence of a pathogen.

More importantly, abstract ideas, concepts, or technical process conveyed through complex noun groups, which are cognitively demanding, are elaborated as a series of actions. For example, the technical methodological process utomated tracking, controlled pathogen exposure is interpreted and elaborated as a sequence of actions: the researchers sprayed a common fungus on a small group of forager ants nd then folowd their movments, and marked all nts i te colony with indival laels . ike R o which is automatically detected and rcorded. The idea in the key transmissin-inhibitory properties f the colony's contact network is elaborated as a series of behavioral habit of ants that stayed withnthir cliques and interacted es outside of their work goup . and forager ants spent more ime outside f thenest Thee bhavioral habit esreferred to as stick tocliques or cliqush ehavior to avoid fecting ther members of the community.

The stylistic adaptation skils through rephrasing, paraphrasing, explanation or elaboration to make technical concepts and pro cesses understandable to non-specialist audiences are exactly what EAP students eventually need to acquire for efective scientific communication in different contexts.

Table 8 Comparison between the abstract and 60-Second Science podcast.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Abstract</td><td>60-Second Science</td></tr><tr><td>Social Network Plasticity Decreases Disease Transmission in a Eusocial Insect [Introduction] Animal social networks are shaped by multiple selection pressures, including the need to ensure efficient communication and functioning while simultaneously limiting disease transmission. Social animals could</td><td>Ants Stick to Cliques to Dodge Disease [Orientation] This is Scientific American-60-Second Science. I&#x27;m Lucy Huang. It&#x27;s peak cold and flu season, which means taking a lot of preventive measures. Frequent hand-washing is a must, as is avoiding</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">potentially further reduce epidemic risk by altering their social networks in the presence of pathogens, yet there is currently no evidence for such pathogen-triggered responses. [Methods] We tested this hypothesis experimentally in the ant Lasius niger using a combination of automated tracking, controlled pathogen exposure, transmission quantification, and temporally explicit simulations. [Results] Pathogen exposure induced behavioral changes in both exposed ants and their nestmates, which helped contain the disease by reinforcing key transmission- inhibitory properties of the colony&#x27;s contact network. [Discussion] This suggests that social network plasticity in response to pathogens is an effective strategy for mitigating the effects of disease in social groups. [Stroeymeyt et al., (2018). &quot;Social network plasticity decreases disease transmission in a eusocial insect&quot;, Science, Vol. 362, Issue 6417, pp. 941-945]</td><td>co-workers or friends who are sick. [Claim] But we humans are not the only animals that change behavior to keep diseases at bay. So do ants. [Credibility] So there are the foragers and the nurses - two different groups of work.&quot; Nathalie Stroeymeyt of the University of Lausanne. [Introduction] She and colleagues observed ants to see their reaction to the presence of a pathogen. With</td></tr><tr><td>the nurses staying inside the nest taking care of the brood and being made of young workers typically, and the foragers are older workers that go outside of the nest to collect food and defend the territory.&quot; Forager ants are at greater risk of getting exposed to diseases because they leave the safety of the nest. [Methods] So the researchers sprayed a common fungus on a small group of forager ants and then followed their movements to see the way the other ants reacted. We marked all ants in the colony with individual</td></tr><tr><td>labels, which carry these two-dimensional bar code marks like QR code which is automatically detected and recorded using a tracking system.&quot; [Results] After the infection, the nurse and forager ants stayed within their cliques and interacted less</td></tr><tr><td>outside of their work group. The researchers also saw that forager ants spent more time outside of the nest. &quot;They increase that amount by 15%, so by quite a large amount.&quot; The researchers also measured the amount of fungus on each ant and saw that it was almost completely contained within the foragers group. Some</td></tr><tr><td>nurse ants and even the Queen did have trace amounts of the fungus&#x27; spores on them but the amount was small enough that they could easily groom them off of their bodies. The study is in the journal Science. [Discussion] Not only does the cliquish behavior stop the spread of the fungus, but it allows you to develop immunization. Something that&#x27;s quite interesting in these ants that&#x27;s been shown by other studies</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 5. Conclusions

The answers to the three research questions have emerged from the analysis of representative Scientific American's 60-Second Science podcasts. Firstly, with more than two thirds of the texts exhibiting the same move types and sequences, i.e., OrientationClaim-Credibility-Introduction-Methods-Results-Discussion-Termination, 60-Second Science appears to be characterized by a dominant and stable generic structure in spite of certain overlapping moves with similar genres such as RA abstracts, 3-minute thesis presentations, and science news reports.

Secondly, functional analysis of the moves shows that 60-Second Science not only provides the general public with scientific in. formation, but i alo attempts to engage the audience and make scientifi discourse approachable to non-specialis audiences through discourse and linguistic adaptations. Therefore, it could be placed toward the popular end on the professional-popular cline of scientific discourse (Ciapuscio, 2003; Hilgartner, 1990; Hyland, 2009; Myers, 2003). This genre i likely to have been created as a competing science popularization genre for commercial, educational, and entertainment purposes via new communication medium.

Thirdly, 60-Second Science not only contains the common linguistic features of typical research genres, but also other distinctive strategies including topic shifters now, so, and well, rhetorical questions; and voice shifts between reporters and researchers to reformulate a dialogic and interactional scientific discourse. The interaction is enhanced by the frequent use of engagement devices such as inclusive pronouns, reader pronouns, questions, and hedges.

These findings offer several insights for EAP practitioners seeking authentic listening materials to suit their students proficiency levels. Firstl, the stable and predictable structure would make 60-Second Science a manageable type of listening material for EFL students who ofte struggle to understand authentic spoken English. As 60-Second Science podcasts are short, they can be conveniently used for classroom instructions about how to predict information by recognizing move signals and discourse structures, leaving students to practice intensive listening skills at their own pace after class.

Move signals such as rhetorical questions and topic shifters now, so, and well are important target features to be taught as microskills to follow topic development i istening to any spoken genres. Furthermore, the highly interactional style with researchers different voices and accents provides students with authentic listening material at an authentic speed'" (Dudley-Evans & St. John, 1998, p. 105) in contexts where access to spoken academic English is limited.

In addition, the functions of Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion moves in 60-Second Science and the academic words associated with these moves could be taught to enable students to acquire a basic awareness of academic discourse, prepare them for tackling more complex professional texts (Ye, 2020b), and strengthen the interface between general and academic English skills (Goh, 2013) in situations where students' EAP needs are growing but their general English proficiency levels are yet to be improved.

It should be admitted that the results would likely be different if ifferent working definitions of move types or different categorization methods were used. The conclusions should be considered tentative due to several obvious limitations of the study. First this study only depict a global picture f the moves in 60-Second Science without a systematic analysi of possble steps to realize the move functions. Second it only focuses on the textual tructure without considering the phonological features. Future studies could explore what phonetic strategies are employed to express meaning, signal moves, and engage the audiences.

A number of basic questions are also worth investigating in the future, for example, whether there are any covert \*private or organizational intentions (Bhatia, 2004, p. 25), other than the overt intention to communicate scientific developments, to create the popularization genre in the form of odcasts, what factors inluence the choice of particular studie as the source for the podasts, what guidelines the odasters are required to follow to organize information, how the researchers voices are otained, and in what way the researchers involvement i the production of podcasts influences the audience's meaning-making. Studies on these contextual factors should throw more light on the recontextualization of scientific discourse and its subsequent social significance.

# Acknowledgments

I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to Professor Hilary Nesi and thre anonymous reviewers for their insightfu, onstructive and very specific suggestions on the earlier versions of this paper.

# Appendix. Move sequences in the sample texts

<html><body><table><tr><td>1</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td></td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td></td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td></td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>Orientation</td><td>claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

(continued on next page)

(continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>13</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Claim</td><td></td><td></td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>14</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Claim</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td> Termination</td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>16</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>17</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Claim</td><td> Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>18</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>19</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>20</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td> Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>21</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>22</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td> Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>23</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>24</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>25</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td></td><td></td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td> Termination</td></tr><tr><td>26</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Claim</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>27</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td></td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>28</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td> Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>29</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>30</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>31</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td> Termination</td></tr><tr><td>32</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td></td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>33</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td></td><td> Methods</td><td> Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>34</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>35</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>36</td><td>Orientation</td><td> Introduction</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Claim</td><td></td><td></td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>37</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>38</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>39</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td> Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>40</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>41</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results-</td><td>Discussion</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>42</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td> Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>43</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>44</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td></td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>45</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td> Termination</td></tr><tr><td>46</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>47</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>48</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>49</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td> Introduction</td><td> Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>50</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>51</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td> Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>52</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>53</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>54</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td> Termination</td></tr><tr><td>55</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td></td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>56</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td> Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>57</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td> Introduction</td><td>Credibility Introduction</td><td>Methods Methods</td><td>Results Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>58 59</td><td>Orientation Orientation</td><td>Claim Credibility</td><td>Credibility Claim</td></table></body></html>

(continued on next page)

(continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>1</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td></td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>83</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>84</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>85</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td></td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>86</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>87</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>88</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>89</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>90</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Claim</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>91</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>92</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>93</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td> Termination</td></tr><tr><td>94</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Claim</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>95</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>96</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>97</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>98</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td> Termination</td></tr><tr><td>99</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>100</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>101</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>102</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>103</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>104</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>105</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>106</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>107</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>108</td><td> Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td> Termination</td></tr><tr><td>109</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Claim</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr><tr><td>110</td><td>Orientation</td><td>Credibility</td><td>Claim</td><td>Introduction</td><td>Methods</td><td>Results</td><td>Discussion</td><td>Termination</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Author statement

The manuscript \*From abstracts to $\ " 6 0 - \cal s$ science' podcasts: reformulation of scientific discourse" is written by the sole author Yunping Ye from the School of Foreign Languages, Beijing Institute f Technology. This manuscript is submitted to Journal of English for Academic Purposes. The content has not been published and the manuscript has not been submitted to any other journal.

# References

erker  1  i /e   cia.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2o04). Worlds of written discourse: A genre-based view. London: Continuum.   
Biber, D., Connor, U., & Upton, T A. (2007). Discose on the move: Sig cous analysis todecribe discose structure. Amsterdm: Jon Benjamins.   
Bondi, M., & Lores, R. (2014). Abstracts in academic discourse: Variation and change. Berlin: Peter Lang.   
Calsamiglia H, & Van Dijk, T. A. (2004). Popularization discourse and knowledge about the genome. Discourse & Societ, 15(4), 369-389.   
Cargill,  , i,  02 i ite  ntl si thidt  y education and English language teaching. English for Specific Purposes, 31(1), 60-69.   
Chag  15      .  ng 39 (4), 29-62.   
Cheg,016 ti   .   ., Th   r purposes (pp. 97-108). New York: Routledge.   
Ciapuscio,  203). tion and oin e  vl ictio t rs and (- n. des 2), 207-23.   
Coer,   .      f Science, 22, 237-267.   
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TEsOL Quarterly, 34(2), 213-238.   
van Dijk, T. A. (1988). News as discourse. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Dudley-Evans, T., & St John, M. J. (1998). Developments in ESP. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Fahnestock, J. (1986). Accommodating science: The rhetorical life of scientific facts. Written Communication, 3(3), 275-296.   
Fu, X., & Hyland, K (2014). Intraction in wo journalistc gees: study of intrctiol metdiscoure. Elish ext Constructin, 7(1), 122-144. Linguistic choice across genres (pp. 173-190). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Giannoni, D. S. (2008). Popularizing features in English journal editorials. English for Specific Purposes, 27, 212-232.   
Gilerts, , Van de de, . (2010 ci maore in reh atce atrt. Jo of Eish r dc Pe, 9, 128139.   
Goh, C. C. M. 2013) EP d istg. n . alig .trld s.), Th hook f ngish fo pic p (.55-76).  ork ote.   
Hilgartner, S. (1990. The dominant view of popularization: Conceptual problems, political uses. Social Studies of Science, 20(3), 519-539.   
Hu . 11 g  otg n ar f p stic are tie st  s-h j. Pragmatics, 43, 2795-2809.   
H, G.  018 i a     .  of s 35, 16-30.   
Hyland, K. (2009). Academic discourse: English in a global context. London: Continuum.   
Hyland, K. (2010). ostrcting proxmty: Reaing to reders in popuar and proesonal cience. onal of Eglish for Adeic Poses, , 16-127.   
Hyland, K, & Tse, P. (2005). Hooking the reader: A corpus study of evaluative that in abstracts. nglishfor Spci Puposes, 24(2), 123-139.   
Hyland, K, & Zou, H. (2020). In the frame: Signaling structure in academic articles and blog. Jounal of Pragmatics, 165, 31-44.   
Jig, .   .g Technological University. https://repository.nie.edu.sg/bitstream/10497/19534/1/JiangJingxin-MAAL_Abstract.pdf.   
Jiang, K. F., & Hyland, K. (2017). Metadiscursive nouns: Ineraction and cohesion in astract moves. English for peic Purposes, 46,1-14.   
edwi, A o, L 2016. in i  an  que E a fl pr.  of s a Communication, 30(3), 352-377.   
Lee, . (009. ie mtes: n exr mprison of mll nd es esit ecte incti. gish for iic Pes, 28, 42-57.   
Lee, J.J. 2016). Teres inioit ehind it.  ge ayis of EAP clom os. Jol of Eish or dc Pe, 23, 9112.   
Le, J J e 205.  t  tie s of   at .h or  e, 3, 52-62.   
Li, X., & Li, F. (2021). Corpus-based move analysis of TED Talks about education. Creative Education, 12, 166-175.   
Lim J.M 2014). ing rch quetio in xpeimecrttions on Aplied gsic.nish for pfi Pes 5, 668.   
Lo-ari ,  -   r    e and LinkedIn. Sustainability, 12(23), 10161.   
Lores, R. (2004). On RA abstracts: From rhetorical structure to thematic organization. English for Specific Purposes, (3), 280-302.   
Luzn, M J. 2013. uc tf sci    re fr a di io, 304, 428-457.   
arn,  (00e aisf sh  h h r  in s c. sh for iic e, (1, 25-43.   
oshghi,. 012 is of      d. and Behavioral Sciences, 5, 2067-2071.   
uoz, V. L (2015. The vauy of aie semariztion artice in Engish ous-a study. ishfor ic e, 39, 6-4.   
Myers, G. (1989). The pragmatics of politeness in scientific texts. Applied Linguistics, 10, 1-35.   
yers, . (14.i   r.   s  79-1 Routledge.   
Myers, G. (2003). Discourse studies of scientific popularizations: Questioning the boundaries. Discourse Studies, 5(2), 265-279.   
u, 191).f     lys ac t cf  m x. is r i e, 10, 111-123.   
Petric, B. (2007). Rhetorical fuctions of citations in high- and low-rated masters these. Jounal of nglish for Academic Pupoes, 6, 238253.   
Pho, P.    i  c  tl stance. Discourse Studies, (2), 231-250.   
aanen02)  .  .) conferencing (pp. 69-93). New York: Peter Lang..   
Rowl-ie,   . 005) rri   i tio , m d ntio io Applied Linguistics, 15, 45-69.   
Salager-Meyer, F (1990). Discoursal flaws in medical English abtracts: A genre analysis per research and text type. Text, 10(4), 365384.   
Salager (9 -  as t    . o  1(2) 93-113.   
Samraj  00i n h eir   .  .0-56) London: Pearson Education Limited.   
dos Santos, M. B. (1996). The textural organization of research paper abstracts in applied linguistics. Text, 4, 481-499.   
Singer, E. (1990. A question of accuracy: How journalis and scientis report research on hazards. Jounal of Communication, 40, 102-116.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Takaesu, A. (2013). TED talks as an extensive istening resource for EAP students. Language Education in Asia, 4(2), 150-162.   
Thompson, . (194). mwors an contxs:  -ad aprch oying ere inctins. gish for ific Pses, 13(2), 171-186.   
ara it 18(2), 177-200.   
Weissberg, B. (1993). The graduate seminar: Another research-process genre. English for Specific Purposes, 12, 23-35.   
Wingrove, P. (2017). How suitable are TED talks for academic listening? Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 30, 79-95.   
Ye, Y. 01   h 38, 48-61.   
Ye, Y. (2020).   ad t mpliction o dt  tcg ang d cie"a an ample.  of EP, 18, 21-31   
Ye, Y. (2020b). EAP for undergraduate science and engineering students in an EFL context: What should we teach? Ampersand, 7 100065.   
Zareva, A. (2009). Student academic presentations: The processing side of interactiveness English Text Construction, 2(2), 265-288.   
Zaa 013     e. English for Specific Purposes, 32, 72-83.   
Zou, H., & Hyland, K. (2019). Reworking research: Interactions in academic articles and blogs. Discourse Studies, 21(6), 713-733.