# Matches and mismatches between Saudi university students' English writing feedback preferences and teachers' practices

Muhammad M.M. Abdel Latifa\*,1, Zainab Alsuhaibanib,2, Asma Alsahil b,3

a Faculty of Graduate Studies of Education, Cairo University, Egypt   
b Collee of ngages  Tanstion rmen of ngish ngge  Littre Mhmad n d lac ivrst (u), Riyad,   
Saudi Arabia

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Writing feedback   
Writing teacher feedback   
Student feedback preferences   
Writing instruction   
L2 writing

Though much research has dealt with feedback practices in L2 writing classes, scarce studies have tried to investigate learner and teacher feedback perspectives from a wide angle. Drawing on an 8-dimension framework of feedback in writing classes, this study investigated the potential matches and mismatches between Saudi university students' English writing feedback preferences and their teachers' reported practices. Quantitative and qualitative data was collected using a student questionnaire and a teacher one. The two surveys assessed students preferences for and teachers' use of 26 writing feedback modes, strategies and activities. A total of 575 undergraduate English majors at 11 Saudi universities completed the student questionnaire, and 82 writing instructors completed the teacher questionnaire. The data analysis revealed that the differences between the students' English writing feedback preferences and their teachers' practices vary from one feedback dimension to another. The study generally indicates that the mismatches between the students' writing feedback preferences and the teachers' reported practices far exceed the matches. The qualitative data obtained from the answers to a set of open-ended questions in both questionnaires provided information about the students' and teachers' feedback-related beliefs and reasons. The paper ends with discussing the results and their implications.

# 1. Introduction

Feedback provision is probably the most time-consuming task in writing clases. It entails anumber of teacher roles and learner activities. Writing teachers are expected to provide students with different feedback types that meet their needs and expectations. Besides, they need to organize and monitor leaner-centred feedback activities- such as peer asessment- to help students have more engaging learning experiences. Therefore, feedback forms and activities in writing classes are to be optimized and orchestrated to positively influence students' motivation, performance, and engagement (Abdel Latif, 2021; Hyland, 2003).

Much research has increasingly been published on feedback in L2 writing classes. Such research has generally been of three main categories: a) the experimental or interventional studies focusing on one or more teacher feedback treatments (e.g., Wang, 2014; Yu & Hu, 2017); b) the studies comparing or surveying students' and/or teachers' perspectives on some feedback types (e.g., Elwood & Bode, 2014; Lee, 2008; Cheng & Zhang, 2022); and c) the studies addressing non-teacher feedack types such as peer feedback (e.g., Fan & Xu, 2020) and automated writing evaluation (e.g., Guo, Feng, & Hua, 2022). Though these studies have revealed important findings about the effectiveness of writing feedback types, some ssues remain to be explored.

A relevant area yet to receive due attention is comparing L2 writing students classroom feedback preferences with teachers practices. Such comparison is important as it informs us about the potential matches and mismatches between the feedback forms and activitiestudents want in writing classes and teachers perceptions and implementation of such forms and activities. Though it is intuitive to find writing learners and teachers agree and disagree upon some feedback dimensions, previous studies have not yet provided us with conclusive evidence about the agreed- or disagreed-upon areas. Thus, research dealing with this ssue could have important implications to optimizing feedback practices in writing classes. The scarce previous relevant research has depended on case studies with small participant samples (e.g., Alshahrani & Storch, 2014; Hyland & Hyland, 2001). Besides, the scope of the feedack types such research has explored is limited.

Arguably, survey research using a more comprehensive feedback framework could help us compare L2 writing learner and teacher feedback perspectives from a wider angle. According to Dornyei and Taguchi (2009), surveys enable us to collect versatile and huge data from a large number of respondents about various topics. Previous large-scale survey feedback studies involving both learners and teachers concen other disciplines rather than 2 writig (e.g., Dawson et al., 2019; Mulliner & Tucker, 2017). Relying upon a detailed framework of feedback practices in writing classes, the present study attempted to addressthis research gap by surveying Saudi university EFL students' writing feedback preferences and their teachers' reported practices and perspectives.

# 2. Types of feedback provision strategies and activities in writing classes

Since surveying student and teacher writing feedback perspectives should depend on a comprehensive feedback framework, it is important t review previous classficatios, and identify whether or not a different feedback typology is neded. Early classfications were concerned with brod ssues in writing teacher fdback such as content verus form, or local vesus global comments , Searle & Dillon, 1980). More detailed taxonomies of feedback focus were given in later studies , such as focusing on ideas, organization, vocabulary, grammar, and mechanics (Lee, 2008). An ssue related to feedback focus s scoring students' texs using an analytc or holistic rubric (e.g., Imbler et al., 2023). Regarding the functions of writig teacher comments, Hyland and Hyland (2001) classify them into comments of praise, criticism, and suggestions.

Feedback provision mode is also another important dimension. In addition to written feedback, teacher comments can also be delivered in an oral or electronic mode (e.g. Elwood & Bode, 2014). Needless to say, technological developments have influenced feedback forms and activities in writing clsses. The clearest example of this is the increasing use of automated evaluation programmes in writing classes (e.g, Guo et al., 2022; Jiang & Yu, 2022). Automated writing evaluation along with peer feedback and self-assessment (i. students critical evaluation of their own writing) are labeled as non-teacher feedack forms (Saito, 1994)

Writing feedback has also been categorized acording to the explicitness of teacher error correction. In this regard, two main written corrective fdback techniques hae been distinguished: direct error correction where the teacher corrects errors and students are to transcrie corrctions intheir texts, and indirect eror correction through which th cher provides fdack on errors students are to correct themseles (Ferris, 2002). Additionally, indirect eror corrction has been further divided int: coded err correction where errors are marked using symbols or abbreviations, and uncoded eror correction where errors are highlighted or underlined and students are to identify the error type and fix it (e.g., Ferris, 2002).

Some works have offered wider frameworks of writing teacher feedback. Ellis (2009), for instance, lists six types of written corrective feack hee are: a)diret fack; b) indect fback; ) mealisic feback (i. ging stdnts some inguistic clues about their errors); d) feedback scope (i.., focused versus unfocused); e) electronic feedback; and f reformulation feedback (reformulating the entire text to improve its phrasing).Liu and Wu (2019) also used a student questionnaire with the ollowing six L2 writing feedback dimensions: a) source: teachers, peers, and computers b) mode: written, spoken and mixed; c) tone: positive, negative and mixed; d) focus: content, organization, style grammar, vocabulary, and mechanics; e) scope: unfocused versus focused feedback; and f explicinss direct versus inirec feedback. On the other hand, Yu, Jiang, and Zhou (2020) developed 23-item scale for assesing the following five writing feedback types: a) scoring students' texts acording to a rubric b) processoriented feedback given on the conten of text drafts; c expressie eeback (i.., prais, criticisms and suggestions) d peer and selfeedback; ande) written corrective feedback.

While some of the above feedback taxonomies concern the treatment each study used (e.g., Hyland & Hyland, 2001), other ones were developed in light of the feedback types made by the teacher (e.g., Lee, 2008). The taxonomies rported by Ellis (2009), Liu and Wu (2019), and Yu et al. (2020) are the only ones representing researchers' literature-driven feedback conceptualizations. These attempts have doubtlessly enriched our understanding of writing feedback dimensions, but we could typologize them using an alternative framework encompassin all fedback types ocurring in L writin instruction environment. In the present study, we use the term "feedback in writing classes" which is broader than "writing teacher feedack"; the former includes both teacher and non-teacher feedback forms. Based on reviewing iterature, we sugest an alternative framework of feedback in writing clases this framework comprises the following eight dimensions:

a) Feedback mode: writte, electronic, oral, audio-recorded; delivere to one student versus to a group of students (g., Elis, 2009; Elwood & Bode, 2014; Liu & Wu, 2019);   
b) Feedback focus: text content, organzation, vocabulary, grammar, spelling and punctuation (g, Lee 208; Searle & Dillon, 1980, Liu & Wu, 2019);   
c) Feedback timing: the first draft or one draft only versus multiple text drafts (e.g., Lee, 2008; Yu et al., 2020);   
d) Feedback function: praise, criticism, and suggestion (e.g., Hyland & Hyland, 2001; Yu et al., 2020);   
e) Text scoring: analytical scoring versus holistic scoring (Imbler et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2020);   
f) Corrective feback explicitness direct versus indirect (coded versus uncoded) (eg., Elli, 2009; Ferris, 2002; u et a., 2020);   
g) Corrective fedback scope: comprehensive versus selective (e.g., Ellis, 2009; Liu & Wu, 2019; Zhang et al., 2021);   
h) Non-teacher feedack self-evaluation, peer fedback, and automated writing evaluation (e.g., Maarof, Yamat, & Li, 2011; Saito, 1994; Tian & Zhou, 2020; Yu et al., 2020).

The proposed taxonomy could be regarded as a more comprehensive framework for surveying learner and teacher writing feedback perspectives. More details about the two surveys developed in light of it are given in the method section.

# 3. Previous relevant studies

Some insights into the effectiveness of particular writing feedack types and students preferences have been gained from a part of the data collcted in experimental/interventional and non-survey studies. The insights gained from interventional and non-survey research, however, concern some feedback types rather than others. For example, some studies indicate that L2 writing students have generally a neative atitude towards pr fedack due to its low-perceived usefulness and fear f crticism e.g, Abdel Latif, 2015; Fan & Xu, 2020; Wang, 2014; Yu & Hu, 2017). Some non-survey studies also imply that L2 writing teachers overuse of written corrective fedback and criticism- and even their over-praise in some cases- could cause students' demotivation (e.g., Lipnevich & Smith, 2009). As willbe noted in the following three ubsections, published studies profilin fedback preferences and practices ave provided larger data about L2 learner and/or teacher perspectives on various writing feedback types. In terms of their participants, these studies are of three types: learner studies, teacher studies and learner-teacher studies.

# 3.1. Research on L2 writing learner feedback preferences

Most studies on L2 learner writing feedback preferences drew upon combining quantitative with qualitative data (through using a questionnaire and interviews or a survey with close-ended and open-ended questions). For example, Elwood and Bode (2014) explored 410 Japanese universty students preferences for the writing feedback focus (mechanical versus content), type (e.g., explicit, coded, content only, and grade only), and mode (red pen, blue pen, handwritten, and computer-mediated). Their participant students were found to prefer detailed writen feedack on both content and mechanical features. On the other hand, Chen, Nasaji, and Liu (2016) probed 64 Chinese universt students perceptions and preference of written corrective feeback types, and found the students had strong preference for detailed comments on writing content and grammar. Zhang et al., 2021 also investigated 117 Thai universty students preference for selectie versus comprehensive writen correctie fedack Thee students -rrespective of their proficiency preferred more explicit feedback and overt linguistic error correction.

Unlike the above small-scale studies, there is a paucity of learner research with a wider feedback scope and large samples. Of these scarce attempts is $\mathrm { Y u }$ et al.'s (2020) study which investigated how 1190 Chinese EFL university students rate the impact of five feedback types (rubric-based text scoring, processoriented feedback, expressive feedack, peer and selfeedback, and written correctivefeedback). For these students, expresive feedback was the feeback type their teachers most frequentl used, whereas written correctiv feedback was the least frequently used one. The students writing motivation was found to be hindered by process oriented feedback and written correctiv feedback, and to be enhancedby scorin, per and self-feedback, and expressiv feedback.

On the other hand, research on learner perceptions of teacher versus non-teacher feedback forms has relatively increased since the early 2010s. Some studies have focused on teacher feedback and peer feedback. For example, Zha0 (2010) investigated 18 Chinese universit L2 students understanding of teacher and peer feedback through using revision analysis and stimulated recall interviews. Her participant students used more teacher than per feedback in their revisions, and passvely acceted teacher feedback. Using a similar methodological approach, Ruegg (2017) also found that L2 students had more preference and positive responses to teacher than peer feedback. Other studies have compared learner responses to teacher feedback versus two non-teacher feedback forms. Maarof et al. (2011), for instance, inestigated 150 Malaysian high school L2 students pereptions of teacher fdback as compared to self-assesment and per feedback. Their students perceived both teacher feedback and selfasessment as more useful than peer feedback. In a naturalistic interview-based study comparing Chinese universty L2 students' responses to teacher feedback, and peer and automated writing asssment, Tian and Zhou (2020) found that automated feedback was the least incorporated type in the students' revision, whereas teacher feedback was the most incorporated one.

# 3.2. Research on L2 writing teacher feedback perspectives

Most L2 writing teacher feedback studies have depended primarily on qualitative data and case studies. For example, Lee (2008) analyzed the fedback content 26 Hong Kong secondary English teachers provided on 174 student texts, and then interviewed six of them about their feedback practices. Her participant teachers primarily provided students with writte comments on single-drafts and that their comments were more error-focused. Cheng, Zhang, and Yan (2021) explored four Chinese universty EFL writing teachers feedback beliefs and practices using semi-structured interviews and lasoom oservation. Al the four participant teachers adopted a comprehensive approach to feedback provision, and focused more on grammar errors.

Some studies have adopted a comparative approach to investigating 2 writing teacher feedback practices. Cheng and Zhang (2022), for instance, used in-depth interviews with four native English-speaking teachers and four non-native English-speaking ones at a Chinese university to compare their beliefs about writing feedback purpose, scope, strategy, focus and orientation. While the two types of teachers shared similar belief regarding feedback focus, their beliefs differed about fdback scope; whereas there were within-group differences in the other three feedback dimensions. Chen (2023) compared the changes in two novice Chinese L2 teachers written corrective feedback provision across learner-centred and teacher-centred environments over time. Her interview and textual data showed that the teachers wrien corective feedback underwent distinct changes acros the ifferent environments, and that such changes were mainly caused by students' motivation and individual differences.

On the other hand, there has been scant research on teacher attitude towards leaner-centred fedback activities (i.., non-teacher feedback forms). The few studies available have only adressed teacher perceptions and experiences of automated writing evaluation. The recent studies reported by Li (2021), Wilson et al. (2021), and Koltoskaia (2023) belong to this reearch strand. Clectively, these studies indicate that while the teachers perceived the potential positive impact of automated writing evaluation tools on students motivation and written text mechanics quality, they are concerned about using them in their writing classes due to the required ecological changes in the learning and instructional environment.

# 3.3. Research comparing L2 writing learner and teacher feedback perspectives

Not many published studies have compared L2 learner writing feedback preferences to teacher practices and views. A common trend in these leaner-teacher studies is focusing on a small number of teachers as case studie along with their students. For example, Hyland and Hyland (2001) analyzed the wrtten feedback two teachers made on six ESL students' texts during a 14-week course at a New Zealand universt, and then interviewed these teachers and students. Their data showed that praise was the most frequently used feedback function type, and that the teachers mitigated their criticisms and sugestions through using hedging, questioning, and personal atribution. Meanwhile, the student interpreted teachers' indirect comments as a form of criticism. Using interview and textual data and student questionnair, Alshahrani and Storch (2014) also examined the writte corrctive feeback practices of three teachers working at a Saudi universty and the reactions of 45 students (15 students per each teacher). While their participant teachers provided their students with comprehensive indirect feedback- very often on mechanics, their students preferred direct feedback particularly on grammar.

At a U.S. intensive English programme, Liu and Wu (2019) surveyed the preferences of 70 students and 16 teachers regarding L2 writing feedback source, mode, fous, scope, and explicins. They collectd their data using: a) astudent questionaire with a5-item part tapping respondent' feedback preferences and a 7-item part asking them to select their preferred grammar error correction strategy; and b) a one-part 13-item questionnaire ssessing teachers beliefs about the target writing feedack dimensions. While the students viewed teachers as the most important writing feedback source and preferred comprehensive and direct feedback, the teachers had neutrl atitudes towards pee feedack and preferred focused and indirect feedback. Meanwhil, both the students and teachers had matched views on usefulness of oral feedback, feedback on both rhetorical and linguistic text aspects.

The above-reviewed studies have enriched our understanding of L2 writing learner fedback preferences and teacher practices; however, some relevant issues are yet to be explored. The feedback dimensions addressed varied from one study to another, but no study has covered a comprehensive range of teacher and non-teacher fedback types. This limitation has been mainly associated with the qualitative nature of some studies, and with the witing feedback frameworks or instruments used in other ones. Beides, the scarce L2 writing leaner-teacher feedback studies available collected data from a smallnumber of participants and can be best described as case studies. While Liu and Wu's (2019) study may be an exception as it gathered data from 70 students and 16 teachers, the items in their student and teacher questionnaires were not identical as they tapped the target feedback dimensions differently in the two surveys. Accordingly, i i important to compare L2 writing learner and teacher feedback perspectives using identicallystructured instrumentsrelying upon a wider fdback framework. Needed also is surveying L2 writing feedback perspectives of larger earner and teacher samples in different international contexts.

# 4. The present study

Taking these gaps into account, this large-scale study surveyed Saudi university EFL writing students' and teachers feedback perspectives in light of the above proposed framework. The study, therefore, could have important implicatins to improving writing feedback practices in the Saudi university context on which a few relevant studies have been published (e.g., Alshahrani & Storch, 2014). We combined quantitative and qualitative data through using two questionnaires with close-ended and open-ended questions. The novel dimension in thistudy is its use of two questionnaires with identical items tapping leaner and teacher perspectives on the same writing feedback dimensions. Accordingly, the study is guided by the following three questions:

1. Which writing feedback provision strategies and activities do Saudi university EFL students prefer more or less?   
2. Which writing feedback provision strategies and activities do Saudi university EFL teachers use more or less?   
3. To what extent do Saudi university EFL students' writing feedback preferences match or mismatch teachers' reported practices?

# 4.1. Setting and participants

The data of this study were collected from a sample of EFL writing students and teachers in the English departments at either the colleges of at or the colleges of languages and translation at Saudi universities. lmost al the students atending these departments are Saudis. In these universty departments in Saudi Arabia, students study English as their major for four academic years, and they are prepared for the English teaching and translation professions. During their 4-year study, these students attend a number of English writing courses, normally ranging from four to six courses depending on the academic programme they attend. In these courses, students practice writig different Englishesay genres; each course normall i alltted 2-3 weekly teaching hours and covers 2-3 genres.

A total of 575 EFL undergraduate students and 82 teachers took part in this study. The students were enrolled at 11different public universities in Saudi rabia. These students were females and males, and they were ll Saudis. At the time of collecting the data, the students were in different academic years or levels, and had varied English writing learning experiences at their universities. As for the participant teachers, they were faculty members teaching English areas, including writing, at 11 public Saudi universities. The 82 teachers were of Egyptian, Indian, Jordanian, Pakistani, Saudi, Sudanese, U.S and Yemeni nationalities. They were female and male teachers with different academic ranks, and varied language teaching and writing instruction experiences. Summaries of the demographic information about the students and teachers are given in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. The participant students and teachers agreed to take part in the study voluntarily. Informed consent for both the students and teachers was ensured by including an introductory questionnaire section which stated the aim of the instrument, confirmed the confidentiality of respondent's personal information and the use of data for research purposes only, and informed them that submitting questionnaire responses means agreeing to participate voluntarily in the study.

# 4.2. Instruments

As implied above, the study drew on two writing feedback questionnaires: a student questionnaire and a teacher one. The two questionnaires hae the same number of items which asss the perspectives of respondent students and teachers on the same feedback issues. For example, in the student questionnaire item 1 isphrased as "in English writing courses, I like my teacher to give handwritten comments on my texts", and in the teacher questionnaire item 1 is phrased as when giving feedback on my students writing, I tend to give handwritten comments on each student's texts' The items of the two questionnaires were written in light of the above writing feedback taxonomy. Besides, the informal discussions were held with 15 English writing teachers working at three Saudi universities helped us identify the normal number of the text drafts evaluated and the five main writing feedback modes commonly used in the research context. We worked collaboratively on identifying the parts of the two questionnaires and phrasing the statements and open. ended questions in each part. The student questionnaire was translated into Arabic to facilitate respondents item understanding, but the teacher questionnaire remained untranslated because it was expected that teachers-- due to their higher English proficiency levels-- would find no difficulty understanding the meaning o is items. We also consulted two expert researchers about the phrasing of the items in the two questionnaires and how these items match the taxonomy we developed. The two researchers' views were generally positive; but two redundant statements were deleted from each questionnairebased on their sugestions. Aditionally, some phrasing modfications were made to a few other statements in the initial Arabic tudent questionnaire version afer piloting it with 30 respondents. The teacher questionnaire was also piloted with 4 teachers who reported having no problem in understanding its items.

The final version of each questionnaire includes 26 items focusing on a set of feedback types and activities used in L2 writing classes. Each questionnaire sarts with an introduction that states its purpose and confirms the confidentiality of respondents personal data; this inroduction is followed by a demographic section used for collcting data about respondents' gender, academic level (for students) or rank (for teachers), writing and language learning or teaching experiences. The second section of each questionnaire is divided into five parts covering the fllowing dimensions of feedback in L2 writing clases: a) feedback mode (5 items); b) feedback focus (6 items) c)feedback timing and function, and text scorin (7 items) d) error correction explicitness and scope (5 items); and e) non-teacher fdback forms (3 items).  5-point Likert response set (always, often, sometimes, rarely and never) is used in all he five parts of each questionnaire. In addition to these close-ended items, each of the two questionnaires also includes five open-ended questions added to obtain data about respondents' explanations for their answers to the statements in each part. The statistical an alyses showed that the average Cronbach's Alphareliabiliy coefficient of the 26 close-ended items in the student questionnaire i 0.76, whereas the one for those in the teacher questionnaire is 0.84. The student questionnaire (its English verson) and the teacher one are Jiven in appendices 1 and 2, respectively.

Table 1 The demographic information of the participant students.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Sub-category</td><td>Number</td><td>Percentage</td></tr><tr><td>Gender</td><td>Female</td><td>401</td><td>69.7 %</td></tr><tr><td>Academic year</td><td>male Freshman</td><td>174</td><td>30.3 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Sophomore</td><td>36 306</td><td>6.3 % 53.2 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Junior</td><td>119</td><td>20.7 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> Senior</td><td>114</td><td>19.8 %</td></tr><tr><td>English writing courses taken at the university</td><td>1-2 courses</td><td>209</td><td>36.4 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> 3-4 courses</td><td>226</td><td>39.3 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>More than 4 courses</td><td>140</td><td>24.3 %</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 The demographic information of the participant teachers.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Sub-category</td><td>Number</td><td>Percentage</td></tr><tr><td>Gender</td><td>Female</td><td>53</td><td>64.6 %</td></tr><tr><td>Academic rank</td><td>Male</td><td>29</td><td>35.4 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Lecturer</td><td>19</td><td>23.2 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Assistant professor</td><td>48</td><td>64.6 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Associate professor</td><td>9</td><td>11 %</td></tr><tr><td>Teaching experience</td><td>Professor</td><td>6</td><td>7.3 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Less than 5 years</td><td>4</td><td>4.9 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> 5-10 years</td><td>18</td><td>22 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>11-15 years</td><td>27</td><td>32.9 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> More than 15 years</td><td>33</td><td>40.2 %</td></tr><tr><td>English writing courses taught in the three years prior to collecting the data</td><td>1-5 courses</td><td>57</td><td>69.5 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>6 - 10 courses</td><td>19</td><td>23.2 %</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>More than 10 courses</td><td>6</td><td>7.3 %</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.3. Data collection and analysis procedures

We collcted the data of the present study using online versions of the teacher questionnaire and the Arabic-translated student one. After creating the two questionnaires on Google Forms, thir webpage URLs were circulated- with the help of some colleague faculty members- through diffrent mediums, including Blackboard announcements, emails, and WhatsApp to several groups of English majors and English writing teachers in a number of universties and they were invited to complete them. The proces of receiving the responses from the teachers and students to the questionnaires lasted for eight weeks.

After collcting the responses to the two questionnaires, we started analyzing the data. We first analyzed the quantitative data by using the independent-sample -test to compare to the responses of the participant students and teachers to the statements asssing their perspecties on the same feedback-related issue. Bonerroni-corrcted significance level was alsocalculated to control for any chance of Type 1 eror caused by multiple test analyse. Additionall, we analyzed the responses to the open-ended questions in both questionnaires by cllboratively reading them and summarizing emerging themes (Bogdan & Biklen, 1992). The explanations given by the teachers and students regarding each feedback dimension were also compared.

# 5. Result of the data analysis

The results of the data analysis are iven in the following five subsections. As wil be noted, we compared the responses of both the students and teachers to the statements about the target feedback strategies. It is worth noting that we have not included the exact phrasing of the statements in the tables summarizing the data, given that the phrasing of the statments differs in each questonnaire. Instead, we have labeled the feedback provision strategy or form in a way summarizing the two identical statements in both questionnaires. We also summarized the students and teachers' answers to the open-ended questions in both questionnairesto pinpoint the potential rationale for their responses.

# 5.1. Feedback provision modes

Table 3 shows a summary of the students and teachers' responses to the statements about the five dominant English writing feedback provision modes at Saudi universities. The teachers' two most frequently used modes are individual handwriten feedback (given to each student) and group oral fedback on sample texts (given to the wholeclass), whereas audio-recorded feedback is thir least used mode. On the other hand, the students' most favourite modes are individual handwritten feedback and individual electronically-wrten fedback, and their least preferred mode is audio-recorded feedback. There are no significant difference be. tween the teachers reported use of individual handwrtten feedback and group oral feedback and the students preference for these two modes. However, significant differences are detected between the students' preference for individual oral feedback and electronically-written feedback and the teachers' reported uses of the two modes $( p < . 0 5 )$ . The effect size analyses indicated that the differences between the teachers and students were medium for both the individual oral and electronically-written feedback $\mathrm { T } \mathrm { d } = 0 . 3 7$ and 0.56, respectively), but large for audio-recorded comments $[ { \mathsf { d } } = 1 . 1 4 ]$ . Overall, these results imply that the teachers meet the students ned for eting individual handwrittenfeedback and group oral feedback, but do not mee their needs for having individual oral feedback, electronically-written feedback, and audio-recorded feedback.

Table 3 The students' and teachers' responses to the statements about feedback provision modes.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Feedback provision mode</td><td colspan="2">Students&#x27; preferences</td><td colspan="2">Teachers&#x27; reported uses</td><td>t</td><td>df</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>m</td><td> SD</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Individual handwritten feedback (to each student)</td><td>4.25</td><td>1.089</td><td>4.02</td><td>1.172</td><td>1.756</td><td>655</td><td>.079</td></tr><tr><td>Group oral feedback (to the whole class)</td><td>3.73</td><td>1.332</td><td>3.96</td><td>.928</td><td>2.000</td><td>131.593</td><td>.048</td></tr><tr><td> Individual oral feedback</td><td>3.93</td><td>1.243</td><td>3.48</td><td>1.205</td><td>3.077</td><td>655</td><td>.002</td></tr><tr><td> Individual electronically-written feedback</td><td>4.22</td><td>1.141</td><td>3.54</td><td>1.265</td><td>4.558</td><td>99.661</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Individual audio-recorded feedback</td><td>3.33</td><td>1.465</td><td>1.88</td><td>1.033</td><td>10.768</td><td>115.753</td><td>.000</td></tr></table></body></html>

In line with this quantitatie data, most students' answers to the open-ended question in this questionnaire part also indicate their preferences for individual written feedback, though they did not report a clear preference for either the electronic type or the handwritten one. Overal, the students answers imply that compared to whole-clas oral feedback, individual witten comments are more advantageous in being personalized, clear, private, and accessible when needed; for example:

I always like to receive written comments, at last these comments are always available and I can read them when I need. As for oral comments, I may forget them as the essay is long.

Some students mentioned their preference for individual oral feedback as it provides space for learner-teacher discussion and direct interaction. Many other students said they like acombination of writte and individual oral feedback. Meanwhile, the answers showed the students' varied views on whole-class oral feedback; some students talked about its benefits in making them aware of common errors, while thers mentioned thati is uses and non-personalizd, and rereents source of embarrasment ee if ther texts are anonymized.

The teachers answers to the relevant open-ended question also support quantitative data. Most teachers referred to individual handwrite, goup oral and to a les extent- electroniclly-writenfdback as their preferred mode. The following answer shows one typical case:

- Ipreer in nd tn-en  t ts hr cl.  li s to student groups on the most common erors so that they can learn from their errors. Other types of feedback are time-consuming.

For many teachers, individual handwritte feedback is more personalized and more memorable for students; for other teachers, group oral feedback is their preferred mode due to convenience, interactivity and immediacy; whereas some teachers like electronicallywritten feedback as it enables them to ad some features such as text highlighting and insertion, suggestions and detailed comments.

# 5.2. Teacher feedback focus

Table 4 gives a summary of the responses to the statements about writing feedback focus. Both the students and teachers almost agree on the relative importance of feedback on text ideas. The higher mean responses to the text organization and grammar statements also imply that thee two areas are top fedback priorities for the students and teachers. This could mean that the students need feedback on these two writing qualit areas more than other ones, and that the teachers prioritize them based on such perceived needs. Likewise, there is no large difference btween ther reonses tthe statemens about fousing fback nvocabulary. The sificant alpha level for vocabulary does not meet Bonferroni significance level which also correlates with the negligible effect size $\stackrel { \cdot } { d } = 0 . 0 3 $ On the other hand, statistically significant differences were found between the teachers reported feedback foci and the students preferences regarding ganzation, grammar, spelling, and punctuation. Despite these significant ifferences, the notd higher means of the teachers responses to all the statements in this part may imply that they pay attention to meeting the students' feedback expectations regarding these textual aspects.

The students open-ended answers in this part revealed their varied preferences for the feedack focus ares to prioritize. The larger group of th stdnt ike ther techr  alte l tel ast in thr eys, t the malr goup pt for riig aluation on selected aspects. Additionall, some other students have a low self-confidnce level in their language-related writing abilit. That is why they fear the teacher's evaluation of the lexical and syntactic aspects in their texts. This is clear for instance, in the following answer:

Table 4 The students' and teachers' responses to the statements about feedback focus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Feedback focus</td><td colspan="2">Students&#x27; preferences</td><td colspan="2">Teachers&#x27; reported uses</td><td>t</td><td>df</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>m</td><td>SD</td><td>m</td><td>SD</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text ideas</td><td>4.33</td><td>1.027</td><td>4.46</td><td>.708</td><td>1.430</td><td>132.780</td><td>.155</td></tr><tr><td>Text organization</td><td>4.44</td><td>.883</td><td>4.80</td><td>.459</td><td>5.792</td><td>178.499</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Text vocabulary</td><td>4.25</td><td>.976</td><td>4.46</td><td>.775</td><td>2.129</td><td>118.882</td><td>.035</td></tr><tr><td>Text grammar</td><td>4.42</td><td>.915</td><td>4.79</td><td>.467</td><td>5.708</td><td>182.520</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Text spelling</td><td>4.11</td><td>1.191</td><td>4.63</td><td>.749</td><td>5.366</td><td>144.559</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Text punctuation</td><td>4.18</td><td>1.133</td><td>4.60</td><td>.683</td><td>4.800</td><td>150.848</td><td>.000</td></tr></table></body></html>

- I like to t tcers uain f all tehi wth the xtif ly. We e tilng n wods d  i iffiulto use good words n esays at this stage. Thea dont have to go in line the techer's high criteria during this rly English lening stage.

Congruent with the quantitative data, the qualitative answers revealed that the larger teacher group tend to focus on multipletext aspects. For these teachers, such comprehensive fdback is necessary for students writing to improve. The smaller group of teachers said they like to focus only on evaluating particular textual aspect. Acording to five students, they do not need teacher evaluation on spelling and grammar as automated writing evaluation tols can do this. In line with some students views, thre teachers also think that with automated writing evaluation they can only prioritize ideational and organizational aspects in their fedback; for example:

- I believe that in the era of technology, students should make use of tools such as Microsoft Word and Grammarly to correct spelling punctuation and grammar errors. As a writing teacher, I should focus only on cohesion and coherence.

As noted, such perceived role of automated writing evaluation i prioritizing fdback focus does not seem to be amainstream belief at Saudi universities (number of the students and teachers reporting this belief $= 5$ and 3, respectively).

# 5.3. Feedback timing and function, and text scoring

Table 5 provides a summary of the responses to the seven statements about feedback timing and function, and text scoring. The mean of thestudents prefernce for evaluating one text draf only dos not differ greaty from the teachers reported use of this option, but a significant mismatch i found betwen the students preference for evaluating two text draft and the teachers rported use f it Significant differenes are alo found between the students preferenes and the tachers provision of suggestions, prase and criticism on written texts, and use of a holistic text score. The students means for all tesefour feedback dimensions are higher than thosef the teachers.

All differences were confirmed by the Bonferroni significance level with a large effect size for receiving criticism $[ d = 1 . 3 2 \rangle$ , and medium to small effect sizes for the other feedback strategies as follows: giving a holistic score $\zeta d = 0 . 7 5 )$ , evaluating two drafts ( $\ Q =$ 0.54), providing suggestions for writing improvement $\dot { \boldsymbol { d } } = 0 . 4 9$ , and praising students' writing $\textstyle \overbrace { d } = 0 . 4 7 $ . Thus, the students' needs for having teacher fedback on two text drafts and receiving performance praise and writing improvement suggestions may not be often met, while thre is ittle variation in the coring rubrics used, particularl the holistic ones. They also imply that the tachers use criticism very cautiously in their writing classes $( \mathbf { M } = 2 . 6 2 $

In their qualitative answers in each questionnaire part, both students and teachers talked about one or more of the feedback provision dimensions asesed. The students' answers concerning their preference for evaluating one text draft only versus two text drafts clearly showed that the majorit of them opt for the later option. Their main reasons include: avoiding writing errors, understanding the progress in writing the two drafts, and knowing the teacher satisfaction with their writing peformance. Contrarily to the students preferences, the relevant parts in the teachers answers indicate while they generall value iving fedback on two text drafts due to its impact on fostering students' writing development, the larger number of them evaluate one draft only. The teachers main reasons for this feedback option include: time constraints, the large number of students attending their clases, and making use of the first draft evaluation as a peer feedback or self-evaluation activity; for example:

-For the fir ft   dt f-te thr es r e them  the ma. h ber f td dent either allow me to evaluate two text drafts.

Regarding the students' preferences for feedback function strategies (praise, criticism and suggestions), their views are almost congruent in that what matters mainly for them isgtting teacher iformative feedback regardles of its functional content. Many students said they are kto get high-qualit fedack that is critical but clear and detailed. They particularly referred to the utmost importance of receiving teacher suggestions. Meanwhile, some students fear receiving teacher criticism of their texts in front of classmates. On the other hand, the few teachers answers about feedback function strategies indicate they use criticism cautiously. As one teacher comments:

Table 5 The students' and teachers' responses to the statements about feedback timing and function, and text scoring.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Feedback provision strategy</td><td colspan="2">Students&#x27; preferences</td><td colspan="2">Teachers&#x27; reported uses</td><td>t</td><td>df</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>SD</td><td></td><td>SD</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Evaluating one text draft only</td><td>3.50</td><td>1.453</td><td>3.30</td><td>1.409</td><td>1.160</td><td>655</td><td>.246</td></tr><tr><td>Evaluating two text drafts</td><td>4.28</td><td>1.064</td><td>3.68</td><td>1.160</td><td>4.693</td><td>655</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Providing suggestions for improving students&#x27; writing</td><td>4.65</td><td>.719</td><td>4.22</td><td>1.000</td><td>3.721</td><td>92.008</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Praising students&#x27; writing</td><td>4.47</td><td>.910</td><td>4.01</td><td>1.043</td><td>4.186</td><td>655</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Criticizing student&#x27;s writing</td><td>4.21</td><td>1.130</td><td>2.62</td><td>1.271</td><td>11.671</td><td>655</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Scoring the text holistically</td><td>4.39</td><td>.938</td><td>3.48</td><td>1.441</td><td>5.508</td><td>89.779</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Scoring the text analytically</td><td>4.19</td><td>1.124</td><td>4.14</td><td>1.046</td><td>.393</td><td>655</td><td>.694</td></tr></table></body></html>

- Students always get very happy with their teacher's praise.

As for text scoring, the few relevant answers given by the teachers indicate they depend more on analytic text scoring due to insti tutional guidelines. Likewise, the larger number f the students' text scoring-related answers generall indicate they are particularly interested in receiving analytic text scores to identify the writing areas they need to improve.

# 5.4. Error correction explicitness and scope

The participants' responses to the statements about error correction explicitness and scope are summarized in Table 6. The table shows significant differences between the teachers practices and the students' preferences in all the five error corrction strategies These differnces are fther verifid y the robust sinificance f Bonferroni with medum to lareffect sizes as follows: diect error correction ( $\gamma d = 1 . 4 7 $ , coded error correction $\zeta d = 0 . 6 8 \AA$ , uncoded error correction ( $\mathbf { \dot { d } } = 1 . 1 8 $ , and comprehensive and selective error correction ( $\dot { \boldsymbol { d } } = 0 . 8 3$ and 1.12, respectively). The noted wide discrepancies and significant differences in this part between the students' preferences and the teachers reported practices imply that the students expect much more direct and comprehensive error correction, and also more variation in teacher error correction strategies.

The qualitative answers showed that the very vast majority of students always want to receive direct and comprehensive error correction. Their comments indicate they like teacher eror correction when it i cer and informative enough. The tudents think that the clearer the teacher error correction is, the less likely they will make the same error(s) again:

- I like to see my errors corrected directl and clearly. I need to know why there is n error in a sentence and how to write itcorrectl.

In contrast to the students high expectations, the teachers' answers revealed they have varied approaches to error corrction. The smaller group of the teachers said they use direct and comprehensive error correction as they view their students need to be more aware of their writing problems and are unable to detect and fix erors n their own. With regardto eror corrction scope, the phrase "correc  large number of erors occurs repeatedly in thee teachers answers. This means that they are unlikely able to corrct all the errors i students text, particularly with the large number of students in their writing classes. Instead, they only correct the largest possible number of writing errors; for example:

- Correctig a large number of erors in writing assignments encourages students to pay closer attention to the details of thir writing

As for the larger group of teachers, their answers showed they use the coded type and combine direct and indirect error correction. The main reasons for this group of teachers are getting students to work autonomously on error correction, and considering their potential de-motivation, time constrains and classroom size; for example:

- I usuall highlight the eors and indicat her tye. Students need to le to e ctive leaners and work ontheir erors y loking thing up, reading explanations and comparing texts. The second reason is time. As an instructor, it would be time-consuming to provide detailed feedback for 20 students or more in one class.

Additionall, some teachers reported that their use of direct versus indirect comprehensive versus selective error correction depends mainly on a number of factors; for example:

- If the error is repetitive, I tend to correct the first one and highlight the rest.

Other contextual factors this group f teachrs mentioned as potentiall influencing their use f error corrction strategies include: text draft type, text length, students' levels, and available time.

# 5.5. Non-teacher writing feedback forms

Table 7 gives  summary of the responses to the the statements about non-teacher writing feedback forms. As noted, the means of the students and teachers' responses to the self-evaluation activities are almost the same. Meanwhile, significant differences are detected between the students and the teachers attitude towards pr feedback and automated writing evaluation activities. The teachers value the use of peer feedback activities more than the students (effect size, $d = 0 . 4 9 $ , whereas the students prefer to be engaged in automated writing evaluation activities more than the teachers are willing to use them (effect size, $d = 0 . 6 4 \AA$ . Overall, these results indicate that unlike their teachers reported practice, the students have a less positive attitude towards participating in peer feedback activities and a preference for having classroom-based automated writing ealuation activities. The reults aso mply that of all the three non-teacher fedback activity types, automated writing evaluation activities are the least used in writing classes.

Table 6 The students' and teachers' responses to the statements about error correction explicitness and scope.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Error correction strategy</td><td colspan="2">Students&#x27; preferences</td><td colspan="2">Teachers&#x27; reported uses</td><td>t</td><td>df</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M</td><td> SD</td><td></td><td> SD</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Direct error correction (giving correct alternatives)</td><td>4.87</td><td>.480</td><td>3.61</td><td>1.113</td><td>10.202</td><td>95.032</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Coded error correction (indicating error types only)</td><td>4.80</td><td>.553</td><td>4.30</td><td>.887</td><td>3.867</td><td>120.557</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Uncoded error correction (i.e., only highlighting/underlining errors)</td><td>3.82</td><td>1.514</td><td>2.18</td><td>1.243</td><td>6.081</td><td>77.068</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Comprehensive error correction</td><td>4.61</td><td>.784</td><td>3.81</td><td>1.119</td><td>4.569</td><td>112.773</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Selective error correction</td><td>4.48</td><td>1.000</td><td>3.27</td><td>1.150</td><td>5.991</td><td>100.618</td><td>.000</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 The students' and teachers' responses to the statements about non-teacher writing feedback forms.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Non-teacher feedback forms</td><td colspan="2">Students&#x27; preferences</td><td colspan="2">Teachers&#x27; reported uses</td><td>t</td><td>df</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Self-evaluation</td><td>3.93</td><td>1.318</td><td>3.95</td><td>1.036</td><td>.131</td><td>119.817</td><td>.896</td></tr><tr><td>Peer feedback</td><td>3.52</td><td>1.501</td><td>4.02</td><td>.935</td><td>4.181</td><td>147.576</td><td>.000</td></tr><tr><td>Automated writing evaluation</td><td>3.87</td><td>1.328</td><td>3.00</td><td>1.396</td><td>5.498</td><td>655</td><td>.000</td></tr></table></body></html>

The students' qualitative answers came in line with their responses to the statements. They generally like to have self-evaluation activitie in writing classes and view them effctive in increasing their awareness of erors, but some students' answers indicat thir need for teacher guidance in such actvities. Other fewer students view self-evaluation activities as useless ineffective and timeconsuming due to their perceived inability to detect their own writing errors. As one student summarizes it:

- It wouldn't make any diference as I always believe the essay I writ is a good one. So, I wouldn't know if there are error in it or not Bu When the teacher corrects my essay and marks my errors for me, I'll try not to repeat these errors.

The larger number of the students reported a positive attitude towards automated writing evaluation activitie, and think they could help in enhancing writing accuracy, rasing their awarenes particularly about grammar and punctuation errors, and saving time and effort Mahle, asmaller goup f stdnts fe sistic for pe feack ativitie. or thdnts, pe feack ativities are interactive, useful, and communicative. Conrarily, more students view peer feback activities boring, neffective, embarrassing stressfu, ses, and rael taken seriously. They fer pes citicis f hr wting, addot fe comfrtable shaig their essays with others or even pointing out to other peers' writing errors. Besides, they underestimate pers ability to provide meaningful feedback because they only trust the teacher's views, and do not even think they are competent enough to evaluate their peers writing.

The teachers' qualitative answers in this questionnaire part only concern per feedback and self-evaluation activities. The lack of the answers covering automated writing evaluation activities could simply mean that these are not commonly used in their writing classes. The teachers answers discussed in subsection 5.2 imply they think that students are supposed to use automated writing evaluation as an autonomous leaning tol rather than as a guided classroom activity. Regarding peer fedback and self-ealuation, in the larger number of answers the teachers indicated using them, and talked about their perceived benefits. For these teachers, selfevaluation writing activities help students become more critical and self-dependent writers and improve their proofreading skil, Whereas peer feedback ones enable students to learn from each other and from their rrors, share ideas communicat and collaborate well, and practice writing asessment. Three teachers also mentioned using rubrics in both activities to guide students assessment processes. However, a small group of teachers said that students cannot participateffectively in both types of activities due to thir inabilit to detect errors, low writing levels, lack f interest, or resistance to showing their written texts to classmates; for example:

-I use er ck tie  t  ineftie  fs e abt  tr m wto. o, we as teachers have to give feedback on their writing.

Overall the answers of both the students and teachers, along with the above quantitative data, indicate that non-teacher English writing feedback activities are neither regularly implemented nor effectively organized at Saudi universities.

# 6. Discussion of the results

As noted above, the matches and mismatches between the Saudi universty EFL students' writing feedback preferences and their teachers'reported practices vary from one dimension to another. The teachers' reported uses of provision modes align with the students' needs for getting individual handwritten feedback and group oral feedack, but not with their needs for having individual oral feedback, electronically-writte feedback, or audio-recorded feedback. With regard to feedback focus, the students' feedback expectations match the teachers' reported feedback on text content and vocabulary, but mismatch thoserelated to text organization, grammar, spelling and punctuation. However, the higher means of the teachers responses suggest that they try to meet the students' text focus feedback needs. Contrarily, we can note wide discrepancies between the students preferences and the teachers reported practices in relation to feedback timing and function, text scoring, and error correction explicitness and scope. The means of the students' responses to all the statements representing these fedback dimensions are higher than those of the teachers, though some mean difference are non- sigificant. While the students needs for feedback on one text draft and for analytical text scoring align with the teachers' practice, their needs for feedback on two text drafts and holistic text scoring do not seem to be adequately met by the teachers. On the other hand, the students' expectations for all the three feedack functions (i.e, praise, criticism and writing rovement suggestions) significantly differ from the teachers' reported uses of them.

There are also wide discrepancies between the students' preferences for and teachers' reported uses of the error correction explicitness and cope strategies asessed in the study. These wide discrepancies generally mean that the students like to receive more direct and comprehensive error corrctin, and to have more variation in teacher error corrction strategies. As for non-teacher feedback forms, mismatches only pertain to per feedack and automated writing evaluation, but not to self-evaluation. Compared to the students, the teachers have a more positive attitude towards implementing peer feedback activities; but the students are more enthusiastic for having clssroom-based automated writing evaluation experience. Overall these results indicate that the mismatches between the students' writing feedback preferences and the teachers' reported practices far exceed the matches.

The qualitative data obtained from the participants answers to the open-ended questions in both questionnaires generally support the quantitative results. More importantly, this qualitative data revealed key insights into the factors accounting for the students feedback preferences and teachers' reported practices. The main factors shaping the students' feedback preferences include: the perceived usefulnessof feedack techniques or activities, the desire for getting rich and detailed input from the teacher, motivation, and writing and language ability beliefs. Thus, the study supports some previous reearch findings e.g, Fan & Xu, 2020; Lipnevich & Smith, 2009; Nassji, & Liu, 2016; Yu & Hu, 2017). I is clear, for instance, that the perceived usefulnesshas played a key role in the students' preferences for individual written and oral feedback modes. Likewise, their preference for having teacher feedback on multiple text aspects and drat, analytical text scoring, teacher suggestions and direct error correction has been driven by the desire for obtaining detailed and clear input. The students motivation has also influenced their atitudes towards receiving teacher praise or criticism, and doing per assessment and automated evaluation activities in writing clses. Meanwhil, some students beliefs about their own and their classmates' writing and/or language abilities have led them to negatively evaluate peer feedback activities.

The teachers' reported feedback practice, on the other hand, have been influenced by some learner-related factors and contextual ones. While learner-related factors include students' motivation, writing and language ability, and error type and frequency, contextual factors encompass the perceived practiclit and usefulness f feedack forms, cass ize, and available time. Some of these factors have also been reported in previous research (e.g, Chen, 2023; Hyland & Hyland, 2001; Liu and Wu, 2019). The teachers consideration of the students' motivation was noted, for instance, in their reported cautious use of criticism. Likewise, their percep. tins of students ow writing and angag ailities led them to minmie ther ueof pr fedack activities andto fous feack on multiple text aspects. The teachers' reported feedback practices were also found to interact with students' error type and frequency. Additionall, the teachers' reported use of individual handwriten and group oral fedback modes and negative atitudes towards automated writing evaluation activities have been shaped by their perceptions of the practicality and usefulnessof such feedback forms. As for class size and available time, these two factors have mediated the teachers' perspectives on a number of feedback dimensions such as using particular feedback modes and focused error correction, and providing feedback on one text draft. As noted. more than one factor normally account for he students preference for or the teachers reported use of a given feedback type or form.

While our study generally implies that the interaction between teacher fedback practices and learner needs in L2 writing classes seem to be a context-specific process in many cases, it also shows that feedback practices in L2 writing environments share some common characteristics. Unlike the results reported by Liu and Wu (2019) and Yu et al. (2020), our study indicates that the students and teachers rate handwriten feedback as their most valued and used mode. Regarding feedback focus, the present results contradict those of Elwood and Bode (2014), but they partially go in line with the ones reported by Alshahrani and Storch (2014), Liu and Wu (2019), and Cheng et al. (2021).

The wide discrepancies the present study found between the students' preferences for feedback scope and explicitness and the teachers reported practices have also been reported by previous studies (e.g., Alshahrani & Storch, 2014; Hyland & Hyland, 2001; Liu and Wu, 2019). Likewise, the present study concurs with previous research findings in emphasizing that L2 writing students view their teacher as the most valuable eedback source compared to non-teacher feedback sources, .., peers or automated writing evaluation tools (e.g., Maarof et l., 2011; Liu & Wu, 2019; Ruegg, 2017; Tian & Zhou, 2020; Zha0, 2010). The students' reported resistance to peer feedback activities is also noteworth, especially when compared to the teachers relatively higher interest in engaging them in such activities. Such resistance was also found in some other international educational contexts (e.g., Abdel Latif, 2015; Fan & Xu, 2020; Wang, 2014). Besides, these results also support the previous research findings that many teachers are skeptical about using automatd writing evaluation tols in their clases due to the required ecological changes in instructional enronments  Li, 2021; Koltovskaia, 2023; Wilson et al., 2021). To conclude, our resuls support some previous research findings and are incongruent with others. These differences may be attributed to the ifferent instruments used and the unique charactristc of tudent and/or teacher participants in the educational environments researched.

# 7. Conclusion

The present study shows the complexity of feedback practices in L2 writing classes. It generally implies that in such classes feedback is a time-consuming and multi-dimensional proces though which the teacher tries to use a variety of provision modes, strategies and activities For the scesul povision of feedback and effctive implementation of its activitie, the writing teacher has also to consider learner-related and contextual factors and to find ways for optimally meeting students' multiple learning needs and expectations. Thus, it is essential to tailor feedback practices in a way matching students' preferences and expectations.

The results of this study indicate the dire need for aligning teachers' and students expectations ofeedback practices in EFL writing classes at Saudi universities. Matching students feedback needs to teachers feedback practices could help in significantl improving students L2 writing performance. Such alignment could be accomplished through teacher feedback provision training, assessment of students feedack needs, and institutional support. Improving feedack provision practices at Saudi universities irt requires raising writing teachers' awareness o effective feedback provision strategies and of assessig students feedback needs. Important also is training these teachers in using self-evaluation, peer fback, and automated evaluation activities in their clsses, and guiding them in how to optimally engage students in theseactivities. eachers awareness of students writing fedack needs could be also fostered through getting them to work closely with their students in order to understand their writing fedback expectations. Apart from writing teacher training, we also need to consider students feedback needs and previous learning experiences. For English writing feedback practices at Saudi universties to be efective, they should be based on meeting students' learning, motivation and engagement needs and expectations. Finally, institutional support in th form of minimizing classroom size and maximizing English writing instruction time at Saudi universities could also help in enabling teachers to meet students' writing fedback needs.

This study is not without it limitations. Addressing these imitations in future research could enrich our understanding of optimal feedback practices in L2 writing, While i realed important findings about writing feedack dimensions at Saudi univeritie, there is still a need for further research to provide a clearer picture about them. A potential contribution of the present study is the two instruments it has used in surveying the writing feedack perspectives of students and teachers. These two instruments may be used in future research to profile writing feedback in other international contexts. Moreover, this study is limited in looking at L2 writing teachers self-reported practices rather than actual ones. Finall, we till nd future large-scale research that may look at L2 writing teachers' actual feedback practices and how students respond to them.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Muhammad Abdel Latif: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Zainab Alsuhaibani: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Asma Alsahil: Writing - review & diting, Writing - original drat, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Concetualization.

# Funding information

This work was supported and funded by the Deanship of Scientific Research at Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University (IMSIU) (grant number IMSIU-RG23043).

# Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors have no potential conflict of interest.

# Data Availability

The data of this study is available upon request.

# Appendix 1

# Feedback in writing classes: student questionnaire

Dear student,

This questionnaire aims at exploring your preferences for the English writing evaluation types. Please note that there are no correct or wrong answers to the statements and that your answers to the questionnaire have no relationship with your academic evaluation or the university's evaluation of your writing teacher's performance. Therefore, please try to give as honest and realistic answers as possible. Allinformation collected will be kept confidential and will not be shared with anyone apart from the research team members. Your participation is completely anonymous and voluntaril. Please note that completing this questionnaire means that you accept to participate voluntarily in the study.

Thank you for your cooperation.

The researchers.

First: Personal information.

University:   
Please tick as appropriate. Gender:

<html><body><table><tr><td>Female</td></tr><tr><td>Male</td></tr></table></body></html>

Academic level:

<html><body><table><tr><td> Level 1</td><td>Level 5</td></tr><tr><td> Level 2</td><td>Level 6</td></tr><tr><td>Level 3</td><td> Level 7</td></tr><tr><td>Level 4</td><td>Level 8</td></tr></table></body></html>

English writing courses studied at university:

<html><body><table><tr><td>1-2 courses</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3-4 courses</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>More than 4 courses</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# Second: Writing feedback-related issues.

In your response to the statements in the following parts, please tick as appropriate:

Part 1: Feedback mode   

<html><body><table><tr><td>In English writing courses, I like my teacher to give:</td><td>Always</td><td>Often</td><td>Sometimes</td><td>Rarely</td><td>Never</td></tr><tr><td>Handwritten comments on my texts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Oral comments to the whole class on students&#x27; texts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Oral comments on my texts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Electronically-written comments on my texts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Audio-recorded comments on my texts..</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

- Please give any details or comments related to your answers to the above statements in this part.

Part 2: Feedback focus   

<html><body><table><tr><td>In English writing courses, I like my teacher to evaluate:</td><td>Always</td><td>Often</td><td>Sometimes</td><td>Rarely</td><td>Never</td></tr><tr><td>Text ideas.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text organization.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text vocabulary.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text grammar.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text spelling.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text punctuation.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

- Please give any details or comments related to your answers to the above statements in this part.

Part 3: Feedback timing and function, and text scoring   

<html><body><table><tr><td>When receiving comments from my writing teacher, I like her/him to:</td><td>Always</td><td>Often</td><td>Sometimes</td><td>Rarely</td><td>Never</td></tr><tr><td>Evaluate one text draft only.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Evaluate two text drafts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Give me suggestions for improving my writing weaknesses (e.g., using a particular reference).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Indicate if s/he is happy with my writing.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Indicate if s/he is unhappy with my writing.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Give an overall score to the text.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Give a score to each aspect in the text (for example, ideas, grammar and vocabulary).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

-- Please give any details or comments related to your answers to the above statements in this part.

Part 4: Error correction explicitness and coverage   

<html><body><table><tr><td>When receiving comments from my English writing teacher, I like her/him to:</td><td>Always</td><td>Often</td><td>Sometimes</td><td>Rarely</td><td>Never</td></tr><tr><td>Correct my errors directly by giving right alternatives.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Only draw my attention to errors by indicating their types only.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Only draw my attention to error without indicating their types.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Correct or highlight all the errors found in the text.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Correct or highlight some sample errors found in the text.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

-- Please give any details or comments related to your answers to the above statements in this part.

Part 5: Non-teacher feedback forms   

<html><body><table><tr><td>In English writing courses, I like my teacher to engage me in:</td><td>Always</td><td>Often</td><td>Sometimes</td><td>Rarely</td><td>Never</td></tr><tr><td>Self-evaluation activities (reading my own essays to find any weaknesses in them).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Peer feedback activities (exchanging essays with classmates for evaluation).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Automated writing evaluation activities using applications such as Grammarly or any other similar one.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

- Please give your reason(s) for why you like OR do not like each of the above three activities in writing classes.

# Appendix 2

# Feedback in writing classes: teacher questionnaire

Dear faculty member,

This questionnaire aims at exploring the ways you evaluate your students English writing. Please note that there are no correct or wrong answers to these questions and that your answers to the questionnaire items have no relationship with the university's eval. uation of your teaching performance. Therefore, please try to give as honest and realistic answers as possble. All nformation collected will be kept confidential and will not be shared with anyone apart from the research team members. Your participation is completely anonymous and voluntarily. Please note that completing this questionnaire means that you accept to participate voluntarily in the study.

Thank you for your cooperation. The researchers.   
First: Personal information. University:   
Nationality:   
Please tick as appropriate.   
Gender:

Academic rank:

<html><body><table><tr><td>Female</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Male</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Lecturer Assistant professor</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Associate professor</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Professor</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Years of university teaching experience:

<html><body><table><tr><td>Less than 5 years</td></tr><tr><td>5-10 years</td></tr><tr><td>11-15 years</td></tr><tr><td>More than 15 years</td></tr></table></body></html>

University English writing courses taught in the last three years:

<html><body><table><tr><td>1-5 courses</td></tr><tr><td>6 - 10 courses</td></tr><tr><td>More than 10 courses</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Second: Writing feedback-related issues.

In your response to the statements in the following parts, please tick as appropriate:

Part 1: Feedback mode   

<html><body><table><tr><td>When giving feedback on my students&#x27; writing, I tend to give:</td><td>Always</td><td>Often</td><td>Sometimes</td><td>Rarely</td><td>Never</td></tr><tr><td>Handwritten comments on each student&#x27;s texts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Oral comments to whole class on sample texts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Oral comments to each student on their texts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Electronically-written comments on each student&#x27;s texts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Audio-recorded comments on each student&#x27;s texts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

- Please give your reason(s) for why you like to use each of above modes of feedback more or lessfrequently.

Part 2: Feedback focus   

<html><body><table><tr><td>When giving feedback on my students&#x27; writing, I tend to pay more attention to evaluating:</td><td>Always</td><td>Often</td><td>Sometimes</td><td> Rarely</td><td>Never</td></tr><tr><td>Text ideas.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text organization.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text vocabulary.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text grammar.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text spelling.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Text punctuation.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

- Please give your reason(s) for why you like to focus more or les frequently on each of the above text aspects when giving feedback

Part 3: Feedback timing and function, and text scoring   

<html><body><table><tr><td>When giving feedback on my students&#x27; texts, I tend to:</td><td>Always</td><td>Often</td><td>Sometimes</td><td>Rarely</td><td>Never</td></tr><tr><td>Evaluate one text draft only.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Evaluate two text drafts.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Provide students with suggestions for improving their writing performance.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Indicate if I&#x27;m happy with their writing.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Indicate if I&#x27;m unhappy with their writing.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Give an overall score to the text.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Give a score to each aspect in texts (for example, ideas, grammar and vocabulary).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

- Please give reason(s) for your responses to the above statements.

Part 4: Error correction explicitness and coverage   

<html><body><table><tr><td>When correcting my students&#x27; errors in a written form, I tend to:</td><td>Always</td><td>Often</td><td>Sometimes</td><td>Rarely</td><td>Never</td></tr><tr><td>Correct them directly by giving their right alternatives. Draw their attention to errors by highlighting them and indicating their types only.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Draw their attention to errors by highlighting them only without indicating their types.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Give them comprehensive error correction.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Give them selective error correction.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

- Please give your reason(s) for why you like to use each of the above error correction strategies more or less frequently.

Part 5: Non-teacher feedback forms   

<html><body><table><tr><td>In my writing classes, I tend to engage students in:</td><td>Always</td><td>Often</td><td>Sometimes</td><td>Rarely</td><td>Never</td></tr><tr><td>Self-evaluation activities (getting them to read their own texts to find any weaknesses in them).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Peer feedback activities. Automated writing evaluation activities.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

- Please give your rason(s) for why you like to use each of the above thre actvities more or les frequently in your writing classes.

# References

Abe Lati. 2015. r f 2 wig i td f  ivst ss. J fRch n  8), 1942. /o.g   
10.1111/j.1467-9817.2012.01549.x Abde if, 021) m ,     019.   oec negative writing affect. Writing & Pedagogy, 11(1), 151-163. Doi: https:/doi.org/10.1558/wap.38569. Alshahrni  t 014) rw tiak r    t   th s institio gline, ad stdnts r?stin R f ple Lustic, 372), 101-122. :/.g/10.1075/l.37.2.02als Bogdan, R., & Biklen, S. (1992). Qualitative research for education. Boston: Allyn & Bacon. Chen,w. 223.i i winch  ane   rtie ek s rom a complexity theory perspective. Language Awareness, 32(3), 465-486. https:/doi.org/10.1080/09658416.2022.2119993 Che   1   ti   nnd China. Asian-Pacific Journal of Second and Foreign Language Education, 1(1), 1-17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40862-016-0010-y Cheg    th    ki anisheaking teachers' beliefs. Frontiers in Psychology, 13, Article 804313. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.804313 hg,   J 1).  c win  a i t  hg Research. , Article 13621688211057665. https://doi.org/10.1177/13621688211057665 o, P  e h,  1  rtief at ie. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 44(1), 25-36. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2018.1467877 Dornyei, Z, & Taguchi, . (2009). Quetionnaires in scond language reearch: onstructin, adminsration, and procesing. London: Routede, Ellis, R. (2009). A typology of written corrective feedback types. ELT Journal, 63(2), 97-107. htps:/doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccn023 e, 014 p- t  t   J2 3/.g   
10.1016/j.system.2013.12.023 Fan, .  200.  tt  th  k wn  f  g 50 l 0075. /.g   
10.1016/j.jslw.2020.100775 Ferris, R. D. (2002). Treatment of Error in Second language Writing. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, Go, Q    2).w fftly     w ti   st Language Learning, 35(9), 2312-2331. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2021.1879161 Hyland, K. (2003). Cambridge. Second language writing. Cambridge University Press. Hd 01 2.10116 S1060-3743(01)00038-8 Jiang, L   202.itn d w i  wi.ee n 35(7)   
1329-1353. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2020.1799824 Kolkai. 2023. 2 wi tc e  a   hr k  3, 2900 doi.org/10.1017/S0958344022000179 org/10.1016/j.jslw.2007.10.001 Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 21, 347-367. Doi: https://doi.org/.1007/s11092-009-9082-2 Li, Q . 0.   l   c  te fti  k    wt f ig Research, 11(2), 299-330. https://doi.org/10.17239/jowr-2019.11.02.03 Marof,    ,01  r  a w    5(1)   
29-35. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2015.1103365 Rueg,  (2017). risi rct d tisf e and thr fak. iig  d, 92).ht/.g/10.158/ap.33157 Sato 1 t         1 (2), 46-70.   
14(3), 233-242. Tn L           1 l   
102247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102247 ang, .01  r  n wq.  06   
10.1016/j.asw.2013.11.008 Wion,  d       r  1) c   orng Tansforg th tg nd g f witin using wig tio. er  tio 168, te 104208 ht/.g/10.1016/. compedu.2021.104208 Yu, S.  017. ric  i rwn  ici    a  gtio, 2 (2), 178-192. https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2016.1221806 Yu, S.,   0 fk in a h scale study. Assessing Writing, 44, 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2020.100451 a i enjoyment matter? Frontiers in Psychology, 12, Article 660564. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.660564 hao  0t   ci hns Assessing Writing, 15(1), 3-17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2010.01.002

Zainab Aha i itr f Ad gstic  ma d  d st  d ahe h ublise df -      w e learning, pragmatic competence and pragmatic instruction, and language learning strategies.

Asma Aahi s   apd stc d dst  d a e  r h t te L2 writing, feedback, technology-enhanced language learning and intercultural communication.