# Linguistic variation in research articles: When discipline tells only part of the story, Bethany Gray. John Benjamins, Philadelphia (2015). 222 pp., US\$143, Hardcover, ISBN: 9789027203793

Throughout recent history, important scientific discoveries have been documented in and transmitted through academic journal articles. The writing in academic articles is typically perceived as rigid, formulaic, and strict in adherence to linguistic prescriptions. In sharp contrast with these stereotypes, Biber (1988) found that “academic prose texts can be quite different from one another and still be considered representative of their genre” (p. 171), noting that this finding was “surprising and contrary to popular expectation” (p. 178). Research since Biber’s seminal study has made some progress toward explaining this variability using variables such as discipline (see Conrad, 1996; Hyland, 2001) and article sub-sections (Conrad, 1996; Biber & Finegan, 1994). While these variables are both strong predictors of linguistic variation in research articles (RAs), they are not adequate to explain the full range of linguistic variation within the register of RAs.

Studies such as these are the backdrop for the critically important research in Bethany Gray’s new book Linguistic variation in research articles: When discipline tells only part of the story (LVRA) in which she endeavors to achieve a more fine-grained explanation of linguistic variation in RAs. In her own words:

the study seeks to go beyond the traditional and often one-dimensional analysis of a generically-defined research article to first distinguish between different types of articles (or registers) within and across disciplines, and then to describe those registers according to their characteristic linguistic and non-linguistic features (pp. 7-8).

LVRA is divided into eight chapters. In Chapter 1 Gray situates her study within the literature on academic writing and disciplinary writing. Chapter 2 covers the methods and results of a situational description of the domain of academic journal articles. Based on that description, Gray developed the Academic Journal Register Corpus (AJRC), which she describes in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 contains the results of a comprehensive analysis of the situational characteristics of the texts in the AJRC. The next three chapters cover the methods and results of three major linguistic descriptions: individual lexical and grammatical features (Chapter 5), syntactic complexity features (Chapter 6), and a Multi-Dimensional analysis (Chapter 7). Finally, in Chapter 8 Gray synthesizes the findings from those three methodological approaches, describing their strengths, limitations, and complementarity. LVRA’s 222 pages contain over thirty informative tables and nearly twenty full-color figures. At the end of the book, the reader can find a wealth of useful information, including details for the 56 journals sampled from (Appendix A), complete accuracy results, both precision and recall, for the automatic tags (Appendix B), and statistical results (Appendix D–F). It is no exaggeration to write that Gray’s LVRA is the most thorough and comprehensive study of academic journal articles to date.

The first step in Gray’s study was to carry out a comprehensive survey of academic journal registers (see Chapter 2). This survey goes beyond traditional disciplinary distinctions by establishing a classification framework for describing RAs along multiple parameters. After manually describing and classifying a large number of RAs, Gray develops a hierarchical taxonomy for RAs, complete with clear operational definitions (pp. 33-34). This novel framework reveals a complex picture in which the RAs within disciplines are described using continuous clines rather than mutually exclusive categories. Gray’s analysis demonstrates that grouping RAs into disciplinary groups, while useful for practical purposes, is often an oversimplification that fails to account for situational heterogeneity within disciplines. Gray’s taxonomy serves as the foundation for the nine register categories in the AJRC, which are hybrid groups that account for both traditional discipline categories and the register distinctions identified in this study (p. 45). These categories make it possible to describe the situational and linguistic characteristics of RAs on a much more fine-tuned level than any previous study of this register.

Most corpus-based descriptions of language use are carried out by a researcher who is not a member of the linguistic community under investigation. While this can add objectivity to the findings of linguistic research, it can also severely limit the researcher’s ability to design representative corpora and interpret linguistic patterns. Gray overcomes this potential limitation by recruiting faculty members in seven disciplines to serve as expert informants for her study. These informants were involved in several stages of Gray’s research, including the development of her classification framework (p. 35), the selection of a representative sample of academic journals (p. 43), the analysis of situational characteristics (e.g. p. 74), and even the interpretation of her results (e.g. p. 165). The choice to involve expert informants allows Gray to make a strong case for the validity of her methods and findings and the credibility of her interpretations.

The corpus developed for this studydthe AJRCdis a two-million word specialized corpus comprising 270 RAs that are balanced across nine register categories. This sample is a shining example of a carefully designed and representative corpus. Throughout her description of the AJRC corpus, Gray refers to principles from Biber’s (1993) landmark paper Representativeness in Corpus Design which, paradoxically, is probably the best-known yet least-applied framework for corpus design. In a corpus design culture where convenience sampling is the status quo and corpus size is often the primary indicator of quality, the design of Gray’s AJRC is a breath of fresh air. The development of the AJRC begins with an in-depth description of the target domain (i.e. population) of academic journal writing (Chapter 2), continues with strategic, stratified sampling informed by experts (Chapter 3), and culminates with a comprehensive description of the situational characteristics of the corpus sample (Chapter 4). This final step is crucial in that it allows Gray, as well as the reader, to evaluate the representativeness of the corpus sample through a comparison of the situational characteristics of the sample and the target domain. Suffice it to say that the design and construction of the AJRC is exemplary in almost every way.

As I mention above, LVRA constitutes the most comprehensive linguistic analysis of RAs ever conducted. Rather than approach the domain of academic articles from one methodological framework, Gray instead uses three independent, yet complementary approaches. Each of these three approaches is carried out using mixed methods, including both quantitative results within and across registers and qualitative interpretation of those patterns using illustrative text excerpts. The survey of individual linguistic features in Chapter 5 offers an in-depth investigation of grammatical categories such as nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs (see p. 87). The analysis of syntactic complexity in Chapter 6 is an application of groundbreaking work by Doug Biber and Bethany Gray on grammatical indicators of phrasal compression and clausal elaboration in speech and writing (see Biber & Gray, 2010; Biber & Gray, 2016). The results presented in LVRA are particularly interesting because they show that the degree of phrasal and clausal complexity in RAs depends, to a large degree, on the register category (see Figure 6.6). While the analyses in Chapters 5 and 6 comprise multiple linguistic variables, only the MD analysis is multivariate in nature, in that it quantitatively accounts for co-occurrence patterns among related linguistic features. Gray uses MD analysis to reveal four functional dimensions of linguistic variation that strongly predict register and discipline variation across RAs (pp. 143-145).

Gray’s three-pronged linguistic analysis converges in Chapter 8 in the form of a research synthesis that accounts for the complex patterns of linguistic variation revealed in LVRA. This synthesis ultimately demonstrates (a) the complementarity of the three methods and (b) the power of triangulating two or more approaches in corpus linguistic research.

The research presented in LVRA lays the groundwork for future research in a number of areas. First, future researchers could attempt to apply Gray’s classification framework to other disciplines to determine its generalizability and possibly identify ways in which it can be expanded or improved. Second, in the future researchers could include multiple expert informants in order to gain more reliable information. Third, future corpus-based research that uses methodological triangulation could endeavor to measure relationships among the various linguistic variables, using correlation or multiple regression, allowing the researcher to estimate the degree of overlap among the quantitative variables. Finally, future research on RAs could collect multiple articles from each author in the corpus, making it possible to quantify linguistic variability due to author style.

The methods and findings in LVRA have profound implications for corpus research, generally, and research on linguistic variation in academic writing, specifically. From this point forward, scholarship on RAs should start with the classification taxonomy Gray proposes. Future researchers from across the spectrum of corpus-based research should consider incorporating information from informants who are experts and/or linguistic ‘insiders’. Corpus developers would also do well to use the AJRC as a model for the design of their corpora, especially for specialized corpora. Finally, Gray’s study demonstrates that triangulating multiple complementary methodologies results in a richer, more comprehensive analysis.

In closing, as the subtitle suggests, the research in LVRC indeed reveals that academic discipline only tells part of the full story of linguistic variation in RAs. Although Gray’s research may not complete that story, she has certainly written some of its most important chapters.

# References

Biber, D. (1988). Variation across speech and writing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Biber, D. (1993). Representativeness in corpus design. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 8, 243-257.   
Biber, D., & Finegan, E. (1994). Intra-textual variation within medical RAs. In N. Oostdijk, & P. de Haan (Eds.), Corpus-based research into language (pp. 201- 222). Amsterdam: Rodopi.   
Biber, D., & Gray, B. (2010). Challenging stereotypes about academic writing: Complexity, elaboration, explicitness. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9, 2-20.   
Biber, D., & Gray, B. (2016). Grammatical complexity in academic English: Linguistic change in writing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Conrad, S. (1996). Academic discourse in two disciplines: Professional writing and student development in biology and history. Doctoral dissertation, Northern Arizona University.   
Hyland, K. (2001). Bringing in the reader: Addressee features in academic articles. Written Communication, 18(4), 549-574.

Jesse Egbert is Assistant Professor in the Department of Linguistics and English Language at Brigham Young University. His primary area of interest is register variation, mostly within the domains of academic writing and internet language. He is also interested in corpus linguistic methods such as corpus design and quantitative research designs.