# Multilingual scholars’ participation in core/global academic communities: A literature review

Sedef Uzuner

Department of Educational Theory and Practice ED 122, University at Albany, State University of New York, Albany, NY, 12222

# Abstract

This paper presents a review of 39 empirical studies that investigated multilingual scholars’ participation in core/global academic communities through article and research publication. These studies were analyzed in terms of multilingual scholars’ reasons for publishing in English, the obstacles that stand in their way of international publication, theoretical assumptions about their socialization and/or participation in core disciplinary communities, and suggested conditions for helping them contribute more to the global intellectual voice. The paper also sets out the conditions under which novice multilingual scholars (graduate students) may best be inducted into the mainstream disciplinary culture and suggests avenues for future research.

$^ { © }$ 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Multilingual scholars; Scholarly publication; Disciplinary writing; International publication

# 1. Introduction

The theme of this paper is multilingual scholars’1 socialization in mainstream disciplinary communities. In particular, the paper reports on studies from the last two decades which looked at these scholars’ participation in core/ global academic communities through article and research publication.

Empirical work investigating the publication practices of multilingual scholars dates back to 1987 with St. John’s (1987) study of 30 Spanish scholars writing and publishing in English. Since then, research investigating multilingual scholars’ publishing experiences in core disciplinary communities has flourished. In addition to such works, several non-empirical articles focusing on the particular difficulties these scholars face in their attempts to obtain visibility in the core/global academic forum have also been published. For example, Gibbs (1995) has discussed and documented the ‘‘near invisibility’’ of Third World nations in international scientific literature. In a similar vein, Agunga (2001), Bhatia (2001), Braine (2005), Canagarajah (1996), Flowerdew (2008), and Salager-Meyer (2008) have provided thorough explanations of the contextual, cultural, social, linguistic, political, and economic forces that serve as exclusionary factors and consequently make the publication world out of reach of these scholars.

Nevertheless, what is missing is a review of the literature that provides an extensive synthesis of the field’s current state of knowledge about multilingual academics’ participation in the world of scholarship. The present paper responds to this need by providing a thorough overview of extant studies on this topic.

# 2. Multilingual scholars and the world of scholarship

Why should the intellectual practices of multilingual scholars be a concern for core academic communities? One reason for the importance of this issue is that multilingual scholars are a main pillar of global scholarship. They make unique contributions that ‘‘help reform, expand, and enrich the knowledge base of core disciplinary communities’’ (Liu, 2004, p. 2). This is certainly a widely accepted idea. For example, Canagarajah (1996) writes, ‘‘if all knowledge is situated and personal, then periphery perspectives on different disciplines may provide unique insights’’ (p. 463). Cho (2004) also views the situatedness of multilingual scholars in their local communities as strength and notes, ‘‘it affords uniqueness and closeness of perspective’’ (p.52). Flowerdew (2001) makes a point similar to Canagarajah’s and Cho’s. According to him, multilingual scholars enrich the knowledge base of core academic communities in two important ways: 1) they write about things that mainstream disciplinary communities do not know of; and 2) through accessing works that mainstream academic communities had not heard of, they draw attention to untapped or unknown resources.

In light of these statements, it can be argued that limited participation of multilingual scholars in global scholarship will impoverish knowledge production. Therefore, it is important that the particular difficulties of multilingual scholars be made public so that the research field can identify ways to help these scholars maintain visibility in the academic forum and contribute more to the core knowledge base (Flowerdew 2000).

# 3. Scope of this review

This review was conducted in order to extensively examine past empirical research concerning multilingual scholars’ international publication practices. Its major goal was to provide a data base that was as extensive as possible and one that was readily available to any interested reader. To achieve this goal, the following methods were used to locate and select studies for inclusion in this review:

First, a number of databases (including ERIC, EBSCO, PsycINFO, and Education Full Text) were searched during the 2007e2008 academic year for relevant studies. The following key words guided the search: scholarly publication, academic writing, periphery scholars, multilingual scholars, international publication, scientific English, disciplinary writing, and writing for publication. Once an item was located via electronic search, the abstract was carefully read. If the abstract looked promising, then the item was obtained from the libraries of SUNYAlbany. For items that could not be located in SUNY Albany’s libraries, it was loaned from other local, statewide, national, and international libraries. Another method involved examination of the reference lists of the selected articles for citations of additional relevant studies.

The following criteria guided the selection of the studies included in this review: 1) the paper was published in a peer reviewed journal or in edited collections; 2) master’s or doctoral dissertations and short reports (e.g., Li, 2006a; Link, 1998; Sahakyan, 2006; Shi, 2002) were not included; 3) the paper was focused explicitly or implicitly on multilingual scholars’ socialization in disciplinary communities through article publication e for example, papers that focused on multilingual scholars’ textual choices and/or linguistic productions (e.g., Burgess, 2002; Duszak, 1997; Montemayor-Borsinger, 2001) were not included; 4) the paper had to provide either qualitative and/or quantitative results e for example, although they do provide important implications for theory, practice, and research, nonempirical papers that do not focus on data-driven exploration of the topic were not included (e.g., Braine, 2005; Burrough-Boenisch, 2003; Canagarajah, 2002; Cargill & O’Connor, 2006; Gosden, 1991; Misak, Marusic, & Marusic, 2005; Swales, 1987); 5) the paper had to provide a sufficient description of data and data analysis from which the results were concluded.

Based on these criteria, 39 papers were found to be suitable for inclusion (see Tables $1 - 3$ ).

It is important to note that the final list of studies is entirely influenced by the author’s own resource availability. There may be other national and international references excluded from this review due to the author’s inability to locate them in the available library sources. Therefore, the author encourages other researchers to refine and extend this list so that a good number of studies investigating the topic at hand are represented in much more comprehensive reviews in the future.

Table 1 Studies that used human subjects.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Study</td><td>Focus</td><td>Participants</td></tr><tr><td>Belcher (1994)</td><td>Focuses on graduate students&#x27; interactions with their mentors during the process of dissertation writing.</td><td>Doctoral students majoring in Chinese literature, mathematics, and human nutrition at a US institution (N=3).</td></tr><tr><td>Casanave (1998)</td><td>Focuses on the transitional experiences of western trained multilingual scholars residing in Japan.</td><td>Two western-trained Japanese scholars who were just starting their academic careers at a university in Japan (N=2).</td></tr><tr><td>Cho (2004)</td><td>Investigates the challenges second language doctoral students experience with academic publishing.</td><td>Second language doctoral students (N = 4) working on their degrees at large public universities in the US.</td></tr><tr><td>Curry and Lillis (2004)</td><td>Looks at the publication practices of multilingual scholars (in what language do they publish? For what</td><td>Scholars of psychology from Hungary, Slovakia, and Spain (N = 16).</td></tr><tr><td>Dong (1998)</td><td>communities do they write?) Examines the impact of language, cultural differences, Multilingual graduate students (N = 169) at two state and social interactions on multilingual doctoral students&#x27; research universities in Southeastern United States.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Dong (1996)</td><td>dissertation writing. Investigates how advisors inducted their graduate students into the disciplinary culture.</td><td>Chinese doctoral students from a southeastern US university (N = 3).</td></tr><tr><td>Duszak and Lewkowicz (2008)</td><td>Investigates the attitudes of Polish scholars towards international publishing.</td><td>Polish scholars (N = 99) from fields such as psychology, social sciences, medicine and foreign languages.</td></tr><tr><td>Englander (in press)</td><td>Examines how reviewers&#x27; criticism of multilingual scientists&#x27; language use impact these</td><td>Spanish speaking (Mexican) scientists (N= 3).</td></tr><tr><td>Flowerdew (2001)</td><td>scholars&#x27; autobiographical self. Investigates journal editors&#x27; attitudes towards</td><td>Editors of high-value international journals (N = 11).</td></tr><tr><td>Flowerdew (2000)</td><td>submissions made by multilingual scholars.</td><td>Looks at what it means to be a multilingual researcher  A Chinese scholar who completed his doctoral studies in</td></tr><tr><td>Flowerdew (1999a)</td><td>seeking international publication in English. Identifies the particular problems multilingual scholars</td><td>the US, but chose an institutional base in Hong Kong. Scholars from Hong Kong (N = 26).</td></tr><tr><td>Flowerdew (1999b)</td><td>experience while writing for publication. Explores the attitudes of multilingual scholars towards</td><td>Chinese scholars working in Hong Kong universities</td></tr><tr><td>Gosden (1996)</td><td>international publishing. Studies the first attempts of novice scholars writing for Japanese scholars (novice) of applied physics, chemistry</td><td>(N = 100). and cell biology from Tokyo Institute of Technology.</td></tr><tr><td>Gosden (1992)</td><td>publication. Lays out the factors that influence journal editors&#x27; decisions with regards to submissions made by</td><td>Editors from the UK, US, and Canadian journals (N = 166).</td></tr><tr><td>Hasrati (2005)</td><td>multilingual scholars. Studies the academic socialization of novice scholars.</td><td>Iranian PhD students in five UK universities (N = 13).</td></tr><tr><td>Li (2007)</td><td>Studies a novice scholar&#x27;s writing processes as he prepares the first draft of a research article for</td><td>A doctoral student of chemistry (Chinese) at a Chinese university.</td></tr><tr><td>Li (2006b)</td><td>international publication. Documents the strategies and problems faced by a novice multilingual scholar in his research write-up.</td><td>A Chinese doctoral student of computer science writing for international publication.</td></tr><tr><td>Li (2006c)</td><td>Explores the processes a novice multilingual scholar goes through in writing for publication.</td><td>A Chinese doctoral student of physics in a university</td></tr><tr><td>Li (2005)</td><td>Examines the disciplinary enculturation of a novice</td><td>located in East China. A Chinese doctoral student of physics.</td></tr><tr><td>Li (2002)</td><td>multilingual scholar. Examines multilingual researchers&#x27; perceived status in</td><td>Doctoral students at Nanjing University in China.</td></tr><tr><td>Li and</td><td>the core disciplinary communities. Explores the influence of journal editors on novice</td><td>(N = 15) Chinese novice scientists (graduate students) from</td></tr><tr><td>Flowerdew (2007)</td><td>multilingual scholars&#x27; international publication practices.</td><td> mainland China (N = 12).</td></tr><tr><td>Liu (2004)</td><td>Investigates multilingual scholars&#x27; publishing experiences.</td><td>Chinese tenure-track assistant professors in applied linguistics at various American universities (N = 6).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Medgyes and Kaplan (1992) Investigates the reasons behind multilingual scholars&#x27;</td><td>Hungarian scholars (N = 342).</td></tr><tr><td>Shaw (1991)</td><td>limited participation in global disciplinary communities. Investigates the dissertation writing processes of</td><td>International graduate students (N = 22) in the</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 1 (continued )   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Study</td><td>Focus</td><td>Participants</td></tr><tr><td>Shi (2003)</td><td>writing for publication as a result of their bilingual/ bicultural intellectual identities.</td><td>Explores the challenges multilingual scholars face while Western-trained Chinese TEsOL professionals in China (N=9).</td></tr><tr><td>St. John (1987)</td><td>Examines the composing processes and products of multilingual researchers writing in English.</td><td>Spanish researchers at the University of Cordoba, Spain (N = 30).</td></tr><tr><td>Swales (1990)</td><td>paper.</td><td>Offers three case studies of novice multilingual scholars&#x27; Novice scholars (Egyptian, Iranian, and Chinese) who rhetorical success and failure when writing the research completed their PhD studies in the US (N = 3).</td></tr><tr><td>Tardy (2005)</td><td colspan="2">Explores multilingual writers&#x27; engagement in high stakes Graduate students at an American university (N =2). writing tasks, such as writing the research paper.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4. Themes and focus questions

Once the nature of the sample was established, the papers were then further categorized by themes which arose from reading the corpus of papers themselves. The focus questions associated with each theme were as follows:

- Why do multilingual scholars publish in English? Do they see it as an obligation?   
- What stands in their way of international publication?   
- Which theoretical perspectives are used in the current literature to predict or explain multilingual scholars’ socialization and participation in core disciplinary communities?   
- What, if any, are the key reported solutions that may help multilingual scholars publish more in mainstream academic communities?

Table 2 Studies based on textual analysis.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Study</td><td>Focus</td><td>Sample</td></tr><tr><td>Belcher (2007)</td><td>Examines the negotiations made between mainstream journal reviewers/editors and off-networked, multilingual scholars in the process of international</td><td>All of the accepted or rejected papers submitted to the English for Specific Purposes journal between 1998 and 2001.</td></tr><tr><td>ElMalik and Nesi (2008)</td><td>publishing. Compares medical research articles published by British and Sudanese scholars.</td><td>20 research articles published in international journals.</td></tr><tr><td>Flowerdew and Dudley-Evans (2002)</td><td>Investigates the problematic features manifested in editorial letters sent to multilingual scholars.</td><td>53 letters sent to multilingual scholars by a co-editor of a leading Applied Linguistics journal.</td></tr><tr><td>Giannoni (2008)</td><td>a) Investigates the status of Italian and other European languages in published medical research; b)studies discoursal variations in editorials written by Italian and English speaking scholars.</td><td>a) Publications that appeared in a comprehensive medical database between the years 1986 and 2005; b) editorials published between 2002 and 2006 in six peer- reviewed medical journals.</td></tr><tr><td>Gosden (1995) Kaplan and Baldauf (2005)</td><td>Textual revisions involved in the creation of successful research articles by multilingual scholars. Examines the language problems faced by multilingual</td><td>Independent writings of Japanese doctoral students (N = 7) at a university in Tokyo. A corpus of less than 500,o00 words retrieved from the</td></tr><tr><td>Lillis and Curry (2006)</td><td>scholars when writing for publication. Looks at the influence of &quot;literacy brokers&quot; in multilingual scholars&#x27; article/research publication.</td><td>journal of Current Issues in Language Planning. 130 text histories (academic research articles, book chapters, books, conference proceedings, and research</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Examines the impact of research funding and English</td><td>reports) of 30 psychology scholars from Hungary, Slovakia, Spain, and Portugal. 5275 articles appearing in the five highest ranked</td></tr><tr><td>Man et al. (2004)</td><td>proficiency on multilingual scholars&#x27; publication practices.</td><td>medical journals between 1997 and 2001.</td></tr><tr><td>Mauranen (1993)</td><td>Examines the cultural differences in scholars&#x27; texts.</td><td>One text written by a Finnish economist, and another written by a native speaker of English.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Studies that used textual analysis and interviews.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Study</td><td>Focus</td><td>Sample</td></tr><tr><td>Aydinli and Mathews (2000)</td><td>a) Investigated the frequency of the contributions from the periphery to leading International Relations journals; b) explores the experiences of</td><td>a) Articles published in 20 International Relations journals from 1990 to 1997; b) interviews with IR scholars (N = 9) from the periphery.</td></tr><tr><td>Sionis (1995)</td><td>multilingual scholars aiming to publish in the academic discipline of International Relations. Investigates the strategies senior and emergent multilingual scholars use when writing research papers in English for international publication..</td><td>Two groups of French scholars (Group I seniors and Group II emergent scholars) and their research articles that got rejected by international</td></tr></table></body></html>

- How can novice multilingual scholars (graduate students) be best inducted into the mainstream disciplinary culture?

The key themes are identified and described in the following sections.

# 5. Results

# 5.1. Multilingual scholars’ reasons for publishing in English

Most papers began with an introduction to the growing importance, or rather the ‘‘hegemony’’, of English in research communication (Curry & Lillis, 2004; Flowerdew 1999a, 1999b, 2001; Flowerdew & Dudley-Evans, 2002; Li, 2002; Lillis & Curry, 2006; Medgyes & Kaplan, 1992; St. John, 1987). Some drew attention to how the languages of the research literature of the past (such as German, French, and Russian) have been replaced by English in international scholarship especially in the last four decades (Flowerdew, 1999a; St. John, 1987). As is the case of disciplinary papers in areas such as mass media, the Internet, entertainment, business, the tourist industry, communication, and international trade, in almost all of these papers, the dominance of English as the global medium of scientific research is linked to globalization.

The power of this irresistible rise of English as lingua franca of research communication has been shown to have some drastic consequences. As English has become the language through which access to global academic communities is possible, publishing in English has become the only way a scholar’s work can be disseminated. For example, as Medgyes and Kaplan (1992) pointed out, if multilingual scholars want their work to have any influence on the world of science, they need to publish in English. Otherwise, they ‘‘cannot reach the larger community if that community is unable (or unwilling) to read the literature in any language not accepted as the dominant language of disciplinary communication’’ (p. 67). Medgyes and Kaplan (1992) are not alone in arguing that publishing in English is the only way a multilingual scholar can be noticed. The studies of Duszak and Lewkowicz (2008), Englander (in press), and Giannoni (2008) also revealed findings supporting this contention.

Apart from seeking wide recognition of their work, the pressure to meet the demands of the ‘publish or perish’ ideology is reported to be another reason for multilingual scholars’ writing and publishing in English (Curry & Lillis, 2004; Lillis & Curry, 2006). It is no secret that in today’s academic environments, the number of one’s publications, especially international ones, is used as a standard against which one’s scholarship is judged. As illustrated in the studies of Gosden (1992) and Flowerdew (1999a), publishing in a language other than English and publishing in local contexts other than global ones limit scholars’ chances of future academic success since international publications are the determining factors for decisions about hiring, promotion, and employment.

While some studies attributed multilingual scholars’ publishing in English to some contingency in the academic environment, such as a degree requirement (Gosden, 1996; Li, 2006b) or institutional policies for promotion and awards (Curry & Lillis, 2004; Flowerdew, 1999b ; Li, 2006c; Lillis & Curry, 2006), others revealed findings showing the other side of the coin. For example, some of the Spanish scholars interviewed in St. John’s study (1987) reported the desire for contributing to knowledge production as the main reason for their publishing in English. Similarly, three out of six Chinese scholars participating in Liu’s (2004) study stated that they also view publishing in English as ‘‘a great opportunity to learn’’ (p. 7). In light of this evidence, it can be concluded that both intrinsic (e.g., pleasure and interest) and extrinsic motivation orientations (e.g., instrumental reasons) influence multilingual scholars’ publication practices in English.

5.2. The problems/challenges multilingual scholars face with international publishing

Some of the papers selected for this review offered explicit examples of the constraints on multilingual scholars with regards to international publication. Seven reasons that stand in multilingual scholars’ way of publication were identifiable.

# 5.2.1. Language problems

Writing according to the conventions specified by a discourse community is a complex endeavor. It becomes even more complex if the same task is undertaken in a second language. Empirical evidence reveals that failure to fulfill the language requirements of core academic communities decreases multilingual scholars’ academic productivity as it leads to editorial rejections (Duszak & Lewkowicz, 2008; Li, 2005; Man, Weinkauf, Tsang, & Sin, 2004). Specific problems that comprise the biggest obscure to these scholars’ successful academic writing were found to be technical problems with respect to having less facility of expression in English and a less rich vocabulary (Flowerdew, 1999a, 1999b; Shaw, 1991), convoluted syntax and unclear modality (Flowerdew, 2001), and inappropriate or incorrect use of idiomatic expressions (Kaplan & Baldauf, 2005; Liu, 2004). Interestingly, Li and Flowerdew (2007) found that even revising a manuscript a few times prior to submission based on peer or reviewer comments does not always render multilingual scholars’ writings native-like.

Based on the evidence provided by the above referenced studies, it can be concluded that writing in a foreign language whose code they have not mastered well puts multilingual scholars at a distinct disadvantage in that their writings become always susceptible to grammatical and lexical errors that impede their essential merit.

# 5.2.2. Parochialism

The problem of parochialism refers to multilingual scholars’ tendency to be too localized in their research. At first glance, parochialism brings with it a number of important benefits. For example, by testing out ‘‘dominant centre’’ theories in local contexts and by investigating ‘‘issues that may never occur to mainstream scholars’’, multilingual scholars make unique contributions to global scholarship (Belcher, 2007, p.2). However, despite these benefits, as some of the journal editors participating in Flowerdew’s (2001) study stated, when multilingual scholars fail to go beyond their local contexts, their research and findings do not seem relevant to the members of the core disciplinary communities.

The tensions between multilingual scholars’ commitment to locally-based research and core academic communities’ lack of interest in locally generated data was well exemplified in the studies of Curry and Lillis (2004) and Duszak and Lewkowicz (2008). They suggested that unless multilingual scholars convince core academic communities about the value or significance of their findings, such communities may not be interested in research originating in peripheral contexts.

# 5.2.3. Divergence from the accepted norms of research reporting

It is generally agreed that the rules and laws of research reporting of the canon require scholars to take an exegetical and critical approach in their writings and organize their research report in a dialogical fashion with the existing literature. This phenomenon is called ‘‘creating a research niche’’ (Swales, 1990). While establishing a research niche, writers are expected to orient themselves primarily to the existing literature and critically discuss and evaluate the arguments, themes, and findings identified by others in the research field. In this tradition, the key is situating the current work within a research context by treating the existing works as incomplete.

Introduction, literature review, and discussion sections of a research paper are the main areas where the activity of carving out a research niche is expected to take place. These are the places where scholars make the rhetorical moves of counter claiming, raising a question, and indicating a gap in the current literature to insert themselves into the scholarly tradition, create a research space for their work, and promote its significance and value. Empirical evidence, however, indicates these areas (introductions, literature review, and discussions) to be the most challenging parts for multilingual scholars to write in English (Li, 2002, 2007; Shaw, 1991; and St. John, 1987).

One may attribute multilingual scholars’ difficulties with writing the introductions, literature reviews, or discussions to linguistic barriers. At first glance, this argument appears to be convincing if we consider the fact that these sections require a strong epistemic presentation in prose form, whereas other sections (such as the methods and results sections) put less demands on writers as tables, graphs, photos, or other non-verbal devices help to represent much of the information in these places. Contrary to this belief, the studies of Flowerdew (2001), Li (2002), Li and Flowerdew (2007), Sionis (1995), and Swales (1990) showed that it is the stylistic differences, not so much the linguistic barriers, that lead to rhetorical weaknesses in multilingual scholars’ writings and hinder the news value of their research reports. What these studies suggest is that multilingual scholars’ failure to create a research niche in their papers is more of a cultural issue rather than a linguistic one.

The stylistic differences arising from the mismatches between the discursive traditions and cultural values of multilingual scholars and those of the English-based core disciplinary communities have been the subject of a few other studies that are selected for this review. For example, in a study investigating the rhetorical development of two multilingual graduate students at a U.S. university, Tardy (2005) illustrated the failure of these students to take bolder stances in expressing knowledge claims and promoting their work. The same phenomenon was also observed with a Korean novice scholar in Cho’s (2004) study and with the Sudanese scholars participating in ElMalik and Nesi’s (2008) study. In these studies, multilingual researchers’ failure to boldly persuade the readers of the importance of their research is attributed to the tensions they had between their cultural values and the literary practices of the mainstream disciplinary community. More simply put, constrained by their cultural values, the scholars participating in these studies felt uncomfortable with making ‘‘overt attempts to boast’’ about their own credibility (Tardy, 2005, p. 334) e an act that is considered to be a legitimate form of persuasion in English-based core disciplinary communities.

In another study, offering insights into Finnish scholars’ academic writing, Mauranen (1993) showed how the rhetorical styles that differ tremendously from the canonical structure affect the credibility of multilingual academics’ scholarly contributions. In the texts that Mauranen studied, lack of authorial presence coupled with writers’ reliance on the poetic and implicit style of Finnish rhetoric were found to be the reasons that made Finnish scholars’ academic texts problematic for center audiences.

Similar observations were also made by Curry and Lillis (2004) in their investigations of Hungarian scholars’ publication efforts and practices. Their findings revealed that when multilingual scholars’ manuscripts display regional styles that diverge slightly from the canonical structure, they are most likely not accepted for publication in English-medium international journals. This is mainly because such divergences often times result in these scholars’ failure to persuade reviewers of their work’s value, significance, and credibility.

Another stylistic problem highlighted in the selected studies is multilingual scholars’ tendency to make nonverifiable claims in their reports (Flowerdew, 1999a; Liu, 2004).

These studies revealed that multilingual scholars’ presentation of arguments without adequate evidence or illustrations do not stem from linguistic deficiencies but from the differences between their literary traditions and those of the English-medium academic discourse communities.

All in all, multilingual scholars’ adoption of regional styles in their writings may at times be welcomed by some core disciplinary communities who value diversity (Flowerdew, 2001). However, more often than not, the peculiarities that are displayed in these scholars’ academic texts due to cultural mismatches are seen more as incompetence than as unique contributions.

# 5.2.4. Consuming and tedious nature of writing for publication in English

Research writing is a lengthy and complex endeavor. It becomes even more cumbersome when done in a second language. Most of the studies selected for the present review addressed the time consuming, tedious, and difficult nature of scholarly writing, and drew attention to the extra burdens writing in English places on multilingual scholars (Casanave, 1998; Cho, 2004; Curry & Lillis, 2004; Flowerdew, 1999a, 2000, 2001; Li, 2002; and Liu, 2004).

Gosden (1996) attributed the time-consuming nature of multilingual scholars’ academic writing in English to the poor writing strategies they usually employ. For example, in a study of a group of Japanese novice researchers’ writing practices in preparing their first scientific research articles to be published in English, he found that $80 \%$ of the participants were writing the entire paper in Japanese first, and then spending tremendous amount of time and effort translating it into English. Translation was also found to be a preferred writing tool among the scholars participating in Li’s (2005, 2007) and St. John’s (1987) studies. However, there is other empirical evidence (Shaw, 1991) which illustrated less or no dependency on translation techniques among multilingual scholars, especially those residing in English-speaking environments or the ones who have matured as researchers by participating in disciplinary communities.

There can be little doubt that variations exist in the techniques multilingual scholars employ during their research writing processes in English. However, no matter what techniques or strategies they use, writing up the research article in English is a formidable undertaking for multilingual scholars, which often times results in delays in their publi cation output. The time-consuming nature of writing in a second language also limits multilingual scholars’ engagement in new projects, and thus reduces their scholarly productivity (Curry & Lillis, 2004).

5.2.5. Lack of connections with members of the core academic communities

Does having contact with members of the core disciplinary communities help multilingual scholars contribute more to the cutting edge scholarship? This question was the subject of investigation in four of the studies selected for this review. The findings were somewhat unsurprising. Two of the studies (Belcher, 2007; Casanave, 1998) found maintaining a network of connections from core disciplinary communities to be a powerful tool that enables novice and emergent multilingual scholars’ entry into the publication world. The other two studies (Curry & Lillis, 2004 and Flowerdew, 2000) found maintaining a distant position from core academic communities to be a limiting factor which reduces multilingual scholars’ chances of participating fully in the global research network.

In light of these studies, it can be agued that having limited or no contact with core academic communities puts multilingual scholars at a distinct disadvantage in terms of making scholarly contributions to the core knowledge base (Flowerdew 2000). However, as Belcher (2007) states, just as being connected to the leading edge does not guarantee acceptance to the world of scholarly publishing, being isolated or off-networked does not automatically doom multilingual scholars to rejection and place the publishing world out of their reach.

# 5.2.6. Potential bias against multilingual scholars’ submissions

In some respects, gaining access to the world of scholarly publishing is like joining a club. A scholar’s admission to the club certainly depends on the merit of his/her academic writings. However, sometimes biases due to issues of race, national origin, institutional affiliation, and class can and do become a determining factor in one’s entry into the club.

Among the studies that addressed the issue of reviewer or editorial biases, two of them (Li, 2002 and Liu, 2004) revealed results refuting the existence of bias against multilingual scholars’ submissions. The academics participating in these studies described international journals as impartial and expressed that they never experienced unfair treatment because of their multilingual or peripheral status. However, other studies (Aydinli & Mathews, 2000; Belcher, 2007; Cho, 2004; Gosden, 1992; and Li, 2006c) found potential bias against multilingual scholars’ submissions to be one of the main reasons for these scholars’ under-representation in global scholarship.

Journal editors participating in Gosden’s (1992) study indicated that ‘‘incoming papers are treated in exactly the same way, irrespective of provenance, with no specific screening guidelines for NNS [non-native speaker] manuscripts’’ (p. 130). Despite the anonymity involved in the review processes of almost all international journals, some of the above referenced studies drew attention to the unfair treatment of multilingual scholars’ submissions.

# 5.2.7. Lack of sufficient funds to conduct research

Only Man et al. (2004) exclusively looked at the issue of international publication from an economic angle. More specifically, they investigated the relationship between nations’ expenditures on research and their publication output. They found the countries allocating more funds to research (such as the US, the UK, Canada, Australia, etc) to be the ones dominating the world of publication, especially in the field of medicine. Not surprisingly, the countries which lagged the most were found to be the ones from outside Kachru’s (1985) Inner Circle, with the exception of Denmark, Finland, Switzerland, The Netherlands, and Sweden.

A similar point was also made by Aydinli and Mathews (2000) in their discussion of the reasons behind periphery scholars’ limited contribution to leading journals in the field of international relations. They argued that money restrictions have a huge impact on furthering the divide between center and periphery scholars in terms of academic productivity.

In short, these two studies showed lack of sufficient funds to conduct research to be an important factor lowering multilingual scholars’ chances of becoming full participants in global research network.

5.3. Theoretical assumptions about multilingual scholars’ socialization and/or participation in disciplinary communities

In a majority of the papers, the following theoretical frameworks were used as a point of reference to explain or predict the particular situations of multilingual scholars in terms of their publication practices: discourse communities (Swales, 1990), legitimate peripheral participation (Lave & Wenger, 1991), exile from Eden syndrome (Geertz, 1983), situated knowledges (Haraway, 1988), and notions of intellectual identity and autobiographical self (Ivanic, 1998). Below these frameworks are described in detail.

# 5.3.1. Discourse community (Swales, 1990)

Not surprisingly, most of the papers within the sampled literature used the concept of ‘‘discourse community’’ as a starting point (Curry & Lillis, 2004; Flowerdew, 2000; Li, 2006b; and Liu, 2004). More specifically, these studies drew on Swales’ (1990) characterization of this notion to describe the inner workings of core academic communities and multilingual scholars’ position in these social settings.

Swales (1990) proposed that in order for a group to be considered as a discourse community, it must operate within a certain number of parameters. These parameters include: 1) common public goals; 2) participatory mechanisms; 3) information exchange; 4) community specific genres; 5) a highly specialized terminology; and 6) a high general level of expertise (p. 29). Characterization of discourse community in this way logically leads to a definition of domain specific academic communities as scientific communities whereby scholars do science based on already agreed and predetermined paradigms. Such a definition implies that one’s entry into such communities rests upon his/her ability to meet the criteria set for them. It is this idea inherent in the notion of discourse community that the above referenced studies used as a point of departure to explain and predict the problems or challenges multilingual scholars face in their attempts to initiate themselves into core academic communities.

# 5.3.2. Legitimate peripheral participation (Lave & Wenger, 1991)

Some papers used Lave and Wenger’s (1991) notion of legitimate peripheral participation (LPP) to illustrate multilingual scholars’ induction into disciplinary communities (Casanave, 1998; Cho, 2004; Englander, in press; Flowerdew, 2000; Hasrati, 2005; Li, 2005, 2006c, 2007; Shi, 2003; and Tardy, 2005).

Lave and Wenger’s notion of LPP presents a viewpoint which emphasizes experience and practice over traditional forms of learning. Viewing learning as a process of negotiation, Lave and Wenger (1991) posit that learners acquire knowledge, tune their enterprise, and develop a unique identity, repertoire, style, and discourse through apprenticeship-like relations with experts. Viewed from this perspective, continuous engagement in the practices of social communities enable newcomers to move from peripheral to full participation and eventually allow them to replace the old-timers. It is this theory of learning that provided a key point of reference in the above referenced studies, especially in their discussions on multilingual scholars’ socialization in core academic communities.

# 5.3.3. Exile from Eden syndrome (Geertz, 1983)

Geertz’s (1983) exile from Eden syndrome provides a metaphorical explanation for graduated doctoral students’ incorporation into the academic disciplines in the US. According to Geertz (1983), ‘‘one starts [an academic career] at the center of things and then moves toward the edges’’ (p. 158). An example of such a peripheral movement includes doctoral students who complete their degrees at top, prestigious institutions, but take up positions in smaller and less prestigious places. It is this downward movement that Geertz’s exile from Eden syndrome symbolizes.

The exile from Eden metaphor was used only in a few of the papers included in this review (Flowerdew, 2000; Swales, 1990). For example, Swales (1990) used this metaphor as a lens to explain an Egyptian scholar’s transitional experiences from being a graduate student in the US to an emergent scholar living and researching in Egypt. In a similar vein, Flowerdew (2000) referred to the exile from Eden metaphor briefly while describing the relationship between a Chinese scholar’s geographical isolation and intellectual dislocation upon completion of his doctorate at an American university.

# 5.3.4. Situated knowledges (Haraway, 1988)

Only Cho (2004) used Haraway’s (1988) notion of situated knowledges as a point of reference. In particular, Cho (2004) used the term ‘‘the situatedness of the researcher’’ to draw attention to the unique contributions multilingual scholars make to global scholarship. In Cho’s terms, the situatedness of the researcher has powerful affordances for global research as it allows multilingual scholars to bring insider awareness about local contexts or issues that mainstream academic communities do not know of. Using Haraway’s (1988) situated knowledges as a reference point, Cho (2004) highlights the importance of the integration of partial or peripheral perspectives in research communication as an alternative to the knowledge claims made by dominant, center scholars.

# 5.3.5. Notions of intellectual identity and autobiographical self (Ivanic, 1998)

Few papers (Englander, in press; Shi, 2003) used Ivanic’s (1998) notions of intellectual identity or autobiographical self as a starting point for discussing and illustrating how the complexities of multilingual scholars’ perceived bilingual and multicultural intellectual identities influence the choices they make in their scholarly writing practices.

According to Ivanic (1998), academic writing is ‘‘an act of intellectual identity which is dynamic, socioculturally shaped, and signifies power relations between reader and writer’’ (Shi, 2003, p. 373). Often linked to the idea of academic writing as an act of intellectual identity or autobiographical self are the problems multilingual writers experience due to the mismatches between their already established first language identities, value systems, ways of thinking, and the linguistic and rhetorical demands of academic writing in English.

Drawing on Ivanic’s (1998) concept of intellectual identity and autobiographical self, Shi (2003) and Englander (in press) revealed the struggles Chinese and Mexican scholars experienced in their writing and publication practices due to their dual identities. The results of these studies illustrated how the conflicting and competing demands of academic writing in English at times create a site of struggle for multilingual academics.

5.4. Suggested conditions for helping multilingual scholars contribute more to global intellectual voice

Most papers in the present review addressed the complexities involved in multilingual scholars’ scholarly writing practices and almost all of them provided some recommendations for helping them contribute more to the global disciplinary forum. Below is a summary of these recommendations.

# 5.4.1. Recommendations for multilingual scholars

The most frequently recurring recommendation for multilingual scholars was that of patience and persistence. Acknowledging the whole process of manuscript submission for publication as a challenging endeavor, most studies selected for this review recommended multilingual scholars to not to give up when faced with rejection, but to ‘‘consider the editor’s and reviewers’ negative comments and decisions positively as constructive criticism, and always keep trying and revising’’ (Liu, 2004, p. 14). For example, the publication experiences of various multilingual scholars displayed in the studies of Belcher (2007), Cho (2004), Curry and Lillis (2004), Flowerdew (2000), Li (2005), and Liu (2004) showed courage, patience, and persistence to be essential factors enabling multilingual scholars’ active participation in their respective research fields.

In addition to patience and persistence, collaboration and co-authorship with experienced researchers were also highly recommended strategies for multilingual scholars’ international publication success. Although some studies (Casanave 1998; Li & Flowerdew, 2007) cautioned against language-related power issues that may arise during multilingual scholars’ collaboration and co-authorship with native English speaking scholars, others (Liu, 2004; Cho, 2004; and Dong, 1996) found these strategies to be valuable tools for multilingual scholars’ eventual success in the world of scholarly publication.

Last but not least, drawing attention to the fact that most manuscripts submitted by multilingual scholars are rejected on the grounds that they diverge slightly from the canonical structure, Liu (2004) made the following recommendations for multilingual scholars:

- Keep abreast of the current and relevant literature and pay close attention to both the content and the rhetoric of the published journal articles in your areas of interest.   
- Familiarize yourself with journal guidelines and conventions (e.g., issues such as originality, discourse structure, rhetorical styles, plagiarism, and illustration) before you submit a paper (p. 14).

# 5.4.2. Recommendations for journal editors and reviewers

The findings of some studies selected for this review have powerful implications for journal editors and reviewers as they reveal useful insights into the roles journal gatekeepers play in multilingual scholars’ negotiation of the demands of international publication. For example, Belcher (2007) and Flowerdew (1999a) recommended journal editors to make careful choices in their selection of reviewers and recruit the ones who are willing to ‘‘take the time to compose well-considered, constructively critical, collegial reviews, even of papers that appear unlikely ever to be accepted’’ (p. 19). Aydinli and Mathews (2000) and Flowerdew (2001) proposed the inclusion of multilingual and periphery scholars on editorial boards of mainstream journals. Belcher (2007), Flowerdew and Dudley-Evans (2002), and Kaplan and Baldauf (2005) recommended journal editors and reviewers to be as clear as possible in their communications with multilingual scholars regarding the recommendations or comments they make on their submissions.

# 5.4.3. Recommendations for curriculum and pedagogy

While acknowledging that multilingual scholars can not develop the skills, practices, and the rhetorical knowledge of disciplinary writing solely through instruction, most authors (Belcher, 2007; Curry & Lillis, 2004; Dong, 1998; Gosden, 1992, 1995, 1996; Li, 2006b, 2006c; Lillis & Curry, 2006; St. Johns, 1987; Tardy, 2005; and Swales, 1990) argued for instructional support for these scholars. More specifically, they encouraged provision of professional preparation programs or research English courses that aim at developing multilingual scholars’ awareness about the genre of scholarly writing in English.

In discussing the pedagogical applications of their studies, most authors, whose works have been selected for this review, viewed the complexities of academic writing for publication as a topic worthy of some curricular space. Drawing on social theories of learning, they (Curry & Lillis, 2004; Li, 2006c) suggested that professional preparation programs’ curricula should adopt a critical approach and raise multilingual scholars’ awareness about the sociopolitical issues that may impact their text production for publication.

5.5. The conditions under which novice multilingual scholars (graduate students) may best be inducted into the mainstream disciplinary culture

Some of the papers selected for this review highlighted constraints on novice scholars (graduate students) and described the conditions under which they may best be inducted into the mainstream disciplinary culture. The focus was often on the role of faculty advisors in graduate students’ disciplinary enculturation.

Drawing on the apprenticeship perspective of legitimate peripheral participation and situated learning, some studies highlighted the importance of experience-based learning on novice multilingual scholars’ disciplinary enculturation. For example, Hasrati (2005), Li (2005, 2007), and Dong (1996) illustrated how apprenticeship-like situations, which provide multilingual scholars with intellectual mentorship, help them develop rhetorical knowledge of disciplinary genres and consequently ease their initiation into their respective academic communities. However, Belcher (1994), Dong (1998), and Shi (2003) showed that apprenticeship-like situations in and of themselves do not always provide the necessary conditions for novice scholars to socialize into disciplinary communities especially when the advisor/graduate student relationships lack sufficient guidance, modeling, and mentoring. Two general arguments were used as evidence:

- In many cases, papers reported on multilingual graduate students’ appreciation of explicit or implicit teaching of skills and practices necessary for their disciplinary enculturation. They claimed that these students should not be expected to socialize in the disciplinary culture with minimal or no assistance.   
- The papers reported on multilingual graduate students’ appreciation of constructive and dialogic mentoring relationships with their advisors. They concluded that intellectual support should be provided to multilingual scholars on a regular basis.

# 6. Conclusion

The literature reviewed in the present paper provides insights into the complexities multilingual scholars face in their attempts to publish globally. There can be little doubt that the difficulties summarized throughout the paper are also experienced by scholars from Kachru’s (1985) Inner Circle, especially among those who are at the very beginning of their publication careers. On the one hand, it is important to note that the problems identified in this review should not be viewed as problems only specific to multilingual scholars. On the other hand, the evidence presented here tempts us to believe that international publication is more of a challenge to multilingual scholars than it is to others who are endowed with economic, cultural and symbolic capitals, and thus able to respond to the demands of the core academic discursive practices with relative ease.

# 7. Future research

To a large extent, the findings within the papers analyzed for this review were consistent regardless of the nationality of the scholars studied. They validated much of the hypotheses about the complexities of academic writing and publishing for multilingual scholars. However, several areas remain to be addressed by future studies. Three of the most pressing are: 1) the need to conduct more case studies of individual scholars from various disciplines and countries; 2) the need to conduct longitudinal studies that investigate multilingual graduate students’ socialization in disciplinary communities. Most of the research to date has focused on a short period of time in graduate students’ academic lives. Research that documents their acculturation in academic communities throughout their studies is needed; and 3) the need for more mixed method approaches to inquiry. Most studies included in this review have been qualitative in nature, relying more on interviews and documentary data. Mixed method studies with larger sample sizes may also offer powerful insights into the publishing practices of multilingual scholars.

Clearly, more research needs to be done concerning multilingual scholars’ participation in core disciplinary communities. Such research might begin by addressing the following questions:

- What are the processes multilingual scholars employ to adapt to academic writing techniques and approaches that are foreign to them e and how can we help to bridge the gaps more effectively? - Do multilingual scholars have a preference for publication in their local contexts rather than global ones? If so, what reasons might account for this? - Is there any difference between multilingual and monolingual (English speaking) novice scholars in terms of the challenges they face in their attempts to get access into core disciplinary communities? - How effective are doctoral programs at preparing multilingual graduate students for international publication?

# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Prof. Arthur N. Applebee and Jason Vickers for their suggestions on earlier drafts of this manuscript. I would also like to thank Ken Hyland for his comments as editor and two anonymous reviewers for their useful feedback.

# References

Agunga, A. R. (2001). How can I make a difference? An interview with Robert Agunga. In D. Belcher, & U. Connor (Eds.), Reflections on Multiliterate Lives. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters. pp. 165e176.   
Aydinli, E., & Mathews, J. (2000). Are the core and periphery irreconcilable? The curious world of publishing in contemporary international relations. International Studies Perspectives, 1, 289e303.   
Belcher, D. (1994). The apprenticeship model to advanced academic literacy: graduate students and their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 23e34.   
Belcher, D. (2007). Seeking acceptance in an English-only research world. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16, 1e22.   
Bhatia, V. (2001). Initiating into academic community: Soma autobiographical reflections. In D. Belcher, & U. Connor (Eds.), Reflections on Multiliterate Lives. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters. pp. 38e50.   
Braine, G. (2005). The challenge of academic publishing: A Hong Kong perspective. TESOL Quarterly, 39(4), 707e716.   
Burgess, S. (2002). Packed houses and intimate gatherings: Audience and rhetorical structure. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic Discourse. London: Longman/Pearson Education. pp. 196e215.   
Burrough-Boenisch, J. (2003). Shapers of published NNS research articles. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 223e243.   
Canagarajah, S. (1996). Nondiscursive’’ requirements in academic publishing, material resources of periphery scholars, and the politics of knowledge production. Written Communication, 13(4), 435e472.   
Canagarajah, S. (2002). Multilingual writers and the academic community: towards a critical relationship. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1, 29e44.   
Cargill, M., & O’Connor, P. (2006). Developing Chinese scientists’ skills for publishing in English: Evaluating collaborating-colleague workshops based on genre analysis. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 5, 207e221.   
Casanave, C. P. (1998). Transitions: the balancing act of bilingual academics. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 175e203.   
Cho, S. (2004). Challenges of entering discourse communities through publishing in English. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 3, 47e72.   
Curry, J. M., & Lillis, T. (2004). Multilingual scholars and the imperative to publish in English: Negotiating interests, demands, and rewards. TESOL Quarterly, 38(3), 663e688.   
Dong, Y. R. (1996). Learning how to use citations for knowledge transformation: nonnative doctoral students’ dissertation writing in science. Research in the Teaching of English, 30, 428e457.   
Dong, R. Y. (1998). Non-native graduate students’ thesis/dissertation writing in science: Self reports by students and their advisors from two US institutions. English for Specific Purposes, 17, 369e390.   
Duszak, A. (Ed.). (1997). Culture and styles of academic discourse. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Duszak, A., & Lewkowicz, J. (2008). Publishing academic texts in English: a Polish perspective. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 7, 108e120.   
ElMalik, A. T., & Nesi, H. (2008). Publishing research in a second language: the case of Sudanese contributors to international medical journals. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 7, 87e96.   
Englander, K. (in press). Transformation of the identities of nonnative English speaking scientists as a consequence of the social construction of revision. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education.   
Flowerdew, J. (1999a). Problems in writing for scholarly publication in English: the case of Hong Kong. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8(3), 243e264.   
Flowerdew, J. (1999b). Writing for scholarly publication in English: the case of Hong Kong. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8(2), 123e145.   
Flowerdew, J. (2000). Discourse community, legitimate peripheral participation, and the nonnative-English-speaking scholar. TESOL Quarterly, 34(1), 127e150.   
Flowerdew, J. (2001). Attitudes of Journal Editors to nonnative speaker contributions. TESOL Quarterly, 35(1), 121e150.   
Flowerdew, J. (2008). Scholarly writers who use English as an additional language: What can Goffman’s ‘‘Stigma’’ tell us? Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 7, 77e86.   
Flowerdew, J., & Dudley-Evans, T. (2002). Genre analysis of editorial letters to international journal contributers. Applied Linguistics, 23, 463e489.   
Geertz, C. (1983). The way we think now: toward an ethnography of modern thought. In Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology (pp. 147e163). New York: Harper Collins Basic Books.   
Giannoni, D. S. (2008). Medical writing at the periphery: the case of Italian journal editorials. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 7, 97e107.   
Gibbs, W. W. (1995). Trends in scientific communication: lost science in the third world. Scientific American, August 76e83.   
Gosden, H. (1991). Teaching research English to ESL researchers: questions of cost and benefit. Journal of Asian Pacific Communication, 2(1), 139e153.   
Gosden, H. (1992). Research writing and NNSs: from the editors. Journal of Second Language Writing, 1, 123e140.   
Gosden, H. (1995). Success in research article writing and revision: a social constructivist perspective. English for Specific Purposes, 14, 37e57.   
Gosden, H. (1996). Verbal reports of Japanese novices’ research writing practices in English. Journal of Second Language Writing, 5, 109e128.   
Haraway, D. (1988). Situated knowledges: the science question in feminism and the privilege of partial perspective. Feminist Studies, 14, 575e599.   
Hasrati, M. (2005). Legitimate peripheral participation and supervising Ph.D. students. Studies in Higher Education, 30(5), 557e570.   
Ivanic, R. (1998). Writing and identity: The discoursal constructions of identity in academic writing. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Kachru, B. (1985). Standards, codifı´cation and sociolinguistic realism: the English language in the outer circle. In R. Quirk, & H. G. Widdowson (Eds.), English in the World: Teaching and learning the language and literatures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 11e30.   
Kaplan, R., & Baldauf, R. B., Jr. (2005). Editing contributed scholarly articles from a language management perspective. Journal of Second Language Writing, 14, 47e62.   
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Li, Y. (2002). Writing for international publication: The perception of Chinese doctoral researchers. Asian Journal of English Language Teaching, 12, 179e193.   
Li, Y. (2005). Multidimensional enculturation: the case of an EFL Chinese doctoral student. Journal of Asian Pacific Communication, 15(1), 153e170.   
Li, Y. (2006a). Writing for international publication: the case of Chinese doctoral science students. Unpublished dissertation. Retrieved October 1, 2007, from http://dspace.cityu.edu.hk/handle/2031/4550   
Li, Y. (2006b). Negotiating knowledge contribution to multiple discourse communities: A doctoral student of computer science writing for publication. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15, 159e178.   
Li, Y. (2006c). A doctoral student of physics writing for publication: a socio-politically oriented case study. English for Specific Purposes, 25, 456e478.   
Li, Y. (2007). Apprentice scholarly writing in a community of practice: an intraview of an NNES graduate student writing a research article. TESOL Quarterly, 41(1), 55e79.   
Li, Y., & Flowerdew, J. (2007). Shaping Chinese novice scientists’ manuscripts for publication. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16, 100e117.   
Lillis, T., & Curry, J. M. (2006). Professional academic writing by multilingual scholars. Written Communication, 23(1), 3e35.   
Link, A. M. (1998). US and non-US submissions: an analysis of reviewers’ bias. Journal of the American Medical Association, 280, 46e47.   
Liu, J. (2004). Co-constructing academic discourse from the periphery: Chinese applied linguists’ centripetal participation in scholarly publication. Asian Journal of English Language Teaching, 14, 1e22.   
Man, J. P., Weinkaif, J. G., Tsang, M., & Sin, D. D. (2004). Why do some countries publish more than others? An international comparison of research funding, English proficiency and publication output in highly ranked general medical journals. European Journal of Epidermiology, 19, 811e817.   
Mauranen, A. (1993). Contrastive ESP rhetoric: metatext in Finnish-English economics texts. English for Specific Purposes, 12, 3e22.   
Medgyes, P., & Kaplan, R. B. (1992). Discourse in a foreign language: the example of Hungarian scholars. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 98, 67e100.   
Misak, A., Marusic, M., & Marisic, A. (2005). Manuscript editing as a way of teaching academic writing: experience from a small scientific journal. Journal of Second Language Writing, 14, 122e131.   
Montemayor-Borsinger, A. (2001). Linguistic choices in two research articles in physics: study of an author’s development. The ESPecialist, 22(1), 51e74.   
Sahakyan, T. (2006). The difficulties of Armenian scholars trying to publish in international journals. Unpublished master’s thesis. Yerevan, Armenia: American University or Armenia.   
Salager-Meyer, F. (2008). Scientific publishing in developing countries: challenges for the future. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 7, 121e132.   
Shaw, P. (1991). Science research students’ composing processes. English for Specific Purposes, 10, 189e206.   
Shi, L. (2002). How Western-trained Chinese TESOL professionals publish in their home environment. TESOL Quarterly, 36(4), 625e634.   
Shi, L. (2003). Writing in two cultures: Chinese professors return from the west. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 59, 369e391.   
Sionis, C. (1995). Communication strategies in the writing of scientific research articles by non-native users of English. English for Specific Purposes, 14(2), 99e113.   
St. John, M. J. (1987). Writing processes of Spanish scientists publishing in English. English for Specific Purposes, 6, 113e120.   
Swales, J. (1987). Utilizing the literatures in teaching the research paper. TESOL Quarterly, 21(1), 41e68.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Tardy, C. M. (2005). It’s like a story’’: rhetorical knowledge development in advanced academic literacy. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 4, 325e338.