# Steering toward situational propensity/shi 势: A multicase study of planning and developing EFL writing centres in China

Chang Liu a,1 , Yebing Zhao b,2 , Jing Zhang c,\*,3 a School of Foreign Studies, Capital University of Economics and Business, No.121 Zhangjialukou Road, Huaxiang, Fengtai District, Beijing, China b School of Foreign Languages, Shenzhen Technology University, 3002 Lantian Road, Pingshan District, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China c Department of Foreign Languages and Literature, Shantou University, College of Liberal Arts, 243 Daxue Road, Shantou, Shantou, Guangdong, China

# A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:   
Agency   
Chinese writing centre   
EFL writing   
Academic language policy and planning   
shi/situational propensity

# A B S T R A C T

Compared with the abundant scholarship on tutor-student interactions during writing centre tutorials, little research has investigated the planning and development of English as a Foreign Language (EFL) writing centres with consideration of specific sociopolitical contexts. From the perspective of academic language policy and planning (ALPP), this study compared the planning and the (failure of) sustainable development of three Chinese writing centres—two thriving ones and a closed one—through the lens of agency and by drawing on an indigenous Chinese notion of shi (势, situational propensity). With a shi-inflected agency framework, we analysed interview and document data from three groups of actors: writing centre directors, tutors, and tutees. Our findings uncovered intriguing insights into shi-inflected agency in planning and developing EFL writing centres: two operational strategies were identified for writing centre ALPP (noting and following shi, and creating shi), highlighting the importance of (1) aligning with macro-level shi and integrating it with meso- and micro-level shi, and (2) managing yin-yang alternations to transform constraints into affordances. Implications are duly provided for international writing centres and L2 writing support practitioners in EFL contexts across the globe.

# 1. Introduction

With the rise of higher education internationalisation, English has become the dominant language for global scholarship and ac ademic communication (Lillis et al., 2010). Against this backdrop, writing centres have spread from North America to over 65 countries (Okuda, 2024), serving as crucial writing support for second language (L2) learners’ English academic writing development across many English as a Second Language (ESL) and English as a Foreign Language (EFL) 1 settings (Ubaldo, 2021). Increasing discussions surround the motivations of establishing L2 writing centres (e.g., Okuda, 2018; Ubaldo, 2021), localised adaptations and practices (e.g., Barnawi, 2018; Zhang & Liu, 2023), and challenges (e.g., Reichelt et al., 2013). However, compared with the promising growth of EFL writing centres across the globe, research on Asian writing centres is generally limited, highlighting the need for investigation into under-represented contexts to extend current understanding about writing centre praxis in Japan, South Korea, and Singapore (e.g., Okuda, 2018, 2024; Turner, 2006; Winder et al., 2016). One such important yet less explored context is China.

In China, although Chinese students have reported various concerns regarding English academic writing (Jiang et al., 2023), L2 writing support beyond the general English courses offered by Chinese universities appears to be insufficient and receives inadequate attention from scholars (Yu et al., 2023). Over the past decades, Chinese universities have incorporated internationally accredited and innovative English for Academic Purposes (EAP) support (e.g., language and learning skill workshops, programmes, and centres) (Guo et al., 2022). As part of these efforts, writing centres have been imported as innovation sites to support Chinese learners’ English academic writing development and serve Chinese higher education (HE) internationalisation (Gao & Du, 2022; He, 2021).

Since 2006, approximately 40 writing centres have been established by Chinese universities (Zhang & Liu, 2023). Currently, most research on Chinese writing centres focuses on comparing North American and Chinese writing centre operational models through non-empirical research (e.g., Gao & Du, 2022; He, 2021), showing Chinese writing centres’ adoption of North American writing centre activities (e.g., workshops and one-to-one tutorials) and reconceptualisation of their tenets (e.g., nondirective, collaborative peer tutoring, and a no-proofreading policy). In comparison, empirical research on Chinese writing centres remains largely underdeveloped (Zhang & Liu, 2023), with only a few exceptions investigating the challenges and strategies of one-to-one tutoring (e.g., Zhang & Zhao, 2024).

Among the many under-explored lines of inquiry into Chinese writing centres, little is known regarding their language planning and sustainable development (Gao & Du, 2022), that is, Chinese writing centres’ planning and implementation of language policies as well as challenges and strategies regarding their long-term sustainability and development. Research on writing centre praxis in non-Anglophone contexts (see Kaufhold & Yencken, 2021; Okuda, 2018, 2024; Reichelt et al., 2013) shows that the planning and development of writing centres requires careful consideration of economic and sociopolitical backgrounds at macro, meso, and micro levels. Similarly, a holistic understanding of micro language planning and development at Chinese writing centres with consideration of education policies at various levels could help Chinese university language planners and practitioners to establish effective and sustainable EFL writing support.

As such, this cross-institutional study explored the planning and development of three writing centres in China from the perspective of academic language policy and planning (ALPP). Through the lens of agency and drawing on an indigenous Chinese notion of shi (势, situational propensity), this study examined how different actors engaged in micro language planning at two existing and relatively successful writing centres and one closed writing centre. We collected interview and document data from three groups of actors (writing centre directors, writing tutors, and tutees) to gain insights into their agentive roles and experiences and offer implications for writing centre/language support practitioners globally to develop L2 writing support services strategically and sustainably as agentive shi-inflected language planners.

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Writing centres: from North America to China

Writing centres, originated from and widely implemented at North American universities, provide writing support characterised by specific educational goals and pedagogical approaches (Okuda, 2024). Central to North American writing centres is the philosophy of cultivating “better writers, not better writing” (North, 1984, p. 438), emphasising students’ long-term writerly development. Traditionally, North American writing centre pedagogies advocate nondirective, collaborative peer tutoring, coupled with a no-proofreading policy, and prioritise higher-order concerns (such as logic and structure) over lower-order concerns (such as language and mechanics) (Liu & Harwood, 2022; North, 1984); nowadays, they have sought to expand their writing support to meet multi lingual students’ demand for language assistance (William & Severino, 2004). As a global pedagogy (Okuda, 2024) with a dynamic, flexible, and context-sensitive nature, North American writer centres serve as a prototype for writing centre practitioners across the globe (Zhang & Liu, 2023).

In China, writing centres have been adapted to address local needs and priorities, assuming a dual role: supporting L2 students’ writing development and enhancing their English language proficiency—balancing tutoring and editing (Kyle, 2018; Zhang & Liu, 2023). Chinese writing centres typically fall into two categories—promoting academic publication through English for Research Publication Purposes (ERPP) writing centres and offering comprehensive, need-driven support through English for Academic Purposes-English for General Purposes (EAP-EGP) hybrid writing centres (Zhang & Liu, 2023). Particularly, ERPP writing centres, with their specific, product-oriented approach, differ greatly from their North American counterparts, which offer all-round writing support with a focus on coursework-related writing. Pedagogically, Chinese writing centres often combine directive and nondirective tutoring, rely heavily on faculty tutors, and generally allow proofreading (Gao & Du, 2022; He, 2021; Zhang & Liu, 2023), reflecting localised adaptations that diverge from the North American model. However, current scholarship offers limited insight into the underlying rationale driving these adaptations, and this gap demands further exploration on the planning and development of Chinese writing centres.

# 2.2. Language planning at EFL writing centres

Language planning at EFL writing centres in other non-Anglophone contexts, much like that at Chinese writing centres, tends to focus on writing and language support simultaneously (LaClare & Franz, 2013). Previous studies have examined several issues on language planning at EFL writing centres, including macro and institutional factors that shape language policy and planning (LPP)2

(Kaufhold & Yencken, 2021; Okuda, 2018), challenges of establishing and maintaining EFL writing centres (Reichelt et al., 2013;   
Schreiber & Đuri´c, 2017), the roles that EFL writing centres play in their educational ecologies (LaClare & Franz, 2013; Okuda, 2024;   
Ubaldo, 2021), and their relationship with higher education policies (Kaufhold & Yencken, 2021).

Various theories were employed to investigate EFL writing centre LPP and administration. For example, Okuda (2024) utilised policy borrowing and language management theories to examine the LPP and practices of a Japanese writing centre. Her findings revealed the socio-economic and political motivations behind the writing centre’s planning, emphasising the institutional aims of enhancing international ranking and increasing publications, a context mirroring many Chinese universities (Zhang & Liu, 2023). Kaufhold and Yencken (2021) adopted a language ideology perspective to examine the pedagogical agency of language developers, portraying them as language brokers facilitating students’ language and writing skills. Their research indicated that language policies at Sweden multilingual writing centres aligned with broader educational policies of internationalisation. Nevertheless, existing research has concentrated on a limited range of EFL contexts, suggesting a strong need to investigate how different contextual factors influence the LPP and development of L2 writing centres, especially in underexplored contexts such as China.

Current research on Chinese writing centres’ LPP is predominantly anecdotal, focusing primarily on their settings and practices (e. g., Gao & Du, 2022) and offering comparative analyses with their Western counterparts (e.g., He, 2021). This general lack of empirical research, especially those grounded in robust theoretical frameworks, highlights the need for in-depth studies on the challenges, strategies, and sociopolitical dynamics influencing language planning and sustainable development of Chinese writing centres.

2.3. Investigating Chinese writing centres’ ALPP through agency and shi/势

# 2.3.1. Agency in ALPP

ALPP refers to the planning and implementation of academic language support in universities (Fenton-Smith & Gurney, 2016), which involves multiple issues, such as personnel policy (recruiting language teachers/tutors), access policy (evaluating target stu dents/tutees), curriculum policy (design of curriculum/service), and resource policy (acquiring funding). Implementing a writing centre is an enactment of academic language policy to improve students’ language learning (Okuda, 2024), thus making the planning of writing centres in EFL contexts a process of ALPP.

Zhao and Baldauf (2012) categorise four types of actors in LPP: people with power, people with expertise, people with interest, and people with influence. People with power are national/institutional leaders or administrators who make decisions on and enact language policies (Chen et al., 2021); people with expertise are experts in specific fields such as “linguists and trained experts” who give professional advice regarding issues in LPP (Bouchard & Glasgow, 2019, p.11), such as language tutors; people with interest, also labelled as invisible planners, are ordinary individuals who participate in the process of LPP from the grass-roots level, such as students (e.g., An & Zheng, 2022); people with influence are social elites who can significantly impact language use/behaviour of the public, such as famous scholars in the field (Zhao & Baldauf, 2012).

Previous studies have primarily focused on one or two groups of agents in LPP, such as university administrators and language teachers, with limited attention to multiple groups of actors. For example, Chen et al. (2021) examined the agency of people with power and people with expertise in planning a language other than English (LOTE) programme. Okuda (2018) and Kaufhold and Yencken (2021) studied the establishment and planning of EFL writing centres from the perspectives of writing centre administrators and tutors. Yet, none of these studies accounted for tutees’ roles and engagement, highlighting a lack of research exploring multiple groups of actors’ agency in micro-level ALPP.

As a recent focus of LPP scholarship (Liddicoat & Taylor-Leech, 2021), agency is understood as “the socioculturally mediated capacity to act” (Ahearn, 2001, p. 112). This conceptualisation emphasises agency as a dynamic and interactive feature that emerges from the interplay between individual actors and the broader sociocultural and institutional structure. Fenton-Smith and Gurney (2016) further describe agency as “the various levels and forms of power invested in the range of actors involved in policy and planning” (p. 74), mediated by the resources and rules of the structure (Chen et al., 2021). As agency considers the roles of multilayered individual actors and the mediation of the structure, we adopt it as our analytical lens to account for the multilayered, reiterative, and socioculturally situated nature of writing centre ALPP (Okuda, 2024). We use macro, meso, and micro context levels to refer to the multilayered structure, including the national, university (including faculty), and writing centre settings respectively.

Recently, research on LPP has complexified theories surrounding agency (Bouchard & Glasgow, 2019; Liddicoat & Taylor-Leech, 2021). Resonating Liddicoat and Taylor-Leech (2021), An and Zheng (2022) conceptualise agency as a “spatial, temporal and dialogical construct” in LPP (p. 373). First, agency is a spatial construct because LPP is distributed to macro, meso, and micro context levels, interacting with various language and education policies (An & Zheng, 2022; Okuda, 2024). Second, agency is a “temporally embedded social process” (Emirbayer & Mische, 1998, p. 963), influenced by the past, contextualised by the present, and oriented towards the future; agency does not simply reproduce the past but rather entails creative reconstruction, pointing towards new directions for the future (Emirbayer & Mische, 1998). Third, agency has a dialogical nature regarding how power is negotiated between different actor groups and how different actors exercise their agency in negotiating/interacting with different structural as well as personal factors (An & Zheng, 2022; Chen et al., 2021; Fenton-Smith & Gurney, 2016). Particularly, L2 learners’ reflexive thinking also accounts for dialogical agency as they could deliberate on their understandings regarding contextual conditions before committing to specific learning decisions (Gao, 2013).

# 2.3.2. The Chinese notion of shi and its application in LPP

To enrich the spatial, temporal, and dialogical nature of agency and describe Chinese language planners’ indigenous strategies of writing centre ALPP, we incorporate the Chinese notion of shi/势 as a context-specific lens. As an ancient, philosophical Chinese way of thinking, shi, or situational propensity, is a polysemous term, whose meaning is highly contingent on its context. First introduced in Sunzi’s The Art of War, shi is associated with Chinese strategic thinking to manoeuvre reality effectively and contains meanings of situational advantage, positional potential, and momentum (Jullien, 1995; Yue, 2024). Shi-inflected thinking emphasises the awareness of identifying the propensity arising from a situation and the ability of knowing when and how to align with or transform the propensity for positive outcomes. Sunzi compares a fast-flowing mountain stream, powerful enough to carry boulders, to a source of propensity/potential, which can be capitalised on strategically to ensure efficacy (Jullien, 1995). Applying shi requires “a joint or interactive force of situational momentum and human agency” (Yue et al., 2024, p. 2), highlighting both the importance of context and individual actors’ ability to recognise and exploit favorable conditions to gain advantages in various situations. A shi-inflected individual can follow shi, that is, recognising and aligning with the “power, potential, disposition, strategic advantage” of a particular situation (Lyon, 2010, p. 181); one can also create shi through yin-yang alternations of the correlated “myriad things” or “all beings” (wanwu3 ) in the cosmos (Jullien, 1995, p. 17), that is, turning constraints (yin) into affordances (yang) to generate situational propensity.

Specifically, yin and yang are fundamental concepts in Chinese philosophy, referring to “opposed but complementary pairs” of attributes or tendencies of wanwu in the cosmos. Literally, yin means “shaded” while yang means “sunny,” such as the shady and sunny sides of a hill (Mao, 2009; Jullien, 1995). Historically, yin has been associated with qualities like darkness, receptivity, and femininity, while yang embodies brightness, activity, and masculinity. Yin and yang are dynamic and convertible, such as the interplay between day and night or life circles, co-creating the self-regulating processes of reality or propensity of things through alternations between opposing yin-yang pairs.

In LPP, language planners can manoeuvre shi by identifying and harnessing specific contextual factors that influence language planning and implementation. First, language planners might assess “circumstances, identif[y] general trends, and cho[o]se to follow them” (An & Zheng, 2022, p. 390) and craft effective, tailored language policies by leveraging situational advantages. For example, An and Zheng (2022) demonstrated how actors capitalised on the Chinese Ministry of Education’s nation-wide LOTE reform to establish an Arabic language programme, thus transforming macro-level language policies into opportunities, that is, shi. Second, language planners can alternate yin into yang for more responsive and effective LPP by harnessing the strengths of their institutional contexts (yang) while navigating challenges (yin). For example, an Arabic instructor in An and Zheng’s (2020) study utilised the university’s Xuecheng Scheme to propose “Learning Certificates,” skilfully navigating an imbalanced credit structure and achieving yin-yang al ternations. These examples illustrate both the applicability of shi in enabling language planners to foster innovative language planning practices and its theoretical value in enriching our understanding of LPP.

# 2.3.3. A shi-inflected agency framework

Shi has been applied and examined in various research fields such as business and management (e.g., Yue et al., 2024), while its application and theorisation is largely under-investigated in applied linguistics. This study examines Chinese writing centre ALPP through the lens of shi-inflected agency, which can be categorised into two operationalised strategies based on previous research (Julline, 1995; Yue et al., 2024): noting and following shi with reactive agency, and creating shi with proactive agency (Yue et al., 2024).

The first operational strategy is noting and following shi. According to ancient Chinese philosophy, wanwu can exert their inherent shi/situational propensity on human actors (Jullien, 1995). Thus, human actors, rather than being the omnipotent agents of all en deavours, can reactively note and work along with the “inherent shi” of other human and non-human actants that exist or emerge in the shared situation (Jullien, 1995, p. 14). As “the propensity of the world as a whole is coproduced by the motions of every tendency within it” (Yue et al., 2024, p. 8), it is imperative to attend to how human actors note and follow the inherent situational propensity/shi within all facilitating factors across different context levels when analysing actors’ agentive roles and actions in ALPP, that is, macro-level shi (e.g., macro-level educational policies, An & Zheng, 2022; Okuda, 2024), meso-level shi (e.g., institutional missions, An & Zheng, 2022), and micro-level shi (e.g., personal beliefs, Chen et al., 2021).

The second operational strategy is creating shi. Just as the inherent shi of all beings can exert their influence on human actors, so can human actors proactively intervene in the formation of (future) reality, initiate and create shi/situational propensity, and work them to one’s advantage by agentively managing yin (constraining attributes/facet)-yang (facilitating attributes/facet) alternations in and of all human and non-human beings (Jullien, 1995). The notion of shi underscores the interconnectivity and reciprocity between human actors and all other beings, implying that language planners should take a dynamic, ever-changing, and dialectical view in analysing all relevant actors and factors at various context levels in ALPP. What appears to be yin could be manoeuvred and turned into yang

Table 1 A shi-inflected agency framework.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Aspect</td><td>Agency</td><td>Shi</td><td>Shi-inflected agency</td></tr><tr><td>Spatial</td><td>Macro, meso, and micro levels.</td><td>Macro-level shi, meso-level shi, and micro- level shi</td><td>Individual actors agentively interacting with shi in and across all levels</td></tr><tr><td>Temporal</td><td>Past-present-future oriented</td><td>Dynamic and ever-changing shi: Inherent shi in existent and emerging beings; new shi. created by humans</td><td>Individual actors noting and following shi inhering in existent/emerging beings (reactive agency); creating new shi (proactive agency)</td></tr><tr><td>Dialogical</td><td>Human actors negotiating with structural/ personal factors and power negotiation between different actor groups.</td><td>Interconnectivity and reciprocity between human actors and all other beings and between yin and yang</td><td>Individual actors interacting with the joint force of human and non-human actants and managing yin- yang alternations</td></tr></table></body></html>

through their active exercise of agency, and vice versa.

To better analyse language planners’ indigenous strategies in Chinese writing centre ALPP, we adopt shi-inflected agency as our guiding framework (see Table 1). The ALPP process requires individual actors to have shi-inflected thinking: in the spatial aspect, to manoeuvre shi at various levels, including macro-level, meso-level, and micro-level shi; in the temporal aspect, to strategically note and follow the inherent shi (ever-becoming and emerging) in all correlated beings through reactive agency, as well as initiate and create new potential/shi through proactive agency; in the dialogical aspect, to interact with the joint force of human and non-human beings and manage yin-yang alternations—to maximise collective situational advantage (Jullien, 1995; Yue et al., 2024).

Drawing on the above shi-inflected agency framework, this study investigates how multiple groups of actors exercised shi-inflected agency in Chinese writing centre ALPP, guided by two research questions: How do different groups of actors exercise their agency in

(1) noting and following shi to plan and maintain the sustainable development of their writing centre? (2) creating shi to plan and maintain the sustainable development of their writing centre?

# 3. Methodology

# 3.1. Research contexts and participants

This cross-institutional study examined three EFL writing centres— two thriving ones and a closed one—at three anonymised Chinese universities (EU, TU and SU) to explore their ALPP. EU is a public research university of economics and management, and its ERPP writing centre (EU-WC) was founded in 2021and affiliated with the School of Foreign Studies. EU-WC offers one-to-one writing tutorials led by international faculty tutors to faculty and graduate students from all 47 majors. It also offers a range of publicationrelated activities, including lunch meetings for novice scholars and workshops for postgraduates. It is funded by the school and runs on a tight annual budget of 300 USD.

TU is a public applied university of technology with an EAP-EGP writing centre (TU-WC) founded in 2020. TU-WC is affiliated with the School of Foreign Languages. With an annual funding of 7000–8400 USD from the school, TU-WC offers faculty-led and peer tutorled one-to-one writing tutorials for undergraduates of all 39 majors, along with workshops and writing contests. Both EU and TU are situated in metropolitan cities in China, while SU is a public comprehensive research university in a coastal city. SU operated a writing centre (SU-WC) from 2014 to 2019. SU-WC, housed in the School of International Studies, served only students from the school. It received 3400 USD annually from the school and was one of the earliest writing centres in Chinese universities, offering one-to-one tutorials led by student peer tutors, writing workshops, and lectures.

Through purposive sampling and snowball sampling (Miles et al., 2014), this study recruited 11 participants (see Table 2 for participant information) from the three focal writing centres, representing three layers of actors: people with power (writing centre directors and coordinators) 4 , people with expertise (writing tutors) and people with interest (writing tutees). To our knowledge, no people with influence were involved in the ALPP of the three writing centres and thus were not included.

Table 2 Participant information.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variables</td><td>Participants</td><td>Categorisation</td><td>University position</td><td>Writing Centre Position</td><td>Education</td><td>Experience (years)</td></tr><tr><td>Case 1- EU</td><td>P1</td><td>People with power</td><td>Lecturer in English</td><td>Founder, executive director</td><td>PhD in Applied Linguistics (UK)</td><td>Researched at Western writing centres (6); </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E1</td><td>People with expertise</td><td>Associate professor in</td><td>Faculty tutor</td><td>BA in Liberal Arts (USA)</td><td>Managing EU-WC (2). Working at EU-WC (2).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>11</td><td>People with interest</td><td>English Student</td><td>Student tutee</td><td>Second-year PhD student in Business Administration</td><td>Visited EU-wC, three times, consulted about research article.</td></tr><tr><td>Case 2- TU</td><td>P2</td><td>People with power</td><td>Assistant professor in English</td><td>Executive director</td><td>PhD in Rhetoric and Composition (USA)</td><td>Worked at a western writing centre (2); Managing TU-WC (2).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E2</td><td>People with expertise</td><td>Assistant professor in</td><td>Faculty tutor</td><td>PhD in Education (UK)</td><td>Working at TU-WC (2).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E3</td><td>People with expertise</td><td>English Student</td><td>Peer tutor</td><td>Junior English-major undergraduate</td><td>Working at TU-wC (1).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>12</td><td>People with interest</td><td>Student</td><td>Student tutee</td><td>Junior English-major undergraduate</td><td>Visited TU-wC, once, consulted about personal statement.</td></tr><tr><td>Case 3- SU</td><td>P3</td><td>People with power</td><td>Lecturer in English</td><td>Founding director</td><td>PhD in Composition and Applied Linguistics (USA)</td><td>Visited a Western writing centre; Managed SU-WC (4).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>P4</td><td>Power with power</td><td>Lecturer in English</td><td>Coordinator, the second director</td><td>MA in Applied Linguistics (China); exchange student</td><td>Worked at and managed SU-WC (5).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E4</td><td>People with expertise</td><td>Student</td><td>Peer tutor</td><td>(USA) MA in Translation (UK)</td><td>Worked at SU-wC (1).</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>13</td><td>People with interest</td><td>Student</td><td>Student tutee</td><td>BA in English; MA in Management (UK)</td><td>Visited su-wc, five times, consulted about course essays and IELTS writing.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.2. Multicase study analysis

This study adopted multicase analysis to explore the ALPP of three Chinese writing centres. Case study is a research approach that allows detailed, in-depth, and multi-faceted investigations of a bounded phenomenon or an issue in its real-life settings (Yin, 2017). It is a commonly used methodology in writing centre studies (e.g., Nakamaru, 2010; Weigle & Nelson, 2004). Multicase analysis is an approach to compare different or replicate similar findings of two or more single case studies with compelling and robust evidence (Yin, 2017). In this study, we employed multicase study analysis to compare the ALPP of three Chinese writing centres and provide insights into how EU-WC and TU-WC planned and sustained their writing centres and the lessons to take from SU WC’s closure.

For each case, we collected multiple sources of data from three groups of actors. All participants were interviewed individually via Tencent Meeting due to distance. During semi-structured interviews, we asked writing centre directors and coordinators (people with power) about their background, the initiation of their writing centres, relevant national/institutional policies, strategies, and ad justments to maintain their centres’ sustainable development, the challenges and facilitating factors of planning and operating their centres, and their experience working with tutors. Tutors (people with expertise) were asked to share their understandings, participation and experiences of their writing centre work, tutor recruitment and training, and their interaction with the director. Tutees (people with interest) were asked about their writing-related needs and their writing centre experience. All interviews except E2’s were conducted in Chinese; we interviewed E2 in English per his preference.

Overall, $^ { 1 2 . 1 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ of interviews were audio-recorded; supplementary materials that were mentioned by participants during in terviews, such as writing centre annual reports, and establishment/reform proposals, were also collected (see Appendix 1, Table 3).

Using NVivo 12 Plus, we adopted Braun and Clarke’s (2006) thematic analysis approach (TA) and Merriam’s (1998) case study analysis procedures to code and analyse the interview and document data. Interview recordings were first transcribed by two online automated transcribing services, iflyrec.com and Tencent Cloud. We then recruited an English-major graduate student to edit the transcripts along with us. Drawing on Saldana ˜ (2009), the first and third authors first read the transcripts iteratively and transcribed around $3 0 \%$ of the interview and document data (three transcripts and two documents) carefully to generate related codes and themes to identify different actors’ shi-inflected agency in planning and developing their writing centres. Then, the two authors compared their codes and did an inter-rating test with a percentage agreement rate of $8 9 \%$ ; several revisions were then made to the codes after careful discussion. Finally, by using the revised coding scheme, the first author coded all the interview transcripts and supplementary document data and abstracted the data into final themes.

# 4. Findings

# 4.1. EU-WC: Flowing with shi to facilitate research publications in English

When planning and developing EU-WC, people with power (the director) took a central leading role in noting and following inherent shi/situational propensity, and creating new shi; people with expertise (tutors) interacted with people with power to help plan and make adjustments to follow shi; people with interest (tutees) exercised their dialogical agency only intermittently through feedback provision. The ALPP of EU-WC is shown in Table 4.

Table 4 ALPP of EU-WC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Spatial Temporal</td><td>Macro-level</td><td> Meso-level</td><td>Micro-level</td><td>Dialogical: Shi-inflected actions</td></tr><tr><td>Noting and following shi</td><td>oHE internationalisation oDouble-First Class5 construction</td><td>oUniversity agenda/goal oUp or out policy</td><td>oTutees&#x27; needs</td><td>People with power and expertise: Design and offer ERPP writing support.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Creating shi</td><td rowspan="3">/</td><td>oTeacher development centre</td><td rowspan="3">oTutors&#x27; motivations/believes Tutee&#x27;s feedback .Demand exceeds</td><td>People with power: recruit international faculty tutors; conduct writing centre</td></tr><tr><td>oResearch grant oPre-existing foreign teacher resources .Limited Chinese</td><td>research People with power and expertise: make ongoing adjustments</td></tr><tr><td>supply</td><td>People with interest: provide feedback</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. ○: Affordance ●: Constraint

# 4.1.1. Noting and following shi

Individual actors—mostly people with power and people with expertise— noted and followed macro-level, meso-level, and microlevel shi to initiate and plan EU-WC. First, the agentive choice of establishing EU-WC was mainly made by people with power (the director, P1) and was largely triggered by macro-level shi, that is, the national agenda of pursuing internationalisation and “the Double-First Class,” and meso-level shi, namely, the university’s research assessment policy — “up or out”/ “publish or perish”. Referring to their proposal, P1 stated the importance of providing L2 writing support at EU, which shaped EU-WC as a vehicle to facilitate the institutional agenda:

In July 2021, we drafted a plan by following the university’s developmental goals of “promoting modernisation, internationali sation, multi-discipline and the Double First-Class” [referring to Appendix 1, Document 1] under the influence of national policies such as HE internationalisation and Double-First Class. We hope to help teachers with their English publications. Our university has implemented a policy of “up or out” since 2017, intensifying the publishing pressure on faculty. Many teachers have a relatively weak foundation in English writing.

The extract revealed that the macro- and meso-level language/education policies, which motivated EU to increase its publication output and thus placed heavy publishing pressure on faculty, led to an increasing demand for ERPP writing support, constituting inherent macro-level and meso-level shi that facilitated the initiation of EU-WC. In other words, people with power exercised dialogical agency by identifying and aligning with the structural factors as driving shi.

When planning EU-WC, micro-level shi was also noted and followed by people with power and people with expertise. To cater their service to the needs of teacher tutees (people with interest), P1 conducted a survey (Appendix 1, Document 2) among 40 teachers from different disciplines. According to the survey, 17 teachers expressed their need for proofreading assistance to publish in English. Noting this micro-level shi, P1 and E1(faculty tutor) exercised their dialogical agency by establishing various services: regarding curriculum policy, they planned one-to-one tutorials and workshops to assist English publishing (Appendix 1, Document 1). Regarding access policy, they included graduate students as target tutees, who also have publication needs, which E1 noted and proposed to P1. This was echoed by I1 (people with interest), a PhD student tutee: “we must publish an SCI-Q3 article for graduation requirement.” As a result, EU-WC was planned to largely promote publication success, distinguishing it from North American writing centres’ focus on sup porting coursework-related writing.

Compared with the central agentive role of people with power, people with interest (teachers and graduate students) generally lacked reactive agency in noting and following inherent shi at the initiation and planning stage. However, they exercised dialogical agency by participating in surveys to express their needs for ERPP support, which helped people with power plan situated writing support and thus constituted a form of micro-level shi.

# 4.1.2. Creating shi

In EU-WC ALPP, individual actors exercised proactive agency to overcome challenges. They created new micro-level shi at the planning phase and new micro-level shi and potential meso- and macro-level shi at the sustainable development phase.

First, people with power (P1) created new micro-level shi in the planning phase by recruiting international faculty teachers as tutors to address the shortage of Chinese faculty tutors. Initially, P1 enlisted Chinese teachers with rich experience publishing in English from other departments as tutors with the help of meso-level administrators (e.g., the Teacher Development Centre) during the pilot operation stage, which she agentively exploited as a yang factor. However, P1’s survey with teacher tutees (Appendix 1, Document 2) indicated that the limited outsourced expert tutors failed to satisfy tutees’ strong need for language and proofreading help. Therefore, to convert this new challenge (yin) into a facilitator (yang), P1 involved international teachers from their faculty (i.e., pre-existing international teacher resources) as writing tutors who were personally motivated to work for the EU-WC: “We believe it was neces sary for the university to have a writing centre to support students and faculty, and we volunteer to do so because of our interests in writing” (E1, interview). In this way, people with power (director) adjusted their agentive actions with the support of people with expertise (international faculty tutors) to create new micro-level shi, solving a human resource crisis and achieved a yin-yang alternation.

Second, the three groups of actors also created new shi across three levels to support EU-WC’s sustainable development. To address meso-level challenges such as lacking funding, human resources, and recognition, which constrained the long-term development of EU-WC, P1 created collective favourable shi through conducting writing centre research. For instance, P1 obtained university research grants to secure funding from the meso-level to relieve the financial burden, thus providing new micro-level shi for sustaining EU-WC. P1 also collected empirical research data from her writing centre work and achieved research output (e.g., publications in high-ranking international journals, monographs, and conference talks), which helped win recognition for the writing centre from the university stakeholders and beyond:

I need to publish more papers to be more confident to ask for more resources and support and gain more recognition for my writing centre. I hope to collaborate with tutors, other colleagues, and researchers from other writing centres to conduct research to expand our influence.… we could not only align with the “publish or perish” trend in China and our university but also help the discipline of writing centre studies gain more attention from the academic community.

In this way, P1 managed to turn her micro-level agency in promoting her own research agenda into new shi at meso and macro levels for the development of EU-WC.

Student tutees, as people with interest, also contributed to EU-WC’s sustainability by exercising their dialogical agency through reflexive feedback, strengthening and creating constant micro-level shi. At interview, I1 noted her satisfaction in the post-service survey and intention to attend more tutorials, while also mentioning difficulties, such as having trouble communicating with Englishspeaking tutors due to her limited oral English competence. Students’ feedback served as a continuous impetus for EU-WC’s development, which was translated into new micro-level shi by people with power (P1) and people with expertise (E1). For example, P1 and E1 added a student teaching assistant and bilingual tutorials to facilitate students’ communication with international tutors and assist research data collection. In this way, not only was students’ language-related concern addressed, but a new yang attribute (research data collection) was also generated, achieving a yin-yang alternation.

4.2. TU-WC: maximising shi by harmonizing timing, local conditions, and human relationships

Similar to EU-WC, people with power (the director) exercised shi-inflected agency and steered shi toward their advantage to plan and develop TU-WC. In contrast, people with expertise (tutors) and people with interest (tutees) exercised limited agency. The ALPP of TU-WC is shown in Table 5.

Note. ○: Affordance; ●: Constraint

# 4.2.1. Noting and following shi

Individual actors—mostly people with power—noted and followed inherent shi at macro, meso, and micro levels to establish TUWC. Similar to EU-WC, the director’s decision about founding TU-WC was facilitated by meso and macro-level missions— serving the university’s (meso-level shi) and China’s (macro-level shi) internationalisation and vocational education agendas. This is evidenced in P2’s interview and the work plan she provided. The work plan (Appendix 1, Document 3) states that the writing centre plays “an essential role in the cultivation of international talents.” P2 further explained at interview:

Our university has a need for internationalisation and benchmarks Germany technology universities and vocational schools because currently China is promoting vocational education…Therefore, our university established our writing centre to meet the national educational need.

This excerpt suggested that the alignment between the university meso-level agenda and the national macro-level policy exerted inherent shi on people with power and facilitated the establishment of TU-WC.

People with power’s agentive actions were also mediated by favourable local conditions at the university, namely, meso-level shi. For instance, P2 noted the university’s urgent need to create English support services for students: “The Academic Affairs Office also recognised the necessity of offering English writing support due to the prevalence of English-instructed courses at our university and allocated a classroom for our use.” This meso-level support, e.g., endorsement of English writing support provision and providing a classroom, surfaced as a yang factor, forming meso-level shi for TU-WC’s establishment.

The decision to establish TU-WC was also influenced by micro-level shi, that is, personal motivation to utilise the writing centre as a platform for professional development. At interview, P2 elaborated that both the dean (founding director) and herself were driven to invest in TU-WC due to their respective personal initiatives:

School of Foreign Languages is usually considered “less important” in a technology university… so our dean needed this writing centre to create a signature programme for the school for publicity purposes. Meanwhile, as a newcomer, I also needed this platform to do campus services. We call this … “harmonizing kairos, contextual conditions, and human relationships.”

When planning and designing TU-WC, micro- and meso-level shi were also noted and followed by the director. To plan the cur riculum policy, P2 surveyed 1109 students (people with interest) across the university (Appendix 1, Document 5) and developed services based on students’ voiced needs for diverse writing support; as such, students’ voices formed micro-level shi through the survey in planning TU-WC. Specifically, P2 expanded their service scope to include various non-tutoring activities, such as “examrelated writing workshops, writing contests, writing clubs, and workshops for study-abroad applications” (Appendix 1, Document 3).

Table 5 ALPP of TU-WC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Spatial Temporal</td><td>Macro-level</td><td>Meso-level</td><td>Micro-level</td><td>Dialogical: Shi-inflected actions</td></tr><tr><td>Noting and following shi</td><td>oHE internationalisation oPromoting vocational education</td><td>oUniversity agenda/goal oA classroom oFunding OThe dean&#x27;s (faculty)</td><td>oTutees&#x27; needs</td><td>People with power: create English support services and expanded service scope</td></tr><tr><td>Creating shi</td><td>Artificial Intelligence (emerging)</td><td>support oResearch grant Limited Chinese teacher resources .Marginalised</td><td>Director&#x27;s motivation Tutors&#x27; motivations and feedback</td><td>People with power: implement peer tutoring;. organise academic conferences; make ongoing adjustments People with expertise: attend training; provide feedback;</td></tr></table></body></html>

Moreover, P2 capitalised on meso-level shi with dialogical agency when planning the resource policy, such as negotiating with the faculty administration for more resources and funding.

However, the shi-inflected agency of people with expertise was absent in planning and designing TU-WC. For peer tutors, this lack of involvement may have been caused by their insufficient confidence in teaching English writing and limited expertise in peer collaboration at this stage, as mentioned by E3 in the interview. For faculty tutors, this may have been due to their heavy teaching workload (12 hours/week) and pressure to publish (“To pass the assessment, faculty tutors must publish two papers annually,” P2, interview). Therefore, TU-WC’s initiation and planning was mostly led by people with power, with people with expertise acting as followers.

# 4.2.2. Creating shi

In TU-WC ALPP, individual actors exercised shi-inflected agency, creating new shi predominantly at the sustainable development phase. These creations were achieved through individual actors’ proactive agency in alternating yin-yang.

For people with power, their biggest challenge to develop TU-WC was limited tutor resource at the meso level: initially, the writing centre only recruited part-time Chinese faculty tutors. Later on, the need to serve a large number of students outgrew the amount of available tutor expertise. To grapple with this challenge, P2 exercised her dialogical agency, deploying meso- and micro-level facilitating factors to turn the constraint into a new micro-level shi/potential: adding peer tutoring. After negotiations with the departmental administration, P2 secured four work-study positions for teaching assistants and obtained a university research grant (Appendix 1, Document 4), which she used to compensate the rest of the teaching assistants and peer tutors. Through these strategies, P2 added ten peer tutors and six student teaching assistants to solve the human resource crisis and strategically created the new microlevel shi/potential of peer tutoring.

In addition, P2 recognised the challenges that AI posed on writing centre services and attempted to create new shi/potential to transform this yin to yang. For example, P2 found that there was a recent significant drop in visits to TU-WC due to students’ use of AIassisted writing tools. In response to this change, she planned to integrate AI tools in peer tutor training to increase their AI literacy, thereby creating new micro-level shi. Furthermore, she intended to organise an academic conference on “advancing Chinese writing centre praxis against the backdrop of AI” in the next academic year (Appendix 1, Document 6) as she believed conducting writing centre research can provide micro-level shi for TU-WC. This latter move also demonstrated P2’s intention to create potentially new macro-shi with collective agency of various writing centre planners and practitioners from different Chinese and international institutions.

People with expertise exercised limited agency in developing TU-WC, mostly through attending tutor training and providing regular feedback to the director as micro-level shi. Their agency was mostly mediated by micro-level factors such as personal goals, including “to understand students better and enrich professional knowledge” (E3, interview). E3 also “offered informal feedback to the director during lunch breaks and suggested doing more promotion,” showing her dialogical agency in generating micro-level shi to promote TU-WC’s development.

Similar to EU-WC’s tutees, people with interest participated in TU-WC activities and exercised their dialogical agency through reflexive feedback as micro-level shi in the post-service surveys distributed by the director. I2, a student tutee, expressed his satis faction at interview:

The tutor greatly expanded my writing content—very helpful. I can’t think of any room for improvement, but I do need help with IELTS writing. I will probably return to the writing centre next semester.

The above excerpt suggested that students’ learning experiences at the writing centre stimulated self-reflexivity and further commitments, through which their dialogical agency was exercised (An & Zheng, 2022). The result of the post-service survey (Appendix 1, Document 5) shared by P2 showed that $\mathbf { \ddot { 9 5 9 } }$ students $( 8 6 . 5 \% )$ ) expressed their willingness to continue using the service or recommend the writing centre to others,” providing continuous micro-level shi for TU-WC’s reputation and sustainability. Based on students’ feedback, the director took agentive actions such as providing more “exam-related support, writing samples, and tweets via WeChat public account” (P2, interview), creating a new cycle of planning and re-adjustments to sustain TU-WC.

Table 6 ALPP of SU-WC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Spatial Temporal</td><td>Macro- level</td><td>Meso-level</td><td>Micro-level</td><td>Dialogical: Shi-inflected actions</td></tr><tr><td>Noting and following shi</td><td>/</td><td>oAdministrator&#x27;s support oPre-existing foreign teacher resources oFunding oThe dean&#x27;s (faculty) support</td><td>Director&#x27;s belief o Tutees&#x27; needs</td><td>People with power: create and design English writing support, yet fail to note national and institutional policy</td></tr><tr><td>Creating and losing shi</td><td></td><td>oIntern credits Limited Funding .Policy changes</td><td>oTutor&#x27;s personal goals .Change of human resource allocation</td><td>People with power: reward peer tutors and increase their affective engagement, yet delay feedback analysis and fail to make ongoing adjustments People with expertise: attend training and maintain regular contacts People with interest: provide feedback</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.3. SU-WC: a closed writing centre failing to manoeuvre shi

SU-WC was established in 2014 and closed in 2019. The first director (P3) took a central role in the ALPP but failed to identify inherent macro-level shi, while the second director (P4) and people with expertise (tutors) only exercised limited agency by following the first director’s lead and failed to create new shi through proactive agency. The ALPP of SU-WC is shown in Table 6.

Note. ○: Affordance; ●: Constraint

# 4.3.1. Noting and following shi

In establishing SU-WC, people with power mostly exercised dialogical agency in noting and following inherent meso- and microlevel shi but failed to draw on national and institutional policy as inherent macro-level shi. On the meso level, both P3 and P4 noted the need for innovative approaches to improve students’ writing in their department. Additionally, P4 expressed her personal belief that “the writing centre is a powerful service to assist L2 students’ writerly development” as micro-level shi for establishing SU-WC. Despite their recognition of the value of writing centres, they failed to identify any inherent shi from the macro- and meso-level education/ language policies.

For writing centre planning, similar to the previous two writing centre directors, SU-WC directors noted and followed inherent shi at meso- and micro-levels. Support from upper administrators at the school provided meso-level shi for planning SU-WC. For example, P3 took agentive actions such as submitting a proposal to the department administrators illustrating the necessity of “promoting English writing teaching and students’ development” (Appendix 1, Document 7), evaluating the feasibility, and negotiating key concerns of establishing SU-WC based on student surveys, as evidenced in her interview: “The key to pre-service work is securing leadership support. After presenting the proposal to the faculty’s teaching director and negotiating several rounds, I obtained both policy and financial backing.” The department approved P3’s proposed personnel policy that included a director, a coordinator, eighteen peer tutors, two student assistants, and a mentor team consisting of six international teachers. Specifically, P3 capitalised on meso-level shi such as pre-existing international teacher resources and the department’s approval to reward peer tutors with intern credits.

However, as people with expertise at SU-WC were all student peer tutors, their agency in designing and planning SU-WC was absent. For the lack of authority, they merely followed the lead and instructions of the director and the coordinator. People with interest (tutees) did not demonstrate any proactive agency, whereas their participation in the survey conducted by people with power provided micro-level shi.

# 4.3.2. Creating and losing shi

Individual actors created limited new micro-level shi yet failed to develop SU-WC sustainably because of losing micro- and mesolevel shi at later stages. P3’s agency was mainly constrained by meso-level factors such as lacking funding, similar to EU-WC. According to the university policy, SU-WC could not pay the 18 peer tutors (Appendix 1, Document 9), who they selected carefully from “a pool of 86 English-major student applicants” (Appendix 1, Document 7). P3, the founding director, then exercised her agency to overcome this challenge with two strategies: first, besides rewarding peer tutors with intern credits, P3 involved them in writing English news reports for the department’s website to earn additional income. Second, P3 designed peripheral products and work cards and held gettogether to increase tutors’ affective engagement and avoid demotivating staff due to limited funding. Meanwhile, peer tutors exer cised their agency through attending tutor training and activities and providing suggestions to the director. Their agency was mostly mediated by micro-level factors such as personal goals: “I believe being a peer tutor offered me a chance to enhance my writing skills and engage more with international teachers” (E4, interview).

People with interest’s agency was almost absent in providing feedback for SU-WC’s development. The feedback stage is highlighted by Okuda (2024) as an important stage that may lead to readjustments. However, although I3 recalled providing feedback to SU-WC at interview and people with power reported collecting more than 200 post-tutorial survey responses (Appendix 1, Document 8), the directors’ agentive actions of making feedback-based adjustment lagged behind, which constrained SU-WC’s sustainable development, evidenced in P3’s interview: “We were a bit behind. We didn’t do very well. Despite collecting data for several semesters, the feedback-to-adjustment process was really slow.”

Later on, SU-WC failed to develop sustainably due to micro- and meso-level challenges, including dramatic changes of human resource allocation (personal factor) and the department’s policy (structural factor). In 2017, P3 (the founding director) left the university and P4 continued the administrative work as the second director without any further agentive actions in adjustments and reforms, as she narrated: “Overall, our model remained unchanged after P3 left. I admired her enthusiasm and persistence… I did not invest as much as she had.” Meanwhile, the faculty shrank the enrolment of English-major students and changed the curriculum schedule, making it difficult for SU-WC to recruit enough peer tutors. In sum, losing micro-level shi (resignation of the founding director and lesser agency of the second director) and meso-level shi (drastic changes of the faculty’s policy) led to the closure of SU-WC in 2019.

# 5. Discussion

Through a multicase study of ALPP of three EFL writing centres, we investigated how different groups of actors dialogically exercised shi-inflected agency as a spatial-temporal continuum to plan and develop their writing centres sustainably in the Chinese context. Our study revealed that the planning and sustainable development of the three centres entailed two types of shi-inflected operational strategies by language planners: (succeeded/failed in) noting and following inherent shi/situational propensity in existent and emerging beings, and (succeeded/failed in) creating new shi/situational propensity. Next, we discuss how the spatial, dialogical and temporal nature of agency was enriched by the Chinese notion of shi in the processes of EFL writing centre ALPP in China, followed by a list of implications.

# 5.1. Shi-inflected agency: spatial, dialogical, and temporal nature

Our study highlighted how individual actors—mostly people with power and people with expertise— dialogically negotiated with micro/meso/macro-level shi by noting and following shi, especially macro-level shi, in planning and developing their writing centres. Previous research suggested that when responding to macro-level policies, individual actors might encounter conflicts between the structure and their agency (Chen et al., 2021). However, our study showed that individuals’ agentive actions can capitalise on macro-level policies by integrating it with other facilitating factors at institutional and programmatic levels as affordances or situational propensity/shi to empower the ALPP of local writing centres. For example, a key to the success of EU-WC and TU-WC lies in the fact that P1, E1 and P2 not only identified the inherent power and opportunities afforded by macro-level education/language policies—such as the “Double First-Class Initiative” (He, 2021), “Higher Education Internationalisation” (Gao & Du, 2022; Zhang & Liu, 2023), and “promoting vocational education”—they also integrated macro-level shi with meso- and micro-level shi to drive the establishment and maintenance of their writing centres. This strategy mirrors trends observed in writing centre LPP in other EFL contexts. For example, some Japanese ERPP writing centres (LaClare & Franz, 2013; Okuda, 2024) were also motivated by the syn ergistic shi arising from macro-level policies of internationalisation and meso-level goals of enhancing the university’s status. The emergence of ERPP writing centres in China and other EFL settings illustrates a localised adaptation of the North American model, showing how writing centres in diverse contexts capitalise on macro-level shi to meet local needs. In contrast, P3 and P4 from SU-WC failed to recognise and follow inherent macro-level shi; nor did they note the changes of shi at different levels, which contributed to the eventual closure of their centre. Therefore, for EFL writing centre practitioners who strive to localise the global pedagogy of writing centres (Okuda, 2024), it is imperative to follow macro-level shi and integrate it with meso- and micro-level shi with a trickle-down effect.

Our findings also highlighted the significance of creating shi and handling yin-yang alternations through individual actors’ “practical evaluation” and “projective agency” (Liddicoat & Taylor-Leech, 2021, p. 12–13), which reflects the dialogically and temporally embedded nature of shi-inflected agency. For example, when negotiating with the challenges of limited teacher resources, funding, and institutional recognition, P1 (EU-WC) and P2 (TU-WC) both evaluated their pre-existing resources, made adjustments accordingly, and turned yin factors into new shi/potential: P1 provided international faculty tutor-led proofreading/language editing services, which contrasts with the orthodox North American writing centre pedagogies that typically emphasise the development of students’ self-editing skills rather than offering direct editing assistance (Liu & Harwood, 2022); similarly, P2 trained peer tutors, which is less common in EFL contexts (Tuner, 2006; Zhang & Liu, 2023) but seemed to be effective at TU-WC. They also created new micro-level shi and potential meso- and macro-level shi through future-oriented agency by conducting research to promote their writing centres’ development in particular and to pave the way for writing centre development in China in general, which is of paramount importance given the lack of empirical research on Chinese writing centres (Zhang & Liu, 2023). That is to say, although the actors at these three writing centres faced similar challenges (e.g., lacking of funding, human resources, and recognition), which are common difficulties of fledgling writing centres in other contexts (e.g., Reichelt et al., 2013; Schreiber & Đuri´c, 2017), our study revealed that the success/failure of their centres hinged on how actors negotiated with yin and yang factors dialogically and temporally to follow and generate shi at different levels contextually.

Therefore, our findings enriched the spatial, dialogical, and temporal nature of agency in micro language planning with actors’ shiinflected operational strategies of noting, following, and creating situational propensity/shi. Our shi-inflected agency framework can inspire language planners across the globe to plan and develop their services and centres sustainably and strategically by taking bottom-up agentive actions in local contexts to create new shi/potentiality and maximise collective favourable shi throughout their ALPP process.

# 5.2. Implications

A number of implications can be drawn from our findings. First, language planners at the micro level should adopt shi-inflected thinking and exercise their agency to operate yin-yang alternations to maximise shi, such as working in sync with macro/meso-level policies/agendas, collaborating with other functional departments and faculties to leverage resources and expertise, applying for research grants to fund innovative initiatives, and utilising pre-existing resources. Second, to promote skill development and create potential new shi, directors could establish a community of practice/research to promote tutors’ development and motivation, such as organizing regular training sessions, peer mentoring, and collaborative research projects. Third, it is important to bring students’ agency to the fore and engage them in writing centre development as more vocal and visible planners, such as cultivating student administrators through mentorship and maximise their agency. Finally, we also advocate policymakers from macro and meso levels to lend more support to writing centres to facilitate L2 writing teaching and research by offering funding and integrating writing centre resources into broader educational policies.

# 6. Conclusion

This study examined different individual actors’ agency in the ALPP of three EFL writing centres in China and enriched the spatial, temporal, and dialogical nature of agency by integrating an indigenous Chinese notion of shi. Our study demonstrated the potential significance for language planners to steer toward shi when planning and developing their EFL writing centres.

We acknowledge that this study only focused on three specific cases, but the findings nevertheless invite further discussion of ALPP in EFL countries since the constraints and strategies outlined in this research may represent common situations faced by many EFL writing support planners in similar contexts. This research proposes a new avenue for ALPP studies by offering an evidence-driven agency-shi framework. For future research, we invite more discussions on language planners’ shi-inflected strategic efforts in exercising their agency in planning L2 writing support, especially from the perspectives of different actor groups.

# Notes

1. In this article, “EFL” and “L2” are used interchangeably.   
2. ALPP is a subfield of LPP.   
3. In Chinese philosophy, wanwu includes humans and nonhumans. Nonhumans include mundane objects, texts, animals, technol ogies, and nonhuman environments, sharing similar understanding with the actor-network theory (e.g., Michale, 2017).   
4. Since writing centre directors and coordinators did not engage in tutoring directly in this research, our analysis focused on their administrative role rather than language expertise, thereby categorising them as people with power.   
5. World-class universities and first-class disciplines (http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015–11/05/content_10269.htm).

# Ethical approval

XRZ2022071, Capital University of Economics and Business

# Funding sources

This work was supported by the Capital University of Economics and Business under Grant XRZ2022071, Shenzhen Technology University under Grant 20221030, and Shantou University under Grant STF22013.

# Declaration of Competing Interest

None.

# Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the editors and anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. The authors would also like to extend sincere gratitude to Prof. Yongyan Zheng for her valuable suggestions during the initial conception of this research, to Prof. Nigel Harwood, Ben Rafoth, and Havva Zorluel Ozer for their insightful suggestions during revision, and to all the participants in this study.

# Appendix

Table 3 List of documents   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Name of document</td><td>Date of publication</td></tr><tr><td>Case 1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Document 1: The Plan for the Trial Operation of EU-wC</td><td> July, 2021</td></tr><tr><td>Document 2: Teacher Needs Survey (Questionnaire) for EU-WC</td><td>October, 2021</td></tr><tr><td>Case 2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Document 3: 2021-2022 Work Plan for TU-wC</td><td>2021</td></tr><tr><td>Document 4: Proposal for University-Level Educational Reform Project in 2022</td><td>2021</td></tr><tr><td>Document 5: English Writing Needs Analysis Report for the TU</td><td> January, 2023</td></tr><tr><td>Document 6 Proposal for an academic conference</td><td>2024</td></tr><tr><td>Case 3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Document 7: Proposal for Establishing the Writing Centre at the SU</td><td>December, 2013</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 (continued )   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Name of document</td><td>Date of publication</td></tr><tr><td>Document 8: Client Feedback Survey</td><td>2014-2016</td></tr><tr><td>Document 9: Salary Statistics Table</td><td> January, 2016</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Data Availability

Data will be made available on request.

# References

Ahearn, L. M. (2001). Language and agency. Annual Review of Anthropology, 30(1), 109–137. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.anthro.30.1.109   
An, N., & Zheng, Y. (2022). Language learners as invisible planners: a case study of an Arabic language program in a Chinese university. Current Issues in Language Planning, 23(4), 371–393. https://doi.org/10.1080/14664208.2021.2005369   
Barnawi, O. Z. (2018). Writing centers in the higher education landscape of the Arabian Gulf. Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-55366-5   
Bouchard, J., & Glasgow, G. P. (2019). Agency in language policy and planning: A theoretical model. In J. Bouchard, & G. P. Glasgow (Eds.), Agency in language policy and planning: Critical inquiries (pp. 22–76). Routledge.   
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa   
Chen, X., Tao, J., & Zhao, K. (2021). Agency in meso-level language policy planning in the face of macro-level policy shifts: A case study of multilingual education in a Chinese tertiary institution. Current Issues in Language Planning, 22(1-2), 136–156. https://doi.org/10.1080/14664208.2020.1741234   
Emirbayer, M., & Mische, A. (1998). What is agency? American Journal of Sociology, 103(4), 962–1023. https://doi.org/10.1086/231294   
Fenton-Smith, B., & Gurney, L. (2016). Actors and agency in academic language policy and planning. Current Issues in Language Planning, 17, 72–87. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/14664208.2016.1115323   
Gao, X. (2013). Reflexive and reflective thinking: A crucial link between agency and autonomy. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 7(3), 226–237. https:// doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2013.836204   
Gao, J., & Du, F. (2022). The functioning and development of English Writing Center in the Chinese Higher Education Context: Fudan University as a Case. Chinese Journal of Second Language Writing, 5, 70–80. +141.   
Guo, Y., Guo, S., Yochim, L., & Liu, X. (2022). Internationalization of Chinese higher education: Is it westernization? Journal of Studies in International Education, 26(4), 436–453. https://doi.org/10.1177/1028315321990745   
He, J. (2021). American English Writing Center Model and its implications. Chinese Journal of Second Language Writing, 2, 71–82.   
Jiang, L., Yu, S., Zhou, N., & Xu, Y. (2023). English writing instruction in Chinese students’ experience: A survey study. RELC Journal, 54(1), 37–54. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/0033688220980227   
Jullien, F. (1995). The propensity of things: toward A history of efficacy in China (Janet Lloy. (trans)). Zone Press.   
Kaufhold, K., & Yencken, D. E. (2021). Academic writing centres in multilingual settings: Intermediary agents of higher education language policy? Linguistics and Education, 64, Article 100950. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.linged.2021.100950   
Kyle, B. R. (2018). Merging tutoring and editing in a Chinese graduate writing center. Praxis: A Writing Center Journal, 15(3), 23–33. 〈https://repositories.lib.utexas. edu/handle/2152/68074〉.   
LaClare, E., & Franz, T. (2013). Writing centers: Who are they for? What are they for? Studies in Self-Access Learning Journal, 4(1), 5–16. https://doi.org/10.37237/ 040102   
Liddicoat, A. J., & Taylor-Leech, K. (2021). Agency in language planning and policy. Current Issues in Language Planning, 22(1-2), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 14664208.2020.1791533   
Lillis, T., Hewings, A., Vladimirou, D., & Curry, M. J. (2010). The geolinguistics of English as an academic lingua franca: Citation practices across English medium national and English medium international journals. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 20(1), 111–135. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1473- 4192.2009.00233.x   
Liu, C., & Harwood, N. (2022). Understandings of the role of the one-to-one writing tutor in a UK university writing centre: Multiple perspectives. Written Communication, 39(2), 228–275. https://doi.org/10.1177/07410883211069057   
Lyon, A. (2010). Writing an empire: Cross-talk on authority, act, and relationships with the Other in the Analects, Daodejing, and HanFeizi. College English, 72(4), 350–366. https://doi.org/10.58680/ce20109970   
Mao, L. (2009). Returning to yin and yang: From terms of opposites to interdependence-in-difference. College Composition and Communication, 60(4), W45.   
Merriam, S. (1998). Qualitative research and case study applications in education (second ed.). Jossey-Bass.   
Michale, M. (2017). Actor-network theory: Trials, trails, and translation. Sage.   
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, ˜ J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook (third ed.). Sage.   
Nakamaru, S. (2010). Lexical issues in writing center tutorials with international and US-educated multilingual writers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 19(2), 95–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2010.01.001   
North, S. M. (1984). The idea of a writing center. College English, 46(5), 433–446. https://doi.org/10.2307/377047   
Okuda, T. (2018). Policy borrowing for a world-class university: A case of a writing center in Japan. Current issues in Language Planning, 20(5), 503–520. https://doi. org/10.1080/14664208.2018.1543161   
Okuda, T. (2024). The writing center as a global pedagogy. Pradhan.   
Reichelt, M., Salski, Ł., Andres, J., Lowczowski, E., Majchrzak, O., Molenda, M., Parr-Modrzejewska, A., Reddington, E., & Wi´sniewska-Steciuk, E. (2013). A table and two chairs”: Starting a writing center in Łod´ ´z, Poland. Łod´´z, Poland Journal of Second Language Writing, 22, 277–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jslw.2013.03.002.   
Saldana, J. (2009). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Sage.   
Schreiber, B. R., & Đuri´c, S. (2017). Alternative venues: An EFL writing center outside the university. Praxis: A Writing Center Journal, 14(2), 37–43.   
Turner, A. (2006). Re-engineering the North American writing center model in East Asia. Praxis: The Writing Center Journal, 3(2) (Retrieved from) 〈http://www. praxisuwc.com/new-page-81〉.   
Ubaldo, E. F. (2021). The Protean Identity of English-Medium Writing Centers in the Asia-Pacific Region: A literature review. MEXTESOL Journal, 45(4). n4.   
Weigle, S. C., & Nelson, G. L. (2004). Novice tutors and their ESL tutees: Three case studies of tutor roles and perceptions of tutorial success. Journal of Second Language Writing, 13(3), 203–225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2004.04.011   
Williams, J., & Severino, C. (2004). The writing center and second language writers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 13(3), 165–172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jslw.2004.04.010   
Winder, R., Kathpalia, S. S., & Koo, S. L. (2016). Writing centre tutoring sessions: Addressing students’ concerns. Educational Studies, 42(4), 323–339. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/03055698.2016.1193476   
Yin, R. K. (2017). Case study research and applications: Design and methods. Sage.   
Yu, S., Liu, C., & Zhang, L. (2023). Understanding L2 writers’ lived experiences of informal writing: A phenomenological approach. Journal of Second Language Writing, 60, Article 100979. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2023.100979   
Yue, F., Persson, S., & Wasieleski, D. (2024). Beyond the Western Conceptions with François Jullien: The process of leadership informed by the Chinese Shi 勢 as organizational propensity. Management and Organization Review, 19(6), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1017/mor.2023.17   
Zhang, J., & Liu, C. (2023). An investigation into the missions and practices of glocal writing centers in the Chinese context: ERPP and EAP-EGP hybrid approaches. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 65, Article 101290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2023.101290   
Zhang, J., & Zhao, Y. (2024). Talking about writing in China: Examining tutor-writer interaction during individualized writing center tutorials at Chinese universities. Linguistics and Education, 81, Article 101310. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.linged.2024.101310   
Zhao, S., & Baldauf, R. B. (2012). Individual agency in language planning: Chinese script reform as a case study. Language Problems and Language Planning, 36(1), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1075/lplp.36.1.01

Chang Liu, Lecturer in the School of Foreign Studies at the Capital University of Economics and Business, Beijing. She completed her PhD at the University of Sheffield, UK. Her research interests include writing centres, academic writing and tutoring, and second language writing. Her recent articles were published in Written Communication, Journal of English for Academic Purposes, Studies in Self-Access Learning Journal, and Contextualizing English for Academic Purposes in Higher Education: Politics, Policies and Practices.

Yebing Zhao, Assistant Professor in the School of Foreign Languages at Shenzhen Technology University and current Executive Director of the university’s SZTU Writing Center. She earned her PhD degree from Miami University, Ohio with a specialization in Composition and Rhetoric. Her research interests include comparative/ intercultural rhetoric, second language/multilingual writing, and writing center studies. She was the recipient of the 2020 RSA Gerard A. Hauser Award and the 2020 CCCC Scholars for the Dream Travel Award. Her recent articles were published in Linguistics and Education, China Media Research and The Routledge Handbook of Comparative World Rhetorics.

Jing Zhang, Lecturer of English in the Department of Foreign Languages and Literature at Shantou University. She earned her PhD degree in Composition and Applied Linguistics from Indiana University of Pennsylvania, USA. A recipient of 2020 IWCA Dissertation Research Grant, she has published in Journal of English for Academic Purposes, Linguistics and Education, Writing Center Journal, Composition Forum, Praxis: A Writing Center Journal, The Peer Review, Chinese Journal of Second Language Writing, and Journal of Literature in Language Teaching. Her research focuses on international writing center praxis, AI-assisted, individualized writing support, and second language/multilingual/translanguaging writing.