# Multilingual writers and the academic community: towards a critical relationship

Suresh Canagarajah

# Abstract

In recent times, ESOL teachers of academic writing have become sensitive to a communitybased orientation to literacy. Such notions as communicative competence in linguistics, social constructionism in philosophy, and situated learning in education help perceive writing as a social activity. They have shown the importance of learning to write as an insider to the community one wishes to address. Though these realizations are constructively altering our teaching practice, there are new problems in defining the community and one’s relationship to it. As we move away from static and homogeneous notions of tightly bound community, we confront new questions in orientating to the academy as a community. Such questions become even more complicated when we think of teaching multilingual students who enjoy membership in diverse communities simultaneously. The issue that has concerned me most in my teaching and research on academic writing is the attitude that I should help multilingual writers adopt towards their engagement with academic discourses. How should they position themselves towards their vernacular community and the academic audience? In this paper I examine how different pedagogical approaches in ESOL answer these questions. In the light of emerging theoretical and research findings, I chart a more critical orientation to the relationship between communities. This discussion should prove useful in helping multilingual students develop a writing practice that is creative and challenging. $©$ 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. The importance of community

Thanks to the advances made in several schools in the humanities and social sciences, we now recognize that simply teaching the linguistic/textual grammar or the cognitive processes of writing are insufficient to make a student competent in academic writing. We have moved beyond both the product and process paradigms to situate these pedagogical activities in the specific discourse communities one is writing in/for. As early as the mid 1960s Dell Hymes corrected an emphasis on the abstract rules of communication and emphasized the need to understand the values, conventions, and practices accompanying the use of those rules. His notion of communicative competence tells us that students need an understanding of the cultural assumptions and social practices of disciplinary communities in order to communicate effectively to this audience (Hymes, 1966). These assumptions cannot be learned from outside the community, just as learning to speak a language fluently is not well served by someone memorizing the dictionary or doing grammar exercises from a textbook. To develop communicative competence one has to engage with the community in question and become familiar with the nuances of its cultural practices and linguistic usage. This realization has encouraged schools like English for academic purposes and genre analysis to study the more specific registers and conventions accompanying text construction in different disciplinary communities.

While such sociolinguistic approaches assume that students could use communityspecific rules and conventions to write about an independent body of knowledge that is out there, social constructionist philosophies later revealed that even knowledge is relative to the different communities (Berger & Luckman, 1967). We realize now that knowledge is shaped by socio-cultural practices. More radical versions of this school developed a non-foundationalist philosophical outlook, teaching us that there is no reality/truth that is independent of language and material life (Harland, 1987). Knowledge becomes, therefore, a ‘‘language game’’ that is maintained through the interaction of community members. It is the linguistic activity of the members in debating, revising, and legitimizing the ‘‘paradigms’’ that make sense to them that constitute knowledge. This realization has led teachers to emphasize content-based courses in academic writing, urging students to pay attention to the knowledge constructs that periodically enjoy dominance in the different disciplinary circles. In other words, we became interested not only in teaching students how to write to the academic community, but also what to write.

But can students effectively learn the form and content of disciplinary discourses in the writing classroom, detached from the scholars who practice them? The notion of situated learning in education has recently made us aware that learning anything is a community activity, done in engagement with the circles that practice that knowledge. Lave and Wenger (1991) show why legitimate peripheral participation in communities of practice is important in the learning process.

First of all, it is practice—not discourses, languages, or rules—that unifies different communities. Therefore, learning these constructs from the outside–if possible at all–will be incomplete. It is by participating in the activity of the community that one can become an insider in the knowledge and conventions of that circle. Of course, since students are not expert members of that community, they have to orientate to the practice with a certain amount of detachment and protection. Therefore, a peripheral participation is ideal till students have developed the insider knowledge and confidence to become full participants. But to be permitted this level of close engagement with the community–and to find transparent its discourses and practices–one should enjoy legitimate access to the workings of that community.

Legitimacy means both that students should be permitted relatively easy access to the activities of the community, and that the pedagogical tasks they engage in should have a functionality and meaning in relation to the activities of that circle. This realization is inspiring teachers of academic writing to devalue textbook learning of academic discourses and simulated tasks of academic writing. The focus is now on apprenticeship. We are exploring how real life tasks and functional projects of students, in collaboration among themselves and with mentoring by disciplinary specialists, help produce written texts that make a valid contribution to knowledge.

If this was all there is to mastering academic writing, things would be simple. Unfortunately, multilingual students already come with membership in other communities of practice. Holding membership in two different communities may not be easy—especially if they have a history of antagonistic relations.1 How do students relate the discourses and cultural practices of their vernacular community to those of academic communities? Would they face the temptation of giving up the vernacular discourses in order to acquire the academic discourses? Would they have inhibitions against participating in the life of a community which enjoys more power and status in relation to their vernacular communities? What kind of stresses and tensions would they face in shuttling between both communities? Can they take the discourses of their vernacular community with them as they participate in the life of the academic community? These are the many questions that arise in actual contexts of writing and pedagogical practice.

The answers to these questions depend considerably on how academic communities are really constituted and defined. Matters are compounded by the fact that there are difficulties in identifying and characterizing communities in the context of postmodern discourses and cultural/economic globalization. We are realizing, for example, that communities are more often imagined than physically constituted (as Anderson, 1984 has reminded us). This means that we may not always find discourse communities that are rooted in a specific spatial or temporal setting. Membership may be enjoyed by individuals working in diverse settings who are still connected by their work on a common project and the information that flows between them. To use fashionable contemporary terminology, communities have become deterritorialized— i.e., unmoored from specific locations.

We are also realizing that communities may be hybrid, characterized by a heterogeneous set of values and discourses. Thus one community may not be separated from another according to unique unchanging values. Members could hold diverse values and ideologies, enjoying membership in multiple communities. Therefore, it may be difficult to pin down the identity of a person as belonging exclusively to one community or as characterized by homogeneous values. Identity has become decentered—i.e., lost the wholeness provided by uniform characteristics.2 These new realizations could empower or limit the writing practices of multilingual students, depending on how we theorize the relationship between the diverse communities that they belong to. It is in the light of these developments that I wish to consider how some of the dominant models in ESOL academic writing conceive of the relationship between multilingual students and disciplinary communities.

# 2. English for academic purposes: asserting boundaries

Among the pedagogical approaches in L2 writing, the school of English for Academic Purposes (EAP) has contributed immensely to understanding the ways of communicating in the academic community. Helped by the research and pedagogical approaches of related movements like English for Specific Purposes (in second language teaching) and Writing across the Curriculum (in L1 writing circles), this school has described a variety of features that characterize the discourses of the different disciplinary circles. Scholars have worked towards describing the knowledge content (Brinton, Snow, & Wesche, 1989), typical genre conventions (such as the research article—Swales, 1990), and register (see Johns & Dudley-Evans, 1991). These findings enable teachers to develop pedagogical approaches that facilitate communicative competence among their students in addressing the discourses of the academic community in general and disciplinary communities in particular.

While this school’s descriptions of discourse are of immense value, its attitude towards the academic community raises some conflicts in pedagogical practice for multilingual students. EAP adopts the normative attitude that the discourses of academic communities are not open to negotiation or criticism. If a student doesn’t adopt the established discourses of a discipline, then she simply loses her claim for membership in that community. For example, if an L2 scholar’s research article diverges slightly from the canonical structure of introductions (formulated in the CARS model) EAP scholars may treat this writer as unproficient in the writing genre (see Swales, 1990, p. 158). But if we could explore why this scholar may be adopting this practice, whether there may be serious reasons that may motivate alternate styles of writing, and whether this may indicate an incipient criticism of the accepted conventions of academic communication, we will develop a critical attitude to disciplinary discourse. This would make us sensitive to academic discourse as ideological—representing the interests and values of a specific circle, suppressing other discourses, and perhaps imposing its own orientation to knowledge on other communities to exercise its domination. But these questions are irrelevant for the EAP approach.

As suggested by the previous example, the school also orientates to the academic community as a homogeneous circle, unified by its distinctive discourse features. The students must realize that their own communities have their own unifying and distinctive discourse features, and must see to it that these discourse systems are kept separate. Mixing the discourse of these communities is treated as a sign of incompetence. In much of the scholarship of this school, there is little interest in the discourses students bring from their own communities. In effect, the cultural and discursive difference ESOL students represent get treated as a ‘‘problem’’ for academic writing. This is therefore a one-sided approach to community that considers how one should acculturate to the community one wishes to join, without considering the discursive implications of the other memberships one brings with oneself.

Perhaps EAP scholars have good reasons for adopting this position. They display a pragmatic attitude to writing. They hold that the practical objective in ESOL is to develop mastery of academic discourses rather than work towards critiquing it. Though some scholars are open to the possibility that academic writing may represent ideological interests, they feel that these questions are irrelevant to students. Asking questions about the underlying values and rationale for academic discourses would only distract students from the immediate objective of becoming proficient in this writing. Swales (1990) explains that his reason for leaving out ideological considerations about academic discourse in his work ‘‘rests on a pragmatic concern to help people, both non-native and native speakers, to develop their academic communicative competence’’ (p. 9). Interrogating academic knowledge is therefore considered unhelpful—i.e., perhaps of secondary interest, irrelevant to the survival needs, and sometimes plainly beyond the linguistic and intellectual abilities of ESOL students.3 The attitude encouraged is to orientate more towards achieving academic success and communicative fluency, rather than developing a critical awareness of the underlying knowledge-making processes.

Others have adopted an instrumental attitude towards academic discourse (Johns, 1990; Reid, 1989). They have argued that it is more important to do things with it rather than reflect on it. Therefore discourse features are reduced to skills that have to be mastered through carefully focused practice. Reid (1989) exhorts ESOL teachers to ‘‘discover what will be expected in the academic contexts their students will encounter, and they must provide their students with the writing skills and the cultural information that will allow their students to perform successfully’’ (p. 232). When discourses are treated as ‘‘skills’’ and ‘‘information’’ leading to successful performance in the academy, students won’t have the space for asking larger questions of power and difference. They will simply receive practice in using the established knowledge and conventions in the expected way.

But ESOL students face serious conflicts in adopting to academic discourses uncritically. Not only do these discourses represent values that are perceived as hegemonical and repressive by multilingual writers, they also appear to lack the strengths and resources represented by their own knowledge traditions. Some students want to bring to their academic communication the resources they enjoy from their vernacular in order to enhance their writing. There are cases where these creative attempts at infusing vernacular features are appreciated for both stylistic and ideological reasons by those in the academic community (Li, 1999). Moreover, to treat each use of deviation from academic discourse as a sign of unproficiency or failure is to underestimate the agency of the students. Lu (1994) relates the experience of an ESL student who uses a peculiar grammatical feature in her essay. After a lengthy discussion Lu discovers that the student had adopted this structure after failing to find a suitable grammatical structure in English that would express what she really wanted to convey about a cultural feature. She had therefore used this grammar item advisedly.

# 3. Contrastive rhetoric: respecting boundaries

Contrastive rhetoric (CR) displays the openness to take the student’s culture seriously and understand the conflicts in interacting with academic communities. It treats the discursive deviations of the students with more tolerance and appreciation. CR begins with the relativistic assumption that different language communities represent different cultures and literacy practices. This would explain why multilingual students may have reservations in communicating in an academic discourse that is predominantly associated with English. They may even have problems in understanding and using this discourse proficiently, as these students will be influenced to orientate to writing through their cultural and discursive practices. This healthy dose of relativism would prevent teachers from criticizing students for using different conventions or thinking of academic discourses as a neutral construct that any intelligent person should be able to adopt.

CR has produced some useful studies on the differences in the discourses of nonnative communities and English-based mainstream disciplinary communities. Scholars in this tradition have undertaken their own studies on text construction, register, and paragraph organization. After Kaplan’s initial studies on paragraph structure, the domain of analysis has become more complex now. There are other areas of surface structure that have been studied—i.e., development of the thesis, cohesion and coherence, and topic development. Furthermore, whole genres like narrative, persuasion, and argumentation have been compared (see Connor, 1996 for a review). The difference from similar studies by EAP is that CR is informed by a relativism that treats the features of each community as motivated by their unique linguistic and cultural traditions that one cannot be generalized as superior over others.

Despite this valuable contribution in understanding community differences, CR has a troubling position on possibilities of crossing community boundaries. Some of the original proponents of CR still hold a cultural and linguistic determinism that considers one’s values as possibly preventing one from practicing academic discourses effectively. Through the developments over three decades CR has moved away from its extreme versions of determinism that made the early scholars argue that multilingual students will be conditioned by their first language to be unable to appreciate or write in other styles (Kaplan, 1966). But Kaplan still seems to hold: ‘‘different cultures have different rhetorical preferences for the organization of written text... Contrastive rhetoric preferences not only shape written text in distinct languages and cultures, but tend to manifest themselves consistently, if subtly, in the writing of students learning a second language’’ (Grabe & Kaplan, 1996, p. 197). The assumption here is that human agency cannot transcend cultural biases. Culture expresses itself beyond one’s control when a writer is composing in a second language. There is the additional assumption here that if features of another culture appear in the writing of a language, it’s a case of interference rather than a creative case of appropriation or negotiation.

Furthermore, CR displays a static and homogeneous orientation to culture. The cultures of different communities are treated as separate and unvarying. There are no common features or overlaps in cultures. This would be called an ‘‘essentialist’’ orientation by postmodern theorists. Such definitions overlook the considerable hybridity and heterogeneity evident in each community. So, for example, theorizing that Japanese students would write and think in a uniform way ignores the diversity of styles one may find in the Japanese community and the changes Japanese rhetoric has gone through in recent history (Kubota, 1999). To make matters worse, these descriptions ignore the reality of linguistic and cultural contact–in terms of which the discourses of a community modify, reconstitute, and borrow from other communities. My studies on Sri Lankan scholars show that they shuttle ably between local and western academic communities belonging to their field as they publish their findings (Canagarajah, 2000). There are considerable overlaps between these two discourses. In fact, local scholars sometimes knowingly import features of western discourse to challenge traditional vernacular rhetoric, just as they modify the established genres of writing with their vernacular ethos. In this age of globalization, when we shuttle between communities and enjoy multiple memberships, it is hard to pin down any person or community as characterized by an immutable set of values.

Despite its rigidity in defining community identity, in a pedagogical move that sounds theoretically inconsistent CR goes on to develop strategies for students to write as insiders to the academic community. It is assumed that with suitable display of textual models and sufficient practice, ESOL students can adapt to academic literacy. But, as in EAP, it is assumed that when students write to the academy they should adopt the normative discourses of that community. Any display of the students’ vernacular is treated as an interference (that is, a problem not a resource). In assuming this, the different-but-equal attitude to discourses prevents CR from addressing the underlying issues of power. Though students may feel comforted in being asked to see diverse discourses as being true in themselves (with neither having a greater claim to rationality), the orientation fails to appreciate that in social life certain communities and discourses enjoy greater legitimacy and power. Students may see a need to resist academic discourse when they sense the power it enjoys historically, with bad previous experiences of objectifying their communities, providing them subordinate positions, and even leading to the domination of minority cultures.

Therefore, students may feel tempted to bring in their vernacular discourses to mediate the power of academic discourses. But CR would perceive these strategies of mediation as an interference. I show elsewhere how a graduate student in the University of Jaffna brings in features that are important for her as a woman and a Tamil speaker to infuse a more personal oral discourse in her dissertation. This is the way she deals with the dissatisfactions she has with academic discourse as a detached and impersonal medium of communication (Canagarajah, 1999, chapter 7).

In effect, CR ends up ignoring issues of power and hampering boundary crossing. In this respect it is similar to the EAP approach. Disciplinary communities are protected from change, modification and democratization, with their interests and values kept intact. They are kept safe from contact with other discourses and contamination from other values. This is eventually disempowering to multilingual students as it prevents them from engaging with the academic discourses in terms of their own interests and traditions. Though CR respects difference and gives dignity to the vernacular discourses represented by the students (unlike EAP), it attempts to contain difference within the respective communities.

# 4. Social process: crossing boundaries

But boundary crossing is made easy by the next school we will consider, social process approach (SP). Informed by social constructionist thinking, scholars who popularized this approach (from predominantly the L1 composition scene) believed that notions of truth or knowledge are not grounded in an underlying material reality (Bruffee, 1983). From this perspective, no discursive paradigm of any group can make a superior claim to truth. Each group constructs discourses that suit its social practice, historical experiences, and interests. Disciplinary discourses, again, represent both the means and end of intellectual activity. SP believes that this non-foundationalist perspective would help prevent multilingual students from treating disciplinary discourses as superior to theirs (Bizzell, 1992). After all, all discourses are ‘‘language games,’’ providing partial and partisan views on reality. This philosophical stance is more radical than the Sapir—Whorf anthropological underpinnings of CR which holds that there is an underlying common reality that cultures only interpret differently.

Social process practitioners assume that a pedagogy of discourse analysis that lays bare the assumptions and features constituting the discourse of the academic community would take the sting off its power and provide access to those outside the group. Having thus demythologized the conventions of the academic community, social process scholars believe that teachers can encourage their students to shuttle between their vernacular community and the disciplinary audience without conflict. As one of the leading proponents puts it:

Conventions that are common in the society could be used as bridges between different discourse communities—for example, to ease the transition into the academic discourse community for students who come from discourse communities far removed from it. Through discourse analysis we might offer them an understanding of their school difficulties as the problems of a traveler to an unfamiliar country—yet a country in which it is possible to learn the language and the manners and even ‘‘go native’’ while still remembering the land from which one has come. (Bizzell, 1982, p. 218, p. 238)

Apart from discourse analysis, students are also encouraged to engage in group activities of debating, reasoning, and analyzing disciplinary subjects (Bruffee, 1983; Rose, 1989). This way, students simulate the activity of the disciplinary communities in constructing the discourses that they agree to uphold in an effort to encode their world view and maintain their identity.

This school thus goes beyond the determinism of CR by arguing that there are common values between even conflicting discourses that can be used to move across community boundaries. In assuming that students can move across communities, SP acknowledges the dynamic nature of interpersonal interactions where subjects do enjoy multiple community memberships in social life. SP proponents also assume that one doesn’t have to lose one’s primary community membership or identity while interacting as an insider in a different community. Borrowing constructs from sociolinguists like Basil Bernstein and Dell Hymes, these scholars assume that such movement across communities is part of socialization for all of us. After being born in a primary discourse community constituted by family or ethnicity, we move on to secondary discourse communities like nation, school, and other institutions. That subjects always move between different communities is a more flexible attitude compared to the EAP and CR assumptions that make boundary-crossing difficult and define communities as exclusive in membership.

Yet, in attempting to practice this model in a writing course for African–American students in an American university, I faced significant problems (Canagarajah, 1997). Despite the demythologization of discourses, minority students find it hard to accept the liberal position that discourses are of equal power simply because they are non-foundational. Students sense that certain discourses enjoy more power in social life, and that they are antithetical to the interests of their vernacular communities. Though the discourses themselves don’t have greater claim for truth, social and material power are used to impose one group’s discourses over others. So using the academic discourses—albeit with some critical detachment—would still give life and power to their dominant status. Furthermore, students are uncomfortable with representing their identities through academic discourses. They see that they are adopting voices and subjectivities that they abhor, and have been trained historically to suspect or resist. In effect, SP simplifies power. Considering power in purely discursive terms and not considering their material and historical underpinnings has led to romanticized views of egalitarianism in deconstructionist and postmodern circles.

The notion that students have to ‘‘go native’’ in the academic community is also not far-reaching. Like EAP and CR, this attitude is informed by the assumption that the discourses of communities are somewhat homogeneous and discrete. When one moves into a community, one has to leave back other discourses and identities. One can only enjoy one community membership at a time. This sounds too restrictive at a time when hybrid identities of subjects and the decentered status of communities are taken for granted. What my students seemed to want was to take their identities, values, and interests with them as they communicate in the academy. It appeared to me (although they didn’t articulate it explicitly) that students would like to creatively complicate the academic discourse by adopting a ‘‘multivocal’’ approach that fuses their native discourses with the conventions valued by the academy (Canagarajah, 1997).

# 5. Transculturation model: merging boundaries

Such a perspective gains a lot of respect in the postmodern culture where identities and discourses are not perceived in dichotomous terms. All subjects claim mixed identities. Similarly, the discourses and texts of each community show considerable fusion deriving from their long histories of contact with other genres of communication. It is possible then for students not to use academic discourses in the academy’s terms, but to construct mixed discourses and identities that take their own interests into account. Such communicative acts may serve to broaden academic discourses and make them more inclusive.

Vivian Zamel (1996, 1997) has recently proposed a model of transculturation (TM) in L2 circles to theorize that moving between discourse communities is quite natural for students who enjoy multicultural backgrounds. Zamel considers it possible for multilingual students to mix discourses and merge discourse boundaries. This may give birth to multivocal texts that display mixed genres of writing. Students may mix their vernacular discourses with textual conventions from dominant communities to produce such novel and creative writing. In fact, Zamel is of the opinion that to define academic discourses and textualities in a discrete manner is misleading. There is considerable overlap in disciplinary discourses and plurality within communities that she considers it a deterministic and stereotypical activity to pin down disciplinary discourses in a homogeneous manner.

Her position is motivated by the postmodernist notion that essentialization, classification, and categorization of any kind is rigid and deterministic. The identity of communities and students is so fluid that there is nothing to prevent one from moving freely between boundaries. Using terms like ‘‘transcending boundaries’’ and ‘‘transculturation model,’’ she argues that academic discourses are so heterogeneous and ESOL student cultures so diverse that many different outcomes are possible. She finds this orientation providing ample space for student agency. Students don’t have to be restricted by their native linguistic or cultural backgrounds, or the exclusionary practices of dominant groups, in their communicative life.

TM thus adopts a more complex orientation to communities and discourses than the previously discussed approaches. We might say that whereas CR and EAP warn students to respect boundaries, and SP allows a careful crossing of boundaries, TM encourages an unceremonious merging of boundaries. Thus borders are made porous. And TM permits one a life in multiple communities simultaneously. Furthermore, while the other schools make the process of shuttling between communities somewhat difficult, TM makes it very easy. But the question remains whether this process is made too easy? It appears that the model attempts to erase difference and nullify power. The oft repeated prefix ‘‘trans’’ in Zamel’s theorization raises suspicions about the eventual direction. It is made to appear that this movement between communities is unrestricted and unhindered (except perhaps by ill-advised teachers). Postmodern discourses of splintered identities and fluid boundaries are exaggerated to simplify the reality of power. Also, these discourses are used to remove subjects from their specific location in society and history. What is lacking is a critical orientation to this boundary crossing process.

Despite trends of postmodern fusion and hybridity, minority communities still occupy marginalized status in society, their discourses don’t constitute cultural capital, and stereotypes are imposed on them to exert domination. More importantly, they cannot move outside discourses and cultures to achieve a neutral, free position as the prefix ‘‘trans’’ may suggest to some. Students do have to struggle against the imposition of negative identities and statuses in order to achieve a space of advantage for themselves in academic discourse. Multilingual students’ struggle for voice is more ‘‘counter’’ discursive rather than ‘‘trans’’ discursive. Aware of their location in society and history, they engage with the dominant communities critically to make a space for their interests. Acceptance into other communities is not guaranteed.

There are different strands of research that warn us not to take too far the postmodern fascination with eradicating power and accommodating difference in scholarly literacy practices. The academic community adopts strict gate-keeping practices in the publication of papers in the leading research journals. We know that reviewers and editors don’t show much tolerance towards divergence from standard discourses in the field. Even variations in dialect in English articles are treated as errors, leading to the rejection of submissions from periphery writers (Canagarajah, forthcoming). Others who have attempted to publish critical perspectives on dominant constructs testify to facing considerable resistance from the academic community. Bazerman’s (1987) chronicling of the growth of the APA Publication Manual from six and a half pages in 1929 to 200 pages in 1983 indicates how the policies and requirements of journals have become tighter. If at all, the conventions and rules of academic writing are becoming more micro-managed, not opened up for fluid genres and discursive play.

Though there is a plurality of discourses that characterize a field at any given time, the range of accommodated discourses still complement the dominant ideologies and suit the interests of the dominant members (see Bahri, 1997). Furthermore, however fashionable notions of hybridity and plurality may be, there is still a glaring inequality in the demography of scholars publishing in mainstream academic journals. Scholars from periphery academic communities, especially from non-English backgrounds, are poorly represented in many fields (Swales, 1990; Canagarajah, 1996). We must keep in mind Geisler’s (1994) recent studies on how academic literacies are implicated in the vested interests of professional classes which provide the rationale for the formation of the academy in the United States.

# 6. Contact zones perspective: appropriating boundaries

A perspective on academy that takes into account the struggles and conflicts in negotiating power while retaining the agency of writers to cross boundaries is Mary Louise Pratt’s notion of contact zones (CZ). Pratt (1991) considers the postcolonial world as constituting many domains of cultural and ideological contact of diverse social groups, giving rise to new genres of literacies and communication. Thus the academy is by definition a meeting point of disparate discourses. Though Pratt adopts a postcolonial orientation that is congenial to the hybridity of subjects and fluidity of discourses of TM, she defines the academy as ‘‘social spaces where cultures meet, clash, and grapple with each other, often in contexts of highly asymmetrical relations of power’’ (1991, p. 34). The cultural contact here takes place under unequal power relationships. Thus Pratt reminds us that heterogeneity shouldn’t be taken to mean that the academy is an egalitarian domain.

Though CZ is sympathetic to concerns of writerly agency and the possibility of negotiating new academic genres of writing, CZ emphasizes that these possibilities come about through a critical negotiation with dominant conventions. They are not available automatically, by virtue of discourses and subjects being plurally constructed or because of the dominant multiculturalist discourse evident in mainstream society.4 Because of the unequal relationship, multilingual writers have to adopt many subtle and creative strategies of communication to construct their oppositional forms of knowledge and discourses. Students shouldn’t be satisfied with just switching discourses as Bizzell argues, or fusing discourses as Zamel encourages, but appropriating dominant discourses according their interests and values in order to gain voice. Through discursive struggle, students adopt creative strategies to reshape academic conventions to represent their interests and values. As dominant discourses are taken over by the students, new genres and literacies are born. Autoethnography, transculturation, critique, collaboration, bilingualism, mediation, parody, denunciation, imaginary dialogue, and vernacular expression are among the few genres Pratt lists.

I can illustrate such a writing practice through an interesting research in ESOL writing done from a feminist perspective. In a case study of a Chinese and a Japanese female graduate student writing their dissertations, Belcher (1997) shows how they produced embedded forms of argumentation in otherwise narrative texts in order to gently and tactfully challenge the biases of their faculty advisors (and, in effect, the dominant discourses in their field). This writing strategy derives from a community-based and gender-influenced desire to show respect, understanding, and co-operative engagement in dialogue, different from the agonistic forms of argumentation associated typically with males. The female graduate students infuse the academic text with a more relaxed, empathetic, involved prose that introduces an oppositional voice in the academic discourse. Despite the risks involved in antagonizing their thesis committee with their ‘‘deviant’’ conventions and losing their degrees, the students manage to evoke respect for their writing.

Belcher in fact takes this example a step further to argue that these alternate modes of argumentation and reasoning are a healthy corrective to the established identities in academic discourse. She relates how mainstream scholars are themselves reconsidering the place of adversarial modes of argumentation and identities which are not conducive to generating meaningful dialogue or cultivating ethical relations in intellectual conversations. The value of the critical voice emerging through strategies of textual appropriation is that it creatively challenges the established ideologies and subjectivities in the academic community. This is a good example of the fact that accommodating new voices enables change, reform, and progress in the discourses of that community. A community that insists on new members participating only on its own terms is denied these advantages. It reproduces the same discourses through time and eventually may ossify.

What teachers have to attempt is to get students to engage with the academy, not necessarily be inducted into it. It is not crossing over into the academy but shuttling between communities that might be ideologically desirable for students. Students then shouldn’t give up their own experiences, values, and interests as they engage with academic discourse. In fact, the relative detachment they enjoy as members of vernacular communities is good for this purpose of appropriation. While engaging with academic scholars, texts, and activities, they should do so with the consciousness that they are partial outsiders. They don’t have to become insiders in the sense that they fully ‘‘go native’’ in the academic community (as spelt out by Bizzell). As Bartholomae and Petrosky (1986) point out in their reading/writing pedagogy, there is an advantage in students maintaining their outsider status. The resulting discursive tension provides a critical detachment towards the academic community that can lead to creative text construction.

Prior (1998) theorizes how members may participate in the specific discursive activities of the community with the full consciousness of their histories–i.e., their experiences, values, identities. It is in this way that they can adopt a relative detachment towards the academic discourses, critique them, and develop new perspectives. How does the native (or primary) discourse of the member play a role in his/her orientation to the academic discourse? Adopting terminology from Bakhtin, Prior argues that this may happen by a process of lamination, where the authoritative discourse of the institution (and faculty members) merges with the internally persuasive discourse of the student. Both may exist in parallel for some time (or even in a state of tension), before they begin to inch towards each other with subtle symbiotic modifications.

Prior shows through his ethnographies on graduate students how their experiences and relationships outside the academy contribute to appreciating the positions presented by their professors. There are some points on which the students’ positions don’t correspond to that of the experts in the discipline. Through time and constant negotiation between the advisor and student, both move towards a position that satisfies both of them while leaving their original positions slightly altered. Thus the authoritative discourse of the expert gradually becomes the internally persuasive discourse of the student, just as the former itself slightly changes in light of the new experiences introduced by the student. This is a creative and critical orientation to literacy. By bringing their own histories into their writing projects students are empowered, not paralyzed or confused. Therefore students have to make a sincere attempt to engage with academic members and infuse their insights into the authoritative discourse.5

# 7. Conclusion

The distinctions I have been making in the orientation of many popular contemporary pedagogical approaches to community membership shouldn’t be taken to mean that I don’t see any value in the models I criticize. First of all, it is the advances made by each respective approach in insights into academic literacy which have made us progress to a more sophisticated understanding of the disciplinary communities and the challenges for multilingual writers. Furthermore, collectively, each of the schools contributes diverse tools and pedagogical practices to help practice academic writing with greater effectiveness.

For example, even scholars in critical writing approaches use the descriptions of disciplinary discourses by EAP in their pedagogy. These descriptions enable them to understand the conventions and rules that serve to maintain the power of the dominant academic circles. These descriptions help to demystify the power of the academy by opening up for analysis their in-group codes and conventions which others have to contend with if they want to make a claim for insider status. Similarly, CR has made fine-grained linguistic and textual descriptions of the differences in the practices of disciplinary communities and non-western communities that critical scholars use in order to anticipate some of the challenges for students as they teach academic writing.

While EAP and CR make empirical contributions, the other models sharpen the theoretical orientation relating to multilingual students. SP and TM provide a space for agency. They provide a useful insight into the possibilities available for students to move across and between discourse boundaries. The sociolinguistic and postmodernist orientations provide a more complex perspective on identity and construct sophisticated tools of discourse analysis that are useful for critical practitioners. Therefore, each of these schools contributes to a richer pedagogical practice as we orientate multilingual students to academic writing. In fact, it is not impossible to adopt these pedagogical and textual insights in the service of critical academic writing, even though leading proponents of some of these schools have distanced themselves from critical pedagogy.

# References

Anderson, B. (1984). Imagined communities: reflections on the origins and spread of nationalism. London: Verso.   
Appadurai, A. (1996). Modernity at large: cultural dimensions of globalization. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.   
Bahri, D. (1997). Marginally off-center: postcolonialism in the teaching machine. College English, 59/3, 277–298.   
Bartholomae, D., & Petrosky, A. (1986). Facts, artifacts and counter–facts: a basic reading and writing course for the college curriculum. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.   
Bazerman, C. (1987). Codifying the social scientific style: the APA publication manual as behaviorist rhetoric. In J. S. Nelson, A. Megill, & D. N. McCloskey (Eds.), The rhetoric of the human sciences (pp. 125–144). Madison, WI: Wisconsin: University Press.   
Belcher, D. D. (1997). An argument for nonadversarial argumentation: on the relevance of the feminist critique of academic discourse to L2 writing pedagogy. Journal of Second Language Writing, 6/1, 1–21.   
Benesch, S. (1993). ESL, ideology and politics of pragmatism. TESOL Quarterly, 27/2, 705–717.   
Berger, P., & Luckman, T. (1967). The social construction of reality. New York: Doubleday.   
Bhabha, H. K. (1994). The location of culture. New York: Routledge.   
Bizzell, P. (1982). Cognition, convention and certainty: what we need to know about writing. PRE/TEXT, 3, 213–243.   
Bizzell, P. (1992). Academic discourse and critical consciousness. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.   
Brinton, D., Snow, M. A., & Wesche, M. B. (1989). Content-based second language instruction. Boston: Heinle & Heinle.   
Bruffee, K. (1983). Writing and reading as collaborative or social acts. In J. N. Hays (Ed.), The writer’s mind. Urbana: NCTE.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (1996). Non-discursive requirements in academic publishing, material resources of periphery scholars, and the politics of knowledge production. Written Communication 13, 4, 435–472.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (1997). Challenges in English literacy for African–American and Lankan Tamil learners: towards a pedagogical paradigm for bidialectal and bilingual minority students. Language and Education (11/1), 15–36.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (1999). Resisting linguistic imperialism in English teaching. Oxford: OUP.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (2000). Understanding L2 academic writing as codeswitching. Paper presented in the Thirty Fourth Annual Convention of TESOL, 14–18 March. Vancouver.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (forthcoming). The geopolitics of academic literacy and knowledge production. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.   
Connor, U. (1996) Constrastive rhetoric. Cambridge: CUP.   
Geisler, C. (1994). Academic literacy and the nature of expertise: reading, writing, and knowing in academic philosophy. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Grabe, W., & Kaplan, R. B. (1996). Theory and practice of writing. Hillsdale, NJ: Longman.   
Hall, S. (1997). Old and new identities, old and new ethnicities. In D. King (Ed.), Culture, globalization, and the world system (pp. 41–68). Minneapolis: University of Minnnesota Press.   
Harland, R. (1987). Superstructuralism: the philosophy of structuralism and post-structuralism. London: Methuen.   
Hooks, B. (1989). Talking back: thinking feminist, thinking black. Boston: South End Press.   
Hymes, D. (1966). On Communicative Competence. Paper presented at the Research Planning Conference on Language Development among Disadvantaged Children, Yeshiva University.   
Johns, A. M. (1990). L1 compositions: implications for developing theories of L2 composition. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: research insights for the classroom (pp. 24–36). Cambridge: CUP.   
Johns, A. M., & Dudley-Evans, T. (1991). English for specific purposes: international in scope, specific in purpose. TESOL Quarterly, 25, 297–314.   
Kaplan, R. B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education. Language Learning, 16, 1–20.   
Kubota, R. (1999). Japanese culture constructed by discourses: implications for applied linguistics research and ELT. TESOL Quarterly, 33/1, 9–35.   
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: CUP.   
Li, X.-M. (1999). Writing from the vantage point of an outsider/inside. In G. Braine (Ed.), Non-native educators in English language teaching (pp. 43–56). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.   
Lu, M.-Z. (1994). Professing multiculturalism: the politics of style in the contact zone. College Composition and Communication 45, 4, 442–458.   
Mignolo, W. (2000). Local histories/global designs. Princeton: Princeton University Press.   
Pratt, M. L. (1991). Arts of the contact zone. Profession 91. New York: MLA. (pp. 33–40).   
Prendergast, C. (1998). Race: the absent presence in composition studies. CCC, 50, 36–53.   
Prior, P. (1998). Writing/disciplinarity: a sociohistoric account of literate activity in the academy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Reid, J. M. (1989). English as a second language composition in higher education: the expectations of the academic audience. In D. M. Johnson, & D. H. Roen (Eds.), Richness in writing: empowering ESL students (pp. 220–234). New York: Longman.   
Rose, M. (1989). Lives on the boundary. New York: Penguin.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: CUP.   
Zamel, V. (1996). Transcending boundaries: complicating the scene of teaching language. College English, 6/2, 1–11.   
Zamel, V. (1997). Toward a model of transculturation. TESOL Quarterly, 31/2, 341–351.