# Employing e-tandem language learning method to enhance speaking skills and willingness to communicate: the case of EFL learners

Masoud Rahimi & Jalil Fathi

To cite this article: Masoud Rahimi & Jalil Fathi (2024) Employing e-tandem language learning method to enhance speaking skills and willingness to communicate: the case of EFL learners, Computer Assisted Language Learning, 37:4, 924-960, DOI: 10.1080/09588221.2022.2064512

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2022.2064512

# Employing e-tandem language learning method to enhance speaking skills and willingness to communicate: the case of EFL learners

Masoud Rahimi $\textcircled{1}$ and Jalil Fathi $\textcircled{1}$

Department of English and Linguistics, Faculty of Language and Literature, University of Kurdistan, Sanandaj, Iran

# ABSTRACT

The present study adopted a sequential explanatory mixed-methods approach to explore the impact of e-tandem on English as a foreign language (EFL) learners’ speaking skills (i.e. speaking fluency and coherence, lexicon, grammatical range and accuracy, and pronunciation) and willingness to communicate (WTC). To this end, two classes at a language institute were randomly assigned to an experimental group (e-tandem group) with 22 EFL learners and a control group (conventional group) with 20 EFL learners. The learners in the e-tandem class communicated with foreign English speakers online using Tandem, a language exchange application, and those in the conventional class had collaborative speaking activities during the class time. IELTS speaking skill test, willingness-to-communicate scale, and an individual semi-structured interview were used to collect the required quantitative and qualitative data. Paired samples t-test and one-way ANCOVA, used to analyse the quantitative data, indicated that e-tandem and conventional classes developed the EFL learners’ speaking skills and WTC; however, the e-tandem group outperformed the conventional group on speaking skills and WTC. Thematic analysis, applied to analyse the qualitative data, generated a number of themes and categories signifying the e-tandem learners’ positive attitudes and perceptions towards the e-tandem-based collaborative speaking activities. Pedagogical implications are discussed for collaborative speaking courses in EFL settings.

# KEYWORDS

E-tandem; speaking skills; willingness to   
communicate;   
telecollaboration; EFL   
learners

# 1.  Introduction

A number of studies suggest that speaking skill has a great influence on learners’ total language improvements. It is claimed that learners with high speaking skills may perform better when performing with other language skills. Among four language skills, speaking skill is developed by intense practice, especially through collaborative speaking activities. Speaking with other peers through group work activities is believed to give learners opportunities to scaffold each other’s speaking skills. However, some factors, like administrative constraints, class size, and limited class time, may prevent learners from mediating each other’s speaking skills properly. Additionally, as exposure to English or using it is so limited in non-dominant English speaking countries, learners have few opportunities to interact with and scaffold their peers’ speaking skills in and outside the classroom. As a result, learners in non-dominant English speaking countries have less opportunities to be engaged in collaborative speaking activities, which are supposed to have a facilitative role in enhancing learners’ speaking skills.

Collaborative speaking (interchangeably referred to as interactive speaking), which hinges upon Vygotsky’s (1978) social-constructivist theory, is based on the idea that more capable individuals, such as more capable learners and instructors, mediate less capable individuals in group-based activities to enhance their skills and achieve their potential level of functioning (Oxford, 1997; see also, Ebadi & Rahimi, 2019). In recent years, collaborative speaking has attracted the attention of researchers in English as a foreign language (EFL) contexts. In collaborative speaking tasks, learners engage in group- and/or pair-based activities to recognise and address their peers’ speaking-skill issues, so as to co-construct their speaking skills (Ebadi & Rahimi, 2017, 2018; Rahimi & Fathi, 2021; Szewkis et  al., 2011; Tutty & Klein, 2008).

As collaborative speaking activities always take a lot of time, instructors usually face a limited and insufficient time to properly carry out the collaborative speaking activities during a conventional class time. Wu et  al. (2017), for instance, assert that in conventional classes, the ‘inadequate communication and interaction between teachers and students, excessive teacher-led lectures, and relatively fatiguing test-based teaching methods still suppress the development of students’ communicative competence’ (p. 142). Wu et  al. (2017) maintain that ‘even with years of English learning, EFL speakers still have difficulty mastering English oral skills and are hesitant when speaking English out loud’ (p. 142). In addition to time limitation for collaborative speaking activities in some EFL contexts, the absence of English language learners with different native languages has made it difficult for EFL learners to be involved in authentic communicative tasks.

Online programmes may help instructors and learners deal with the aforementioned issues and do collaborative speaking tasks more effectively and efficiently (e.g. Fathi & Rahimi, 2020; Rahimi & Fathi, 2021). E-tandem, for example, is an online learning method which can involve learners in different collaborative activities with foreigners (i.e. those learning a foreign language) who communicate to learn each other’s languages (Vassallo & Telles, 2006). In such a collaborative learning method, learners with different first languages are engaged in reciprocal collaborations to enhance their target language. This learning method may create the learning environment more interactive, authentic, dynamic, and efficacious in comparison to conventional classes. That is, by involving learners in collaborative speaking activities with both native and non-native speakers of English around the world (Belz, 2003; Ke & Cahyani, 2014; O’Dowd, 2013), this method may increase learners’ native-like lexicon and grammar structure (Kabata & Edasawa, 2011), cultural awareness (O’Dowd, 2003), and autonomy (Vassallo & Telles, 2006) in an interactive and engaging learning environment. Nonetheless, the scant literature on e-tandem in the area of English language teaching and learning in EFL contexts has concentrated on how e-tandem contribute to grasp learners’ viewpoints towards the impact of this online programme on language sub-skills (i.e. vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation). Moreover, how e-tandem is applied to develop EFL learners’ speaking skills have received little attention.

Therefore, in the present study, we designed an e-tandem-speakingactivity course to help EFL learners collaborate with native and non-native speakers of English around the world, and examined the impact of this language learning method (i.e. e-tandem) on EFL learners’ speaking skills by focusing on speaking fluency and coherence, lexicon, grammatical range and accuracy, and pronunciation. The learners could have telecollaboration with their foreign peers and develop their speaking skills accordingly. Speaking activities of learners have been explored in e-tandem environment by previous researchers, however, different components of speaking have not been explored so far. Additionally, as the present study followed the principles of Vygotskyan collaborative learning, the EFL learners’ other-regulation (i.e. collaborations with other partners) and self-regulation (i.e. autonomous functioning) in speaking skills were also explored to shed further light on the contribution of e-tandem to EFL learners’ speaking skills.

Furthermore, Tandem application, which has been specifically designed to facilitate learners and other speakers’ communicative activities, was applied in this study. This application has not been sufficiently used for e-tandem collaborative speaking purposes in previous studies. As a result, this study applied this application to facilitate EFL learners’ e-tandem communications with other partners worldwide. To yield further insights into the contribution of e-tandem to EFL learners’ speaking skills, the learners’ willingness to communicate (WTC) and their attitudes and perceptions towards the e-tandem language learning method were explored. This means that qualitative data were further collected and analysed to explain and refine the quantitative findings. Mixing quantitative and qualitative data collections and analyses provide deep insights into the phenomena under investigation (Creswell, 2003, 2008; Ivankova & Creswell, 2009). The findings of the present study have practical and pedagogical implications to effectively and efficiently improve EFL learners’ speaking skills and WTC during collaborative speaking activities through e-tandem.

# 2.  Literature review

# 2.1.  Theoretical framework

Engeström’s (1987) activity theory was applied as the theoretical framework of this study. Activity theory follows Vygotsky’s (1978) social constructivist theory in which learners’ zone of proximal development can be achieved through their interactive (or collaborative) activities. Activity theory comprises the interaction among six components of subject (e.g. EFL learners and instructors), object (e.g. the learners’ aims, like developing speaking skills), the mediational tools or artefacts (e.g. online applications which mediate between the subject and object), rules or norms (e.g. using technological devices), community to which learners share a common aim (e.g. language institution), and division of labour (e.g. learners’ responsibilities to do an activity in the community) (Engeström, 2001). In this theory, learning is considered as an activity system that learners are first mediated by the tools and community in order to construct knowledge, and gradually, internalise their knowledge and skills and act autonomously.

Based on this theory, the EFL learners in the present study were first mediated by foreign speakers through telecollaboration activities or collaborations with their peers in the classroom. The EFL learners were the subjects in activity theory who formed the learning community and followed a common goal (i.e. improving their speaking skills) by collaborating with other members and peers to accomplish collaborative speaking tasks. In this study, activity theory helped explore the collaborations among learners and their social and cultural settings comprehensively and identify the constructs in the EFL context. That is, by considering the six components of activity theory, we could explore every dimension of EFL learners’ communicative activities in the e-tandem environment. To the best of our knowledge, no previous research has drawn on Engeström’s (1987) activity theory to explore the impact of e-tandem language learning method on EFL learners’ speaking skills, which could be regarded as another specific goal of the current study.

# 2.2.  E-tandem

E-tandem, also referred to as teletandem and virtual exchanges, is conceptualised as learners’ interactions with native and non-native speakers of the target language (Belz, 2003; Dooly & Sadler, 2013) and people from distant geographic locations (Furstenberg et  al., 2001; Kitade, 2012). It ‘involves the use of Internet communication tools by internationally dispersed students of language in institutionalized settings in order to promote the development of (1) foreign language linguistic competence and (2) intercultural competence’ (Belz, 2003, p. 68). That is, through such interactive activities, learners can provide and receive authentic input and output and improve their language skills (Warschauer, 1996). Following, Brammerts (2003), this telecollaboration may happen between two learners of English in which a speaking partner can ‘bring certain skills and abilities which the other partner seeks to acquire and in which both partners support each other in their learning’ (p. 29), so as to achieve their autonomatisation in language learning. E-tandem language learning is described as mutual studying of the language and culture of native speakers of other languages, so as to learn more about other characters and cultures, develop language skills, and exchange more knowledge and skills about professional life (Calvert, 1999).

A number of studies have explored the role of e-tandem in collaborative learning activities (Calvert, 1999; Sabbah-Taylor, 2021). Elo and Pörn (2021), for instance, exploring the authenticity of e-tandem learning in language education, found that there were differences in authenticity levels among classroom e-tandem tasks, which further signified the authenticity of e-tandem learning in educational settings. Cando-Guanoluisa et  al. (2020) surveyed a number of learners’ leaning strategies in an e-tandem English programme and revealed that the learners applied some learning strategies when participating in the e-tandem programme, including cognitive, memory, compensatory, metacognitive, affective, and social strategies. The learners applying previous knowledge to find speaking opportunities, plan, listen to English music and videos, collaborate better with other peers, use language skills, memorise words and pronunciation, apply new words and expression, set learning goals, correct their mistakes, and enhance their motivation and socialisation. The findings recommend that learners should be trained to apply effective learning strategies in e-tandem to benefit more from their collaborative learning. In the present study, the learners were trained how to apply explicit and implicit peer mediations while communicating with their partners in an authentic language learning environment (i.e. e-tandem space) so that the learners benefited more from their collaborative speaking activities.

E-tandem is considered as modalities of telecollaboration. Researchers have applied the term telecollaboration to refer to learners’ online intercultural exchanges and learning in tandem (i.e. reciprocity and autonomy) (El-Hariri, 2016). The concept telecollaboration has been explored by researchers in a substantial body of studies (Develotte, 2009; Guth & Marini-Maio, 2010; Jepson, 2005; Lee, 2018; O’Dowd, 2013; Rosell-Aguilar, 2005; Sevilla‐Pavón, 2019). Canals (2020), for instance, explored the development of EFL learners’ oral skills through interaction with native speakers by checking their motivation, communication, and collaboration in an online language exchange environment. Collecting the required data from the learners’ oral grades and two questionnaires in both experimental and control groups, the findings showed that online language exchange, which was oral, enhanced the experimental learners’ oral skills, motivation, and collaboration with other peers during the communicative tasks. The results further indicated that virtual language exchange had greater impact on the oral skills of learners with lower proficiency levels. The current study also explore the learners’ oral skills and patterns of collaboration while communicating with their foreign partners in e-tandem space; however, it focuse on every speaking skill and check the learners’ collaborative speaking activities through the six components of activity theory, which could provide more comprehensive and detailed findings.

Ware and Kessler (2016) explored the impact of online language exchange (both oral and written) on secondary language learners’ interactions and teachers’ decisions on pedagogical issues in the secondary context. Data were collected through documenting and analysing a 15-week telecollaboration-based classroom and focal teacher interviews. The findings revealed that the learners posed a lot of information-seeking questions which helped them become engaged in the interactive activities with their partners. Additionally, the results indicated that by providing prompts, creating a safe online environment, and monitoring, guiding, and communicating with the learners, the teacher could better contribute to the learners’ interaction in the secondary learning context. Hauck and Youngs (2008), similarly, explored the synchronous and asynchronous collaborations of second language learners with native speakers over 10 weeks in online audio-graphic tuition environment. The required data were collected through pre- and post- treatment questionnaires, documenting the learners’ online interactions, and publishing the learner and tutor discussions in blogs. The results indicated that the synchronous and asynchronous telecollaborations enhanced the learners’ interactive activities. The synchronous audio-conferencing context contributed to the learners’ real-time communication with native speakers. In addition, the asynchronous environment using blogs contributed to the learners’ closer contacts with their learning partners.

Jaime et  al. (2013) checked and compared the effects of telecollaboration on 255 students’ academic success. The communication tools applied for the telecollaborations, which comprised email, social networks, like Facebook and Twitter, chat and voice tools, like Messenger and Skype, blogs, and telephone, were also explored to check their impact on the students’ learning satisfaction. Data were gathered through students’ marks and practical works and a questionnaire. The results indicated that students engaged in telecollaborations with their partners achieved better academic results in comparison with the students in the face-to-face class. However, the telecollaborators achieved lower levels of satisfaction in comparison with their face-to-face student counterparts. The findings also indicated that the telecollaborators preferred day-today tools, like non-institutional email, social networks, chat, and voice tools, for their telecollaboration activities. Finally, the students preferred synchronous rather than asynchronous tools for telecollaboration purposes.

Different online programmes could be applied to engage learners in e-tandem learning activities. Tandem (https://www.tandem.net/), for example, is a language exchange application comprising the affordances to engage learners with different native language speakers in order to do telecollaboration activities and improve their communication skills and intercultural competencies (Stickler & Lewis, 2003; Woodin, 2003). Tandem provides a convenient environment to practise language skills, such as speaking, through texts, audio calls and audio recordings, and video calls. Tandem, which could be used on iPhone (https://apps.apple. com/us/app/tandem-learn-new-languages/id959001619) and Android (https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id $\equiv$ net.tandem&hl $\underline { { \underline { { \mathbf { \Pi } } } } }$ en&gl=US) operating systems, helps learners find a native or non-native speaker of English with whom the learners have a lot in common. Additionally, it allows learners to select different topics for their collaborative discussions.

After signing up, the learners can use the search engine of Tandem to find a suitable partner by specific language, interests, age, gender, and location. For collaborative speaking purposes, learners may choose a partner by clicking/tapping on the community feed of Tandem, which is filled with native and non-native speakers of English, and communicate with their partners using audio or video calls, text messages, and voice notes. The correction-and-translation affordance of Tandem allows learners to search, check, and find appropriate utterances to keep the conversations flowing. At the end, learners can take a proficiency test and earn a certificate (a Tandem PDF certificate) for their English proficiency level which might be beginner (A2), intermediate (B1), advanced (B2), or fluent (C2).

To engage with native and non-native speakers of English in tandem, not only choosing an appropriate online programme and proper partners are necessary, the learners need to have strong motivation and willingness to be engaged in different communicative activities. That is, learners who are more willing to communicate, might be more successful in collaborative speaking activities. Therefore, exploring learners’ willingness to communicate, might help researchers yield profound insights into how and why learners are engaged in various collaborative speaking activities in e-tandem environment.

# 2.3.  Willingness to communicate

WTC, first coined by McCroskey and Baer (1985), is conceptualised as individuals’ incentives to communicate with other individuals. Following Kruk (2019), WTC is referred to as individuals’ mental preparation to use language whenever possible. Second language WTC, introduced in the 1990s (Cao & Wei, 2019; Lee & Drajati, 2019), is defined as ‘a readiness to enter into discourse at a particular time with a specific person or persons using an $\mathrm { L } 2 ^ { \prime }$ (MacIntyre et  al., 1998, p. 547). WTC is believed to be influenced by learners’ communication abilities (MacIntyre, 1994), context of class (Peng, 2019), and motivation (Lee, 2020).

Following Kang (2005), learners with a high level of WTC are more likely to use the target language in authentic communicative activities and improve their language skills, learners who are more willing to take part in communicative activities would engage in communication both in and outside the class, learners who are willing to communicate can reach their autonomy in language learning, and learners, who are willing to communicate, believe in their language abilities and follow their language learning aims more effectively (Dakowska, 2007, Kruk, 2019). WTC has attracted the researchers’ attention in the past two decades (Buckingham & Alpaslan, 2017). A number of studies have explored the impact of WTC on English language learning in online learning environments. Lee and Dressman (2018), for example, corroborated a link between WTC and online learning of English. Jauregi et  al. (2012) also, using pre-, mid-, and post-questionnaires to check the impact of video-web communication on EFL students’ WTC, found that video-web communication had great effects on the students’ willingness to collaborate with the native speaker partners.

# 3.  Purpose of the study

Reviewing the literature indicates that e-tandem can contribute to learners’ language learning skills, their performance in telecollaboration settings, and culture learning (Belz, 2003; Calvert, 1999; Cando-Guanoluisa et  al., 2020; Guth & Marini-Maio, 2010; Hauck & Youngs, 2008). However, to the best of the researchers’ knowledge, insufficient studies seem to have been conducted so far exploring the impact of e-tandem on learners’ speaking skills and WTC, especially, in an EFL context where speaking courses do not engage students in collaborative speaking activities. To address this research lacuna in the literature, the current study drawed on Engeström’s (1987) activity theory to explore the impact of e-tandem on EFL learners’ speaking skills (i.e. speaking fluency and coherence, lexicon, grammatical range and accuracy, and pronunciation) and WTC. Additionally, the present study explored the EFL learners’ attitudes and perceptions towards the e-tandem language learning method. To this aim, the following research questions were addressed:

1. Compared to conventional collaborative speaking activities, how effective are e-tandem-based collaborative speaking activities in enhancing EFL learners’ speaking skills and WTC.   
2. What attitudes and perceptions do EFL learners hold towards e-tandem-based collaborative speaking activities?

# 4.  Method

A mixed-methods approach (Creswell et  al., 2003; Ivankova et al., 2006) was employed in this study to collect and analyse the required data both quantitatively and qualitatively. Mixed-methods approach originates from the concept of triangulation in social research (Campbell & Fiske, 1959) which refers to the combination of research methods in general, and the combination of multiple observers, theoretical perspectives, and methodologies in particular (Denzin, 2012; Dörnyei, 2007), and is ‘an attempt to secure an in-depth understanding of the phenomenon in question’ (Flick, 2004, p. 82) by combining the strengths of both quantitative and qualitative research methods.

Mixed-methods research mixes quantitative and qualitative data collection and/or analysis based on the sequence of quantitative and qualitative data collection or analysis, the priority given to either quantitative or qualitative data collection and analysis, and how quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis should be mixed (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2007). In addition, mixed-methods research may follow one of the explanatory design (quantitative data are collected and analysed first in sequence and then qualitative data help explain, refine, clarify, and extend the quantitative findings), the exploratory design (qualitative data is collected and analysed first based on which data are collected and analysed quantitatively), the triangulation design (the quantitative and qualitative data are collected or analysed at the same time), and the embedded design (either quantitative data collection and analysis or qualitative data collection and analysis are embedded or nested within the qualitative or quantitative design) (Creswell et  al., 2003).

In this study, mixing quantitative and qualitative data collections and analyses were carried out based on the sequence of quantitative and qualitative data collections and analyses and following explanatory mixed-methods research design. That is, a sequential explanatory mixed-methods approach (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2007) was applied in the present study to collect and analyse the data and address the research questions. This means that to explore the impact of e-tandem on EFL learners’ speaking skills and WTC, quantitative data were first collected and analysed based on which qualitative data were collected and analysed. In order to further shed light on why the e-tandem or conventional group outperformed the other one on speaking skills and WTC based on the quantitative data collections and analyses, qualitative data collections and analyses were further carried out to clarify the findings.

# 4.1.  Participants

Based on convenience sampling method (Dörnyei, 2007), two classes in a private language centre in Tehran, Iran participated in this study. The classes were randomly assigned to an experimental group (e-tandem class) with 22 EFL learners and a control group (conventional class) with 20 EFL learners. The participants were non-English major students, comprised both male $( \ N = 1 8 )$ and female $\left( \mathrm { N } = 2 4 \right)$ learners, and their ages varied from 23 to 36 years (mean $= 2 6 . 6$ . The purpose of this course was to improve the EFL learners’ IELTS (International English Language Testing System) speaking skills. None of the participants reported to have used e-tandem for language learning before. Both e-tandem and conventional classes were taught by the researcher/instructor who had years of experience in teaching and practising technology devices for English language learning purposes.

Based on the standards of the private language centre, the participating EFL learners were considered as upper-intermediate (Based on Common European Framework of Reference, the learners were either in B1 or B2 level). To further confirm that the learners were at the same proficiency level in both groups, Oxford Quick Placement Test (OQPT) comprising 60 items was conducted. OQPT, as a proficiency and norm-referenced test, assesses English language learners’ global language abilities to identify their proficiency level (i.e. elementary, pre-intermediate, or intermediate). Learners who receive 41 to 51 out of 60 are regarded as upper-intermediate learners. The reliability coefficient of this test, checked through Cronbach’s Alpha, was 0.86, which was acceptable.

Moreover, the e-tandem partners in the present study were both native and non-native speakers of English around the world. They were supposed to either follow the same purpose (i.e. improving their English language speaking skills) or share some knowledge and skills about their native language with their e-tandem peers. Therefore, the participating EFL learners in the e-tandem group could engage in collaborative speaking activities with their e-tandem partners in order to develop their speaking skills and/or share their first language knowledge and culture with their e-tandem partners so that the learners could have more collaborative speaking activities in English and develop their speaking skills in return. In addition, the e-tandem partners would follow similar interests as the participating EFL learners. As Tandem application has prespecified a number of filters for choosing partners, the learners selected the most suitable partners, following the Tandem filters for choosing foreign partners, for their target collaborative speaking tasks.

# 4.2.  Instruments

# 4.2.1.  IELTS speaking skill test

The EFL learners’ speaking skills were checked through IELTS speaking skill test which measures candidates’ speaking skills in four equally weighted areas of fluency and coherence (i.e. speaking fluently by linking ideas together without hesitation), lexicon (i.e. using a repertoire of vocabularies accurately and appropriately), grammatical range and accuracy (i.e. applying a repertoire of grammatical structures accurately and properly), and pronunciation (i.e. using features of English pronunciation, like intonation, stress and connected speech) through some selected IELTS speaking test topics. IELTS Speaking Band Descriptors (see Appendix A) was applied to give the learners a mark from 1 to 9 in each area (i.e. fluency and coherence, lexicon, grammatical range and accuracy, and pronunciation), the total of which was divided by four to produce the learners’ overall speaking skills mark. That is, each learner received a mark from 1 to 9 for fluency and coherence, lexicon, grammatical range and accuracy, and pronunciation to measure each learner’s mark in each speaking skill. Subsequently, the four marks were divided by four to indicate each learner’s total speaking skill. The learners’ marks were checked by two trained and experienced raters (i.e. the researcher/instructor and another experinced EFL researcher), the result of which produced an acceptable inter-rater reliability of 0.85 (checked through Pearson coefficient correlation) to ensure the consistency of the marks.

# 4.2.2.  Willingness to communicate scale

Willingness to Communicate (WTC) scale, created by MacIntyre et  al. (2001), was administered to check the participants’ willingness to communicate in the present study. This instrument includes 27 items for in-class WTC and 27 items for out-of-class WTC. It is a 5-point Likert scale questionnaire comprising four skill areas of speaking (8 items), reading (6 items), writing (8 items) and listening comprehension (5 items). Concerning the reliability of the scale, internal (alpha) reliability estimate was reported to be 0.88 in this study, which was acceptable.

# 4.2.3.  Interview

Following sequential explanatory mixed-methods approach, an individual semi-structured interview (see Appendix B) was conducted with the group who outperformed the other group on speaking skills and WTC in the quantitative part of the study to further clarify the findings. The interview was conducted with 10 EFL learners in the target group to explore their attitudes and perceptions towards the impact of the instructional procedure on their speaking skills and WTC. It was attempted to select a range of EFL learners who received low, mid, and high marks in the post-tests of speaking skills and WTC scale. Caution was also exercised to select those learners who volunteered to participate in the interview.

The learners’ first language (i.e. Persian) was used in the interview sessions in order to ensure that the participants provided all the necessary information. Each intervie session took approximately 30 minutes, they were recorded, transcribed, and translated into English for data analysis purposes. Following Creswell (2007), the credibility of the interview data was checked through member checking techniques. To this end, in addition to clarifying the interview questions for the participants during the interview sessions, the transcriptions of the interviews were returned to the participants to check their authenticity and make changes and modifications to the content, if necessary. L1, L2, …., and L10 were used as the EFL learners’ pseudonyms in order to protect their identities.

# 4.3.  Procedure

The EFL learners in both e-tandem and conventional classes took one sample of Cambridge IELTS 11 speaking test as the pre-test, which was checked against IELTS Speaking Band Descriptors. The learners were first asked to speak about themselves and some familiar topics, which took four to five minutes. Subsequently, a card containing a particular topic was given to the learners to speak accordingly. The learners were given two minutes to take down notes and prepare themselves before speaking about the topics, which was guided by the researcher/instructor’s questions. The questions helped the learners discuss more abstract ideas and issues which let the researcher/instructor assess the learners’ speaking skills in all four areas of fluency and coherence, lexicon, grammatical range and accuracy, and pronunciation. After assessing the learners’ speaking skills as the pre-test, the learners in each class received IELTS speaking instruction; however, the experimental group had out-ofclass speaking practices through e-tandem and the control group had out-of-class speaking practices in a lab.

# 4.3.1.  E-tandem class

After elaborating on Tandem application through some instructional videos, the learners in the e-tandem group were asked to install the application and look for a right partner within the first two weeks. The first two weeks were considered as a trial for the learners to become familiar with e-tandem language learning method and Tandem application. Each session, the learners worked on a topic which was introduced in the coursebook. The learners were required to discuss the topics with the researcher/instructor at the beginning as a warm-up activity, and then, collaboratively worked on some speaking tasks with other peers in groups of three or four. After the class, the learners were engaged in collaborative speaking activities with their peers on Tandem application. The learners were supposed to have collaborative speaking activities with their foreign peers related to the same speaking topics of the previous session. As the partners were selected based on some criteria, like the same interest, the e-tandem partners were willing to follow the learners’ chosen topics for collaborative speaking activities. The topics for collaborative speaking tasks had been already established and integrated into the Tandem application so that the learners followed the same topics for collaborative speaking activities with their foreign partners. The learners used different ways for communication, like audio or video calls, text messages, and voice notes; however, only the video and audio calls were taken into consideration for data analysis. To make sure that the learners carried out the tasks orally (i.e. using video and audio calls for collaborative speaking activities), the whole conversation between the learners and their partners were screen-recorded and used for data analysis purposes. The learners were asked to reflect on their telecollaboration experiences and publish their thoughts.

# 4.3.2.  Conventional class

The conventional learners received the same materials and speaking topics as the e-tandem learners. That is, the same speaking activities in the e-tandem group were also carried out in the conventional group.

However, unlike the learners in the conventional class, the learners in the e-tandem class had telecollaboration activities with foreign and native speakers of English through Tandem application outside the class. The EFL learners in the conventional class were required to discuss the speaking topics with the researcher/instructor at the outset, and subsequently, be engaged in collaborative speaking activities with their peers.

After the class, the conventional learners completed the same task in face-to-face presentation in a language lab. As there were three class sessions per week of the term, three presentation sessions were planned accordingly, each after a 30-minute break from the regular class. The reason for distributing the presentation sessions over the week, rather than holding only one session, was to prevent exhausting the participants, which might have affected their participation and performance, and let them attend the sessions on their time preferences. Each participant attended at least one of the sessions and assured by the fact that they had an assigned presentation to deliver; however; they were free to attend all the sessions as the researcher/instructor did. Once the session began, the participants were allowed 10 minutes to prepare their presentation. Once it was delivered, the participating classmates had feedback and comments on the presenter’s performance.

To investigate the learners’ out-of-class engagement with the programme (Tandem application or in a lab), the amount of time they spent on the devices were measured. To this end, the participants of the two groups were asked to keep time logs and submit them to the researcher/instructor each session. The log included one item (see Appendix C) which helped the learners specify and monitor the amount of time they spent on the programme. The average time of all 18 weeks was computed for each group, the results of which are presented in Table 1.

Table 1 indicates some differences between the two groups’ mean scores on the amount of time spent out of the class involving in speaking collaborations. Table 2 further indicates the results of the independent samples t-test.

As shown in Table 2, significant differences were found between the two groups in terms of the amount of time spent out of the class involving in collaborative speaking activities, signifying that the e-tandem learners spent more time telecollaborating with native and/or non-native speakers of English in comparison with the conventional learners.

Table 1. T he amount of time spent working on e-tandem and conventional groups outside the class.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Group</td><td>N</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. deviation</td><td>Std. error mean</td></tr><tr><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>154.22</td><td>25.70</td><td>5.48</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>90.75</td><td>15.80</td><td>3.53</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2. I ndependent samples t-test, checking the difference between the amount of time spent out of the class in both groups.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>df</td><td>Sig.</td><td>Mean difference</td><td>Std. error difference</td></tr><tr><td>Groups</td><td>40</td><td>.00</td><td>63.47</td><td>6.66</td></tr></table></body></html>

The speaking courses in each class lasted for one term (i.e. 18 weeks, each week one 90-miute session) and 15 collaborative speaking tasks were accomplished. At the end of the courses, another sample of Cambridge IELTS 11 speaking test was applied as the post-test and the results were checked through IELTS Speaking Band Descriptors. Additionally, an individual semi-structured interview was carried out with 10 EFL learners of the e-tandem group to express their experiences and perceptions towards the effect of e-tandem-based collaborative speaking activities.

# 4.4.  Data analysis

# 4.4.1.  Quantitative analysis

As continuous marks were assigned to the speaking tasks in both groups in pre- and post-tests, the data were normally distributed, as checked through Kolmogorov-Smirno test, and there were no outliers, we adopted parametric tests to analyse the quantitative data. To check the impact of e-tandem and conventional speaking collaborations on the EFL learners’ speaking skills and the comparison between these two groups in improving the learners’ speaking skills, one-way between-groups analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) was used. ANCOVA was also run to check the impact of and comparison between e-tandem and conventional speaking collaborations in developing the learners’ WTC. As in ANCOVA, any pre-existing differences between the two groups were controlled by considering the learners’ pre-test marks as covariates.

# 4.4.2.  Qualitative analysis

To analyse the transcribed interviews, a thematic analysis (Boyatzis, 1998) was adopted. A reiterative and bottom-up approach was followed to initially code the transcribed interviews based on open thematic coding, so as to identify the main themes related to the learners’ attitydes and perceptions towards the e-tandem course. The recognised themes were clustered based on their interrelationships. Subsequently, clusters were labelled following the uncovered themes within each cluster. Inter-rater reliability (Gass & Mackey, 2000) of the processes of open coding, axial coding, and labelling were checked in which the researcher/instructor along with another expert EFL researcher investigated the processes of open coding, axial coding, and labelling and any discrepancies between the two researchers were resolved through discussion.

# 5.  Results

Following a sequential explanatory mixed-methods approach, adopted in the present study for collecting and analysing the data, this section, presents the quantitative and qualitative findings.

# 5.1.  The quantitative analysis

Descriptive statistics was first applied to reveal the pre- and post-test mean scores of the EFL learners’ speaking skills in both e-tandem and conventional classes. Table 3 presents the results of the descriptive statistics.

Table 3 shows some differences between the pre- and post-test mean scores of speaking skills in both groups. For instance, the mean score for fluency was 5.30 in the pre-test, while it was 5.85 in the post-test and the mean score of pre-test of fluency was 5.19 in the conventional group, while it was 5.33 for the post-test fluency. This showed some changes between the two groups’ speaking improvements. As a result, more statistical analyses (i.e. paired samples t-test and one way ANCOVA) were carried out to indicate if significant changes occurred between the learners’ pre- and post-test marks in each group and between the learners’ post-test marks in both groups. Paired samples t-tests were run to indicate if the differences between the learners’ pre- and post-test mean scores were significant in each group. The results of paired samples t-tests, conducted in the e-tandem group, are presented in Table 4.

Table 3. D escriptive statistics of pre- and post-test marks of speaking skills.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Group</td><td>N</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. deviation</td><td>Std. error mean</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Pre-fluency</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>5.30</td><td>.60</td><td>.12</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>5.19</td><td>.64</td><td>.14</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Post-fluency</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>5.85</td><td>.87</td><td>.18</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>5.33</td><td>.64</td><td>.14</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"> Pre-vocabulary</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>4.52</td><td>.66</td><td>.14</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>4.68</td><td>.62</td><td>.14</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"> Post-vocabulary</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>5.62</td><td>.75</td><td>.16</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>5.02</td><td>.73</td><td>.16</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Pre-accuracy</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>5.50</td><td>.81</td><td>.17</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>5.35</td><td>.81</td><td>.18</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Post-accuracy</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>6.21</td><td>.85</td><td>.18</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>5.56</td><td>.84</td><td>.18</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Pre-pronunciation</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>4.70</td><td>1.17</td><td>.25</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>4.51</td><td>.68</td><td>.15</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Post-pronunciation</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>6.10</td><td>.80</td><td>.17</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>5.41</td><td>.79</td><td>.17</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Total1</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>4.12</td><td>.36</td><td>.07</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>4.09</td><td>.28</td><td>.06</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Total2</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>5.94</td><td>.61</td><td>.13</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>5.33</td><td>.43</td><td>.09</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4. P aired samples t-test, indicating the changes of mean scores of speaking skills from the pre- to post-test in the e-tandem group.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. deviation</td><td>Std. error mean</td><td>t</td><td>df</td><td>Sig.</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 1</td><td>Pre- and post-fluency</td><td>-.54</td><td>.80</td><td>.17</td><td>3.16</td><td>21</td><td>.00</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 2</td><td>Pre- and post-vocabulary</td><td>1.09</td><td>.50</td><td>.10</td><td>-10.21</td><td>21</td><td>.00</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 3</td><td>Pre- and post-accuracy</td><td>-.70</td><td>.22</td><td>.04</td><td>14.55</td><td>21</td><td>.00</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 4</td><td>Pre- and post-pronunciation</td><td>1.40</td><td>1.56</td><td>.33</td><td>-4.21</td><td>21</td><td>.00</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 5</td><td>Pre- and post-total</td><td>1.82</td><td>.42</td><td>.08</td><td>-20.25</td><td>21</td><td>.00</td></tr></table></body></html>

As indicated in Table 4, significant changes in the EFL learners’ preand post-test marks in speaking skills were observed in the e-tandem class, signifying that e-tandem played a significant role in improving the learners’ speaking skills. For example, subtracting pre-test mean score of fluency from post-test mean score of fluency indicated −.54 difference between the EFL learners’ improvements of speaking fluency from the pre-test to the post-test which was a significant difference, as indicated by the $\boldsymbol { p }$ value ( $5 . 3 0 \mathrm { - } 5 . 8 5 = \mathrm { - } . 5 4$ , $p = . 0 0 $ ) $( p$ value lower than 0.05 shows a significant difference between two groups). Paired samples t-tests were further applied to check the differences between the preand post-test mean scores of the conventional learners. The results of paired samples t-tests are shown in Table 5.

Table 5 indicates significant improvements in the EFL learners’ post-test marks in speaking skills which reveals that conventional class coud also play a significant role in improving the speaking skills of the EFL learners. To examine if there were any significant differences between the two groups’ speaking skills improvements, one-way ANCOVA was used. Table 6 shows the results of one way ANCOVA, checking the differences between e-tandem and conventional classes in improving the EFL learners’ fluency.

Table 6 reveals that after controlling for the pre-test marks of speaking skills (i.e. the covariates), there were significant differences between the two groups’ post-test marks on fluency skill, confirming that e-tandem was more effective in improving the EFL learners’ fluency in comparison with its conventional group counterparts. Table 7 also presents the results of one way ANCOVA, examining the differences between the two groups in improving vocabulary skill.

Table 5. P aired samples t-test, indicating the changes of mean scores of speaking skills from the pre- to post-test in the conventional group.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="11">Mean Std. deviation Std. error mean t</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 1</td><td>Pre- and post-fluencye</td><td></td><td>-.14</td><td>.21</td><td>.04</td><td>3.00</td><td>df 19</td><td>Sig. .00</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 2</td><td></td><td>Pre- and post-vocabulary</td><td>-.33</td><td>.29</td><td>.06</td><td>-5.11</td><td>19</td><td>.00</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 3</td><td></td><td>Pre- and post-accuracye</td><td>-.20</td><td>.13.</td><td>.03</td><td>6.58</td><td>19</td><td>.00</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 4</td><td></td><td>Pre- and post-pronunciation</td><td>-.89</td><td>1.00</td><td>.22</td><td>3.98</td><td>19</td><td>.00</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 5</td><td> Pre- and post-total</td><td></td><td>1.24</td><td>.20</td><td>.04</td><td>26.56</td><td>19</td><td>.00</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 6. ANCOVA, examining the differences between the two groups’ fluency skill.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Source</td><td>Type III sum of squares</td><td>df</td><td>Mean square</td><td>F</td><td>Sig.</td><td>Partial eta squared</td></tr><tr><td>Pre-fluency (covariates)</td><td>9.79</td><td>1</td><td>9.79</td><td>27.32</td><td>.00</td><td>.41</td></tr><tr><td>Groups</td><td>1.86</td><td>1</td><td>1.86</td><td>5.21</td><td>.02</td><td>.11</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 shows significant differences between the two groups’ post-test marks of vocabulary skill after controlling for the pre-test marks of vocabulary. This signifies that the e-tandem class was more effective in developing the EFL learners’ vocabulary than the conventional class. Table 8 shows the results of one way ANCOVA, investigating the differences between the two groups’ accuracy skill.

As evident in Table 8, there were significant differences between the two groups’ post-test marks of accuracy skill after controlling for the covariates which reveals that e-tandem class enhanced the EFL learners’ accuracy more effectively than the conventional class. Table 9 also presents the results of one way ANCOVA, checking the differences between the e-tandem and conventional classes’ pronunciation skill.

Table 9 displays that after controlling for the covariates, there were significant differences between the two groups’ post-test marks of pronunciation skill, indicating that the e-tandem class was more effective than the conventional class in developing the EFL learners’ pronunciation. Table  10 further indicates the results of one way ANCOVA, examining the differences between the two groups’ total speaking performance.

Table 7. ANCOVA, examining the differences between the two groups’ vocabulary skill.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Source</td><td>Type III sum of squares.</td><td>df</td><td> Mean square</td><td>F</td><td>Sig. Partial eta squared</td></tr><tr><td>Pre-vocabulary (covariates)</td><td>15.08</td><td>1</td><td>15.08</td><td>85.13</td><td>.68</td></tr><tr><td>Groups</td><td>5.80</td><td>1</td><td>5.80</td><td>32.78</td><td>.45</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 8. ANCOVA, examining the differences between the two groups’ accuracy skill.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Source</td><td>Type III sum of squares</td><td>df</td><td> Mean square</td><td>F</td><td>Sig.</td><td>Partial eta squared</td></tr><tr><td>Pre-accuracy (covariates)</td><td>27.18</td><td>1</td><td>27.18</td><td>724.58</td><td>.00</td><td>.94</td></tr><tr><td>Groups</td><td>2.62</td><td>1</td><td>2.62</td><td>70.08</td><td>.00</td><td>.64</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 9. ANCOVA, examining the differences between the two groups’ pronunciation skll.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="5">Type III sum of</td><td rowspan="2">Sig.</td><td rowspan="2">Partial eta squared</td></tr><tr><td>Source</td><td>squares</td><td>df</td><td> Mean square</td><td>F</td></tr><tr><td>Pre-pronunciation (covariates)</td><td>.30</td><td>1</td><td>.30</td><td>.46</td><td>.50</td><td>.01</td></tr><tr><td>Groups</td><td>5.27</td><td>1</td><td>5.27</td><td>8.11</td><td>.00</td><td>.17</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 10. ANCOVA, examining the differences between the two groups’ total speaking performance.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="10">Type III sum of</td></tr><tr><td>Source</td><td>squares</td><td></td><td>df</td><td> Mean square</td><td>F</td><td>Sig.</td><td>Partial eta squared</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Pre-total speaking (covariates) Groups</td><td>7.43 3.35</td><td>1 1</td><td></td><td>7.43 3.35</td><td>70.31 31.71</td><td>.00 .00</td><td></td><td>.64 .44</td></tr></table></body></html>

As indicated in Table 10, after controlling for the covariates, significant differences between the e-tandem and conventional groups were observed regarding their post-test marks of total speaking performance, confirming that the e-tandem group improved the EFL learners’ total speaking performance more effectively than its conventional group counterpart.

Quantitative statistical analyses were also run to examine the impact of the e-tandem and conventional instructions on EFL learners’ WTC. First, descriptive statistics was run to check the pre- and post-test mean scores o WTC scale in both groups. Table 11 demonstrates the results of the descriptive statistics.

As indicated in Table 11, there were some differences between each group’s pre- and post-test mean scores of WTC. Moreover, there were some differences between the two groups’ post-test mean scores of WTC. Paired samples t-tests were first applied to check if there were significant differences between the pre- and post-tests in each group. The results of paired samples t-test, examining the differences between the pre- and post-tests of WTC in the e-tandem group, are displayed in Table 12.

Table 12 reveals significant changes in pre- and post-test marks of the EFL learners’ WTC in the e-tandem group, corroborating that the e-tandem programme played a central role in developing the learners’ WTC. Paired samples t-test was used to examine the differences between the conventional learners’ pre- and post-test mean scores of WTC as well. The results of paired samples t-tests are presented in Table 13.

Table 13 indicates that there were also significant differences between the conventional learners’ pre- and post-test marks of WTC, confirming that the conventional-based instruction played a crucial role in enhancing the EFL learners’ WTC. However, in order to investigate the differences between the two groups’ WTC improvements, one-way ANCOVA was applied. Table 14 displays the results of one way ANCOVA, examining the differences between the e-tandem and conventional groups in enhancing the EFL learners’ WTC.

Table 11. D escriptive statistics of pre- and post-test marks of WTC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Group</td><td>N</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. deviation</td><td>Std. error mean</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Pre-WTC</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>3.23</td><td>.66</td><td>.14</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>3.04</td><td>.58</td><td>.13</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Post-WTC</td><td>E-tandem</td><td>22</td><td>3.88</td><td>.76</td><td>.16</td></tr><tr><td>Conventional</td><td>20</td><td>3.21</td><td>.56</td><td>.126</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 12. P aired samples t-test, showing the changes of mean scores of WTC from the pre- to post-test in the e-tandem group.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Mean Std. deviation</td><td></td><td>Std. error mean</td><td>+</td><td>df</td><td>Sig.</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 1 Pre- and post-WTC</td><td>-.65</td><td>.29</td><td>.06</td><td>10.25</td><td>21</td><td>.00</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 13. P aired samples t-test, showing the changes of mean scores of WTC from the pre- to post-test in the conventional group.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. deviation</td><td>Std. error mean</td><td>t</td><td>df</td><td>Sig.</td></tr><tr><td>Pair 1</td><td>Pre- and post-WTC -.17</td><td>.15</td><td>.03</td><td>-5.03</td><td>19</td><td>.00</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 14. ANCOVA, examining the differences between the two groups’ WTC.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Source</td><td>Type III sum of squares</td><td>df</td><td> Mean square</td><td>F</td><td>Sig.</td><td>Partial eta squared</td></tr><tr><td>Pre-WTC (covariates)</td><td>16.05</td><td>1</td><td>16.05</td><td>269.11</td><td>.00</td><td>.87</td></tr><tr><td>Groups</td><td>2.26</td><td>1</td><td>2.26</td><td>38.02</td><td>.00</td><td>.49</td></tr></table></body></html>

As evident in Table 14, there were significant differences between the two groups’ post-test marks of WTC after controlling for the pre-tests, as covariates, signifying that the e-tandem class was more effective in comparison with the conventional class in enhancing the EFL learners’ WTC.

# 5.2.  The qualitative analysis

As the e-tandem learners outperformed the conventional learners on speaking skills and WTC in the quantitative part of the study, further qualitative data collection and analysis were conducted with e-tandem learners to clarify their higher improvements in speaking skills and WTC. To this aim, an individual semi-structured interview was conducted with 10 EFL learners in the e-tandem group to explain about their speaking skills and WTC improvements. The results of the interviews, analysed using thematic analysis, generated a number of themes and categories about the learners’ attitudes and perceptions towards the impact of e-tandem programme on their speaking skills and WTC. Table 15 presents the generated themes and categories.

Table 15 shows that seven categories along with 24 themes were generated addressing the EFL learners’ positive attitudes and perceptions towards the impact of e-tandem on speaking skills and WTC. For example, the EFL learners highlighted the special role of e-tandem in enhancing their speaking skills. The learners argued that e-tandem could identify their language-related errors and mistakes which helped them speak more accurately in future telecollaboration activities. One of the learners, for example, stated that:

I like the correction function which could help us see the errors and mistakes, but I was not able to delete some photos in the middle of the conversations. (L7)

This excerpt reveals that the EFL learners were provided with an affordance to correct their mistakes and errors while collaborating with their partners, which further contributed to their speaking performance in e-tandem space. More affordances, such as sharing videos and voices, were also emphasised by the participating EFL learners. In this line, a participating learner highlighted that:

Table 15. G enerated themes and categories about the learners’ attitudes and perceptions towards the e-tandem programme.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Categories</td><td>Themes</td></tr><tr><td>Having special affordances</td><td>Addressing language-related errors Allowing verbal and non-verbal communication.</td></tr><tr><td>Being user-friendly</td><td>Not being limited by time and space Being convenient</td></tr><tr><td>Communicating with other speakers</td><td>Being appropriate for learners in different proficiency levels Acquiring native-like language Having more communication opportunities Being acquainted with different cultures</td></tr><tr><td>Improving collaborative speaking</td><td>Making speaking more fascinating Encouraging discussions with peers Changing the viewpoints towards communication Having further collaborative speaking activities</td></tr><tr><td>Creating language learning opportunities</td><td>Finding right partners for speaking collaborations. Exchanging language knowledge and skills Making more collaborative activities Finding more language partners</td></tr><tr><td>Overcoming speaking anxiety</td><td>Relieving speaking anxiety. Overcoming communication barriers Lowering public anxiety Providing conditions for collaborative speaking</td></tr><tr><td>Changing speaking perceptions</td><td>Boosting speaking confidence Getting positive speaking attitudes Finding the right way to improve speaking abilities Enhancing language comprehension</td></tr></table></body></html>

It is the best language learning method to learn English with individuals from all over the world. It allows us to have voice and video calls and record our voice…one problem was that I could translate just about three messages that I couldn’t understand. (L3)

It is evident that communication through video and audio calls further engaged the learners in collaborative speaking activities with their e-tandem partners and facilitated the communication processes. The participants also claimed that e-tandem was a user-friendly programme which allowed them to have collaborative speaking activities with the other speakers wherever and whenever they thought were convenient. One of the learners mentioned that:

It is extraordinary when you can talk with people all over the world while lying down on your bed at home. (L9)

As indicated, the learners were quite satisfied with this feature of e-tandem, since it saved a lot of time and allowed them to spend more time on the collaborative speaking tasks. In addition, as the learners stated, e-tandem was similar to other social networking sites, like Facebook, and it did not make demands upon learners to use e-tandem programme. A learner stated that:

I had already used Facebook or Instagram to have relationship and contact with foreigners, so I got used to this application very easily. This application is also better for improving speaking. (L3)

Learners with different English proficiency levels could be also easily engaged in e-tandem collaborative speaking activities. A learner, for instance, highlighted that:

E-tandem was a wonderful programme for anyone trying to enhance their language learning, no matter if they are beginners, intermediate learners, or even advanced learners. I found the community very friendly and supportive. You will not come across persons downgrading on your skills like what we sometimes have in real classrooms. (L8)

It could be argued that the e-tandem programme was a great language learning method appropriate for learners with all English language proficiency levels. It allowed the learners to find partners at their own proficiency level to facilitate the collaborative speaking activities and help them enhance their speaking skills more effectively and efficiently. The EFL learners also highlighted the effectiveness of e-tandem in communicating with other English speakers. They stated that communicating with native and non-native speakers of English helped them learn native-like words and expressions and made the communication more fascinating. One of the learners, in this regard, said that:

I learned idioms and some fixed expressions which are frequently used by other native and non-native speakers of English. (L5)

It is thus suggested that communicating with other English speakers contributed to the learners’ speaking skills. Additionally, the EFL learners had more opportunities for communicative activities with native and non-native speakers of English. A learner pointed out that:

I had never talked with other native and non-native English speakers around the world. Through this programme, I found a golden opportunity to have conversation with other English speakers. This experience was very enjoyable and great. It also gave me much confidence. (L1)

Having more learning opportunities helped the learners improve their speaking skills on the one hand and acquainted them with the cultures of other English speakers on the other hand. One of the learners highlighted that:

It is a very nice programme by which you can meet and make friends from different countries and with different cultures. (L5)

Learning about the other English speakers’ culture provided more opportunities for collaborative speaking activities. In addition, the e-tandem programme fascinated the speaking collaborations for the EFL learners, as the learners became more engaged in the collaborative speaking activities. One of the learners, in this regard, added that:

English speaking is neglected in our educational system. This language learning programme can be a compensation for learners who do not have access to other English speakers around the world. I now know how enjoyable speaking collaboration is when you speak with foreign English speakers. (L10)

It could be claimed that the e-tandem language learning method engaged the EFL learners in collaborative speaking activities and improved their speaking skills more effectively. Another group of themes highlighted the impact of e-tandem in improving the learners speaking skills by providing a number of affordances for the EFL learners. For instance, having access to foreign English partners further encouraged the learners in the e-tandem discussions. In this regard, a learner claimed that:

I found two good partners. I liked to talk with them and this encouraged me to speak better. I even got prepared before I met them next time. (L4)

This new experience is believed to have contributed to the learners’ speaking skills, as the learners were more enthusiastic about this new experience. Due to these learning opportunities, the learners’ viewpoints on communicative speaking activities changed and they became more willing towards collaborative speaking activities with foreign speakers. One of the learners, for instance, stated that:

I did not like speaking at all. This experience motivated me to improve my speaking. I also enjoyed communicating my ideas with people from different countries. E-tandem really encouraged me to change a lot and gain a wonderful experience from English language learning. (L6)

The learners’ positive perspectives on collaborative speaking activities through the e-tandem environment, further encouraged the learners to have more effective speaking activities, which might be another reason behind the e-tandem learners’ better collaborative speaking performance in the quantitative part of the study. These opportunities allowed the learners to gradually have more collaborative speaking activities with their e-tandem partners, since they thought foreign speakers were more helpful and they were more open and enthusiastic about the collaborative speaking activities. A learner expressed that:

At first, I was not very willing to have long conversations with my e-tandem partners. But, when we got more familiar, I got more open to discussions and further interactions. (L2)

This excerpt suggests that the learners would spend more time collaborating with their partners, since they found this learning experience more motivating. This language learning method helped the learners find right partners for collaborative speaking activities. A learner, for example said that:

I used to spend much time at the beginning. But later I just talked to some people who were really helpful and worth talking with. I could make new friends and I learned from them. Some of them were very friendly and willing to help. (L2)

This can indicate that the e-tandem programme provided an extensive range of partners for the learners to select the most appropriate ones for their communicative activities, which further engaged the learners in the collaborative speaking tasks, and hence, improved their speaking fluency and coherence, lexicon, grammatical range and accuracy, and pronunciation.

The learners also claimed that the e-tandem programme provided more language learning opportunities. For example, they could share their first language skills with other foreign speakers and find more foreign speakers in this regard which naturally helped them have more collaborative speaking activities. A learner stated that:

I did not like this language learning method at first. Because it was not easy to find the right partners. Then, I got familiar with a partner from Canada who wanted to learn Persian. We had good collaborations; I taught her some basic Persian and she corrected my English pronunciations and taught me some good idioms. (L4)

It could be argued that both the learners and their partners benefited from the collaborative speaking activities in e-tandem environment, since they shared their first language knowledge and skills with their peers, which not only increased their willingness to have more speaking collaborations, but also enhanced their speaking skills. Another learner mentioned that:

I got familiar with good partners who wanted to discuss topics in French with me and I practised English with them. Sometimes, we switched to either English or French and it was so motivating. (L8)

As evident in this excerpt, collaborating with foreign partners helped the learners have more speaking collaborations. The EFL learners also highlighted that having access to a lot of partners around the world gave them opportunities to have more collaborative speaking activities. In this regard, a learner stated that:

I think e-tandem is better for those who know some languages to share with others. I know some French and I am learning German now. I could find partners better than my classmates who just know English and their mother tongue is Persian. (L7)

This indicates that the e-tandem language learning method helped the learners have access to a lot of English partners, especially the learners who are familiar with some other languages, which could naturally contribute to the learners’ speaking skills. As the learners argued, e-tandem reduced their speaking anxiety as well. They claimed that communicating with foreigners encouraged them to speak more eagerly which gradually diminished their anxiety in speaking. One of the learners, for instance, believed that:

Two of my partners were so supportive and helped me a lot to reduce my anxiety in English speaking……actually they encouraged me to have further enthusiasm to speak in English. (L9)

Relieving the speaking anxiety was another contribution of the e-tandem language learning method which increased the learners’ collaborative speaking activities, and hence, their speaking skills. The EFL learners also claimed that e-tandem helped them overcome their communication barriers. A learner, in this line, expressed that:

Though it was difficult to find the right partners, I am positive about it, since it reduced my speaking anxiety. Real communication with others is really effective. E-tandem was worth it. (L6)

This excerpt reveals that e-tandem helped the learners overcome some collaborative speaking barriers, such as finding the right partner for collaborative speaking tasks, which could further contribute to their speaking skills. E-tandem provided a user-friendly and convenient environment for the learners to communicate with rightful speakers, according to the learners’ viewpoints, which reduced their public speaking anxiety to speak more assertively. Another learner thought that:

I did not like to speak in public. I thought I may make mistakes in front of my classmates. Regular communication with foreigners has reduced this public speaking anxiety in me.

It is evident that e-tandem diminished the learners’ anxiety, especially their public anxiety, which helped them have more collaborative speaking activities with their peers online. The learners also highlighted the appropriate context that e-tandem provided, which further facilitated their communicative activities. One of the learners asserted that:

Imagine that I had never talked with a native in all my life. I found a native partner. Honestly, I felt much anxiety when I began to speak with him. But I felt much more comfort as we proceeded and got to know each other better. (L2)

This excerpt shows that e-tandem provided a right condition for the learners to communicate with native and non-native speakers of English. This could gradually boost the learners’ confidence in collaborative speaking activities. Another learner claimed that:

The best advantage of e-tandem is its potential for removing the fear of speaking. English speaking was always stressful to me. I thank e-tandem developers as I no longer feel that stress. The keyword is confidence. E-tandem gave me confidence to speak in English. The more I used it, the more confidence I gained. (L9)

It is argued that e-tandem was an effective language learning method in diminishing the learners’ speaking anxiety and boosting their confidence. Due to these changes, the EFL learners pointed out that their comprehension was enhanced during the collaborative speaking activities and they had more positive attitudes and perceptions towards such speaking activities. For example, one of the learners suggested that:

I no longer feel escaping from English speaking. I have gained positive attitudes towards English speaking. (L7)

This positive perception contributed to the learners’ collaborative speaking activities, since they deemed speaking skills more important. This could also help the learners find more appropriate ways to improve their speaking skills in the future. Another EFL learner highlighted that:

I came across many non-native speakers from other countries and talked with them. All I can say is that speaking does not need much emphasis on pronunciation and stress, as some of our teachers do. What matters is the ability to understand and to be understood. (L1)

It is evident that the learners found more appropriate ways to improve their speaking skills in the future and they thought it was e-tandem language learning method which changed their viewpoints towards speaking skills. Another example in this regard, which was highlighted by the learners, was the comprehension of the English language which was enhanced due to e-tandem language learning method. A learner, for instance, stated that:

I felt frustrated when I could not understand some utterances at first, because the pronunciation of some words used by my interlocutors were different from the standard British or American pronunciation that I had been exposed to. (L3)

The learners’ positive attitudes and perceptions towards the collaborative speaking activities in the e-tandem environment further engaged the learners in communicative activities with native and non-native speakers of English worldwide, and hence, enhanced their speaking skills. Overall, it could be argued that e-tandem was an effective and efficient method for developing speaking skills, as the EFL learners claimed.

# 6.  Discussion

Following Engeström’s (1987) activity theory and a sequential explanatory mixed-methods approach (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2007), this study aimed at examining the impact of e-tandem on EFL learners’ speaking skills (i.e. speaking fluency and coherence, lexicon, grammatical range and accuracy, and pronunciation) and WTC. Furthermore, an individual semi-structured interview was conducted at the end of the e-tandem programme to explore the attitudes and perceptions of the EFL learners towards the e-tandem-based collaborative speaking activities. The quantitative findings revealed that both e-tandem and conventional courses improved the EFL learners’ speaking skills and WTC; however, the e-tandem programme outperformed the conventional course on improving the EFL learners’ speaking skills and WTC. The findings in this regard could be in line with those of Cando-Guanoluisa et  al. (2020) who found that learners could conveniently apply different learning strategies in e-tandem course to effectively develop their telecollaboration and language learning skills. Following Belz (2003) and Hauck and Youngs (2008), communicating with native and non-native speakers of English might have been the main reason for the learners’ better speaking performance in the e-tandem class in the current study. The EFL learners in the e-tandem environment could select an appropriate native or a second/foreign speaker of English in order to do collaborative speaking activities more effectively. The e-tandem learners were engaged in collaborative speaking activities with other speakers of English, since they were more enthusiastic in this regard (as the learners highlighted in the interview sessions).

Following Engeström’s activity theory, EFL learners, being involved in collaborative speaking activities with other members of e-tandem, could effectively develop their speaking skills. E-tandem was believed to be a great programme to facilitate the learners’ communication with other native and/or non-native speakers of English around the world. Following this theory, the EFL learners in this study were considered the subjects who followed a specific goal or object (i.e. improving their speaking skills) using e-tandem as a mediational method that mediated between the subjects and the specific object. The learners followed a number of rules or norms, like using different affordances of e-tandem in order to be involved in collaborative speaking activities in a community where all users shared a common goal. Finding appropriate partners (O’Dowd, 2013), the learners were engaged in collaborative speaking activities to accomplish speaking tasks and develop their speaking skills accordingly. In the e-tandem environment, the learners were responsible to do the speaking activities; that is, they were responsible for improving their own and partner’s speaking skills in the e-tandem space. Based on this theory, the learners were first mediated by the mediational tools, the community, and following some rules to develop their speaking skills and gradually internalised their skills. It could thus be proposed that the e-tandem programme facilitated the EFL learners’ movement from other-regulation to self-regulation of their speaking performance, which could be a reason behind the learners’ higher speaking improvements. In the interview sessions, the learners also highlighted their positive attitudes and perceptions towards the e-tandem-based collaborative speaking activities, which could be further in line with the quantitative findings of the study.

The findings could imply that conducting an e-tandem programme for EFL learners’ speaking courses can provide a convenient context for the learners to communicate with other native and non-native speakers around the world, which can enhance their speaking skills. EFL learners are believed to be actively engaged in collaborative speaking activities with native English speakers and English learners of different native languages, as confirmed in the current study. Thus, this can facilitate the learners’ other-regulation and help them achieve their self-regulation or automatisation in speaking performance sooner than expected. Due to this, EFL instructors are suggested to run an e-tandem programme, following the findings of the present study, and help EFL learners reach their speaking self-regulation.

The quantitative findings also showed that the e-tandem course improved the EFL learners’ WTC and outperformed its conventional class counterpart. MacIntyre (1994) and Peng (2019), in this regard, argued that communicative abilities and context of class enhanced learners’ WTC. In this study, the EFL learners were more engaged in e-tandem context, since they could use different affordances available in the e-tandem environment and communicate with other e-tandem members, which could subsequently enhance their communicative abilities, and hence, their WTC. Kang (2005) also claimed that the authentic context of communication could also contribute to learners’ WTC. In the current study, e-tandem provided an authentic environment for the EFL learners by involving them in authentic collaborative speaking activities with native and non-native speakers of English. Following Kang (2005), communicative activities in and outside the class could develop learners’ WTC. In harmony with this claim, in this study, the learners were engaged in collaborative speaking activities both in and outside the class, which could be another reason why their WTC were enhanced to a greater extent in comparison with their conventional counterparts. E-tandem learners’ high level of WTC could further contribute to the learners’ autonomous functioning in the EFL collaborative speaking context, as corroborated by Kang’s (2005) findings.

The findings encourage EFL instructors to run an e-tandem course for EFL learners’ speaking courses in order to enthusiastically involve them in collaborative speaking activities with native and non-native speakers of English. As EFL learners are more willing to communicate with foreign speakers of English, they can enhance their speaking skills more effectively and efficiently. That is, e-tandem is regarded as an effective online language learning method which can connect EFL learners to the other English speakers for communication purposes. This can develop the learners’ speaking skills and their willingness to communicate, as corroborated in the current study. As a result, EFL instructors are suggested to run an e-tandem programme and help EFL learners communicate with rightful partners so that the learners’ speaking skills and willingness to communicate would be enhanced to a great extent.

Moreover, the findings revealed EFL learners’ positive perceptions towards the e-tandem programme. The EFL learners’ positive perceptions might be due to the abundant affordances provided in the e-tandem space, like video and audio calls, that contributed to the learners’ collaborative speaking activities on the one hand and improved their speaking skills and WTC on the other hand. The learners believed that they were not restricted by time and place when they communicated with other e-tandem members, which might be another reason behind the learners’ positive attitudes and perceptions towards the e-tandem programme. Communicating with native speakers of English and non-native English speakers is believed to enhance learners’ engagement in communicative activities which was possible in e-tandem environment. Such communication helped the learners learn about native-like words and expressions which further enhanced the learners’ engagement in collaborative speaking activities to a great extent. In comparison with the conventional learners, the e-tandem learners had more opportunities to communicate with speakers of English which could further contributed to the e-tandem learners’ positive attitudes and perceptions towards the e-tandem programme. E-tandem also diminished the learners’ speaking anxiety and this could increase the learners’ communicative activities and WTC in the e-tandem space. Moreover, e-tandem helped the learners communicate with a rightful speaker of English, which not only diminished their anxiety level, but also boosted their confidence in collaborative speaking activities.

Confirming the quantitative findings, the qualitative findings also make a number of recommendations for pedagogical contexts. For instance, EFL instructors are suggested that they should help EFL learners become more acquainted with e-tandem environment, so as to facilitate the learners’ collaborative speaking activities on the one hand and enhance their positive attitudes and perceptions towards this language learning method on the other hand. Instructors can help EFL learners boost their confidence in speaking with other English speakers by giving them some guidelines on how to carry out different speaking tasks with native and non-native speakers of English. EFL instructors may also encourage learners to communicate with their partners in e-tandem environment wherever and whenever they like so that the learners can other-regulate, and subsequently, self-regulate their speaking skills at their own pace. Finally, based on the learners’ viewpoints, designing an e-tandem language learning programme for EFL learners’ collaborative speaking courses is essential, as e-tandem can familiarise the learners’ with different cultures and give the learners opportunities to learn English as an international language.

# 7.  Conclusion

Drawing on Engeström’s (1987) activity theory and adopting a sequential explanatory mixed-methods approach (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2007), the findings of the present study indicated that the e-tandem programme developed the EFL learners’ speaking skills and WTC and outperformed its conventional counterpart. Furthermore, the EFL learners held positive attitudes and perceptions towards the e-tandem-based collaborative speaking programme. These findings might be due to the learners’ speaking collaborations with native and non-native speakers of English around the world. E-tandem could be regarded as an effective programme to facilitate telecollaboration activities online, and hence, develop learners’ speaking skills and WTC in EFL contexts.

The findings recommend some practical and pedagogical implications for EFL context of learning and teaching. As e-tandem programme is in line with learner-centeredness, leading to successful learning and teaching results, it could be recommended for collaborative speaking courses in EFL contexts. Following the findings of the study, EFL teachers are suggested that they should apply e-tandem in EFL collaborative speaking courses in order to help EFL learners have effective collaborative speaking activities with appropriate partners through Tandem application so that the learners can improve their speaking skills and WTC more effectively. As EFL learners can have unlimited telecollaboration activities with e-tandem members, they can have and receive more and proper peer-mediations on the collaborative speaking tasks and improve their speaking skills usig e-tandem programme. Designing an e-tandem programme, helps EFL learners improve their WTC in EFL contexts. EFL learners need to be trained on how to find a suitable partner in e-tandem environment, so as to improve their speaking skills and WTC better.

However, there are a number of limitations which need to be addressed by future EFL researchers. For example, as the findings of the present study are based on a small number of participating EFL learners, future EFL researchers are recommended to replicate the current study while recruiting a larger number of EFL learners in order to generalise the findings of the study. Although we adopted a mixed-methods approach to explore the impact of e-tandem on EFL learners’ speaking skills and WTC more profoundly, more studies, such as longitudinal studies, might be needed to more deeply explore EFL learners’ successful achievements in e-tandem environment. As we used a sequential explanatory mixed-methods approach, we only conducted interviews with the e-tandem learners, since they outperformed the other group of learners. More studies might be required to check and compare EFL learners’ attitudes and perceptions towards the two instructional procedures. The interviews could be also conducted at different stages of the study (before, while, and after the instructional procedures) in order to shed more light on the findings.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

# Notes on contributors

Masoud Rahimi did his PhD in applied linguistics at Razi University, Kermanshah, Iran. He is currently a lecturer at University of Kurdistan, Sanandaj, Iran. His research focuses on computer assisted language learning (CALL), second language writing and speaking, and research practice in English language teaching. He has published extensively in internationally acclaimed journals, such as Computer Assisted Language Learning, Research Papers in Education, Thinking Skills and Creativity, TESOL Journal, and Issues in Educational Research, and accredited national journals. He has also presented extensively in both international and national conferences. He won the top researcher award at Razi university in 2019.

Jalil Fathi received his Ph.D. degree in applied linguistics from Allameh Tabataba’i University, Tehran, Iran. He is currently an associate professor at University of Kurdistan, Sanandaj, Iran. His areas of interest are Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL), teacher education, and second language writing. He has published extensively in accredited national journals and authored several papers in internationally acclaimed journals like Computer Assisted Language Learning, System, International Journal of Multilingualism, and Education and Information Technologies. He has also presented extensively in both international and national conferences.

# ORCID

Masoud Rahimi $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0684-2087  
Jalil Fathi $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1146-1024

# References

Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68–117.

development. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   
Brammerts, H. (2003). Autonomous language learning in tandem: The development of a concept. In T. Lewis. & L. Walker (Eds.), Autonomous language learning in tandem (pp. 27–36) Academy Electronic Publications.   
Buckingham, L., & Alpaslan, R. S. (2017). Promoting speaking proficiency and willingness to communicate in Turkish young learners of English through asynchronous computer-mediated practice. System, 65, 25–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2016.12.016   
Calvert, M. (1999). Tandem: A vehicle for language and intercultural learning. Language Learning Journal, 19(1), 56–60. https://doi.org/10.1080/09571739985200111   
Campbell, D. T., & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent and discriminant validation by the multi trait-multi method matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56(2), 81–105. https://doi. org/10.1037/h0046016   
Canals, L. (2020). The effects of virtual exchanges on oral skills and motivation. Language Learning & Technology, 24(3), 103–119.   
Cando-Guanoluisa, F., Tovar-Taipicana, J., & Vargas-Guevara, W. (2020 The use of learning strategies in an e-tandem English program [Paper presentation]. 2nd International Academic Conference on Teaching, Learning and Education, Munich, Germany.   
Cao, Y. K., & Wei, W. (2019). Willingness to communicate from an English as an international language (EIL) perspective: The case Macau. System, 87, 102–149. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2019.102149   
Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed method approaches. Sage Publications.   
Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five traditions (2nd ed.) Sage.   
Creswell, J. W. (2008). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative and qualitative approaches to research (3rd ed.). Merrill/Pearson Education.   
Creswell, J. W., & Plano Clark, V. L. (2007). Designing and conducting mixed methods research. Sage Publications.   
Creswell, J. W., Plano Clark, V. L., Gutmann, M., & Hanson, W. (2003). Advanced mixed methods research designs. In A. Tashakkori & C. Teddlie (Eds.), Handbook on mixed methods in the behavioral and social sciences (pp. 209–240). Sage Publications.   
Dakowska, M. (2007). Teaching English as a foreign language: A guide for professionals. Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWN.   
Denzin, N. K. (2012). Triangulation 2.0. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 6(2), 80–88. https://doi.org/10.1177/1558689812437186   
Develotte, C. (2009). From face to face to distance learning: the online learner’s emerging identity. In R. Goodfellow & M. N. Lamy (Eds). Learning cultures in online education (pp. 71–92). Continuum.   
Dooly, M., & Sadler, R. (2013). Filling in the gaps: linking theory and practice through telecollaboration in teacher education. ReCALL, 25, 4–29. https://doi.org/10.1017/ S0958344012000237   
Dörnyei, Z. (2007). Research methods in applied linguistics. Oxford University Press.   
Ebadi, S., & Rahimi, M. (2017). Exploring the impact of online peer-editing using Google Docs on EFL learners’ academic writing skills: a mixed-methods study. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 30(8), 787–815. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588 221.2017.1363056   
Ebadi, S., & Rahimi, M. (2018). An exploration into the impact of WebQuest-based classroom on EFL learners’ critical thinking and academic writing skills: A mixed-methods study. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 31(5–6), 617–651. https:// doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2018.1449757   
Ebadi, S., & Rahimi, M. (2019). Mediating EFL learners’ academic writing skills in online dynamic assessment using Google Docs. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 32(5–6), 527–555. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2018.1527362   
El-Hariri, Y. (2016). Learner perspectives on task design for oral-visual eTandem language learning. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 10(1), 49–72. https:// doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2016.1138578   
Elo, J., & Pörn, M. (2021). Challenges of implementing authenticity of tandem learning in formal language education. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 24(6), 771–784. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2018.1516188   
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research. Orienta-Konsultit.   
Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity-theoretical reconceptualization. Journal of Education and Work, 14(1), 133–156. https://doi. org/10.1080/13639080020028747   
Fathi, J., & Rahimi, M. (2020). Examining the impact of flipped classroom on writing complexity, accuracy, and fluency: A case of EFL students. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 1–39. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2020.1825097   
Flick, U. (2004). Triangulation in qualitative research. A companion to qualitative research, 3, 178–183.   
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language of culture: The culture project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55–102.   
Gass, S. M., & Mackey, A. (2000). Stimulated recall methodology in second language acquisition. Erlbaum.   
Guth, S., & Marini-Maio, N. (2010). Close encounters of a new kind: The use of Skype and Wiki in telecollaboration. Telecollaboration, 2, 413–426.   
Hauck, M., & Youngs, B. L. (2008). Telecollaboration in multimodal environments: The impact on task design and learner interaction. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(2), 87–124. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588220801943510   
Ivankova, N. V., & Creswell, J. W. (2009). Mixed methods. In J. Heigham, & R. A. Croker (Eds.), Qualitative research in applied linguistics: A practical introduction (pp. 135–161) Palgrave Macmillan.   
Ivankova, N. V., Creswell, J. W., & Stick, S. L. (2006). Using mixed-methods sequential explanatory design: From theory to practice. Field Methods, 18(1), 3–20. https://doi. org/10.1177/1525822X05282260   
Jaime, A., Domínguez, C., Sánchez, A., & Blanco, J. M. (2013). Interuniversity telecollaboration to improve academic results and identify preferred communication tools. Computers & Education, 64, 63–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2013.01.008   
Jauregi, K., De Graaff, R., Van den Bergh, H., & Kriz, M. (2012). Native/non-native speaker interactions through video-web communication: A clue for enhancing motivation? Computer Assisted Language Learning, 25(1), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 09588221.2011.582587   
Jepson, K. (2005). Conversations and negotiated interaction in text and voice chat rooms. Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 79–98.   
Kabata, K., & Edasawa, Y. (2011). Tandem language learning through a cross-cultural keypal project. Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 104–121.   
Kang, S. J. (2005). Dynamic emergence of situational willingness to communicate in a second language. System, 33(2), 277–292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2004.10.004   
Ke, I. C., & Cahyani, H. (2014). Learning to become users of English as a Lingua Franca (ELF): how ELF online communication affects Taiwanese learners’ beliefs of English. System, 46, 28–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2014.07.008   
Kitade, K. (2012). An exchange structure analysis of the development of online intercultural activity. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 25(1), 65–86. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/09588221.2011.584512   
Kruk, M. (2019). Dynamicity of perceived willingness to communicate, motivation, boredom and anxiety in second life: The case of two advanced learners of English. Computer Assisted Language Learning,35(1–2), 190–216. https://doi.org/10.1080/0958 8221.2019.16777222   
Lee, J. S. (2020). The role of grit and classroom enjoyment in EFL learners’ willingness to communicate. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development. https://doi. org/10.1080/01434632.2020.1746319   
Lee, J. S., & Drajati, N. A. (2019). Willingness to communicate in digital and non-digital EFL contexts: Scale development and psychometric testing. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 32(7), 692–712. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2018.1535509   
Lee, J. S., & Dressman, M. (2018). When IDLE hands make an English workshop: Informal digital learning of English and language proficiency. TESOL Quarterly, 52(2), 435–445. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.422   
Lee, K. (2018). Implementing computer‐mediated intercultural communication in English education: A critical reflection on its pedagogical challenges. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 34(6), 673–687. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12275   
MacIntyre, P. D., Baker, S. C., Clément, R., & Conrod, S. (2001). Willingness to communicate, social support, and language-learning orientations of immersion students. Studies in second language acquisition, 23(3), 369–388.   
MacIntyre, P. D. (1994). Variables underlying willingness to communicate: A causal analysis. Communication Research Reports, 11(2), 135–142. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 08824099409359951   
MacIntyre, P. D., Clement, R., Dörnyei, Z., & Noels, K. A. (1998). Willingness to communicate in a L2: A situational model of L2 confidence and affiliation. The Modern Language Journal, 82(4), 545–562. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.1998. tb05543.x   
McCroskey, J. C., & Baer, J. E. (1985 Willingness to communicate: The construct and its measurement [Paper presentation]. Presented at Annual Meeting of the Speech Communication Association Convention, Denver, CO.   
O’Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the other side: Intercultural learning in a Spanish-English e-mail exchange. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 118–144.   
O’Dowd, R. (2013). Telecollaborative networks in university higher education: Overcoming barriers to integration. The Internet and Higher Education, 18, 47–53.   
Oxford, R. L. (1997). Cooperative learning; collaborative learning; and interaction: Three communicative strands in the language classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 81(4), 443–456. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.1997.tb05510.x   
Rahimi, M., & Fathi, J. (2021). Exploring the impact of wiki-mediated collaborative writing on EFL students’ writing performance, writing self-regulation, and writing self-efficacy: A mixed methods study. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 1–48. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2021.1888753   
Rosell-Aguilar, F. (2005). Task design for audiographic conferencing: Promoting beginner oral interaction in distance language learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(5), 417–442. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588220500442772   
Sabbah-Taylor, A. (2021). Intercultural competence in a face-to-face tandem language learning: A micro-analytic perspective. Language and Intercultural Communication, 21(2), 304–3017. https://doi.org/10.1080/14708477.2020.1837149   
Sevilla‐Pavón, A. (2019). L1 versus L2 online intercultural exchanges for the development of 21st century competences: the students’ perspective. British Journal of Educational Technology, 50(2), 779–805.   
Stickler, U., & Lewis, T. (2003). Tandem learning and intercultural competence. In T. Lewis & L. Walker (Eds.), Autonomous language learning in tandem (pp. 93–104) Academy Electronic Publications.   
Szewkis, E., Nussbaum, M., Rosen, T., Abalos, J., Denardin, F., Caballero, D., et  al. (2011). Collaboration within large groups in the classroom. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6, 561–575. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-011-9123-y   
Tutty, J. I., & Klein, J. D. (2008). Computer-mediated instruction: a comparison of online and face-to-face collaboration. Educational Technology Research and Development, 56, 101–124. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-007-9050-9   
Vassallo, M. L., & Telles, J. A. (2006). Foreign language learning in-tandem: Theoretical principles and research perspectives. The Especialist, 27(1), 83–118.   
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press.   
Ware, P., & Kessler, G. (2016). Telecollaboration in the secondary language classroom: Case study of adolescent interaction and pedagogical integration. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 29(3), 427–450. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2014.961481   
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic communication in the second language classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2), 7–26.   
Woodin, J. (2003). Encouraging intercultural competence in tandem learning. In T. Lewis & L. Walker (Eds.), Autonomous language learning in tandem (pp. 71–78) Academy Electronic Publications.   
Wu, W.-C V., Chen Hsieh, J. S., & Yang, J. C. (2017). Creating an online learning community in a flipped classroom to enhance EFL learners’ oral proficiency. Educational Technology & Society, 20(2), 142–157.

# Appendices

# Appendix A.IELTS speaking band descriptors

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Fluency and Coherence</td><td colspan="3">Grammatical range</td></tr><tr><td>Band 9</td><td>f speaks fluently with only f uses vocabulary with rare repetition or</td><td>Lexical Resource full flexibility and precision in all topics</td><td>and accuracy f uses a full range of structures naturally and appropriately</td><td>Pronunciation f uses a full range of pronunciation features with precision and</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>self-correction; any hesitation is content- related rather than to find words or grammar f speaks coherently with fully appropriate cohesive features f develops topics fully and appropriately f speaks fluently with only f uses a wide. occasional repetition or</td><td>f uses idiomatic language naturally and accurately vocabulary resource</td><td>f produces consistently accurate structures apart from &#x27;slips&#x27; characteristic of native speaker speech f uses a wide range f uses a wide range of. of structures flexibly</td><td>subtlety f sustains flexible use of features throughout f is effortless to understand pronunciation features</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>self- correction; hesitation is usually content-related and only rarely to search for f uses less common. language f develops topics coherently and appropriately</td><td>readily and flexibly to convey precise meaning and idiomatic vocabulary skilfully, with occasional inaccuracies f uses paraphrase effectively as required f speaks at length without f uses vocabulary..</td><td>f produces a majority of error-free sentences with only very occasional inappropriacies or basic/ non-systematic errors f uses a range of complex structures with</td><td>f sustains flexible use of features, with only occasional lapses f is easy to understand throughout; L1 accent has minimal effect on intelligibility f shows all the positive features of Band 6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>noticeable effort or loss of. coherence f may demonstrate language- related hesitation at times, or some repetition and/or self- correction f uses a range of connectives and discourse markers with some flexibility</td><td>resource flexibly to discuss a variety of topics f uses some less common and idiomatic vocabulary and shows some awareness of style and collocation, with some inappropriate choices f uses paraphrase effectively f has a wide enough</td><td>some flexibility f frequently produces error-free sentences, though some grammatical mistakes persist</td><td>and some, but not all, of the positive features of Band 8</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>f is willing to speak at length, though may lose coherence at times due to occasional repetition, self-correction or hesitation f uses a range of connectives and discourse markers but not always appropriately</td><td>vocabulary to discuss topics at length and make meaning clear in spite of inappropriacies f generally paraphrases successfully</td><td>f uses a mix of simple and complex structures, but with limited flexibility f may make frequent mistakes with complex structures, though these rarely cause comprehension problems</td><td>f uses a range of pronunciation features with mixed control f shows some effective use of features but this is not sustained f can generally be understood throughout, though mispronunciation of individual words or</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="7">5 4 3</td><td>speech but uses repetition, self-correction and/or slow speech to keep going f may over-use certain connectives and discourse markers</td><td>f usually maintains flow of f manages to talk. about familiar and unfamiliar topics but uses vocabulary with limited flexibility f attempts to use paraphrase but with mixed success</td><td>f produces basic sentence forms with reasonable accuracy f uses a limited range of more complex structures, but these usually contain errors</td><td>f shows all the positive features of Band 4 and some, but not all, of the positive features of Band 6</td></tr><tr><td>f produces simple speech fluently, but more complex communication causes fluency problems noticeable pauses and may speak slowly, with frequent repetition and self-correction f links basic sentences but with repetitious use of simple connectives and some breakdowns in coherence</td><td>f cannot respond without f is able to talk about familiar topics but can only convey basic meaning on unfamiliar topics and makes frequent errors in word choice f rarely attempts paraphrase</td><td>and may cause some comprehension problems f produces basic sentence forms and some correct but subordinate structures are rare f errors are frequent misunderstanding f attempts basic</td><td>f uses a limited range of pronunciation features simple sentences f attempts to control features but lapses are frequent f mispronunciations are frequent and cause and may lead to some difficulty for the listener</td></tr><tr><td>f speaks with long pauses f uses simple f has limited ability to link simple sentences f gives only simple responses and is frequently unable to convey basic message</td><td>vocabulary to convey personal information f has insufficient vocabulary for less familiar topics</td><td>sentence forms but with limited on apparently memorised utterances f makes numerous errors except in memorised</td><td>f shows some of the features of Band 2 and success, or relies some, but not all, of the positive features of Band 4</td></tr><tr><td>2 f pauses lengthily before most words f little communication possible 1 f no communication possible</td><td>words or memorised utterances f no rateable language</td><td>expressions f only produces isolated f cannot produce. basic sentence forms</td><td>f speech is often unintelligible</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Appendix B.Semi-structured interview questions

1. What do you think about your experience of using e-tandem?   
2. What positive or negative points can you mention for using   
e-tandem?   
3. Please discuss the difficulties you experienced while using e-tandem.   
4. How might e-tandem have affected your speaking skills?

# Appendix C.Time log, checking the amount of time spent on collaborative activities outside the class

Please specify the amount of time (in minute) that you have spent working with e-tandem/conventional group outside the class.