Book review

# Introducing Researching English for Specific Purposes, Lindy Woodrow. Routledge, Abingdon, UK (2022). 1-242 pp (pbk), ISBN: 978-0-367-50370-3

The spread of English as a lingua franca (ELF) in science, technology, education, and communication firmly positioned English for Specific Purpose (ESP) within tertiary education and research (Tuzlukova, 2022). Likewise, the globalization of English, alongside the internationalization of higher education, have inspired ESP practitioners to follow research-driven practice and teaching-driven research (Anthony, 2018; Rose, 2019). Such an approach made ESP a prominent area of research and practice over the last couple of decades. However, for many students and novice researchers in ESP, finding a plausible research topic and conducting a study are still chalenging. Published by Routledge, "Inoducing Researching Englis for Specific Purposes", by Lindy Woodrow, amply ddreses such struggles by atending to a wide variety of considerations in conducting research in ESP. By doing so, it expands the scope of ESP research and makes valuable contributions to this field. Although the book is geared toward novice ESP reearchers and undergraduate students, it can expand the methodological practice of ESP research for applied linguistics teachers and teacher educators as wel. Woodrow progressiely explains diffrent stages of conducting original ESP research, drawing on representatie excerpts from scientific journals and dissertations. She presents the chapters in a way that sufficientl covers the requirements of ESP research and makes space for new discoveries.

Regarding the structure, the book comprises 10 chapters presented step-by-step, yet readers can read them non-linearly, depending on their needs. In the opening chapter, the author offers an overview of ESP research and background. Then in chapter 2, the author explains different stages of choosing a reearchable topic, reviewing the literature, and finding proper data collection instruments. This is taken up with common theoretical trends in ESP research in chapter 3, in which Woodrow expounds on the methodological ori entations of genre analysis, including systemic functional linguistics (SFL), rhetorical genre studies comprising intercultural rhetoric, ELF, academic literacies, multimodalit, and critical perspectives to ESP. To broaden the readers horizons in ESP research, the author goes deeper in chapter 4 and skilfully explains research considerations associated with English for Academic Purposes (EAP), English for Business Purposes (EBP), English for Professonal Purposes (EPP), and English for Occupational Purposes (EOP). Additionall, she includes scientific evidence from articles and dissertations concerning diferent strands of reearch in ESP, such as neds analysis, ESP assessment, language analysis, teaching ESP, and learning ESP.

Before embarking on practical aspects of research, the author presents common methodological approaches and research para digms in chapter 5, and aptly differentiates epistemology, ontology, and approach as three elements of a paradigm (McKinley, 2020. Then she elucidates positivism, post-positivism, constructivism, and pragmatism as paradigms that inform quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods research designs. Additionall, core characteristics of each paradigm that may appear in ESP research are described and examples are provided. Going further, in chapter 6, Woodrow ilustrates how quantitatie research methods can be employed in ESP research. She expertly pinpoints that diffrent designs such as cross-sectional, longitudinal, survey, correlational, experimental, quasi-experimental, and evaluative research designs can fit with ESP research and its quantitative methods. Published studies using such designs are also provided for readers to understand how the various designs have been utilized. Moreover, the author succinctly presents different data gathering methods including questionnaires (open-ended, closed-ended) and corpora.In addition, diffrent scales such as Likert, can-do, semantic differential, and rating as well as binary choice, open-ended, and multiple-choice questions that are commonly used in questionnaires are described. Subsequently, this ilminating chapter provides different statistical methods for analyzing quantitative data, along with their underlying assumptions. The author explains the most common data analysis methods in ESP research, such as t-tests, corelations, analysis of variance (AnovA), factor analysis (FA) regression analysis (RA), non-parametric tests, and corpus analysis.

As an important theme in ESP research, qualitative research methods such as case study, grounded theory, ethnography, and action research are examined in Chapter 7, which is the lengthiest chapter of the book. After describing each method, Woodrow offrs a reader-friendly account of several research tools to glean qualitative data in ESP research, including interviews, observations, focus groups, diries, journals think-aoud protocols, stmulatd rcall, and logs. he aso spels out the typologie, charateristics, piall, and stes associated with each of these instruments. Then in this chapter, the author introduces qualitative data analysis methods, namely content analysis, discourse analysis, corpus analysis, genre analysis, critical discourse analysis, and multimodal discourse analysis.

To clarify and position psychometric properties in the context of EAP, in chapter 8, the author explicates the reliability, validity, and various ethical considerations in conducting research in ESP. The author defines rliability and validity and maintains that these crucial propertie ave differt relizations in quantitative and qualitative rearch deigs. he preets ifferent ways b whch ESP researchers can ensure these two indices in quantitative and qualitative studies. For quantitative studies, the author suggests internal consistency measures and factor analysis, while for qualitative research she argues for the use of inter-rater reliability and expert judgments. Furthermore, the author decribes ethical aspects of anonymity, privacy, consent, and confidentiality and offers practical ways to safeguard them. At the end of this chapter, Woodrow explains the concept of researcher positionality, which is pivotal for qualitative research in which the researcher plays a significant role.

Afterward, in chapter , the author shifts from theoretical concerns to practical suggestions for writing disertations and articles. In so doing, she presents diffrent steps in writing, reportig, and publishing research papers. Woodrow adroitl explains how different chapters of adissertation should be writen. In the tenth and final chapter, she describes and lists ifferent resources and publishers in the field f E that can facilitate the proces f conducting and ublishing arch. The author aso preents scietfic ourals related to ESP and its sub-clasifications, research methodology handbooks, ESP organizations, publishing guideline, common corpora in ESP, software to organize and analyze data in corpus studies, wordlists, and common tests in ESP.

Overall, this thought-provoking book is commendable in several respects. The first virtue of this book is its clear and smoth language and writing style that allows the reader to understand the ideas without any complication. The second merit concerns the evidence-based nature of arguments put forward by the author. Instead of providing ad hoc information and contentions, the author integrates published studies to support what she intends to convey to the readers. This connection between what the author proposes and what has already been published enhances the credibility and engagement of the book. Another advantage of the book is that it provides a comprehensive guide for getting familiar with research topic, paradigms, designs, and instruments in ESP research, and practicallyconducting studies using guidelines for each phase of research. The booki also meriorious i offerig a glossary of core concepts in ESP that offers readers simple definitions of the main terminologies in this field.

However, the book suffers from some weaknesses. The existing content provides no reflection on how pedagogy can be informed by the emerging ESP research agenda. Moreover, i is unfortunate that the book has not bridged the gap between theory and practice in ESP by offering insights into ESP teaching and teacher education. Likewise, it would have been beneficia for the book to offer some explanations on ESP research in light of "discilinary neds variations, as different disciplines have different general and research needs. Hence, including voices from diferent disciplines could have multiplied the contributions of this excellent resource. The book also could have incorporated some complementary sections. First, none of the chapters has a conclusion section or asynopsis, which is essential, especiall in lengthy chapters. Second, the bibliography of sources, which might help readers in finding researchable topics, is missing. Another missing section is "directions for future research' at the end of each chapter to inspire further research. Furthermore, it would have been more practical if the book had included some exercises and multi-leveled questions in each chapter to extend the readers' knowledge.

Despite these shortcomings, this penetrating resource is praiseworthy for providing novel and deep insights into ESP research methodology and practice, which is rarely (if ever) done in textbooks in this field. It makes snificant conributionsto SP reearch y unpacking different research trends, methods, approaches, and topics. t is an illuminating boo for EP teachers, students, language and educational researchers, materials developers, content providers, and language and educational policymakers interested in conducting research and injecting scientific findings into ESP research and practice.

# Funding details

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

# Acknowledgements

The authors highly appreciate the insightfl comments suggested by the editor, Dr. Rebecca Chory, and the anonymous reviewers.

# References

Anthony, L. (2018). Introducing English for specific purposes. Routledge.   
cKine, . 2020)i  m in t gf ad ii h k, .), handbook of research methods in applied linguistics (pp. 1-13). Routledge.   
Rose H 09n t io e 0 r l for    3(, 505 h/./10.1002 tesq.517 Journal, 5, 1-4.