# Influence of prior educational contexts on directed self-placement of L2 writers

Youmie J. Kim\*, Matthew J. Hammill

epartment of Languages, Literatures, and Linguistics, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, United State.

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Directed self-placement   
Assessment   
L2 writing

Directed self-placement (DSP) allows for student agency in writing placement. DSP has been implemented in many composition programs, although it has not been used as widely for L2 writers in higher education. This study investigates the relationship between student placement decisions and students' prior educational backgrounds, particularly in relationship to whether they had attended an English-medium high school or an intensive English program (IEP). Actual placement results via an exam were compared to 804 students' self-placement decisions and correlated with their prior educational backgrounds. Findings indicated that most students' DSP decisions matched actual exam placement results. However, there was a large number of DSP decisions that were higher or lower than exam placement results. Additionally, the longer students studied at an English-medium instruction high school, the more likely they were to place themselves higher than their exam placement. We conclude that DSP can be used in L2 writing programs, but with careful attention to learners' educational backgrounds, proficiency, and sense of identity.

# 1. Introduction

Directed self-placement (DSP) refers to methods of placement into first-year writing courses that foreground student agency during the placement process DSP can send a message to students that their voice matters in decisions aout courses they take and can be empowering and motivating (Crusan, 2011; Ferri et al., 2017; Royer & Gills, 1998). However, DSP comes with concerns students could over or underestimate their bilitie (Lewiecki-Wilson et al., 200). Research on DSP in multilingual programs has ben limited, but logistical dfficultie in administering placement exams warrant a closer look at SP as a method for placing students (Ferrist al., 2017). L2 writing programs need to develop fair and practical means of placement. Placing students into appropriate courses is a crucial firs ste in assurig efftie g ome for stdnts. In the csef wiig oures effive lamet olicie resent a number f particular challenges. Indirect measures of writing competence, such as overall TOEFL scores, may present advantage in terms of feasibility, but are not designed specifically for placement and have not been empirically demonstrated as efective for placement purposes (Kokhan, 2013). However, there i littl research in DSP for L2 writers (Ferris e l., 2017). As coordinator of a large program for L2 writers, we noticed anecdotally that some students who had attended an English-medium high schoo seemed les satisfied with their intial placements. This study investigates overall statistical correlations between students self-lacements and placement test scores, and then makes further corrlations between students' educational backgrounds and their self-placement

tendencies.

# 2. Directed self-placement (DsP)

Directed self-placement (DSP) refers to a clustr f ssessment approaches that bring together self-assesment and course selection to guide the enrollment of incoming college students into first-year writing courses" (Aull 2021, p. 1). DSP gained prominence in composition studies through the work of Royer and Gille (1998), who described the use of a DSP approach at Grand Valley State Universty. The essence of DSP is that students are provided information and guidance that helps them decide on their own which course best is their needs. Toth (2019) states that, \*The twin fundamentals of DSP arethus guidance and choice (p. 2). The particular method of implementing DSP varies acording to the nees of institutions and contexts. Some ways that students are provided guidance in their choices include the use of explanatory texts or checklis, questionnaire, in-person advising, and self-assesment through the use of writing tass or reading sample texts (Toth, 2019). DSP is now widely used in American L1 composition programs (Inoue et al., 2011; Moos & Van Zanen, 2019).

Royer and Gille (1998) explain how their transition to DSP was motivated by dissaisfaction among stakeholders, particularly students, about the accuracy of using standardized tets, in their case the ACT; students felt that their ACT scores placed them too low. Also, when the ACT was supplemented with a placement essay as a direct measure of writing, students sillfelt some disstisfaction with their placement, which also impacted the instructors who were teaching these dissatisfied students. Afer implementing and refining their DSP procedures, Royer and Gilles (1998) found that there was an increase in saisfaction among stakeholders affcted by this innovation in writing placement. In addition to increased satisfaction, there has been some reearch that supports DSP in terms of effectieness as measured by student suces. Tompkins (2003), Frus (2003), and Blakesley et al. (2003) allfound that the DSP procedures adopted at their insttions led to positie changes in terms of student sccesas measured by GPA and pasing rates. More research is needed into DSP and student learning as measured by particular writing skils rather than by holistic measures such as GPA and pass rates.

DSP has ben framed as a means to encourage student agency as well as to foster equity and inclusion, particularly regarding students from marginalized backgrounds (Crusan, 2011; DasBender, 2012; Ketai, 2012). DSP proponents argue that giving students agency is empowering (Blakesley et al., 2003; Royer & Gille, 2003) increases motivation (Crusan, 2011; Royer & Gille, 1998; Ruecker, 2011) and encourages a sense of ownership by student writers (Neal & Huot, 2003). However, there have been some crit icisms and caveats regarding DSP. It has been argued that students do not necessarily have the ability to ealuate their own proficiency, which could lead to misplacment (Bedore & Rossen-Knill, 2004; Lewiecki-Wilson et al. 2000; Nicolay, 2002). This line f criticism echoes what is known in psychology as the Kruger-Dunning efect (Kruger & Dunning, 199), in which they found that lesscompetent individuals tended to significantly overestimate ther ability in a number of different domains, including sense of humor, grammatical knowledge, and logical reasoning. Kruger and Dunning (1999) make the cas that, \*heskill that engender competence in a particular domain are ofen the very same skill necessary to evaluate competence in that domain-one's own or anyone else's (p. 1121). In the case of self-assesment in writing, it takes a certain lelof comptence and knowledge of what constitutes good writing in a particular context, along with metacognitive acuity, to make an acurate elfassessment. This is lot to ask for a first-yer student entering into the university culture of writing for the firs time. Gere et al. (2010) found that DSP methods may not be adequately aligned with what actually happens in writing programs and that it can be difficult to balance the needs of multiple stakholder e., students, advisers, instructor, and administrators), who may have diffrent values and goals related to placment, erollment, and staffng (Toth & All 2014).

# 3. Directed self-placement (DsP) and L2 writers

Ferris et al. (2017) note that among L2 scholars and administrators that there is less enthusiasm for DSP (Crusan, 2006, 2011) Ferris et al. (2017) remark that:

Even those who are enthusiastic or sympathetic towards DSP in theory acknowledge that it carries risk: If students who are not fully aware (because of their diffring cultural and educational experiences) of what language/writing proficiency entails, particularl in a demanding L2 academic environment, they might be more likely to aggressively place themselves so that they can make rapid progress through their degree requirements. Conversely, other students may lack confidence in their own abilities and place themselves lower than required. (p.2)

These concerns have not been extensively addressed in empirical studies. As program coordinators, we noticed anecdotally that some students who had attended an English-medium high school seemed les satisfied with their itialplacements. As Ferrs et al. (2017) note above, prior educational experiences may influence DSP decisions, along with perhaps reflecting the role of identity (Harklau, 1994; Ortmeier-Hooper, 2008) in how L2 students make DSP decisions. For these reasons, Johnson and Vander Bie (2024) stress that L2 writers willbenefit when the \*directed" nature of DSP is balanced with student agency. This can be done by taking into account students' prior literacy experiences, preferences for learning environments, allowing for student appeals, and desire for community (whether with L1 or L2 students), and making sure that students receive acurate information about course curricula. Sinha (2022) found that L2 writer identity, prior academic performance, and the nature of institutional communication about DSP affected students' placement decisions. Further, this study recommends that DSP, if implemented, should not serve to perpetuate a deficit bias towards lower-level courses, which in turn could affect students' identities and self-efficacy.

Johnson and Vander Bie (2024) highlight some of the concerns around DSP that have been raised in relation to L2 writers, particularly those who were educated outside of the North American context. They note, The very concept of elf-assessment may be an unfamiliar, culturally coded practice for students used to working under the weight of standardized tests, national exams, and language testing" (p. 4). The influence f national exams to other types of examinations i also noted in Ma (2020) who highlights how the pressure associated with the national Gaokao exam for Chinese students is transferred to TOEFL and the SAT exam for many students. Previous research (e.g. Costino & Hyon, 2007; Ruecker, 2011) has also noted that L2 writers may be drawn to choosing L2-focused claes for the sense of community, although other students may avoid L2 sections based on their own sense of identity.

Other researchers have noted differences in students placement decisions based on factors such as gender, race, selfefficacy and writing apprehension. Cornell and Newton (2003) found significant dfferences in placement decisions based on gender and race, with females and those of European decent picking higher-level clases. Schendel and ONeill (199 found that students past experiences with assesment influenced their decision making, while Blakesley et al. (2003) highlight the role of axiety towards writing as playing a role in student DSP decisions. Reynolds (2003) also found that self-eficacy and apprehension play a role in DSP. With these concerns in mind, itis important to note that students are not entering the universty as blank slates, so understanding the possble influence of prior educational experiences, one goal of the present study, is important.

Adding to this body of research, the present study intends to investigate the relationship between the prior educational contexts of L2 students and the accuracy rate of student self-placements compared to actual placements. The research questions that guided the study were the following:

1. How do L2 students' self-placements compare to exam placement results?   
2. Is there a relationship between L2 students' previous English education and their self-placement decisions?   
a. Is there a diffrence between L2 students who went to an Intensive English Program (IEP) and those who did not in how they place themselves?   
b. Is there a relationship between length of study at an English medium high school and how L2 students place themselves?   
c. Is there a difference between students who went to high school i an English-speaking country and those who didn't in how they place themselves?

# 4. Method

# 4.1. Institutional context

The study was conducted at a large university in the northeastern part of the United States. There are two writing programs at this university that are in separate departments but housed within the same college. One of the writing programs ofers writing courses designed primarily for native-speakers of English. The other program is an English as a Second Language (ESL) program and ffrs courses desiged primaril for students for whom English i a second language. There re 4 levels of writig courses offeed to students whose English is a second language: ENG 101, 102, 103, and 104. ENG 101 focuses primarily on reviewing grammar and vocabulary and covers minimal writing skill. NG 102 equally teaches writing sills and reviews grammar, and it is the level into which most students place. There are two types of ENG 103 courses - ENG 103 CY (continuing year) and ENG 103 FY (first-year).Students who have completed ENG 102 take ENG 103 CY, which continues to equally cover writing sills and grammar. NG 103 FY is for students who placed directly into this evel, and it covers writing sills only. Students who place into ENG 103 FY write with a high level of grammatical accuracy and do not require extensive grammar instruction; students are provided grammar feedback on writing, but grammar instruction is not a focus. ENG 104 also covers writing skils and is the final writing course taken by all students in the program; students cannot be placed into this course since they must take a two-course sequence to fulfill the university writing requirement. Students in ENG 104 are provided grammar fedback on writing, but grammar instruction is not a focus of this course. The universty requires students to complete a sequence of either ENG 103 and 104 offered by the ESL program or WRT 105 and 205 offered by the general writing program in order to graduate. ENG 103 and 104 are considered equivalent to WRT 105 and 205 respectively. Students can place into ENG 101, ENG 102, ENG 103, or WRT 105. Students who are laced into WRT 105 are given the choice of taking L2 composition courses (ENG 103 & 104) or L1 composition courses (WRT 105 and 205), and they are told of the differences between the courses offered by the two programs.

A writing course placement exam is required of all students for whom English is not a dominant language. Incoming students who self-identify as not speaking English as a dominant language register for and take the exam. Announcements are made to al incoming students (regardes of language background that the exam is required if nglish is not their dominant language. Aditionall, the ESL program is provided a list of incoming international students along with their TOEFL and IELTs scores if they have taken them. Based on the assumption that students with TOEFL and IELTS scores are most likely non-native speakers of English, those students are contacted and reminded about the online placement exam. Advisors of students aso try to identify which students might need to take the online placement exam and send them reminders. There are typically around 450 to 550 students who take the online placement exam each academic year.

The placement exam is offred online and is taken during summer or winter break prior to students' first semester of study at the university. The exam was developed by the coordinators of the ESL program. Exam questions are based on the course curricula. For instance, grammar questions are similar to those that can be found in textboos used in the courses. The exam consists of three sections: 1) grammar and vocabulary, 2) response writing to an artice, 3) and short answer questions. Exams were cored by writing instructors in the ESL program, who then placed students into ENG 101, ENG 102, ENG 103, or WRT 105. When placing students with borderline scores, intructors took into consideration students scores on TOEFL or IELTS and their prior education e.g, whether or not they had studied in a U.S. high school).

Kane's (2006, 2013, 2021) concept of argument-based validity was employed throughout the development and implementation of the placement exam used in the present study. In this framework, test developers and researchers are required to specify what test interpretation and use entail. Kane (2021) describes an example usage of this approach to validity, specificll for placement testing. He describes the inferences that must be evaluated and supported empirically in the development of a placement exam; for example, 'the test assesses the competencies developed in the courses over the range covered by the courses \*(p. 42) and \*the levels of achievement needed to get   or beer in the courses increase cross the sequence, and the sssment scores are positiely related to these levels of achievement"(p. 43). For the placement exam used in this study, a team of faculty continuously work together to establish theoretical and empirical support for the exam, including a consideration of student achievement, satisfaction, and farness Data sources included student grades, retention and graduation statistics, student and faculty surveys, as well as a review of student writing acros the levels of the curriculum. This process is ongoing as student demographics and curricular needs evolve.

# 4.2. Data collection

The data collected include placement exam results, self-placement survey results, and information on students' educational backgrounds. Data was collcted during the summers and winters prior t Fall 2020, Spring 2020,Fall 2021, and Spring 2021. Students for whom English was not a dominant language took the aforementioned placement exam online prior to their frst year of study at the universit. On the day of the exam, students were asked to optionally complete a self-placement survey (see Appendix A). The survey consisted of two parts. The first part was a Likert scale survey that asked students questions about their English language use. An example question from this survey is, I am comfortable taking a writing class with native speakers of English. a) Strongly Agree,b) Agree, c) Disagree, d) Strongly Disagree, e) Not Applicable." In the second part of the survey, students were provided a description of writing courses at the university and were asked which course they thought was most appropriate for them. For instance, they were told the dfference between ENG courses in the ESL program and the WRT courses in the general writing program and asked which type of course was most appropriate for them.

Data about student' educational background was colected through several means. The names and locations of students high schools were provided by the university's instutional research offic. Students provided information about the number of years they studied at an English medium high school as well as the name of their high school when they registered to take the exam. The uni. versity's intensive English program provided the list of students who have graduated from their program; we did not know if students had studied at an intensive English program at other institutions.

During the period data was collected, there were 1018 students who took the placement eam. Of these students, 829students took the optional elf-placement survey. 1004 students provided information about their high schol education. Students were not included in our data analysis f they did not take the elf-placement survey or did not provide information about thir high school education or provided information about thr high school that conflicted with information obtained from the universt instittion reearch ffice (e.g., student reported they did not study at an English medium high school, but information from the university's institution research office indicated that the location of their lst high school was in the U.).I total, dat from 804 students were included in the data analysis.

# 4.3. Data analysis

Frequency analysis and the chi-square test of independence were used to addressresearch questions because all variables were categorical and there was no dependency between the variables. First, we conducted multiple chi-square tests to determine whether there were significant ifferences between the groups of students who took the placement exam in different time periods. There was not a significant difference between the groups, so our subsequent analysis considered allstudents as one group.

To answer the first research question (How do students' self-placements compare to exam placement results?), we used frequency analysis. We counted the number of students whose slf-placement was lower, matched, or was higher than the exam placement. To answer the second research question (Is there a relationship between students' previous English education and their self-placement decisions?), we used the chi-square test of independence in multiple steps. First, we analyzed data to answer the question 2 A (Is there a difference between students who went to an Intensive English Program (IEP) and those who did not in how they place themselves?). We found that there was asignificant difference between these two groups. Because of this and to avoid skewed reults, data from the students who had studied at an IEP were excluded from subsequent analysis for answering questions $^ { 2 \mathrm { ~ B ~ } }$ and 2 C (2 B: Is there a relationship between length of study at an English medium high school and how students place themselves? $_ { 2 \mathrm { ~ C ~ } }$ Is there a difference between students who went to high school in an English-speaking country and those who didn't in how they place themselves?). We next loked to se if there was a difference between students who studied at an English medium high schoo for 0 years and 1-2 years in how they placed themselves. We found that there was not a statistically significant diffrence, so we considered them one group in subsequent analysis. We also looked to se if there was a dfference between students who studied at an English medium high school for 3 years and 4 years in how they placed themselves. We found that there was not a statistically sig nificant difference, so we considered them one group in subsequent analysis.

# 5. Results and discussion

5.1. Research question 1: how do students' self-placements compare to actual placement results?

Table 1 shows the frequency statistics for students' self-placement (SP) match to actual placement (AP). $1 2 . 8 \%$ of students placed themselves lower than their actual placement. $2 3 . 6 \%$ of students placed themselves higher than their actual placement. $6 3 . 6 ~ \%$ of students placd themselve atthe same lel as their actual plaement The obsevation tht almost a quarter f the students self-placed themselves higher than their actual placement exam scores echoes the concern (Bedore & Rossen-Knil, 2004; Lewiecki-Wilson et al. 200; Nicolay, 2002) that L2 students might over or under-place themselves. However, it is notable that the majority of the students $( 7 6 . 4 \% )$ did not place themselves at higher levels than their actual placement. Similar to Ferris et al. (2017), we conclude from this analysis that students can generally be relied on to provide valuable input regarding their placement.

Table 2 shows the frequency statistics of students self-placement by course level (their actual placement). The relationship be. tween these variables was significant $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 6 , \mathrm { N } = 8 0 4 ) = 3 0 0 . 9 9 6 ,$ $\mathbf { p } < . 0 0 1 )$ . Students with the lowest proficiency were likely to place themselves higher than their actual placement; $7 7 . 5 ~ \%$ of students who were placed into the lowest level course placed themselves higher than their actual placement tudents with the highest English proficiency level were likely to accurately place themselves into the highest level; $9 5 . 2 \%$ of students whose writing indicated it might be appropriate for them to take a composition course with L1 speakers self-placed themselves into an L1 writing course. It is noteworthy that students with higher proficincy were significantly better able to ases their English proficiency and place themselves than students with lower English proficiency. It is possible that students might avoid placing themselves into the lowest level available for psychological (e.g., avoiding shame) or strategic (e.g, wanting to complete a degre faster) reasons. This data suggests that in DSP procedures it would be advisable to pay particular attention to the placements of lower-level students.

Table 3 shows the frequency statistics of students' self-placement by course level. One of the primary differences between the course level is that whil ENG 101 and 102 provide review of various grammar topics, ENG 103 and WRT 105 do not explicitly teach grammar. Of the 635 students who were placed into a course reviewing grammar topics (either ENG 101 or ENG 102), 538 students or $8 4 . 7 \%$ of the students also self-placed themselves into a course reviewing grammar topics, meaning that their self-assessment matched actual placement as to whether or not it would be helpful for them to take a course reviewing grammatical ccuracy in writing. These students were willing to take aditional ENG courses in order t receive intruction on grammar, even though the two writing courses required for graduation were only ENG 103 and ENG 104. However, the remaining $1 5 . 3 \%$ whose self-assessment did not match their actual placement regarding needing grammar review was concerning, suggesting that student self-assessments alone might not be appropriate for placing students at this large program.

5.2. Reearch question2 A: s there  ifference betwee students who went to an Intensive English Program (IEP) and those who did not in how they place themselves?

Table 4 shows the frequency statistics for students' self-placement match to actual placement of those who atended an IEP compared to those who did not atend an IEP, among those students who atended an English medium high schol for 0-2 years (i., excluded from this analysis were all students who attended an English medium high school for 3-4 years). $3 7 \ \%$ of students who attended IEP placed themselves higher than their actual placement while only $1 9 ~ \%$ of students who did not attend an IEP placed themselves higher than their actual placement. The former IEP students in this study were more likely to over-place themselves than those who had not attended an EM HS. The relationship between these variables was significant, $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 2 8 5 ) \mathrm { = } 7 . 4 8 9 , \mathrm { p } = . 0 2 4 ) ]$ However, our sample size of students who had studied at an IEP was small $( \mathbf { n } = 2 7 )$ , so it is difficult to generalize.

5.3. Research question 2B: Is there a relationship between length of study at an English medium high school and how students place themselves?

Table 5 shows the frequency statisticsfor students' self-placement match to actual placement for those who attended an English medium high school for 0-2 years compared to those who attended for 3-4 years. This analysis excluded students who had previously studied at an IEP since our previous analysis indicated that there was a significant dfference in how former IEPstudents and non-IEP students placed themselves; including former IEP students would skew the analysis. Students who had studied at an English medium (EM) high school for 3-4 years were more likely to over-place themselves than those who had studied at an EM high schol for 1-2 years or had never studied at an EM Hs. The relationship between these variables was significant, $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm N = 7 6 2 ) = 4 . 1 5 6$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 4 1 )$

Table 1 Course-Level Comparison of Self-Placement (SP) to Actual Placement (AP).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Group</td><td>Frequency (N = 804) (%)</td></tr><tr><td>SP is 3 levels lower than AP</td><td>0 (0 %)</td></tr><tr><td>SP is 2 levels lower than AP</td><td>8 (1 %)</td></tr><tr><td>SP is 1 level lower than AP</td><td>95 (11.8 %)</td></tr><tr><td>SP matches AP</td><td>511 (63.6 %)</td></tr><tr><td>SP is 1 level higher than AP</td><td>166 (20.6 %)</td></tr><tr><td>SP is 2 levels higher than AP</td><td>24 (3 %)</td></tr><tr><td>SP is 3 levels higher than AP</td><td>0 (0 %)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Match between Self-Placement (SP) and Actual Placement (AP) by Course Level.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Course Level</td><td>SP lower than AP</td><td>SP matched AP</td><td>SP higher than AP</td></tr><tr><td>ENG 101 (N = 102)</td><td>NA</td><td>23 (22.5 %)</td><td>79 (77.5 %)</td></tr><tr><td>ENG 102 (N = 533)</td><td>48 (9 %)</td><td>390 (73.2 %)</td><td>95 (17.8 %)</td></tr><tr><td>ENG 103 (N = 127)</td><td>53 (41.7 %)</td><td>58 (45.7 %)</td><td>16 (12.6 %)</td></tr><tr><td>WRT 105 (N = 42)</td><td>2 (4.8 %)</td><td>40 (95.2 %)</td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><td>Totals (N = 804)</td><td>103 (12.8 %)</td><td>511 (63.6 %)</td><td>182 (23.6 %)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Students' Self-Placement (SP) by Course Level.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Course Level</td><td colspan="4">Self-Placement</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>ENG 101</td><td>ENG 102</td><td>ENG 103</td><td>WRT 105</td></tr><tr><td>ENG 101 (N = 102)</td><td>23 (22.5 %)</td><td>77 (75.5 %)</td><td>2 (2 %)</td><td>0 (0 %)</td></tr><tr><td>ENG 102 (N = 533)</td><td>48 (9 %)</td><td>390 (73.2 %)</td><td>73 (13.7 %)</td><td>22 (4.1 %)</td></tr><tr><td>ENG 103 (N = 127)</td><td>8 (6.3 %)</td><td>45 (35.4 %)</td><td>58 (45.7 %)</td><td>16 (12.6 %)</td></tr><tr><td>WRT 105 (N = 42) Totals (N = 804)</td><td>0 (0 %)</td><td>0 (0 %)</td><td>2 (4.8 %)</td><td>40 (95.2 %)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 4 Compariso of Students Wh omplete or Did Not omplete University Intensive English Program (IEP), Among 02 ers at English Medium High School (EMHS).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Completed IEP</td><td>SP lower than AP</td><td>SP matched AP</td><td>SP higher than AP</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Completed IEP and 0-2 years at EMHS</td><td>0 (0 %)</td><td>17 (63 %)</td><td>10 (37 %)</td><td>27 (100 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Did not study at IEP and 0-2 years at EMHS</td><td>34 (13.2 %)</td><td>175 (67.8 %)</td><td>49(19 %)</td><td>258 (100 %)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 Comparison of Students with 0-2 years and 3-4 years of study at an English-medium high school.   

<html><body><table><tr><td># of Years at an English-medium high school</td><td>SP matched or lower than AP</td><td>SP higher than AP</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>0-2 years</td><td>209 (81 %)</td><td>49 (19 %)</td><td>258 (100 %)</td></tr><tr><td> 3-4 years</td><td>375 (74.4 %)</td><td>129 (25.6 %)</td><td>504 (100 %)</td></tr></table></body></html>

5.4. Research question 2 C: is there a diference between students who went to high school in an English-speaking country and those who didn't in how they place themselves?

Table 6 shows the frequency statistic for students self-placement match to actual placement for those who attended a high school in an English-speaking countr compared to those who did not attend high school in an English-speaking country. Excluded from this analysis were students who had never attended an English-medium HS. Also excluded from this analysis were students who had previously studied at an EP since our previous analysi indicated that there was significant difference in how former EP students and non-IEP students placed themselves; including former IEP students would skew the analysis.  greater percentage of students whose HS was located in an ES country placed themselves either lower or higher than their actual placement in comparison to those whose MHS was not located in an ES country. However, the difference between those two groups was not significant, $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm { N } = 5 4 7 ) = 3 . 8 9 9$ $\boldsymbol { \mathbf { p } } =$ .142)).

In sum, the group of students who either atended an English-medium HS for 3-4 years or attended an IEP were more likely to over. place themselves than the group of students who had neither attended an IEP nor studied in an English-medium HS for more than 2 years. The difference between these two groups was significant $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 1 , \mathrm N = 8 0 4 ) = 4 . 5 3 1$ $\mathbf { p } = . 0 3 3 )$ ). Table 7 below shows the frequency statistics for students self-placment match to actual placement of these two groups. Of the 190 students who over-placed themseles 141 students had studied previously at the university's IEP or an Englis-medium high schol for 3-4 years. In total, of the 804 students who were placed in AY 2020-2022, 755 students $( 9 4 \% )$ of students had either 1) placed themselves below or at the same level as their actual placement or 2) had studied previously at the university's IEP or an English-medium high school. Students who had spent more time in English-medium education may have developed a more confident L2 writer identity and may have more knowledge of re. sources and strategie for uces in U..higher education. With this in mind, understanding the full ecology of the assessment context is important, thesestudents may not be "over-placing' themselves, but rather making a calculated risk in line with their own sense of self-eficacy. Reynolds (2003) found in a review of previous research that elfefficacy and apprehension played a role in students decision making during the DSP proces. However, more research is needed concerning the complex relationships among self-fficy, identity, affective factors, and placement decisions.

Table 6 Comparison of Students Who Studied at an English-Medium High Schoo in an English-Speaking Country and Those Who Did Not.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>High school location</td><td>SP lower than AP</td><td>SP matched AP</td><td>SP higher than AP</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>High school in ES Country</td><td>45 (16.1 %)</td><td>159 (56.8 %)</td><td>76 (27.1 %)</td><td>280 (100 %)</td></tr><tr><td>High school not in ES country</td><td>32 (12 %)</td><td>173 (64.8 %)</td><td>62 (23.2 %)</td><td>267 (100 %)</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 6. Conclusion

This study supports that DSP and direct assesment of writing i combination allow for generally accurate placement. Limitations of the study are that self-reported data was used for the number of years in EM high school and that the number of participants who had studied at an EP and participants who studied 1-2 years in EMHS was small In adition, it s possile that some students had attended an IEP not ffiliated with the universt. The study found that students who attended an English-medium HS for 3-4 years or attended an IEP were more likely to over-place themselves. Students with high proficiency were better a assessin their nglish proficiency and at placing themselves than students with lower English proficiency. Students with more time spent in English-medium education may have developed more confidence, be more aware of how U.S. writing class operate, and perhaps have a sense of the strategies and resources that might help them beyond a sense f their own proficiency. For example, students may feel confident that they can pass or get a good grade in aclas that might be challenging from a proficiency standpoint. Also, students with more time in English-medium education may have developed a robust 2 writer identity, where being in higher level L2 classe o clases with L1 leaners etter fits their sense of identity. This would be in line with previous research on L2 writers identity and self-eficacy (e.g. Reynolds, 2003); however, more research is needed in this area to draw more concrete concusions. Also, more qualitative research is neded into why students under or overplace themselves alo affective factors such as motivatio, idntit, and self-fficacy need to be inestigated. More research is needed into other demographic factors (race, gender, class) that might influence self-assessment.

This study lends support t the use of DSP in L2 writing programs; at the same time, students who needed extra support might have not benefitte if only DSP (without the exam) had bee implemented. Slomp (2016) argues that ethics needs to be a foundational aspect of writing asesment, so in the case f DSP i is important to understand thical onsiderations in balancing student agency with program-level placment decisions. Since DSP can be considered a means to incorporate student agency into the placement process, we feel that over-placement" and under-placement" need to be understoo criticall in light of student motivation and identity uture research can shed more light on why students make their DSP decisions and on what additional factors need to be considered when implementing DSP in L2 writing programs.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Matthew J. Hammill Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing Youmie J. Kim: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing.

# Data availability

The data that has been used is confidential.

# Appendix A. Self-Placement Survey

Please answer this survey to provide some more information for us. Placement decisions will be based on your test result, other standardized test scores, prior education, and your preference to some degree. Thank you.

Table 7 Comparison of Self-Placement to Actual Placement by Course Level and $\#$ of Years at EM HS Years or IEP.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>0-2 yrs at EM HS</td><td>IEP or 3-4 yrs at EM HS</td><td>Total (n = 804)</td></tr><tr><td>SP is 2 levels lower than AP</td><td>3 (1.2 %)</td><td>5 (.9 %)</td><td>8 (1 %)</td></tr><tr><td>SP is 1 level lower than AP</td><td>31 (12 %)</td><td>64 (11.7 %)</td><td>95 (11.8 %)</td></tr><tr><td>SP matches AP</td><td>175 (67.8 %)</td><td>336 (61.5 %)</td><td>511 (63.6 %)</td></tr><tr><td>SP is 1 level higher than AP</td><td>45 (17.4 %)</td><td>121 (22.2 %)</td><td>166 (20.6 %)</td></tr><tr><td> SP is 2 levels higher than AP</td><td>4 (1.6 %)</td><td>20 (3.7 %)</td><td>24 (3 %)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>258 (100 %)</td><td>546 (100 %)</td><td>804 (100 %)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Part 1 Instructions: The first group of questions willask you about your English usage. These questions wil not affect your placement. For instance, indicating that you do not watch TV in English regularly will not lead to you being placed into a ower-level course.

1. I use English often in my daily life. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 2. I watch TV shows in English regularly. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 3. I read websites or use the internet in English regularly. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 4. I read books in English for fun. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 5. I write in English regularly to communicate with others. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 6. I am comfortable taking a writing class with native speakers of English. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 7. I am confident I can evaluate and reference sources I use in research papers. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 8. I am familiar with rhetorical concepts such as audience, genre, logos, pathos, ethos, etc. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 9. I can write in English with a high level of grammatical accuracy. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 10. Professors at American universities care a lot about grammatical accuracy. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 11. I am confident in my ability to read and understand college level texts in English. a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable 12. I enjoy writing in English.

a) Strongly Agree b) Agree c) Disagree. d) Strongly Disagree e) Not Applicable

Part 2 Survey Instruction: The following questions are about courses at SU. We will take your course preference in consideration to some degre. However, your placement willprimarily be based on your ELAE test results and other standardized tests scores. Please type "Ok" below and continue.

13. All SU students most complete asequence of writing requirements for graduation. The writing courses availableat xx University are ENG and WRT courses. WRT courses are primaril for native-speakers of English, and ENG courses are primarily for non-native speakers of English. Both WRT and ENG cover similar writing topics. ENG professors have a background in teaching composition to non-native speakers and are familiar with difficulties non-native speaking students encounter in writing, which may include challenges in organizing ideas according to American conventions, writing and reading quickly, and writing with sources. Additionall, the reading and writing assignments in ENG classes tend to be shorter than WRT classes because reading and writing in a second language usually takes longer than in the first language.

Based on the above understanding of WRT and ENL courses, which type of course do you think is most appropriate for you.

a) ENG courses b) WRT courses

14. Please read the below brief description of our courses and answer the question below.

ENG 101 reviews grammar and vocabulary a lot and discusses some writing.

ENG 102 covers writing skills and some grammar review. This is the most common first class for SU international undergrad tudents. If you begin with ENG 101, you wil take ENG 103 CY the following semester which will ontinue to cover a mix of writing kills and grammar review.

ENG 103 focuses on writing sills only. Students whostart with this clas have a lot of experience writing longer papers and doing research. They write with high grammaticalaccuracy and do not need grammar review. There are more papers in Level 3, then 207 Based on your own understanding of your ability and goals, which course do you think would be best for you?

a) ENG 101 b) ENG 102 c) ENG 103 d) WRT courses

# References

asw.2021.100522   
Bere   K 04    c i 1, 578   
Blake,  e   003   n  Th10 st placement program. In D. J. Royer, & R. Giles (Eds.), Directed self-placement Principles and practices (pp. 31-47). Hampton Press.   
Conell,   . 003Th f aal bl  st   t .  e  . placement: Principles and practices (pp. 149-178). Hampton Press.   
Costio    . 007    ike m   t l,   an t mainstream or multilingual composition. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16(2), 63-81.   
Cusan    n  f fo     .), politics of second language writing: In search of the promised land (pp. 205-221). Parlor Press.   
Crusan, D. (2011). The promise of directed self-placement for second language writers. TES0L Quarterly, 45(4), 774-780.   
eer    .  t century: Essays in honor of Edward M. White (pp. 371-384). Hampton Press.   
Feris,   er 21  n t for t n  //01016 j.asw.2016.10.001 and practices (pp. 179-191). Hampton Press. doi.org/10.1016/j. asw.2010.08.003.   
Harklau, L. (1994). ESL versus mainstream classes: Contrasting L2 learning environments. TES0L Quarterl, 28, 241-272.   
Placement. WPA-CompPile Research Bibliographies, 16, 1-17.   
Joon, r .24)     1). org/10.5070/W4jwa.1550   
Kane, M. T. (2006). Validation. In R. L. Brennan (Ed.), Educational measurement (pp. 17-64). American Council on Education/Praeger.   
ane M.13 t i  f  .    1 73././1200   
Kane, M. T. (2021). Articulating a validity argument. In The Routledge handbook of language testing (p. 32-47). Routledge.   
e 141-154). Peter Lang.   
Kokan, 13.            ) courses. Language Testing, 30(4), 467-489. https://doi.org/10.1177/0265532213475782   
ruger,  9  i   n Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6), 1121-1134.   
Lki-o, ,   re e  n, 165-18.   
Ma, Y. (2020). Ambitious an anxious: Hw Che cole sudents suced nd stugglein Amerian higher dction. Columbia Universit res.   
Moos, A an ae 019.t ef a a  o fn stt ac. n 41, 8-71. t/.g/10.106/. asw.2019.06.001   
el,    03 e  .)  l  i (243-255) Hampton Press.   
Nicolay, T. (2002). Plnt and instrtin in contx: ing writing withna firs-yr progam WA: writing Pom tion 25,4159.   
Ortmeier-Hooper C. (2008). English may be my second languagebut I'm not ESL. Collge Composition and Communication, 59(3), 389-419.   
R 03    .e (pp. 73-103). Hampton Press.   
Royer, D. J, & Giles, R (1998). Directed self-lacement: An attitude of orientation. Colege Composition and Communication, 50(1), 54-70.   
Royer, D. J., & Gilles, R. (2003). Directed self-placement: Principles and practices. Hampton Press.   
Ruecker, T. (2011). Improving the placement of L2 writers: The students perspective. WPA: Writing Program Administration, 35(1), 91-117.   
Schendel,  ell . (199. ping the thre d  f fm thoghta qur.s in 62, 199-227   
Sia 2  t  i  n -  i   l start. The International Joumal of Assessment and Evaluation, 29(2), 31-45. https://doi.org/10.18848/2327-7920/CGP/v29i02/31-45   
Slomp, D. (2016). Ethical considerations and writing assessment. Journal of Writing Assessment, 9(1), 1-6.   
mpin 03   t r il .)   p 192-206). Hampton Press.   
Toth, C. (2019). Directed self-placement at two-year colleges: A kairotic moment. Journal of Writing Asessment, 12(1), 1-18. asw.2013.11.006

and second language writing.