# Title Author(s) Source

Published by

This document may be used for private study or research purpose only. This document or any part of it may not be duplicated and/or distributed without permission of the copyright owner.

The Singapore Copyright Act applies to the use of this document.

# The lexico-grammar of partnerships: corpus patterns of facilitated agency

CSILLA WENINGER

# Abstract

This article contributes to the growing body of research that joins critical discourse analysis with corpus analysis. I investigate a one million-word special corpus on US urban redevelopment in an attempt to illustrate that partnerships as popular collaborative coalitions in new capitalism can be identified in representations of social actors at the lexico-grammatical level. Focusing on two recurrent patterns in a Hallidayan framework, I argue that these representations break with the traditional binary of activation–passivation that is frequently used to discuss how key participants are portrayed in discourse. I suggest the category of facilitated agency in order to accommodate representational patterns where actors are depicted as jointly though not necessarily equally contributing to the completion of a process. The analysis further highlights the potential of corpus methods to uncover patterns of language use that may lead to a refinement of CDA’s existing analytic repertoire.

Keywords: critical discourse analysis; corpus linguistics; representation of social actors; transitivity; urban redevelopment; neoliberalism.

# 1.  Introduction

For some time now, a dialogue has been unfolding about the connections between critical discourse analysis (CDA) and corpus linguistics (CL).1 A set of articles by researchers pioneering this work has recently boosted the discussion (Baker et al. 2008; Mautner 2007; Gabrielatos and Baker 2008; O’Halloran 2007, 2009) and has opened up avenues for further exploration. These contributions have made it clear that combining critically-oriented discourse analysis with a corpus approach is a valid and fruitful mode of inquiry. There is a substantial body of research now showing that a CDA-CL “synergy” (Baker et al. 2008) can greatly expand our analytic repertoire as well as strengthen the empirical base from which we make our claims.

The goal of this paper is to contribute to this discussion, though I will be more focused on how corpus linguistic techniques can enhance critical analyses of discourse than the converse. A number of benefits of a joint CDA-CL framework have already been identified. One key argument is that relying on corpus methods provides a more objective or at least more systematic means for the selection and initial analysis of texts for CDA research, thus bolstering the representativeness of textual samples and countering criticisms of researcher bias (Hardt-Mautner 1995; Orpin 2005; Stubbs 1997). Adding the quantitative dimension also enables researchers to triangulate their data; that is, to use more data sources to verify their findings. In fact, Baker et al. (2008) suggest that researchers using a combined CDA-CL approach engage in a “virtuous research cycle” where, not unlike in Glaser and Strauss’ (1967) Grounded Theory, findings are used to revise hypotheses and generate more analysis until (presumably) no new insight can be gained. Ideally, the goal of revising existing analytic categories should constitute an integral part of the research cycle. Baker et al. (2008) illustrate this point by providing corpus evidence that calls into question the binary division of British national newspapers into tabloids vs. broadsheets.

This potential for more diversified interaction between CDA’s conceptual repertoire and textual evidence makes a CDA-CL combined approach much more than methodological innovation. The need for refinement of CDA’s analytic categories is especially timely in light of recent socio-economic transformations that have drawn the attention of many critical discourse scholars. Neoliberalism — in its origins a political-economic theory that valorizes unconstrained individual entrepreneurial freedom (Harvey 2005) — has been shaping not only economic but also social and cultural practices. As Fairclough (2005) points out, discourses of neoliberalism are penetrating an increasing number of spheres, and analyses are needed to “describe this field of dispersal” (Fairclough 2005: 148). A CDA-CL joint approach offers a robust framework for exploring the nuanced ways in which these changes are articulated discursively and thus enables analysts to chart connections between concepts and data. Equally importantly, new categories may be generated in the process that could inform and prompt further analyses.

This paper is also primarily concerned with connections between concept and data, namely with how the neoliberal concept of partnerships appears in discourse. Partnerships have emerged in the past two decades as a new way of coordinating action and resources in the socio-political arena. They range from transnational alliances such as the EU-Africa Strategic Partnership, to smallscale initiatives that involve local organizations and local government to address issues affecting the community. Partnerships have been characterized as central to the neoliberal agenda, both by discourse scholars (Fairclough 2000, 2005) and by others (Geddes 2006; Maloutas and Malouta 2004). Using corpus evidence, I aim to show that partnership exists not simply as a central term in neoliberal discourse but can be traced in representations of social actors at the lexico-grammatical level. Working with a one million word-corpus on US urban redevelopment, a domain where partnerships abound, I analyze the lexicosyntactic environment in which key redevelopment participants (residents, officials, the city) occur.

The analysis draws on transitivity, a framework developed within Systemic Functional Grammar (Halliday 2004: 168–305) to describe the representational structure of English clauses. Within the system of transitivity, Halliday proposes a transitive model that construes experience into various process types (e.g., material, mental) and attendant participant roles (e.g., actor, goal). The ergative model of transitivity, on the other hand, construes that same experience by foregrounding what is common to all process types; that every process must have a Medium, a participant role through which a process is actualized. The two modes are complementary ways of looking at English clauses, much like “looking at a figure that can be seen as either concave or convex” (Halliday 2004: 288).

Utilizing the transitive mode to highlight differences in participant roles, I show that residents are often represented as Actors engaged in processes that were initiated by institutions, suggesting power differentials in partnerships. The same data are also examined through the ergative model of transitivity to illustrate how different groups of social actors are represented in urban redevelopment as co-agents of processes. Further, I discuss the implications of the findings for the notion of role allocation (van Leeuwen 1996) and argue that the binary distinction of activation vs. passivation that is frequently used within CDA to describe how social actors are represented may be reconceptualized to include what is in-between: cases of facilitation where two actors are represented as interdependent in the realization of a particular process.

The paper is structured as follows. The next section provides an overview of the literature on partnerships, both from a social scientific and explicitly discourse-analytic perspective, paying particular attention to how partnerships relate to urban redevelopment. Given the paper’s objective to link the findings to the category of role allocation, one section is devoted to reviewing research on that topic. The analysis consists of two main parts, each centering on a recurrent lexico-grammatical frame (colligation) involving the word residents and each presented as evidence for the new conceptual category of facilitated agency. Throughout, critical interpretations for corpus findings are offered in line with the paper’s general CDA-orientation. The discussion integrates the various arguments by situating the findings within the broader study of partnerships and reiterates the benefits of a combined CL-CDA approach.

# 2.  Partnerships and governance

The notion of partnership is closely tied to governance, a term that captures changes in the nature and structure of political decision-making that have taken place in a number of post-industrial countries. According to Jessop (2003), governance emerged as an alternative to state-hierarchical and purely market modes of coordinating action across a range of social spheres. What characterizes governance (as opposed to government) is that individuals representing a wide range of interests (business, community, NGOs, public agencies) form a strategic coalition to shape the fate of a community (Skelcher 2003). Governance emerged partly as an attempt to deal with demands created by globalization, devolution of state responsibilities and increasing societal complexity and has become the preferred mode of coordinated political decision-making in many post-industrial societies (DiGaetano and Strom 2003; Jessop 2003).

Partnerships, the most common type of governance arrangement, have undoubtedly become the primary governing mode within US urban politics, involving representatives from government, business and community who join together to create policies to address challenges facing the city (DiGaetano and Strom 2003). The role of partnerships in US urban politics has changed since their initial appearance in post-war restructuring (Levine 1989) and contemporary urban politics is characterized by diverse forms of partnerships that have differential effects on how cities change (Jonas and Wilson 1999; McCann 2001).

Governance is not about the complete eradication of state control but rather a change in the role of government (Martin et al. 2003). Further, while the notion of partnerships clearly originated in the US (DiGaetano and Strom 2003), its transplantation into other cultural, social and political contexts has resulted in quite different manifestations of the same neoliberal idea. Comparative analyses have shown that in the UK, for instance, the state’s role in partnerships is much more pronounced than in the US (DiGaetano and Strom 2003). Partnerships in the UK are mandated by the state and the state’s participation is often seen as a tool for the diffusion and augmentation of its power (Davies 2003).

Partnerships and the concept of governance have not escaped scholarly critique. While direct democracy and voluntary participation are often associated with governance, Maloutas and Malouta (2004) argue that their existence is merely a part of a larger “neoliberal narrative” since in reality groups and individuals with more resources and better organization assert their interest over others. Further, the relative openness and flexibility of partnership governance may turn it into a “quasi market process with meritocratic rules [running the risk of] reducing democratic participation to middle-class self-serving ‘civic engagement’ ” (Maloutas and Malouta 2004: 457). Smith et al. (2006) also identify “democratic deficit” as a key characteristic of $5 0 \mathrm { U K }$ partnerships they analyze, as community members in their sample were generally not involved in decision making on key policy choices and resource allocation. Fairclough (2000) explicitly discusses partnerships as central to the language of New Labour, while arguing that an international language of governance seems to be spreading. More recently (Fairclough 2005, 2007), he has discussed “partnership governance” primarily as a technology in the service of restructuring and rescaling relations within the European Union, calling for critical analyses that unearth the role of discourse in this restructuring process.

Studies that have queried the intersection of discourse, partnerships and community redevelopment have all taken up the issue of power relations within partnerships. Collins (1999) investigated a Scottish initiative, viewing partnership primarily as a Bakhtinian speech genre that is based upon collaboration and consensus. When community participants challenged this basic premise by shifting to conflict and confrontation to assert their interests, their partner status was basically eliminated. Both Atkinson (1999) and Hastings (1999) analyze case studies of partnerships with a look at how a dominant discourse emerged that provided legitimization for conducting partnerships in a certain way. Atkinson (1999) draws attention to how participation in certain speech events, such as training seminars, brought about the inculcation of community partners into such dominant discourse that stressed economic necessities over social issues, while Hastings’ (1999) analysis illustrates how participants may adopt more powerful, institutional discourses through exposure to them during partnerships. While the arguments of this paper are related to these studies, my specific interest in representation as it relates to partnerships requires a further review of discourse-oriented research in this area.

# 3.  Representing social actors in text

CDA scholars have long been concerned with examining the representational dimension of language, assuming that since our linguistic repertoires offer many ways of talking about the world, instances of language use always involve certain selections and thus are always produced from a particular perspective. People constitute an important aspect of social events and a number of CDA studies have investigated how social actors are represented in various discursive domains. An almost mandatory reference for these articles is van Leeuwen’s (1996) elaborate framework for representing social actors in discourse. The appeal of his “sociosemantic inventory” lies in its focus on sociological, rather than linguistic, agency as a starting point for describing a network of representational choices, each choice with corresponding linguistic-rhetorical resources through which it can be realized. Role allocation, or the question of “who is represented as ‘agent’ (‘Actor’), who as ‘patient’ (‘Goal’) with respect to a given action” (Van Leeuwen 1996: 43) is part of this complex system. Van Leeuwen identifies two basic mechanisms for role allocation: activation and passivation. Social actors, he argues, can be represented as “the active, dynamic forces in an activity” (i.e. are activated) or “as ’undergoing’ the activity, or as being ‘at the receiving end of it’ ” (i.e. are passivated; p. 44). The category of passivation is further differentiated since social actors may be either subjected or beneficialized, depending on whether they are treated as objects of some action or perhaps as benefiting from that action.

Transitivity is the primary means through which role allocation can be realized linguistically (Van Leeuwen 1996) and some studies have made explicit use of this term. Galasinski and Marley (1998) compared a large corpus of British and Polish newspapers with regard to how geopolitical groups were represented and identified clear differences in who appeared in the role of agent in articles covering European Union, Central and Eastern European and Third World countries. Jeffries’ (2003) study also utilizes transitivity in analyzing the participant roles that water occupied in news reports of a water crisis. She argues that contrary to general use, water in this discourse was represented as a passive substance, which contributed to its commodification during the shortage. Transitivity has been central to a particularly interesting set of studies that has looked at the tendency to suppress human agency in texts discussing environmental degradation (Schleppegrell 1997; Stubbs and Gerbig 1993). Primarily through nominalized subjects, passives, and a high frequency of ergative verbs with non-human agents (e.g., factories have closed ), these texts create “a world where human beings are largely absent as responsible agents, where processes take place spontaneously or as caused by other abstract processes” (Stubbs and Gerbig 1993: 75).

Critical analyses that draw on corpus data have also chosen to explore how social actors are represented. Pearce’s (2008) study of the lexico-grammatical patterning of man and woman in the British National Corpus found stereotypical gender representations concerning physical strength, psychological traits and sexuality. A study that directly discusses role allocation is Mautner’s (2007) analysis of the collocational profile of elderly in the 57 million-word Wordbanks Online. The discourse prosody (i.e. evaluative meaning) of dependence and passivity that characterized elderly was evident, among others, in its very low occurrence rate as Actor in material processes. Piper (2000) also addresses the issue of role allocation in her analysis of individuals in a corpus of British and European Commission texts on lifelong learning. Her point of departure is the foregrounding of the individual as responsible agent in “The Third Way” of contemporary British politics. With regard to role allocation, Piper shows that individuals frequently appear as beneficiaries or receivers of actions initiated by institutions. Although individuals appear as secondary actors in these representations, they are simply enacting institutional agendas rather than pursuing their own. This kind of representation, argues Piper, contributes to the “institutionalization of individuals” in the context of the learning society.

My analysis builds upon these previous studies by emphasizing the usefulness of transitivity as an analytic framework for looking at role allocation. As an addition, I stress that exploring both the transitive and ergative interpretations within the system of transitivity allows the researcher to highlight different aspects of the data and produce a fuller analysis of representation. Examining the recurrent lexico-grammatical pattern residents to constitutes one section of the analysis. Similar to Piper (2000), I comment on the frequent occurrence of residents in conjunctive phrases with other collectives. The overall argument of the paper is that the patterns identified by the corpus analysis constitute two different but interlinked ways in which partnerships may be lexicosyntactically represented — in the context of neighborhood redevelopment and possibly in other social domains.

# 4.  Data and methods

# 4.1. The larger project

The corpus used in the analysis consists of over one million words and was compiled by me as a special corpus for a larger research project on US redevelopment discourse. I studied three historically low-income neighborhoods in a mid-size city in the southeastern United States (Chattanooga) that were participating in a redevelopment initiative, led and partially funded by a local non-profit organization. The initiative employed a community-based approach where residents were encouraged to play a very active role in the “social and physical renewal” of their neighborhoods. Primary data were gathered during three field visits in 2005 by conducting interviews and focus group discussions (22 in total) with residents and representatives of the various government, forprofit and civic organizations involved in the redevelopment. Together with a research colleague, we were also taken on a walking tour of each neighborhood where guides pointed out the changes that had been taking place. Interviews and walking tours were audio recorded and subsequently transcribed. Parallel to eliciting primary data, I was compiling a corpus relevant to the topic of redevelopment (see details below).

The research project had a double focus: qualitative discourse analysis of the interview and walking tour data, and quantitative analysis of the corpus, though the two informed each other throughout the analysis. Overall, I was interested in what kind of resident persona the funding organization was trying to nurture among residents and how it was discursively constructed. Results from the qualitative analysis have been published elsewhere (Weninger 2009). The corpus analysis was guided by the following questions:

1. What are the keywords that distinguish this corpus from a general corpus of American English?   
2. What kind of lexico-grammatical patterns characterize target words that were selected based on the keyword list and the interview analyses?

In addition, the study had the explicit objective to relate results of the qualitative and quantitative analyses.

# 4.2. The corpus

The corpus is comprised of two different sub-corpora that were compiled in parallel, using similar procedures. While both cover the general topic of urban redevelopment, one is based on local sources while the other is made up of texts with regional and national coverage. Prior to compilation, I designed a preliminary plan that guided the search and selection of texts for each subcorpus. A key objective was to make the two sub-corpora comparable, with regard to size, the proportion of spoken vs. written discourse and the variety of text types. As Meyer (2002) points out, the resources one has available for creating a corpus will greatly impact aspects of design such as size. Since I had to restrict myself mostly to publicly available (i.e. free) documents, I set the target size for each corpus at 500,000 words. Given the difficulty in acquiring transcripts of spoken discourse, particularly given the specificity of the topic, I planned to have each corpus comprise of $80 \%$ written and $20 \%$ spoken language. Table 1 gives an overview of the actual size and generic make-up of the two sub-corpora.

Newspaper articles, which make up about $50 \%$ of the entire corpus, were selected using online archives and databases. The spoken section includes 25 transcripts from interviews/walking tours as well as transcripts of National Public Radio programs covering the topic of urban redevelopment. Publications by local and national organizations include documents that relate to some aspect of urban redevelopment, such as a description of the US Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Community Development Block Grant Program, or a Fannie $\mathrm { M a e } ^ { 2 }$ newsletter on inclusive housing. My method for finding texts for this category involved checking websites of organizations that deal with urban issues and searching through their online publications. All publications in this category are intended for urban planners, municipal agencies or community groups. Finally, the miscellaneous category is admittedly a rather ad-hoc collection of academic writings on aspects of urban redevelopment, such as parts of a book on community-based development, two articles on urban revitalization, and newsletters from one of the local neighborhoods. The majority of texts in the corpus dates from 2004–2006, although roughly 10 percent either had no identifiable date or dated from 2001–2003.

Table 1. Numeric and generic make-up of the corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Source</td><td>Number of words</td></tr><tr><td>Local sub-corpus</td><td>Local newspapers</td><td>255,711 (49.7%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Publications by local organizations</td><td>54,284 (10.6%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Interview transcripts</td><td>172,990 (33.7%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Miscellaneous</td><td>31,151 (6%)</td></tr><tr><td>Local sub-total</td><td></td><td>514,136 (100%)</td></tr><tr><td>National sub-corpus</td><td>National and regional newspapers</td><td>252,386 (50.2%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Publications by national organizations</td><td>100,947 (20%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>NPR transcripts</td><td>100,775 (19.9%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Miscellaneous</td><td>50,129 (9.9%)</td></tr><tr><td>National sub-total</td><td></td><td>502,590 (100%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>1,016,726</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.3.	 Analytic tools and procedures

I used a commercially available computer software program, WordSmith Tools Version 4.0 (WST) to analyze the corpus.3 Keywords are often the first analytic step to investigate a corpus as they can provide a point of orientation for further inquiry (Baker 2004). The Keyword function in WST enables the analyst to compare two corpora based on the wordlist created for each corpus. Specifically, the Keyword function tells the researcher which words in a corpus occur significantly more or less frequently than in some reference corpus. Since I created the corpus from scratch, the keyword analysis also enabled me to verify its “aboutness”. I compared the wordlist of the redevelopment corpus to the wordlist of FROWN, a general corpus of one million words of written American English published in 1991.4 The time gap of fourteen years between the two corpora, and the lack of spoken data in FROWN, offered a less than ideal comparison. However, I had no access to a wordlist from an American English corpus from the same timeframe. Table 2 lists the words that occur statistically more frequently (and thus are “key”) in the redevelopment corpus than in general American English. The broad semantic fields covered by these words correspond to those one might expect in connection with urban revitalization, confirming the topical focus of the corpus.

Table 2. Keywords of redevelopment corpus compared to FROWN   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="6">Keyword list compared to FROwN (Total number of occurrences in redevelopment corpus given in parentheses)</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>community (3,853)</td><td>11</td><td>Green (113)</td><td>21</td><td>homes (879)</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>neighborhood (3,179)</td><td>12</td><td> building (1,825)</td><td>22</td><td>project (1,325)</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>city (4,579)</td><td>13</td><td> people (3,300)</td><td>23</td><td>neighborhoods (1,296)</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Chattanooga (2,424)</td><td>14</td><td>area (1,871)</td><td>24</td><td>officials (1,042)</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>downtown (3,248)</td><td>15</td><td>mayor (1,015)</td><td>25</td><td>local (1,207)</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>said (8,494)</td><td>16</td><td>revitalization (808)</td><td>26</td><td> Tennessee (521)</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>housing (2,354)</td><td>17</td><td>property (1,226)</td><td>27</td><td>Hamilton (513)</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>Mr (2,735)</td><td>18</td><td>county (1,234)</td><td>28</td><td>know (1,923)</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>development (2,540)</td><td>19</td><td>street (1,707)</td><td>29</td><td>think (1,635)</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>residents (1,755)</td><td>20</td><td>urban (1,262)</td><td>30</td><td>new (3,070)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Next, I selected residents from the keyword list, prompted by the urban literature suggesting that residents are often less powerful than their “partners” in partnerships. Using the Concord function of WST, I generated a concordance list of all the occurrences of the word residents and examined the list of its most frequent collocates; that is the words occurring most frequently to the left and right of residents within a span of five words on each side. Given the small size of the corpus, seeing only function words among the top 20 collocates (except for community and neighborhood ) was no surprise. This article focuses on the first and second most frequent collocates to the immediate right of residents, and and to, as they revealed particularly interesting patterns that I argue converge in creating representations of social actors as co-agents. I start by examining a colligation, a recurrent patterning of lexis and grammar involving residents to, and continue with a similar analysis of residents and. In addition, I also analyze officials and the city (both keywords) as representing institutional actors that participate in lexico-grammatical patterns with to and and. In keeping with my claim about representing residents as “partnering” with other social actors in redevelopment discourse, I argue that the patterns analyzed in this paper are crucial in drawing our attention to the lexical-grammatical realization of partnerships as a pervasive form of social behavior.

# 5.  Representation of social actors in redevelopment discourse

# 5.1.	 Colligation with residents to, officials to, the city to

From the 1,755 occurrences of residents in the corpus, there were 102 instances where the word was followed by to. Looking at the concordance lines that show the keyword in context reveals that in some cases, to acts as a preposition, resulting in phrases/clauses such as the same things that draw residents to the area. However, 68 of the total occurrences of residents with to as its immediate right collocate involves a grammatical frame where to acts as an infinitival particle. A schematic representation of this structure is given in Table 3.

Table 3. Lexico-grammatical frame with residents to   

<html><body><table><tr><td>SUBJECT</td><td>VERB1</td><td>OBJECT</td><td>TO</td><td>VERB</td></tr><tr><td>She and her committee</td><td>got</td><td>residents</td><td>to</td><td>sign petitions</td></tr><tr><td>Criminal justice officials</td><td>cooperate</td><td>with residents</td><td>to</td><td>weed out criminal activity</td></tr></table></body></html>

In terms of sentence structure, residents occupies the position of direct or prepositional object of a preceding verb $\mathrm { ( V E R B _ { 1 } ) }$ . It is followed by an infinitival particle that introduces a second verbal element $\mathrm { ( V E R B } _ { 2 }$ ). Sinclair (1991; 1996) calls such patterns colligations — the co-occurrence of lexical items with certain grammatical choices. There are numerous variants of this lexicogrammatical frame; for instance, the first verbal element $\mathrm { ( V E R R _ { 1 } }$ ) may be realized by a participle (e.g., this is achieved by enabling impoverished neighborhood residents to express their right to the city) or the object may be more complex (e.g., Officers establish an ongoing dialog with community residents to solve problems). The majority of verbs in $\mathrm { V E R B } _ { 1 }$ position expresses notions of ­facilitation and includes:

encourage, mobilize, convince, engage, work with, cooperate with, meet with, equip, help, counsel, get, empower, assist, spur, call upon, enable, enlist, need, invite, allow residents

Verbs in the $\mathrm { V E R B } _ { 2 }$ position, on the other hand, are either material or verbal processes that relate to forms of participation in the development process:

residents to voice their opinions, to voice their concerns, to take control of their property, to save their money, to sign petitions, to provide input and feedback, to participate at different levels, to participate in community-building, to participate in problemsolving, to weed out criminal activity, to manage day-to-day issues, to identify strategic priorities, to have a voice in decision-making, to effect and sustain positive changes, to develop and implement strategies, to develop plans for their neighborhoods, to build capacity, to actively participate in the transformation, to become more involved

The subject of the finite verb is generally some institution or organization, its representatives or particular programs that are operating under some institution:

law enforcement agencies and criminal justice officials, officers, neighborhood conservation overlay zone, National Institute of Health Sciences, Community Impact, community mobilization, neighborhood restoration, Redevelopment Agency, neighborhood job coaches, Kinsey Probasco Hays and BlueCross, Hospital of Saint Rafael officials, local elected officials, resident leaders

It is worth pointing out that among the above are also several non-governmental groups (Community Impact, Kinsey Probasco Hays, BlueCross) and also some resident actors (resident leaders, neighborhood job coaches).

If we view the above lexico-grammatical frame through a transitive interpretative lens, we may argue that the social actor represented by the subject is the Initiator (or Facilitator) of the process while residents, though occupying the object position, is Actor. According to Halliday (2004), there is a host of English verbs that form such initiating structures, such as “ripen” in the sun ripened the fruit where there is a need to differentiate between an external Initiator (the sun) and the Actor (the fruit) that undergoes the process. In the corpus structure discussed above there are two different processes with their own participant roles, where Process 1 is represented as causing (or initiating) Process 2, as depicted in Table 4.

Table 4. Transitive interpretation of frame with residents to   

<html><body><table><tr><td>PROCESS 1 INITIATOR + Verb1E</td><td>PROCESS 2 AcTOR + Verb2</td></tr><tr><td>LOCAL MUNICIPALITIES, LAND TRUSTS AND ACTIVISTS encouraged</td><td>RESIDENTS to plant more trees.</td></tr></table></body></html>

This interpretation supports Piper’s (2000) findings regarding the institutionalization of individuals, or in this case, of residents: the events represented entail some action by an institutional initiator that causes residents to engage in some other action. Within the domain of contemporary US neighborhood redevel opment, residents are often supposed to assume an active and engaged role (Lepofsky and Fraser 2003; Weninger 2009). In places where such initiatives follow a market-oriented model (as opposed to a grassroots approach), such engagement is often facilitated and given direction (and frequently funds) by some organizational or institutional group; in other words, the initiative operates as a partnership. It is precisely the nature of such community-institutional relationships that is revealed by the transitivity analysis of the pattern I just described.

However, it is also possible to view the same data from an ergative point of view, which focuses on what is similar across process types. Following Halliday (2004: 280–305), the key difference between a transitive and an ergative reading of the above lexico-grammatical frame concerns whether the two verbs $\mathrm { ( V E R B _ { 1 } }$ and $\mathrm { V E R B } _ { 2 }$ ) will form two separate processes or one.

Table 5. Residents as Actor and Agent   

<html><body><table><tr><td>TRANSITIVE</td><td>Initiator</td><td>Process</td><td>Actor</td><td>Process</td><td>Goal</td></tr><tr><td>CORPUS EXAMPLE</td><td>She and her committee</td><td>got</td><td>residents</td><td>to sign</td><td>petitions</td></tr><tr><td>ERGATIVE</td><td>Agent2</td><td>Pro-</td><td>Agent1</td><td>-cess</td><td>Medium</td></tr></table></body></html>

As illustrated in Table 5 (adapted from Halliday 2004: 300), in the ergative interpretation we have one single process that has a primary and a secondary agent. Such co-agency emphasizes that both she and her committee and residents acted as external agents necessary for the process to have been realized through the medium (i.e. for the petitions to be signed). Here, instead of adding a different participant and a feature of cause as in the transitive model, we simply have an added feature of agency — hence we have Agent1 and Agent2. Among the 68 concordance lines that are a variation of this lexico-grammatical pattern, we find 16 that license a different ergative interpretation, as Table 6 suggests:

Table 6. Residents as Actor and Medium   

<html><body><table><tr><td>TRANSITIVE</td><td>Initiator</td><td>Process</td><td>Actor</td><td>Process</td></tr><tr><td>CORPUS EXAMPLE</td><td>They</td><td>got</td><td>the residents</td><td>to participate</td></tr><tr><td>ERGATIVE</td><td>Agent</td><td>Pro-</td><td>Medium</td><td>-cess</td></tr></table></body></html>

The residents here functions as Medium rather than $\mathrm { A g e n t } _ { 2 }$ since it is this element “through which the process is actualized” (Halliday 2004: 284), though Halliday does not discuss any examples that correspond to this particular structure. However, the two verbal elements are still represented ergatively as one process, with both Agent and Medium as obligatory roles, though perhaps facilitation here is more foregrounded than in the example in Table 5. Additionally, several of these structures could have been realized through a nominalization, such as they got resident participation or they got resident feedback. That they were not, however, further underscores the finding that facilitated agency or co-agency as a key tenet of partnerships is manifest in the lexicogrammar of the corpus.

Linking the transitive and ergative interpretations enables us to unpack the complex representational significance of the pattern depicted in Table 3. As pointed out above, the transitive model gives us insight into the different participant roles of social actors who are involved in neighborhood redevelopment and suggests power differentials that may obtain among them. Institutions who provide a framework and often funds act as initiators of processes of which residents are acting participants. The ergative reading, on the other hand, highlights that there is a relationship in the first place; i.e. that these various groups of social actors are represented as engaged in a complex process as co-agents. While transitivity enables us to make claims about the institutionalization of residents, ergativity licenses arguments for the discursive representation of partnerships in these structures.

A closer look at the lexis of the infinitival clause following residents to raises further points for a critical discussion of partnerships. Phrases such as identify strategic priorities, effect and sustain positive changes, build capacity, or develop and implement strategies are part of a neo-bureaucratic (as opposed to state-bureaucratic) apparatus that aims to extend its growth-oriented logic to civil society. The focus on strategies, positive changes and capacity-building is also part of the “progress narrative” of neoliberal discourse (Fairclough 2000). Residents in redevelopment partnerships are often expected to adopt such language use (e.g., Hastings 1999), which further tips the balance of power away from them. More generally, “engendering” residents to engage in these activities points to the central role of civic participation in neoliberal regimes (Jessop 2002).

In order to provide evidence that the collaborative, partnering element is not exclusive to residents but is part of a more general pattern of representation in redevelopment discourse, I want to focus on two further groups of social actors in the corpus: officials and the city. 7 As indicated in Table 1, both are keywords and it turns out they both appear in structures similar to the one in Table 3 where they occupy the OBJECT position. Out of 33 concordance lines where officials is followed by to, 30 represent structures illustrated by the following two examples:

(1) the state is working with local officials to attack the problem of blight (2) Iorio8 directed city officials to explore rules

The verbs that come before officials (i.e. occupy $\mathrm { V E R B } _ { 1 }$ position) are similar to those that occur before residents in the parallel structure, although there is perhaps less engendering (enable, empower, enlist) compared with the same list for residents:

help, expect, want, sent, elected, work with, directed, urged, need, asking, negotiating with, contacting, approach, petition Officials

The SUBJECT position is filled by a diverse array of institutions and their representatives, including law enforcement, politicians, the mayor, non-profit organizations, developers but also two examples where the subject is resident groups. The verbs following the infinitival particle $\left( \mathrm { V E R B } _ { 2 } \right)$ also represent processes that are characteristic of city and neighborhood redevelopment (e.g., to toughen code enforcement, to jump-start talks, to engage other governments, to discuss plans, to bring improvements to the districts). The point here is that it is not exclusively residents who are represented as being on the receiving end of directives and merely enacting institutional agendas. It is also officials, who are typically employees of a government agency, that are being asked, helped, contacted, petitioned, etc. to do certain things for other groups of social actors. As these representations suggest, a diverse array of social actors engage in coordinated action that facilitates further action in order to bring about urban redevelopment.

Let me provide a quick concordance analysis of a third social actor, the city. This particular article+noun construction occurs 2,068 times in the corpus, and is followed by to 61 times. When we examine the concordance lines, we find 57 cases with a lexico-grammatical structure that is nearly identical to those discussed so far. As in the previous examples, a diverse group of social agents may occupy the SUBJECT position, followed by verbs in $\mathrm { { V E R B } _ { 1 } }$ that include:

work with, use, arguing, cajoling, persuading, partnered with, call for, asking, wants, needs, requires, keep pushing, has prompted, pushed for, called on, allow the city

While this list of verbs resembles those associated with residents and officials, a number of the verbs seem to connote an almost demanding tone (e.g. call for, wants, needs, requires, keep pushing, pushed for). If we examine the processes that are represented by the second verb in the frame $\mathrm { ( V E R B } _ { 2 } )$ , many of them have to do with executive actions only a city (as a municipal-political entity) is authorized to carry out:

to shut down some downtown SROs, to seize certain properties, to rezone the area, to renew a large commercial strip, to pass an ordinance, to just go out and buy up the land, to install retail, to have utilities, to find a new hotel location, to build a mid-size municipal building, to annex land, to acquire the property, to focus on neighborhood redevelopment, to develop CanalSide, to close part of Gateway Avenue

In ergative terms, the city appears most often (in 50 out of 57 concordance lines) as co-agent of the process represented in the clause, rather than medium. The processes that follow the city to are overwhelmingly material, highlighting the city’s power to act materially and portraying it as an entity whose collaborative participation is absolutely vital in order to bring about certain infrastructural (e.g., to have utilities) or legislative (e.g., to pass an ordinance) changes. Rather than being the authoritative and sole decision-making body of a locality, however, the city is constructed as a social actor who together with various others (represented by the SUBJECT) participates in realizing a process. Note that in some cases, this “together with” aspect of the representational effect of the frame is further reinforced by the semantics of VERB1: work with, partner with, cooperate with, meet with, negotiate with. Examples of this can be found in the concordance lines for all three lexical items.

In sum, the data presented in this section support two related arguments about how social actors are represented in urban redevelopment discourse.

Residents, officials and the city comprise key groups within this social domain, not only according to the keyword list but also based on extant literature and ethnographic insight gained during the research project. Following an ergative transitive interpretation of a recurrent lexico-grammatical pattern in the corpus, they along with various other social groups are represented as engaged in processes that entail coordination and collaboration of action. Exactly what these activities are varies depending on what group acts as $\mathrm { A G E N T _ { 1 \cdot } }$ ; so as part of a network of such collaborative engagement, residents voice their concerns and participate in problem-solving, officials start the planning process and jump-start talks, and the city rezones the area and buys up land. If we look at the pattern and participant roles through a transitive lens, we see that there is some consistency regarding who is represented as Initiator versus Actor, since the SUBJECT (Initiator) position tends to be occupied by institutional groups and much less frequently by residents or resident groups (only in 11 cases out of the 155 combined occurrences of residents, officials and the city $+ \ t c$ o). As a whole, however, the pattern offers a representation of these different social groups as working together to make urban redevelopment happen.

# 5.2.	 Colligations involving residents $^ +$ and

In this section I examine concordance lines of residents with and as either an immediate left or an immediate right collocate, preceded or followed by a noun phrase. As mentioned earlier, and appears as the second most frequent collocate of residents. Here I focus on three coordinating grammatical patterns, with numbers of occurrence in parentheses:

residents and NOUN (111) NOUN and residents (44) NOUN, residents, (and) NOUN (152)

The third option was included to capture concordance lines where residents appears within a longer list. It is not simply the frequency of the occurrence that merits attention but rather the groups with whom residents are in this way brought together. My overall argument is that conjunctive patterns like these add further evidence to the salience of partnership as a representational category in redevelopment discourse.

Looking at the three patterns combined, the noun phrases that occur in these colligations with residents represent a broad spectrum of social actors and collectives. The majority fall into the following categories:

business / economic $( 3 5 \% )$ : e.g., business, business owners, financial in stitutions, developers, retail tenants, customers, clients, merchants, employers;

political/government $( 2 4 \% )$ : e.g., the city, city planners, elected officials, government agencies, law enforcement officials;   
community $( 2 2 \% )$ : e.g., civic leaders, community leaders, community organizations, church groups, ministers;   
leisure $( 5 \% )$ : e.g., tourists, visitors, shoppers.

There is a category that comprises about $1 3 \%$ of the nouns conjoined with residents and includes some referentially underspecified groups such as stakeholders, other stakeholders, interested citizens/parties, or strategic partners. What is remarkable about the pattern with and is that it brings together groups of social actors who traditionally occupy very different domains of life. Added to this, in about $60 \%$ of the examples, social actors are represented as engaged in some collaborative action. Grammatically, this can happen in different ways but most examples involve some explicit lexis that makes it obvious that these social collectives are “joining forces”:

(3) the task force — composed of area business owners, residents, community leaders and local politicians   
(4) city planners have been working with landowners, residents, community leaders and \$200,000 consultants   
(5) we coordinate resources, residents and partners   
(6) through collaboration with residents, businesses, government agencies, and others   
(7) involving residents and other community stakeholders   
(8) contract with neighborhood residents and organization staff   
(9) formed committees of core residents and officials to shape   
(10) during the workshops, residents and local officials pondered such questions   
(11) strengthen lines of communication between residents and law enforcement officers   
(12) neighborhood leaders, residents and elected officials who met at Friday’s luncheon   
(13) 100 community meetings involving township officials, residents   
(14) daily interactions between residents, CIF staff, the CIF board, and community development experts   
(15) partner with residents, business people, government officials and others

The corpus is rich with similar structures where the partnering aspect is made explicit through lexis, either within a noun phrase (a coalition of ) or a verb phrase ( partner with) or both (the task force — composed of ).

There are two key observations to be made in view of the conjunctive patterns and the clauses in which they appear. First, residents are represented as being linked to a network of social actors, ranging from government to the business sector, with whom they are engaged in a variety of activities connected to redevelopment. As Fairclough (2000) points out, it is precisely these newly forged connections (partnerships) among previously autonomous domains that embody the new mode of governance as an alternative to government. Such representations also contribute to the erosion of boundaries among domains, and between what was previously thought of as public versus private. In fact, neoliberal arguments for partnerships often involve joining the public and private sectors. Second, as seen from the examples in this section, other, new categories of social actors are being introduced that cannot be tied to any one social domain any more: stakeholders and interested parties can be associated with multiple domains or with none in particular as their motivational interests are firmly rooted in their (financial or other) investment (stake) in urban redevelopment.

# 6.  Discussion and implications

The corpus findings described above align with insights gained from previous research into partnerships. First, partnerships at the level of representation are prevalent in contemporary US urban redevelopment discourse. Not only was it possible to capture partnership as a representational category through quantitative corpus analysis, but the investigation also revealed clear patterns of how partnerships may be realized linguistically. I focused on the recurrent lexicogrammatical frame (colligation) residents to that seems to provide an ideal resource for representing “independent actors involved in complex relations of reciprocal interdependence” (Jessop 2003: 142) — a basic tenet of partnerships. The ergative framework afforded an analytic means to formulate this interdependence at the grammatical level, as I argued that the two verbal elements represented one process that was conjointly brought about by both participant roles (Agent1 and Agent2; Agent and Medium). I also noted the preponderance of conjunctive phrases that link a multitude of social actors in representations of joint action. As a second convergent finding, transitivity analysis was able to corroborate arguments about power differentials in partnerships from the vantage point of discursive representation. Community partners in the present data occupied mostly OBJECT (Actor) position, while the SUBJECT (the initiating participant role) was mainly filled by institutional or business representatives.

As suggested by others (e.g., Maloutas and Malouta 2004; Smith et al. 2006), partnerships may fall short on their promise of true participatory democracy where all members share equally in steering the direction of an initiative. The notion of facilitated agency may appear as a move toward an inclusive form of governance where residents are given a voice in shaping the fate of their neighborhood or city. Some scholars (Lepofsky and Fraser 2003; Fairclough 2003) have noted that engagement in processes of deliberation and decision-making over public matters is becoming a defining element of contemporary citizenship. The analysis of conjunctive phrases certainly illustrated that partnerships are capable of pooling an impressively diverse array of actors. However, the direction of change in redevelopment seems to be set by everyone but the residents. Save for a few examples, residents almost never occupied the Initiator role. Although clearly affected by the socio-spatial changes at stake, residents were facilitated, rather than being the facilitators themselves.

As I argued at the beginning of the paper, corpus analysis offers new ways of looking at data that also has implications for CDA’s analytic repertoire. The lexico-grammatical frame that is the focus of the first analytic section provides empirical motivation to revisit a binary pair that — in some form or another — has found application in many CDA studies. Following Van Leeuwen (1996), activation and passivation are often used to describe the representational role given to participants in discourse. I believe that the ergative analysis presented in connection with the colligation warrants an interpretation according to which residents, officials, and the city are neither entirely activated nor passivated in representation. Rather, as I argued above, this particular frame represents a facilitating structure where social actors placed in the OBJECT position (the position followed by to) are best viewed as co-agents of a complex, temporally and spatially incongruous (i.e. multi-step) process. I also illustrated that the social actor or collective appearing as OBJECT can be a true co-agent or the medium of the overall process, though this does not change the fact that both actors are needed in order for the process to be completed. Linguistically, they are all obligatory elements, whereas passivated participants can often simply be omitted.

This proposal for the analytic category of facilitated agency or co-agency is further validated by extra-linguistic evidence on the proliferation of coalitions of interdependent actors that are becoming the dominant model for successful governance. The fact that partnership as a social category can be detected in representation indicates a certain level of discursive diffusion, at least with regard to the social domain of US urban redevelopment. Partnerships is not simply a keyword or a strategy that first needs to be supported by legitimizing narratives (cf. Fairclough 2000). It has been institutionalized, materialized and enacted in daily life, of which the redevelopment corpus is a testimony. The question of how far patterns identified in this analysis appear in other discourses is an empirical one; given Piper’s (2000) findings, I suspect they are neither entirely new, nor unique to redevelopment, nor the only way part nerships may be represented discursively. While facilitated agency purports to address the representation of social actors specifically, there may be other linguistic or rather semiotic resources that can be drawn upon to depict partnerships in discourse and other modes of representation.

Let me emphasize: I am not arguing that facilitated agency appears at the expense of other forms of representation where social actors occupy a decisively active or passive role. Though it was not the focus of my analysis, there are plenty of examples in the corpus where residents, officials and the city appear in either of these participant roles. Rather, facilitated agency could be added as a third dimension or representational possibility alongside passivation and activation. Given the central role of cooperation as opposed to conflict in new capitalism (Fairclough 2000, 2005), finding linguistic representations that depict social agency as a scalar rather than a binary category comes as no surprise. I believe that the notion of facilitated agency offers a way to incorporate this cooperative representational mode into an existing CDA analytic framework.

Some caveats are in order concerning the pervasiveness and dispersion of these colligations in the corpus. The words examined in the paper are all keywords; residents, officials and the city appear significantly (in the statistical sense) more often in the redevelopment corpus than in the reference corpus of American English. However, their colligations with to make up only a small percentage $3 . 8 \%$ for residents, $2 . 8 \%$ for officials and $1 . 8 \%$ for the city) of their total corpus occurrences. In terms of the spread of the identified patterns across the text types that make up the corpus, we find a fairly even dispersion that roughly corresponds to the percentages in Table 1: $52 \%$ of the colligations with to were found in newspapers; $2 5 \%$ in organizational publications; $10 \%$ in spoken texts (NPR and interviews); and $1 1 \%$ in the miscellaneous category. While there is no space here to elaborate on the details of the spread, it is worth mentioning one document that contained $2 5 \%$ of all occurrences for residents to. It is the implementation manual for the Weed and Seed program of the Community Capacity Development Office of the U.S. Department of Justice — essentially a partnership to fight violent crime in neighborhoods with resident cooperation. Representing residents as co-agents in crime-fighting underscores the extent to which civil society, in the name of democratic citizenship, is increasingly called upon to solve its own problems (Jessop 2002).

I would like to return to the question of how corpus linguistic methods can enhance critical analyses of discourse. With regard to the present study, I am almost certain that the patterns described here would have eluded my attention in a purely qualitative investigation of the texts. Apart from the role of chance in deciding to take a look at those top collocate function words (to, and ) that are often overlooked in favor of content words, only by seeing the patterns over and over on the concordance list did I start thinking about possible interpretations. The colligations discussed in the paper also supply further evidence for the fundamental tenet of corpus linguistics about grammar and lexis working together to produce meaning (cf. Sinclair 2004). In my view, there seems to be a preference for CDA analysts working with corpora and corpus methods to focus on collocations and on semantic prosody, as especially the latter highlight attitudinal meaning that is so central to critical inquiries. However, as my analysis of the colligation with residents, officials and the city illustrated, looking at co-selections of words and grammatical choices and examining larger strings of language may be equally worthwhile when trying to uncover recurrent representational patterns. Following Hardt-Mautner’s (1995) advice, it may mean letting that femina ludens in us explore the corpus without a strict set of research questions. The results of such less-guided explorations are likely to be fruitful, as I hope they have been for the present analysis.

# Notes

1.	 The term CDA has come to denote a particular theoretical framework for critical analyses of text and talk, associated with scholars such as N. Fairclough, R. Wodak, T. van Dijk, P. Chilton, and many others. While I orient to this framework, I do not mean to imply that other critical approaches to discourse may not benefit from the inclusion of ideas and techniques of corpus linguistics. Similarly, corpus linguistics is an umbrella term that encompasses many different strands of research, some of which have no interest in critical applications.   
2. Fannie Mae is a US government-sponsored corporation that trades in mortgages.   
3. Default settings of WST were used: span of 5 words to the left and right of node; frequency cut off of 5.   
4. The FROWN (Freiburg-Brown) Corpus of American English can be purchased on a CD-ROM from the following website: http://icame.uib.no/newcd.htm.   
5. Green was part of one of the neighborhoods’ name.   
6. Chattanooga (research site) is in Hamilton County.   
7. Interestingly, mayor, the only other explicitly human referent on the keyword list (apart from the generic people), did not appear in the structure with to.   
8. Pam Iorio, mayor of Tampa, FL.

# References

Atkinson, R. 1999. Discourses of partnership and empowerment in contemporary British urban regeneration. Urban Studies 36(1). 59–72.   
Baker, P. 2004. Querying keywords: questions of difference, frequency and sense in keyword analysis. Journal of English Linguistics 32(4). 346–359.   
Baker, P., C. Gabrielatos, M. Khosravinik, M. Krzyżanowski, T. McEnery & R. Wodak. 2008. A useful methodological synergy? Combining critical discourse analysis and corpus linguistics to examine discourses of refugees and asylum seekers in the UK press. Discourse & Society 19(3). 273–306.   
Collins, C. 1999. Applying Bakhtin in urban studies: the failure of community participation in the Ferguslie Park Partnership. Urban Studies 36(1). 73–90.   
Davies, J. S. 2003. The governance of urban regeneration: a critique of the “governing without government” thesis. Public Administration 80(2). 301–322.   
DiGaetano, A. & E. Strom. 2003. Comparative urban governance: an integrated approach. Urban Affairs Review 38(3). 356–395.   
Fairclough, N. 2000. New Labour, New Language? London & New York: Routledge.   
Fairclough, N. 2003. Analysing discourse: textual analysis for social research. London/New York: Routledge.   
Fairclough, N. 2005. Governance, partnership and participation: cooperation and conflict. Paper presented at the annual conference of the International Association for Dialogue Analysis, Bucharest, Romania. http://www.ling.lancs.ac.uk/profiles/263/ (accessed April 30, 2009).   
Fairclough, N. 2007. The contribution of discourse analysis to research on social change. In N. Fairclough, G. Cortese & P. Ardizzone (eds.), Discourse and Contemporary Social Change, 25–47. Bern: Peter Lang.   
Gabrielatos, C. & P. Baker. 2008. Fleeing, seeking, flooding: a corpus analysis of discursive constructions of refugees and asylum seekers in the UK Press, 1996–2005. Journal of English Linguistics 36(1). 5–38.   
Galasiński, D. & C. Marley. 1998. Agency in foreign news: a linguistic complement of a content analytical study. Journal of Pragmatics 30. 565–587.   
Geddes, M. 2006. Partnerships and the limits to local governance in England: institutionalist analysis and neoliberalism. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 30(1). 76–97.   
Glaser, B. & A. Strauss. 1967. The discovery of grounded theory: strategies for qualitative research. Chicago: Aldine.   
Halliday, M. A. K. 2004. An introduction to functional grammar, 3rd edn. London: Arnold.   
Hardt-Mautner, G. 1995. Only connect: critical discourse analysis and corpus linguistics. www. comp.lancs.ac.uk/computing/research/ucrel/papers/techpaper/vol6.pdf (accessed April 30, 2009).   
Harvey, D. 2005. A brief history of neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Hastings, A. 1999. Analysing power relations in partnerships: is there a role for discourse analysis? Urban Studies 36(1). 91–106.   
Jeffries, L. 2003. Not a drop to drink: emerging meanings in local newspaper reporting of the 1995 water crisis in Yorkshire. Text 23(4). 513–538.   
Jessop, B. 2002. Liberalism, neoliberalism and urban governance: a state-theoretical perspective. Antipode 34. 452–472.   
Jessop, B. 2003. Governance and metagovernance: on reflexivity, requisite variety and requisite irony. In H. Bang (ed.), Governance as social and political communication, 142–172. Man chester: Manchester University Press.   
Jonas, A. E. G. & D. Wilson. 1999. The city as a growth machine: critical reflections two decades later. In Jonas, A. E. G. and D. Wilson (eds.), The urban growth machine: critical perspectives twenty years later, 3–18. Albany: State University of New York Press.   
Lepofsky, J. & J. Fraser. 2003. Building community citizens: claiming the right to place-making in the city. Urban Studies 40(1). 127–142.   
Levine, M. 1989. The politics of partnership: urban redevelopment since 1945. In G. D. Squires (ed.), Unequal partnerships: the political economy of urban redevelopment in postwar America, 12–34. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.   
Maloutas, T. & M. P. Malouta. 2004. The glass menagerie of urban governance and social cohesion: concepts and stakes/concepts at stakes. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 28(2). 449–465.   
Martin, D., E. McCann & M. Purcell. 2003. Space, scale, governance and representation: contemporary geographical perspectives on urban politics and policy. Journal of Urban Affairs 25(2). 113–121.   
Mautner, G. 2007. Mining large corpora for social information: the case of elderly. Language in Society 36. 51–72.   
McCann, E. J. 2001. Collaborative visioning or planning as therapy? The politics of public-private policy-making. Professional Geographer 53. 207–218.   
Meyer, C. F. 2002. English corpus linguistics: an introduction. Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press.   
O’Halloran, K. 2007. Critical discourse analysis and the corpus-informed interpretation of metaphor at the register-level. Applied Linguistics 28(1). 1–24.   
O’Halloran, K. 2009. Inferencing and cultural reproduction: a corpus-based critical discourse analysis. Text & Talk 29(1). 21–51.   
Orpin, D. 2005. Corpus linguistics and critical discourse analysis: examining the ideology of sleaze. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 10(1). 37–61.   
Pearce, M. 2008. Investigating the collocational behavior of MAN and WOMAN in the BNC using Sketch Engine. Corpora 3(1). 1–29.   
Piper, A. 2000. Some have credit cards and others have giro cheques: “individuals” and “people” as lifelong learners in late modernity. Discourse & Society 11(3). 515–542.   
Schleppegrell, M. 1997. Agency in environmental education. Linguistics and Education 9. 49–67.   
Sinclair, J. 1991. Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Sinclair, J. 1996. The search for units of meaning. Textus 9. 75–106.   
Sinclair, J. 2004. Lexical grammar. In J. Sinclair & R. Carter (eds.), Trust the text: language, corpus and discourse, 164–76. London: Routledge.   
Skelcher, C. 2003. Governing communities: parish-pump politics or strategic partnerships? Local Government Studies 29(4). 1–16.   
Smith, M., N. Mathur & C. Skelcher. 2006. Corporate government in a collaborative environment: what happens when government, business and civil society work together? SOURCE 14(3). 159–171.   
Stubbs, M. 1997. Whorf’s children: critical comments on critical discourse analysis (CDA). In A. Ryan & A. Wray (eds.), Evolving models of language, 100–116. Clevedon: British Association of Applied Linguistics / Multilingual Matters.   
Stubbs, M. & A. Gerbig. 1993. Human and inhuman geography: on the computer-assisted analysis of long texts. In M. Hoey (ed.), Data, description, discourse, 64–85. London: HarperCollins.   
Van Leeuwen, T. 1996. The representation of social actors. In C. R. Caldas-Coulthard & M. Coulthard (eds.), Texts and practices: readings in critical discourse analysis, 32–70. London: Routledge.   
Weninger, C. 2009. Urban pioneers in the making: Recontextualization and the emergence of the engaged resident in redeveloping communities. Journal of Sociolinguistics 13(1). 83–105.

Csilla Weninger is Assistant Professor of English Language and Literature at the National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. She is interested in analyzing discourse from a critical, interdisciplinary perspective, combining qualitative and quantitative methods. Her current research examines the discursive dimensions of political economic processes, particularly issues of identity. Address for correspondence: Department of English Language & Literature, National Institute of Education, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616 <csilla.weninger $@$ nie.edu.sg>.