Book review

# Advancing Natural Language Processing in Educational Assessment, Victoria Yaneva, Matthias von Davier. Routledge, New York (2023). 250 pp ISBN: 978-1-032-24452-5 (pbk) ISBN: 978-1-003-27865-8 (ebk)

Natural language processing (NLP) techniques have had a substantial impact on the fields of educational asessment. With the continuous development of artificial intelligence (Al) and data science, NLP technology has brought more surprises and gains to the area of learning, writing and automated asessment (Caratozzolo et al., 2022; Wulff t al., 2023; Ramachandran et al., 2017). The use of NLP techniques not only improves the tasks of exam delivery and data collction, but also has the otential to help language testers analyze rater comments and understand rater behavior (Cai & Yan, 2023). However, a series of issues such as the maturity of technology and how to better apply it to assessment practice are worth exploring in depth It i in this context that this volume, entitled Advancing Natural Language Processin in Educational Asessment, aims to address some of the questions that the field of human assesment grapples with when it comes to the practical use of NLP. This volume is edited by two scholars from the United States, namely Victoria Yaneva and Matthias on Davier. Victoria Yaneva is Senior NLP Scientist at the National Board of Medical Examiners, USA. Matthias von Davier is Monan Professor of Education in the Lynch School of Education and Executive Director of TIMss & PIRLS International Study Center at Boston College, USA.

Structurall, the volume is divided into four parts. In Part I, it begins with a synopsis of some basic concepts from the field of software engineering as they relate to the application of automated scoring in the first chapter, the author discusses some consider. ations that need to be involved when developing automated scoring software (p.4) For example, the interests of these four groups need to be balanced when developing automatic scoring software: NLP scientists and engineers, experts, product managers and other business representatives, and scoring users. Next, this volume elaborates on the need to follow best practices from four aspects (comprehensive testing, version control, reroducibility and code review) and show how they are integral to ensuring the validity and reproducibilit of automated scores. This chapter focuses on the development of software for automated scoring applications. It in. volves the selection and regular update of software, which requires the joint effrt of multiple peronnel. Subsequently, this volume introduces the psychological measurement considerations when using deep learning for automatic scoring in chapter 2. This section explains how Deep Learning (DL) can be applied in the field of automatic scoring (p.18), and then discusses the psychological mea surement challenges (p.21) when using DL for automatic scoring from four aspects: explainability, use of pretrained models, training complexity, and robustnes in live scoring. lthough DL methods are complex and relatively immature compared to classcal methods, it is hoped that in the field of automated scoring,efforts should be made to consider DL methods as worthy of research and use, and widely studied by audiences. Chapter 3 describes the methods currently available for extracting the lexical content and other infor. mation from spoken responses in the context of assessments that are used in selection and qualification, as well as in controlling adaptive instruction and in providing formative guidance for learners. Chapter 4 studies the application of NLP in clinical asesment through case studies.It presents us with the INCITE system (p.63), which is a system aimed at identifying quantifiable concepts described as key elements and is currently applied in the fields of education and medicine.

Part I discusses various aspects related to technology-supported item generation. These include Automated Item Generation (AIG) using traditional and deep learning approaches, the generation of reading passages, and their alignment tostandards and instructional materials. Automatic generation of multiple-choice test items from paragraphs using Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is inroduced in Chapter 5. The purpose of this chapter s to find effective altenatives for constructing multiple choice questions by employing state-of the-art NLP and DL techniques. Finally, future research ideas were pointed out. Future research envisages experiments using high. performance DL models and LASER, and expanding this research to different languages and domains, where problems are postedited to correspond to the content of RC paragraph. The purpose of Chapter 6 is to provide evidence on the use of DNNS to AIG. The next section introduces language models based on the following methods that can be used to generate the probability of the next word or language tag using information about previously observed sequences of words. The following section outlines potential application areas and shows some examples of options for how to use NN-based language models in AIG's medical licensing and other evaluation ares. With a brief inroduction to the computational psychometric framework, Chapter 7takes the Duolingo English Test as an example to explore how these methods support digital-irs testing and assessment. The next step is to introduce a brief introduction to the computational psychometric framework, outlining the techniques used for automatic content generation and automatic scoring, with examples from the actual test..

Part II of this volume focuses on validity and fairness implications when using language technology in assessment. Chapter 8 discusses vality and faness and ther relationship, including validt and faness ssues in teting indviduals with diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds. A noteworthy point in this chapter is that the validity and farnessisues in using AI and NLP in the design and use of automated scoring engines, technology-based simulation, and automated item generation are talked over. Chapter 9 delves into the evaluation of fairnes of automated scoring in educational measurement. This chapter addresses methods to explore one type of unfanss alled diffeentil prediction bias, which occurs when the predite scores geratd from  cific I rater are lower (or higher) than what would be expected for a specified subgroup assessed by the human rater.

Finally, Part IV is a summary and look towards the future. It presents emerging technologiesuch as the automated prediction of item characteristics, stealth literacy asessment, and the use of machine translation (MT) for automated scoring in international samples. Chapter 10 elaborates on the key issues involved in several well-known NLP approaches for representing text (traditional linguistic features, non-contextualized word embeddings, and contextualized embeddings) and demonstrates how these representations can be use to solve practical measurement problems. Then, it provides an empiricalillutration of these approaches by outlining the process of predicting item characteristics for multiple-choice questions (MCQs) acompanied by various relevant findings. Chapter 11 describes and analyzes the feasibility of implementing stealth asssment in a game-based learning context to assess learners literacy skill. It decribes how LP tehnques hae be usd in iteracy assment and then t ilustraes the applications of stealth assesment and iSTART system. Chapter 12 explores the extent to which freeand open-source tols for NLP, ML, and MT could break cost constraints and advance the scope of international measurement and assessment research focusing on written scientific expla nations. Specifically, the chapter 13 examines how Automated Writing Evaluation (p.221) can be used beyond standard automated scoring and feedack, and suggests the implications for real-time student retention analytics firstly. To do this the authors provide a demonstration through the discussion of astudy that examines the role of writing achievement as a retention factor. Based on this writing achievement lens, the larger am is to llstrate how to help allstudents in writing who want to atend collee, and support for their graduation. Teachers may find this section very useful because it elaborates on the specific use of each emerging technology and the effects it bring. Teachers can adopt the corresponding technical measures acording to the actual situation of their students and apply them into teaching practice as much as possible.

From the above explanation, we can see that this volume follows a logical and coherent sequence from introducing concepts, operating procedures, case study, current application status, and directions of futurefforts, which may enable readers to think critically. Meanwhile, the reearch of each part is based on the concet or method proposed in the previous parts, and goes deer layer by layer.

The second characteristic of this volume is the emphasis on discussing the utility of software or technology, but without providing conclusive answers. This can drive readers or researchers interested in NLP to engage in discussions from a certain perspective, delve into problem-solving solutions, and explore ways to improve technology. At the same time, this volume will place great emphasis on innovation. For example, the application of open-source code in automatic scoring is an innovation in technology usage, and the psychological measurement challenge of DL in automatic scoring is an innovation in research (chapter 1). These areall forefront isues in the application of natural language processing in the field of educationalassessment, which make readers fel novel and bring infinite thinking room.

The third characteristic of this volume is the extensive use of empirical research. When explaining the aplication of a natural anguage procesing technology in the field of educational asessment, specific experiments and data are presented to readers, making the merits and demerits of the technology clear, objective, and convincing. For example, the Duolingo English test is used as an example to illustrate the progress of digital-first assessment over traditional assessment (chapter 7).

On the whole, the above three characteristics make this volume stand out among academic writing guides or textbooks. In particular, the volume emphasizes the utility of a certain technology instead of providing conclusive answers, so that readers or re. searchers can judge and evaluate ased on their own cognition and description. In the meantime t aso gives everyone unlimited space to continue researching a certain technology and promoting its progress.

This volume has profound significance for educators. We believe that many cutting-edge technologies and concepts can be bor. rowed into teaching for a future / skilled English teacher. It willbe illustrated in the following examples.

Traditional literacy asessments typicall occur after students have read or written an article, making it almost impossible to provide timely feedback. Unlik traditional assessment methods, implicit asessment (chapter1) provides an inovative approach to asses students literacy abilities during the learning proces. This type of asessment isa user modeling type, where asssments are seamlessly woven into a game based learning environment to inconspicuously evaluate students. Specifically, the asessment of student abilitie occrs during leaning activitie, rater than in summary or checkpoint assessments. In addition, implicit asesment is not presented in the form of "tests', but is based on the behavior and performance of students in the task. Therefore, implicit assesment can dynamically asses students' literacy ability and provide timely feedback throughout the learning process. f this technology can be popularized in Englis teaching, it wil greaty enhance the interest of students in learning and also comply with the current promotion of core literacy.

The application of Automated Writing Evaluation (AwE) in teaching will also make a significant contribution. irstly, it examines the contribution of writing scores to college retention. Meanwhile, this monograph provides an example by discussing a study that examined the role of writing performance as a retention factor. From this perspective of writing achievement, the greater goal is to inspire educators on how to bettr prepare writing for allstudents who want to go to collge and support their graduation. The application of automatic writing assessment in teaching can reduce the workload of teachers, enable them to focus more on dynamically monitoring the learning status of students, communicate with students in a timely manner, and improve learning efficacy. At the same time, knowing the current situation of students can help teachers bettr preparefor future writing classes, provide direction for teachers to work hard, and promote their professional development.

In addition, many other emerging technologies have also been proposed in this volume. If i can be smoothly popularized in the field of education, it wll quickly promote the development of education in the world. Although many technologies sill have imperfections, it is belied that they willbe thoroughly studied and continuously updated and improved. This wl require the effrts of multiple personnel: plicy support, the effrts of technical personnel, the practice of educator, and so on. Overall this book will be useful to education measurement researchers, psychometricians, testing professionals, policymakers, teachers, and normal collge students who subsequently understand the latest technologies and better apply them to practice.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Qiaoyu Min: Writing - review & editing, Conceptualization. jiabao zhong: Writing - original drat, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

# References

Cai 23i- it in writing assessment. Language Testing, 00(0), 1-28. https:/doi.org/10.1177/02655322231210231   
zo  ,   022 l s    i  20 gineering Education Conference (EDUcON) (pp. 1549-1554). IEEE.   
Raachandr , ger,   d,  017). a  f th quat f pr ree sig a si cqe. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 27, 534-581.   
Wulf, , l ,, k ki   ati n h languag tive f sc a- ic trs wn tio.  ne in tin (.7,. 061461) Frontiers.