# "Writing by oneself is too lonely": Understanding Chinese returnee. scholars' English collaborative writing experiences in academic publishing

Fei Wanga, Bin Aib,\*, Alexander Kostogriz c

a Department of English, Anhui Normal University, Wuhu, China b School of Foreign Studies, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China c Faculty of Education, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Handling Editor: Dr Hilary Nesi

Keywords: Chinese academic returnees Academic writing Identity (re)construction Community of practice Collaborative writing

Chinese returnee scholars' trans-spatial integration and identity (re)construction have received considerable attention in recent discussions. However, their collaborative academic writing practices in English have been relatively neglected in research. This paper addresses this gap by examining how a group of Chinese returnees engage in collaborative English writing for publication, aiming not only to navigate the challenges of competitive academia but also to excel within it. The concept of community of practice is used as a lens to analyze these returnees' motivation in seeking collaboration in English writing. The examination encompasses the affordances derived from such collaborative efforts and the subsequent impact on the scholars' (re) constructed identities. The paper explores their perceptions of how collaborative writing has built their professional social capital and strengthened their identity as academics. This study contributes to understanding Chinese returnee scholars international publishing practices and urges universities to reconsider their policy when assessing scholars' collaborative writing and publishing practices.

# 1. Introduction

This study was inspired by the first two authors' collaborative writing experiences as Chinese returnee scholars who became acquainted with each other at an academic conference in 2015 in Shanghai, China. Subsequently, we have actively exchanged thoughts on English teaching, research and daily life in mainland China, culminating in the collaborative publication of several articles. Our conversations have provided valuable support throughout our shared and individual research endeavors. Through collaborative experiences, we have also gained clarity regarding our academic positions within our respective communities. Motivated by our own experiences, we felt compelled to explore the collaborative writing experiences and publishing practices of other returnees in China.

Amid the trend of higher education internationalization, there has been a notable surge in the return of Chinese PhD holders to mainland China's universities i recent years (Ai et l., 2023; Du et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022; Xu & Ou, 2022). These returnees are privileged in terms of their theoretical and methodological knowledge and international social network (Jiang et al., 2020). Yet recent studies have revealed their vulnerabilities in professional development and identity (re)construction when returning back to China.

For instance, isues such as a misalignment of reearch agendas and limited acces to academic resources and local social networking are frequently reported (Ai, 2019; Ai & Wang, 2017; Jiang et al., 2020; iu et al., 2022). As a matter of fact, many of them have few publications in either English or Chinese journals (Miao et l., 2022). As new PhD graduates, they need guidance in conducting independent and mature reearch projects and in particular, in English writing and publishing, yt at home they fin it ifficult toobtain such support due to their returnee status. On the one hand, they find it hard to stay up to date with the atest research in international academic communities; on the other hand, they are not familiar with the concerns of domestic scholars. Hence, this cohort of scholars assumed to be privileged, has, over time, found themselves increasingly marginalized within both international and domestic academic communities, with some experiencing a decline in academic productivity (Miao et al., 2022).

These returnee scholars often grapple with a profound sense of loneliness and rootlessness (Poole & Xu, 2022; Uu & Ou, 2022) as they struggle to integrate into the home academic environment. Extant studies have analyzed sociocultural factors mediating their integration experiences and strategies that they adopted to navigate the new academic landscape, along with theconcurrent proess of (re)constructing their identities (Ai, 2019; Liu et al., 2022). Presure from the current \*publish-or-perish" policy has posed the biggest challenge for these academic returnees (Lu, 2019 Pole & Xu, 2022). It has long been assumed that these returnee scholars are more confident about publishing in English-medium journals because of their longer experience in English academic writing (Lu, 2019), but as mentioned above, many of them are actuall novice ESL research writers who desperately need mentorship in publishing their research. Extant research has examined their publishing preferences (Lu, 2019) and career development chllenges (Liu et al., 2022) and has recognized the importance of publication for their career development in their home country (Jiang et al., 2020; Pole & Xu, 2022; Xu & Poole, 2023), yet ittleattention has been paid to the critical proces of how to get publication mentorship, which is not easy for them, because they lack a local academic social network.

Overall extant studies on Chinese returnee scholars have revealed the hidden' challenges and vulnerabilitie they face during their home integration. But we know lessabout the actual strategies they have adopted to cope with those potential vulnerabilities. Therefore, this articl aims to look into what these returne scholars have gone through during the writing and publishing process per se, with a focus on the collaborative writing strategies these returnees may be adopting to develop their academic profil at home.

In this article, "Chinese academic returnees" denotes scholars professionally educated in higher education systems outside mainland China who subsequently returned to work in Chinese universities. Under the pervasive \*publish-or-perish' policy, these scholars navigate both local university systems and international publishing protocols in their endeavour to maintain a prolfic publication record. Crreny, itl rrch has exploed h writing eriences f thee rtrs. This article as to investigate the role that collaborative writing plays in these scholars' English writing and publishing practices and their professional development. Specifically, this study explores the following questions.

1. What are these returnee scholars' collaborative writing experiences of publication in English language journals?   
2. How have these returnee scholars English collaborative writing experiences affected their identity (re)construction?

# 2. Literature review

# 2.1. Collaboration writing in research practices

The extant literature on academic writing in higher education contains a wealth of research on students' collaborative writing (Chen et al., 2022; Storch, 2019), but much les on academics collaborative writig. This is somewhat surprising, as academic work is inherently collaborative (Jaff et al, 2021). Collaborative writing is a social activity involving individuals working collectively to produce and publish a shared document, commonly manifested through co-authorship (Alonzo & Oo, 2023). Collborative work begins with the conceptualization of a research paper and concludes with tass such as revising, editing, submiting and responding to reviewers' feedback (Berndt, 2011).

Collaborative writing ffers wider benefits than sole authorship (Bucholtz, 2021), and enables the exchange and sharing of research resources among partners such as knowledge, field acces and labor, which they might not have f they work alone. It alo provides a contact zone (Pratt 1991, pp.3-40) akin to a \*third space (Gutierrez etal. 199), fring collaborators a social environment for expressing and developing viewpoints, providing mutual support and sharing concerns. In this space, disciplinary and geographic borders can disappear if parties are working together to achieve a common goal. Hence, collaborative writing can offer strong emotional support, which holds particular significance for early-career academics dealing with journal rejections (Soler, 2019)

Collaborative writing has a notable efect on academic productivity (Alonzo & Oo, 2023; Dua et al., 2023), enhancing citation impact and social media visbilit crucial for researchers academic profile building. In today's performance-oriented higher education cultures, the discourse on academic witing predominantly revolves around it output rather than the production process(Kempenaar & Murray, 2016). The challenges and strategies of early-career returnee researchers who lack experience in navigating through the unknown areas in English writing practices have been underexplored.

# 2.2. Chinese returnee scholars' research writing experiences

While al newly graduated PhDs, or any beginning researchers who decide to embark on an academic caree, face academic writing and publishing pressure as they progres in it, Chinese retunee scholars have their distinctive nes and challnges Liu et al., 2022; Xu & Poole, 2023). Their behind-the-scenes struggle and chllenge as they adust to their homeland have gradually become known to the public (i, 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Liu e al., 2022; Pooe & Xu, 2022; Xu & Ou, 2022). The change ofacademic milieu may make their research writing and publication situation more precarious and challenging (Miao et al., 2022; Poole & Xu, 2022). Just like other newly graduated PhDs, these returnees' experiences of research are usuall limited, and they also find publishing stressul (Lu, 2019). Unlike their domestic-trained pers, who have some experience in publishing, many of these scholars have few academic publications in international and domestic communities (Miao et a., 2022). As beginers, they need expert guidance n reearch and publishing, but they do not know where to seek help in an unfamiliar environment. Their research paradigms, acquired overseas, are sometimes not valued at home. For example, there i an undeniable bias in the Chinese academic circle (and more widely in international academia) against qualitative research (Yu & Ai, 2022; Yuan et al., 2022). Another challenge is lck of social capital as researchers, such as an established social network in the local academic community, field aces, research collaborators, and lack of knowledge of local ac ademic and publication cultures (Liu et al., 2022; Xu & Ou, 2022). These are their distinctive disadvantages compared with their domestic-trained counterparts.

There is a prevalent misunderstanding in Chinese academia that returnees from Anglophone universties are all experienced in international journal publishing (Jiang et al., 2020). In fact, for non-native English scholars, the processof publishing in international journals, ften those indexed in ssCI or A&HCI, is laden with emotional and psychological stress(Kuteea & McGrath, 2014; Yang et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2022). Earning a PhD in an Anglophone country and having better English language proficiency do not mean that it iseasy for the returnee scholars to publish in English-medium journals. As novice researchers, they lack experience with "hidden' rules, opportunities, and resources in English-medium journal publishing (Soler, 2019). Seeking collaboration with more experienced writers has thus become an active writing strategy for these returnees when facing the pressure of publishing in English-medium journals (Soler, 2019; Yang et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2022).

Returnee cholars undergo intricate processes of identity (re)construction (Ai, 2019; Ai & Wang, 2017), closely intertwined with their writing and publishing experiences (Yuan et al., 2022). Returning to their homeland with a limited number f publications, many scholars perceive their academic identity as inadequate (Poole & Xu, 2022). Writing and publishing become a criticall importnt if not the only way, for thesereturnees to be recognized in the academic community. Moreover, academics often need to establish thir selfhood, their personal voice, in research writing (Awadelkarim, 2022). Their writing and publishing should demonstrate who they are and serve as a venue to express their personal, academic and societal concerns.

While co-authorship has become a common practice in international publications, ittle scholarly atention has been paid to how and why Chinese returnee cholars co-write their research papers and how collaboration in writing/publishing relates to their aca demic identity (re)construction. This study aims to understand why and how these Chinese returnees co-write for publication and how their English collaborative writing experiences affect their academic identity construction.

# 3. Theoretical framework

# 3.1. The communities of practice

This article draws upon Wenger's (1998) theory of communities of practice to examine these returnees' English collaborative writing and publishing practices. The concept of \*communities of practice" refers to groups of people who share a concern, a set of problems, or a passion about a topic, and who deepen their knowledge and expertise in this area by interaction on an on-going basis" (Wenger et al., 2002, p. 2). When people as community members are engaged in social practices, they not only acquire community-related expertise but also develop their communal identity. Three fundamental concepts - domain, community and practice - hold paramount significance. For effctive collaboration and shared purpose, community members must share a common domain of interest, enabling them to work cohesively towards shared goals. In pursuing a shared goal i their domain, members engage in joint activities and discussions, and then support each other and share information whether face-to-face or virtually. They do not necessarily need to interact on a daily basis they can discs and exchange ideas at their own pace. In fact, most of the time they may work alone, allowing for flexibility in their collaborative dynamics. Community members then can develop a shared repertoire of resources and practice through sustained interaction with each other. The three elements of domain, community, and practice are essential in cultivating a community of practice.

Grounded in a social perspective on learning, communities of practice foster the formation of members identties through active participation in social practices. According to Wenger (1998, p. 162), identity is a way of being in the world, and one's identities are produced within the rich and complex set of relational practice. Participation in social practices helps members to build a sense of belonging to a community. Belonging to such a group can be empowering, since membership can translate into expertise, resources and competence (Wenger, 1998). According to Wenger (1998), identities form trajectories that connect the past, the present, and the future. Old-timers and newcomers interact witheach other, with each having arole to play and to contribute. Identity is a continuous process of becoming, characterized by its \*constructed, multipleand dynamic" nature (Ha, 2007, p. 21). The formation of an identity within a community invariably entails the development of new relationships and the assumption of new positions i relation toneself and others.

The concept of communities of practice is relevant in analyzing these participants' English collaborative writing experiences because they are engaged in collaborative research writing on topics f shared interest and for the common goal of publications. These participants exchange ideas, see for help and share information faceto-face as wellas online as most partners are not at the same geographic location. Also, they actively share and exchange resources and ideas, expanding their theoretical expertise, data aces, research methods, etc. through regular interactions.

# 3.2. Scholar's academic network as social capital

Another concept that contrbutes to the understanding of how collaborative writing can benefit these returnee is social capital (Xu & Ou, 2022). Social capital is a natural byproduct or asst aquired through engaging in communities of practce. t is the "sum of the actual and potential resource embedded within, available through, and derived from the network of relationships posssed by an individual or social unit (Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998, p. 243). Primarily, social capital resides in human relations and, hence, is socially-embedded and dependent upon ocial relationships, their structure and qualit (Coleman, 1988). By working together towards a common goal, community members develop meaningful social relations, facilitating the acquisition and exchange of social caital, i e. knowledge, resources and opportunities. Such collaboratie efforts provide aes to elements that may be elusive when working in isolation. That is, a shared identity is a form of social capital that they acquire through collaboration, and in the community, similar identities facilitate the output of new knowledge, ideas and opportunities (Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998).

In China, the term \*guanxi" is similar to the concept of social networking, but specifically connotes the richness, flexibility, and complexity of human relationships in Chinese society (Chen et al., 2013). Compared to western societies, which are largely based on individuals, Chinese people and society are said to be relation based and their lives and social actions are dominated by relationships (Ho, 1998; Hwang, 2000). Heavily influenced by Confucian relationalism, Chinese nterpersonal relationships tend to be hierarchical, with prominent ingroup/outgroup distinctions (Hwang, 200). Dedication and commitment o guanxi are fundamental to one's access to social resource, opportunities and life and work development. Chinese people rely on building and using personal relationships to get through life and work and gain competitive advantage, and use guanxi as a mechanism of transaction in many aspects of life and work (Chen et al., 2013).

# 4. Methodology

# 4.1. Research design

Interviewing is adopted as the main method of inquiry because researchers are interested in understanding the lived experiences of the Chinese returne scholars writing practices and the meaning they make of their experiences (Seidman, 2019). Through reflecting on the concrete details of their ollaborative writing experience, participants are able to telltheir own writing stories in depth, which allows the reearchers to ccess important social and educational isues rflected through their words (Sedman, 2019). Interviewing is a suitable inquiry tol that provides rich information on participants' attitudes, eelings, preferences and behaviors in regard to collaborative writing. emi-tructured interviews were conducted with 12 participants with an interview guide. Plase see theattached interview guide in Appendix 1.

# 4.2. About the participants

The data draws on interviews of 12 Chinese PhD returnees who completed their doctoral studies outside mainland China, in Hong Kong and other countries such as Australia, the UK, and the USA. The researchers selected participants with academic experience in language education mainly because the researchers' own backgrounds are in language education and hence it helps us to better understand participants' stances and experiences. The participants are currently employed at universities situated in various geographical locations across China. Detaled demographic information is provided in Table 1, with pseudonyms used to ensure privacy. A purposive snowballing method (Biernacki & Waldorf, 1981) was used to recruit the participants. The first two authors contacted a couple of PhD returnees that they personally know, and then relied on referrals from the itilly sampled respondents. The researchers aimed to ensure a diverse participant selection by considering factors such as gender, age, academic discipline, career stae and the number of co-authored publications, etc.

Table 1 Profile of the participants.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Gender</td><td>Age</td><td>Academic rank</td><td>Discipline</td><td>PhD holding location</td><td>Year of returning</td><td>Number of co-authored articles</td></tr><tr><td>Rose</td><td>Female</td><td>34</td><td>Assistant Professor</td><td>Educational Sociology </td><td>Australia</td><td>2022</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td>Brian</td><td>Male</td><td>48</td><td>Professor</td><td>English Education</td><td>Australia</td><td>2014</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>Sherry</td><td>Female</td><td>39</td><td>Associate Professor</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>France</td><td>2014</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Finn</td><td>Male</td><td>30</td><td>Associate Research</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>Macao, China</td><td>2022</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td> Jen</td><td>Female</td><td>36</td><td>Fellow Associate Professor</td><td>Educational Sociology</td><td>UK</td><td>2018</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td> Jackie</td><td>Female</td><td>45</td><td> Professor</td><td>Sociolinguistics</td><td>Australia</td><td>2017</td><td>18</td></tr><tr><td>Larry</td><td>Male</td><td>60</td><td> Professor</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>UK</td><td>2012</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>River</td><td>Female</td><td>33</td><td>Associate Professor</td><td>Second Language Acquisition</td><td>US</td><td>2020</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Yoni</td><td>Female</td><td>35</td><td>Assistant Research</td><td>Education</td><td>Canada</td><td>2020</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td> Janice</td><td>Female</td><td>35</td><td>Fellow Professor</td><td>English Education</td><td>Hong Kong, China</td><td>2017</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>Fiona</td><td>Female</td><td>45</td><td>Associate Professor</td><td>Foreign Language Education</td><td>US</td><td>2013</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Genie</td><td>Female</td><td>43</td><td>Professor</td><td>Sociolinguistics</td><td>Australia</td><td>2011</td><td>20</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.3. Data collection and analysis

The interviews spanned from May 2023 to July 2023. Given the dispersed locations of most participants, interviews were con. ducted online, video-recorded and subsequently transcribed. Primary data sources included 12 video-conferenced interviews, each lasting around $5 0 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ to 1 h. Additionally, complementary data sources included participants' casual online chats. Interviews were carried out in Chinese and transcribed verbatim in the same language. The quotes used in the paper are English translations of the original transcripts. The translation was done by the first author and adaptations were made whil translating for the sake of eficiency The English translations have been checked and approved by the participants to ensure that the original meaning is kept. Verbal consent was obtained in advance to use the interview data in this study.

Data analysis followed the three stages of open-coding, axial-coding and selective-coding, informed by grounded theory research (Creswell, 1998). Intiall, thefirs two authors read all the interview transcripts and developed the open coding for each participant. This involved identifying recurring notions related to the research questions, such as feling alone, \*how to integrate into domestic academic community", lack of social networking", "attending conferences', "lacking publication guidance", "seeking for help with writing", \*collaborating with colleagues", "mentor's help, being rejected by journals", among others. Next, interconnections were identified among the above open codes to form higher level categories for each participant, such as \*motivations to see for collaboration, challenges in academic adaptation, eefits of collaboration in writig", \*criteri i elcting writing partners", \*reasons to choose international publishing instead of publishing in Chinese, \*collaborative writing helps developing asense of belonging", etc. Finally, these categories were selected and re-grouped across the 12 participants to develop four main themes to address the research questions. Data triangulation from interviews, casual chats and emails was implemented. Member checking by the participants were constantly performed during data analysis.

# 4.4. Researchers' positionality

In this study, the inflence of researchers' positionalit (Savin-Baden & Major, 2013) has affcted the process of research, from choosing the topic, contacting interviewees, deciding on a theoretical framework, to interpreting the findings. The first two authors worked closely together in determining the topic, selecting the target journal, .., Journal of Englis for Academic Purposes (JEAP) to submit to, encouraging each other to keep writing and keep revising when receiving reviewers feedback. All three authors advocate collaborative writig, ince they have reconized the value of collaborative writing as a strategy in facilitating academic productivity and constructing a positive academic identity. The authors communicated and collborated with each other throughout their reviewing of revant litrature, framing rearch questions collecting and analyzing data, writig, revising anddetermining to submit to JEAP.

# 5. Findings

The findings focus on participants' motivation for seeking collaboration, the benefits derived from collaborative fforts and the mpact n ther (recontructed denttie. o be spic firt ofall, he miation for eeking cllabortion maly lies in the deire to overcome lonelines in the domestic academic community. Secondly, the benefits include sharing research resources, generating new ideas and gaining mentorship in publishing in English-medium journals. Thirdly, participants have been (re)constructing communities of practice in collaborative writing. The details of the findings are presented as follows.

5.1. Overcoming loneliness in domestic academic community in collaborative writing

Almost all the participants mentioned the feling of loneliness when they returned home. Having lft their doctoral supervisors, they were disconnected, at least geographicall, from the academic community where they were trained. Aording to Brian, they felt like an "academic orphan" who had just lost the mentorship of their doctoral supervisor and had nobody to \*take care of [them] academically' any more. Upon returning to China, many fced the challenge of realizing that their prior research topics were often deemed irrelevant. Additionall, the research paradigm under which they were trained abroad might not be widely acknowledged domestically. The absence of a robust academic network or academic guanxi, to be more accurate, further complicates their access to research fields. These challenges made them feel lonely as a researcher. As Jen said,

When I just returned, I wanted to interview principals in international chools in Shanghai. I thought it would be easy, because when I was in Britain, if I wanted to interview someone for research purpose, I just needed to send him an email and the interviewee would usually agree. Here, I must rely on some oficial guanxi to get the principal's consent for interview. I don't have that kind of guanxi yet. (Jen)

Jen's experiences were shared by many other participants. Just returning home, these returnees did not have a suficient social network for their research, making it challenging to find suitable research collaborators. Trained overseas and being young, novice researchers, they are stil outsiders to the Chinese academic community. Their academic social network, or guanxi, has not yet been established. Feling lonely, they needed other scholars to recognize them in their disciplinary field. Per acknowledgment held sig. nificant value for them, serving as a motivating force to propel them forward on their academic journey. As Jackie shared:

When I had just returned, I didn't know anyone in China who is doing leading research in sociolinguistics. Then I decided to attend conferences, to present papers and to meet people. At a conference, I met a guru in sociolinguistics in China, and he introduced me to his research team. Also, I met Brian who had studied in Australia. He liked my work, and this meant a lot to me. I felt that I was recognized again as a PhD. So, we started

co-writing after that, and we now have published several co-authored articles. That was

my first academic revival. (Jackie).

All the participants agreed that "writing by oneself is too lonely" (Janice).

Having a writing partner can make the writing process more disciplined and efficient than writing alone. If you write by yourself, you tend to procrastinate. Writing with partners will push you to move forward because we have to meet a common deadline. ... What's more, writing together can make writing more fun and more enjoyable than writing alone. (Sherry)

These experiences indicate the affective power produced by collaborative writing, serving as a means for returnee to overcome their ense of lonelines.All i al, cllaborative writing has enabled the participants to fee acknowleged, reconnectd and supported within their domestic academic milieu.

5.2. Sharing research resources and generating new ideas in collaborative writing

Nearly all the participants acknowledged the necessity of altering their previous research directions upon returning home. Collaborating with other scholars has proven instrumental in enabling them to cultivate new research scopes and perspectives. Throughout this collaborative proces, participants engaged in the exchange f ideas concerning topics, methodology, data collection and analysis, allowing them to transcend their original disciplinary boundaries. For example, Sherry recounted her transition from French linuisic, the fous f her dotoral this, to ald inguistics. This shift was influcd by her cllaorationwith olleagues engaged in English language education. Indeed, she was very thankful for this change:

It is very dificult to publish artice in French linguistics when living in China. My colleagues are very productie in publishing their English teaching articles in international journals. I decided to work with them. They are good at language teaching methodology, and I can provide data on French teaching. I have co-published a lot with my English-teaching colleagues. (Sherry)

Collaboration has facilitated transdisciplinary research, as reported by participants who have benefited from the exchange of expertise. They have successfully generated new research topics that span across multiple isciplines. Yoni, majoring in teaching Chinese as a foreign language, has been working with a partner with expertise in analyzing English teaching materials. They have been co-writing papers about analyzing Chinese teaching textbooks and materials, which is a relatively less explored area. Besides broadening their research scope, collaboration has helped these scholars to generate new research ideas. Many of their important research ideas occurred during informal chats. As Fiona recalled,

I have been thinking about writing a paper on translanguaging for a long time, yet I don't know which specific topic I should focus on. One day I was chatting with Brian online about the teacher education courses that I am teaching, and I said I want to write an article on translanguaging pedagogy. Then Brian said, "why not just write about your students' attitudes towards translanguaging pedagogy in China's schoo seting?" Wow, I reall liked this idea! Later, Brian and I co-wrote this paper. (Fiona)

Collaboration also has helped the returnees to share and expand their research resources that they may not get access to if they work alone The participants hav shared theretical lenses, acessto field data, knwledge of target jounals to submit to, publication channels, etc. These resources have proven crucial due to the participants lack of essential reearch resources and a sufficient social network within their local academic community. Finn, a highly productive scholar in his early 30s, recalld his collboration experience:

I needed a specific model to analyze the data, but I am not familiar with the model. I have no time to study this model, so I contacted a friend who knows this model, and we added his name to the author list, which saved us a lot of time. (Finn)

Research data have been shared as well. \*Working with others makes i possible to write about a topic that I personally do not have access to." (Brian) As Brian said,

One of my co-writing partners works at a border city near Burma. She has access t multilingual data that I do not have. We cowork together, and I get an opportunity to write about these data. In this sense, I have fulflled my research interest and broadened my research scope. (Brian)

In sum, collaborative writing has expanded these participants' research fields, faciliting the generation of new ideas. It has enabled the sharing of theoretical and methodological expertise, as well as accessto data. The change of these returnees' academic environment forced them to explore new research directions, prompting collaboration to expand their research scopes, perspectives,

and opportunities.

# 5.3. Gaining mentorship in English collaborative writing practices

Some participants, particularly young returnee cholars, expressed a lack of confidence in their academic writing abilities. At this juncture, mentorshipfrom seasoned writers with extensive publishing experiences was crucial, as without such guidance, they faced the risk of giving up. Nearly allof them admitte that they did not get enough training in English publishing during their PhD study. While they did not find English writing iself tobe particularly challenging, the process of successull getting articles published in English-medium journals posed a significant hurdle for them. Yoni reflcted on the asstance she received from more experienced partners, saying:

Before I published articles in good journals, I was anxious and not sure whether I was competent enough. . d not know how to revise to meet reviewers expectations. My co-writing partners have more experience and so they have guided me along the way. (Yoni)

More experienced partners can offer valuable guidance to young retunees in publication strategies, including navigating responses to reviewers feedback and selecting target journals. This support is particularly crucial for newly graduated PhD holders who may be in need of such expertise. Rose, a highly productive returnee scholar in her early 30s, greatly appreciated the mentorship that she received from experienced partners throughout her academic journey:

I think the biggest benefit that I get from collaborative writing is that my partners have mentored me on how to get the articles published. You know, I go to conferences and find people to work with me. I do the major writing and they offer me advice on how to revise. They have mentored me on theoretical framework, specific writing skill, etc. Thanks to my partners' guidance, now I am very familiar with those processes. (Rose)

As young returnees, they were istant from their PhD supervisors and found it challenging to secure necessary mentorship. They also lacked social support from their local academic environment. Consequently, they had to proactively seek collaboration with more experiencd cholars, mostly other returnee scholars. dditionall, they benefite from peer suggestions. Jen commented on the roleof her peers' recommendations:

My writing partners are just like the reviewers of the journal. My partners who have more publishing experiences tel me that, when you submit your article to the journal, the reviewers assigned by the journal editors are scholars just like our partners. So, revising according to partners suggestions before submission can make the whole publication process more eficient. (Jen)

Young scholars especially needed to learn how to deal with journal rejections. It was found that having a partner could help these returnees to respond much more positively to the journal rejections than being alone. Fiona recalled how collaboration played a crucial role in facilitating the publication of an article that might otherwise have languished in her computer indefinitely:

Collaborating with others simply makes you feel more confident with your writing. I used to write by myself. When my manuscript was rejected, I was easily frustrated and started to doubt whether I am suitable for doing research. For example, I had a paper that got rejected, and then I let the paper slep in my computer for 10 years. Later, my co-writing partner encouraged me to submit it again. He provided insightful feedback, and we revised it together. The revised paper eventually got published in a good journal. Every time we got rejected, my co-writing partner would say, "OK, that is not a big deal and let's look at other journals" . If you have a partner with more experience, he/she will encourage you, and you feel you are not alone and you have someone to share this pressure. Simply knowing that you have someone out there to face this pressure together makes you feel more relaxed and confident. That will make you move forward. (Fiona)

Almost all participants agreed that writing alone can be frustrating and stressful.

Having someone to co-work with simply makes you feel more confident. Especially when your article is rejected, having someone to talk with makes you feel much stronger. (Yoni)

Jackie mentioned that once she was co-writing an article with her PhD supervisor, who was a guru in sociolinguistics in Australia Yet when the submission was rejected by a journal, Jackie said that she stopped questioning her research competence.

If a famous scholar like my doctoral supervisor can be rejected, there is no reason for me to make a big fuss about reection. You just keep trying. (Jackie)

Furthermore, collaborative writing provided publishing opportunities for these PhD returnees.

I got to know more publishing opportunities, such as journals, book chapters, through attending conferences and meeting people. Now, co-working with other scholars, we have started to call for papers, to organize conferences and special ssues. (Jackie).

Collaboration raised their publishing opportunities for these early-career academics.

In sum, these participants experiences demonstrated that having a doctoral degree did not mean that they were wel prepared in English publishing. As early career researchers, writing with partners provided them with necessary guidance, stategically and emotionally, along the publishing process.

# 5.4. (Re)Constructing communities of practice in collaborative writing

Having become disconnected from their overseas academic communities, these returnee scholars embarked on building new communities where they aimed to regain a sense of connection, support, and recognition as researchers. The study indicated that the experience of these returnees collaboration related to how writers positioned themselves as scholars.First participants have gained more confidence as researchers through their co-author publishing. For instance, Rose, a productive writer now working at a top university in China, recalled that:

I felt like I was nothing when I just got my PhD and had few publications. Now, with almost 20 co-authored articles published, I can easily find a job at a good university. (Rose)

I feel I am gradually gaining my academic 'power' back since I published my articles. (Jackie)

'ublication record seems to closely relate to participants' sense of academic confidence

Secondly, among these participants, all those with productive co-authorship publications, such as Janice, Rose, Yoni, and Jackie, appreciated the sense of belonging that collaborative writing provided for writers. Having regular research partners made these participants feel they are part of an academic community. As Janice said,

Research and writing alone is hard. As you can see, all my articles are co-authored. I have a stable academic collborative network. Collaboration makes me fel I have my place in this academic network and I am connected to other scholars. I am not by myself. I am part of a big academic community. (Janice)

Having a sense of belonging to an academic community was important for them. This sense of being part of a community simply made returnee scholars feel secure and confident in academic life.

Collaborative writing also helped these returneesto connect to local scholars with similar research interest. Because of the change of the research context,returnees needed to adjust their research foci to meet the local needs. Collborative writing provided an important venue for them to build relationships with local scholars. This study indicated that going to conferences, presenting papers, and attending academic seminars were productive ways to meet domestic scholars.

The returnee scholars in this study all agreed that it was critically important for them to familiarize themselves with what domestic scholars were doing and join the local academic community. Collaborating with local scholars not only helped these returnees get ther scholarly work known to others and better committed to address local needs, but it also encouraged them to serve as a bridge, introducing new theoretical and methodological perspectives to the local context.

In return, collaboration with local scholars brings returnees local research resources, funding opportunities and Chinese journal publication venues, which are hard to obtain if one has no guanxi in the Chinese academic community. Collaboration sometimes becomes a purposeful strategy for trading other social capital that only insiders can enjoy in the local academic market. As Rose reflected,

To be honest, now I have the ability to write and publish independently. But in China, as a young grassoots rturnee, the only academic social capital I have is my international publication experiences.  must choose to collaborate with others in exchange for other forms of local social capital, such as funding opportunities and guanxi (social network), etc. (Rose)

Meanwhile, the academic confidence and resilience obtained from collaborative writing could be aplied to other aspects of life. A Rose commented,

... ow if my paper is reected by a journal, I say to myself, OK it's not a big del." I willtry other journals. I ill not ely get frustrated with litle setbacks in life. I am becoming a more optimistic person. The resilience comes from our collaborative writing, and my partner and I have benefited from such resilience, not just in collaborative writing, and the resilience has also affected our everyday life. I have published almost 20 articles in three years, I have gained confidence that I can tackle other challenges in my work and life. (Rose)

Furthermore, the participants acknowledged a shift in their role in the processof co-working. Some participants have transitioned from being "a returnee who sees help by co-working' to becoming "a returnee who would like to help others by co-working" in the course of their professional development. Initilly, as recent PhD graduates, certain participants sought the guidance of more experienced partners for mentorship in writing and publishing. Over time, as they accumulated publishing experiences, some of them like Brian, Jackie, Janice and Yonie, expressed a desire to help other novice scholars to write and publish. They began to consider helping younger scholars to write and publish as part of their professional mission, deriving satisfaction from the collborative process.For instance,

Working with younger scholars and helping them to publish make me fee happy and fulfilled professionally. (Brian)

The above analysis demonstrates that collaborative writing experiences closely relate to how returnees position themselves as academic scholars. Through collaborative writing, they have recreated new communities they feel that they belong to. They have become more confident in academia and ife. Collaborative writing has helped them connect to other returnees and local cholars with similar reearch interests, facilitating dialogues between intenational and local scholars. Furthermore, as they became more proficient in academic publishing, they provided assistance to other les experienced returnees, viewing their professional role as evolving from being recipients of help to actively supporting others.

# 6. Discussion

Findings of this study resonate with other studies conducted on Chinese returnee scholars (Ai, 2019; Ai & Wang, 2017; Poole & Xu, 2022; u & Ou, 2022) in revealing their potential vulnerabilities and marginalization in Chinese academia and their recognition that the best way, if not the only way, to rebuild their academic confidence and professonal identity in today's competitive Chinese academia isto publish (Xu & Poole, 2023). More importantly, this paper contributes to the current itrature by unpacking the usually hidden and under-reearched writing proces they go through i coping with the ifficulties. The findings thus ad to ur knowledge of the strategies (here, collaborative writing) returnee cholars are adopting to navigate the lonely writing-to-publishing journey and the effects of the collaborative writing on developing their academic identity.

# 6.1. Engaging in collaborative writing practices produces social capital

The pervasive sense of academic loneliness and anxiet felt by most participants drives them to proactively seek for collaboration with other researchers, including their PhD supervisors, ther returnees, and domestic scholars. Unlike local scholars who have already developed extensive social networks within their academic community at home, these returnees, leaving the overeas academic network at least geographicall, lack a domestic academic community that can furnish them with essential social capital. This social capital can manifest in various forms, including academic guidance, research resources, opportunities, emotional support, and publication mentorship (Ai, 2019; Jiang e al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022). The feeling f academic lonelines could be overwhelming for many returnees upon their return.

This study demonstrates that co-writing and co-authorship can benefit academic writers, no matter their age, gender, carer development stage, personalities, etc. As the participants profile shows, the participants with the most co-authored articles are usually in their 30s and early 40s and have returned to their homeland in the last five years; they are often called early career researchers (ECRs) (Poole & Xu, 2022). ECRs especiall need academic collaboration for their carer advancement. But others, like Fiona, Brian and Larry, who obtained their doctoral degree overseas more than 10 years ago, expres their rgret over not realizing the importance of ollaboration when they were younger, and they sill ong for collaboration. All participants expresed the wish to collaborate more, regardless of whether they described thir personality as extrovert (e.g. Sherry, Jackie) or as introvert (e.g. River, Larry, Fiona). Resonant wit the findings of u and Poole (2023), collaboration is indeed a good strategy for al aademic writers, regardessof ther backgrounds and personalities.

This study demonstrates that, through working with co-writing partners, these returnees are creating new communities where they feel uported and can exchange research ideas, resources and opportunities. They learn how to write for publications when engaging in such communities. In other words, they are building their academic social capital through interacting with other community members with similar research interests, who might be across disciplines and geographic borders. Since social capital arises from human relationships (Coleman, 1988), such regular dialogues and interactions among writing partners have expanded the returnees' research scopes and resource repertoire, thus adding to their otherwise insufficient social capital for doing research.

Just like other newly-graduated PhDs, returnees need guidance on how to publish research articles. The activity of academic publishing is different from the activity of academic writing in that it needs more strategic knowledge of research writing skills knowing which journals are more suitable to submit to and how to deal with reviewers comments (Soler, 2019). This study confirms that this strategic knowledge may be unknown to newly graduating PhD holders if they write alone (Poole & Xu, 2022).

Another benefit lies in helping these returnees to familiarize themselves with local academic trends and main concerns. This can help returnees, who have been disconnected from the domestic research milieu when doing their degree overseas, to adjust their research direction to serve the local needs. This study affirms that newly graduated PhD holders may be unaware of this srategic knowledge if they write in isolation (Miao et al., 2022).

Additionally, these returnees are developing thir academic guanxi in China as they engage in collaborative research practices. In China's academic community, just as in many other aspects of social life in China, guanxi ofte playss a gatekeer for reearchers to get accessto resources, felds of knowledge, and opportunities (Chen et al., 2013; Hwang, 2000). Collaboration alows returnees to connect and build cooperative relationships with ther scholars, which in turn would trade into other forms of social capital within the local academic market, such as funding and publishing opportunities and domestic interpersonal guanxi, an indispensable set for them to further their career advancement in China.

# 6.2. Obtaining emotional support by engaging in communities of writing

Such communities of practice contribute to the members' identity formation (Wenger, 1998). Collaborative writing has played a significant role in facilitating the (re)formation of their identity as scholars returning to their home country. As they interacted with each other in the research and writing processe, allof them have developed a sense of belonging to their disciplinary communitie of practice newly established at home. his is important for the returnee, who were disconnected" geographicl from their overseas academic social network and needed to build new research communities at home. As they interact with other scholars, whether they are returnees or domestic scholars, they are establishing connections, expanding their academic social network and exploring their new research positions. Having someone to share research, everyday life and English research writing in particular, these participants have constructed their professional identity and alleviated the pervasive sense f loneliness which is often felt by retunee cholars (u & Ou, 2022). This shared identity developed through engagement in collaborative writing practices serves a form of social capital. Similar identities among members facilitate the more eficient generation of new knowledge, ideas and opportunities (Nahapiet &

# Ghoshal, 1998).

Nearlyall participants acknowledged that having a writing partner makes their academic writing and publishing processes more efficient and enjoyable. They are more productive and eficient when working together to meet a shared agenda. They exhibit greater discipline in collborative writing compared to when working individuall. That is collaborative writing helps these participants recognize their belonging to acommunity. They understand that many other members are facing similar challenges, and some have successfully overcome them. This realization boosts their confidence in academic writing and publishing.

Given that novice research writers who use English as asecond language usuall lack confidence in publishing and they easily get frustrated and give up when faced with journal reviewers' rejection or harsh comments (Poole & Xu, 2022; Soler, 2019), ths study suggests that collaborative writing can assist scholars in building confidence in their research abilities and developing emotional resilience when faced with rejection and frustration. Through connecting to other members in academic communities these participants get to understand that they are ot alone when facing rejections and challenges, and they realizethat what they ned to do is just to keep writing and keep trying.

Their academic confidence increases when they feel recognized by their pers, which aligns with findings from previous research (Lu, 2019; uan et al., 2022). Very ofen, the research paradigm in which some of the participants were trained overseas i not valued at home, leading to a sense of marginalization within domestic academic communities. Working with other returnee cholars, they have peers with whom they can share similar research paradigms, and find a sense of being recognized. This recognition serves as a potent motivating factor for novice reearchers to progres in their academic journey. On such ocasions, they fee ther past social and cultural capital accumulated overseas (Jiang et al., 2020) is once again recognized and valued. This recognition aids them in bridging their past and future as scholars.

Some of the most productive returnee scholars, such as Brian, Jackie, Janice and Rose are seeing their positions as changing from being mentored to mentoring other newly returnees on overcoming the loneliness of academic writing and publishing. This identity change comes naturally as their collaboration and sucesful publishing experiences accumulate. Furthermore collaboration with domestic scholars help returnees to act as a bridge to connect academic dialogues intenationally and locally (Ai et al., 2023). These participants have graduall become academically localized and more committed to addressing local research concerns. Leveraging their advantages of intenational perspectives these returnees play a crucial role in fring freh insights to addres local problems. They strive to provide new theoretical and methodological perspectives in interpreting local issues, thereby faciliting dialogues between local scholars and their international counterparts.

# 7. Concluding remarks

This study examined participants motivation for seeking collaboration and the benefits collaborative writing brings, with a focus on how their collaborative writing has affected their professional identity (re)construction. The importance of ollaboration for all types of aademics is generally acknowledged, but or study highlights the unique sigificance and affordances collaboration can bring for returnee scholars, ften called a rootless group of academics (Xu & Ou, 2022). Through it, outsiders can become insiders. Collaboration helps returnees to form writing communities where \*disconnected rturnee feel connected and supported again. The power of engaging in writing communities les in developing new research ideas, sharing academic resources and opportunities building academic guanxi, larning writing and publishing skill and providing emotional support for returnees to tackle challenges and rejections arising from their mobilit. The emotional power of feeing connected and recognized builds these returnee scholars academic confidence and pushes them to move on as scholars in their homeland.

Most of the participants in this study (except Fiona and Larr, who work in a lessdeveloped area) work at top universities in metropolitan cities in China and it i relatively easy for them to seek scholars, domestic or intenational, with similar backgrounds to collaborate with, since top universities in China posses richer academic resources and opportunities. However, there are increasingly more Chinese returnees now working in les developed areas and they may have les access to collaborative networks, while til having to play the academic publishing game (Poole & Xu, 2022) by themselves. We hope that the findings of this article can encourage these returnees to proactively seek collaboration with colleagues and scholars inside and outside their workplace to tackle the pervasive loneliness felt by them. Furthermore, our rationale for promoting collaborative writing applies to all kinds of scholars domestic or returnees, novice or veteran, who aim to stay productive in academia.

The findings also have implications for university executives and administrators. They may beter understand returnee scholars harsh journey and make policies that encourage collaborative writing and recognize the benefits of co-authorship in academic promotion. Indeed, the participants in this study admitted that they choose to co-publish only in English-medium journals rather in Chinese journals, because correspondence author is given credit in international journals (e.g. sscI/A&HCI indexed), but correspondence author cannot get any credit at al in Chinese journals in most Chinese universities. This policy does not recognize the great value of collaborative writing nor encourage academic collaboration among scholars.

This paper focuses on collaboration as an individual pursuit of academic career development, but at this historical moment in China, it could become tool of the neoliberal university to enhance roductivity (u & Poole, 2023). As the profile of the participant indicates, younger returnees are producing more co-author articles than older returnees, due to the increasing publication pressure. How this neoliberalism in Chinas higher education system affcts academics' motivation and behavior in their scholarly collaborative practices is worth investigating in the future.

This paper merely focuses on the positie results f ollaboration, but collaboration might also bring other less desirable scenarios. such as vicious competition, unbalanced accumulation of social capital at the expense of one party, etc. Participants have reported some of the less positive experiences, but they were indeed very few compared with the overwhelming benefits collaboration has brought about. Neertheles, further studes can stil iestigate how to avoid ngative reults of collaboration to reach win-win for al members.

This qualitatie case study does not assert that collaborative writing is imperative for one's academic career development Inthis study, a few participants like Brin, River, and Larry have managed to stay productive as sole authors for many years, though they all expressed their overwhelming loneliness and longing for collaboration. Afte all seeking someone to communicate with can render academic writing, a task that demands significant cognitive efort, more eficient and enjoyable. This study marks our initia endeavor to comprehend the significance of collaboration in research and the invisible yet agonizing' writing-to-publishing process by concentrating on Chinese returnee scholars. This focus stems from their vulnerabilit to marginalization due to the shift in their ac. ademic environment and the absence of sufficient research resources and social network in their homeland. Future studies could explore the ongoing impact of collaborative writing on the professional development of these returnees. Additionall, investigating how their perspectives and attitudes towards collaborative writing evolve over time as their academic trajectories progres in ther homeland would be valuable.

# Funding

This work was supported by Anhui Normal Universty under Grant [2023AH050118] and Shanghai University of Finance and Economics under Grant [No. 2020110925] and [No. 2021120046].

# Declaration of conflicting interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Fei Wang: Writing - original draft. Bin Ai: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft. Alexander Kostogriz: Writing - review & editing.

# Acknowledgements

The researchers thanks go to the anonymous reviewers and the editors for their constructive comments on earlier versions of this article; the researchers also thank the participants for sharing their lived experiences.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j jeap.2024.101363.

# References

Ai B. 019  i       / doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2019.1590320   
Ai B.  g  017  o n  e ri i h i.   f ive , 16 1-9 https://doi.org/10.1177/1609406917696741   
Ai, B. hg, J, iz 2023. kgh   g h  miit d it etion  hstie qualitative case study. Research in Education. https://doi.org/10.13039/501100007931   
Aloo . 23   340.. org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1076340   
Aea/        s. World English Journal, 13(1), 495-524. https://doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol13no1.33   
Bedt, A01). ative  g  f  375, 97-498. /./0.1016/je11.04.010   
Biki,   1981).       1 163. doi.org/10.1177/004912418101000205   
uchz,  (021. n stc sic 26, 113-1./..109//ma64   
he3i  e 9() 167-207. https://doi.org/10.1111/more.12010   
Chen , a ., e, . (202). poring r t in he d n n   sy f clative witin t 108, ile 102841. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2022.102841   
Coleman, J. S. (1988. Social cptal i th crtion of hman capital. Amrican Jounal of Scology, 94, 95-120. htps://do.g/10.1086/228943   
Creswell, J. w. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five traditions. Sage.   
Du , u , , ig  021  o  theh ar r The hr, 27 123. /o./10.1017 S0305741021000023   
Du    3 i 69.. org/10.1007/s11192-022-04606-0   
e 6(4), 286-303. https://doi.org/10.1080/10749039909524733   
Ha P.L 2007.ian  tc o he ait ti. e  1, 05. /.g 10.2167/lcc324.0   
Ho, D.Y. (198). nn eltionsh nd relionshne n ayi d n meth ltionlis. Ai nl f Pc, 11) 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-839X.00002   
Hwan,  200.he olis tica tin d ml oion.  fo the Thf l , 302), 15-7. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-5914.00124 Higher Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2021.1989581   
Jig, ,    .    tl i    c e. Returnees. Higher Education Policy, 33, 531-554. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41307-019-00175-9   
ear,  a 016 ig  a th  win .  h nd Development, 35(5), 940-950. https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2016.1139553   
utea, 1i t t   3 (3-4), 365-387. https://doi.org/10.1515/multi-2014-0017   
L, .          ie Frontiers in Psychology, 13, Article 859240. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.859240   
Lu . 01 r  n  h Social Science, 47(4-5), 484-507. https://doi.org/10.1163/15685314-04704004   
Miao, w.     (202).tiol me   ttig th ulicon prct f   h n the humanities and social sciences. Journal of Scholarly Publishing, 53(4), 249-270. https://doi.org/10.3138/jsp-2022-0014   
apit   l l,   2.. org/10.5465/AMR.1998.533225   
Poole,   i  a nn. Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/03057925.2022.2149242   
Pratt, M. L. (1991). Arts of the contact zone. Profession. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25595469.   
Savin-Baden, M., & Major, C. (2013). Qualitative Research: The esential guide to theory and practice. Routledge.   
Seidman  019).  iti ch  fr hr   t  i h .). cr l r.   
Solr, . (01  ssti  t  f  86339 https://doi.org/10.1080/15348458.2019.1671193   
Storch, N. (2019). On collaborative writing. Language Teaching, 52(1), 40-59. https://doi.org/10.1017/0261444818000320   
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge University Press.   
Wenger, , Mdmot, R, & Snyder, . (202). Civating conities of ractice: A guide to mangin kwledge. Hrard Bsis Scho Pes.   
u J  .    it tin tg  h ct a i  c in hn. Journal of Language, Identity and Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/15348458.2022.2060228   
Xu, W. & ooe,  (03. mi w ulicions ae us i mperil  wut sons he ime f h hr tio Jo Education Policy. https://doi.org/10.1080/02680939.2023.2288339   
ng .,    .,  s ishn,   n     tthe  ofoa resilience. Higher Education, 84, 235-254. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-021-00765-w   
Yu, H   22pcing n-chr ie n d ie h n h t. Qualitative Methods, 21, 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069211070443   
Yun , Bi    202. it i awn g  tf ie h kr nh Education Research and Development, 41(3), 981-995. https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2020.1865282