# The relationship between syntactic complexity and rhetorical move-steps in research article introductions: Variation among four social science and engineering disciplines

Xiaofei Lua,\*, J. Elliott Casalb, Yingying Liua, Olesya Kisselevc, Jungwan Yoond.

a Department of Applied Linguistics, The Pennsylvania State Universty, 234 Sparks Building, University Park, PA, 16802, USA   
b Department of Cognitive Science, Case Western Reserve University, 617C Crawford Hll Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA   
Deartment f Bilingual Biculral Stdies, University of Texas at n Antonio, One UTSA Circle, 3.302Main Building, Sa Antonio, TX, 78249,   
USA   
d Department of English, Carnegie Mellon University, Posner Hall 262, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Academic writing   
Disciplinary variation   
Function-form mappings   
Genre analysis   
Linguistic features   
Rhetorical goals

This study investigates disciplinary variation in the relationship between syntactic complexity and rhetorical move-steps in research article (RA) introductions. Our data consisted of the introduction sections of 400 published RAs in two core social science disciplines, Anthropology and Sociology, and two core engineering disciplines, Chemical Engineering and Electrical Engineering. Each sample was manually annotated for rhetorical move-steps using an adapted version of Swales' (2004) revised Create a Research Space model and assessed for syntactic complexity using multiple measures of global complexity, finite subordination, clausal elaboration, and phrasal complexity. Our results revealed significant disciplinary variation in terms of the syntactic complexity of sentences realizing each of six rhetorical move-steps commonly found in RA introductions. Our findings contribute to the emerging understanding of disciplinary variation in function-form mappings in RA writing and have useful implications for genre-based academic writing research and pedagogy.

# 1. Introduction

The variable deployment of rhetorical and linguistic features in academic writing genres across diciplinary contexts has been a Iong-standing focus of genre-based writing research in the English for Academic and Specific Purposes (EAP/ESP tradition (Moreno & Swales, 2018). This line of research has generated valuable insights into how academic writers engage in written genre practices from rhetorical and linguistical perspectives (e.g., Biber & Gray, 2010; Swales, 1990, 2004) and how academic text construction varies across academic disciplines (e.g., Hyland, 199, 2008; Hyland & Tse, 2007). A growing body of corpus-based genre analysis research highlights the potential of integrating rhetorical and formal perspectives to more directly address the "function-form gap" (Moreno & Swales, 2018, p. 41) that drives much EAP scholarship (e.g, Corte, 2013; Durrant & Mathews-Aydnl, 2011; Le & Harrington, 2015; Lu, Casal, & Liu, 2021; Omidian, Shahriari, & Siyanova-Chanturia, 2018), over such approaches which privilege either function or form. However, despite the understanding that genre practices are situated community practices, extant corpus-based genre analysis research has not yet systematically explored disciplinary variation in the mappings between linguisic forms and rhetorical functions in academic writing.

The current study addresses this gap by examining disciplinary variation in the relationship between syntactic complexity and rhetorical move-steps in research article (RA) introductions. Using a corpus of introduction sections from 400 RAs from two social science and two enginering disciplines annotated for rhetorical move-stes (Swales, 2004), we first determine whether syntactic complexity varies significantly by discipline and rhetorical move-step and then closely assess isciplinary variation in the syntactic complexity of six rhetorical move-steps found across disciplinary RA introductions. Through these analyses, we seek to ofer pedagogicall useful insights into how RA writers from diferent disciplines engage with syntactic complexit differently to realize their rhetorical goals.

# 1.1. Disciplinary variation in the rhetorical and linguistic features of academic writing

The importance of disciplinary variation in the rhetorical construction of academic texts has been acknowledged since the early days of rhetorical discourse analysis. In one such study, Swales and Najjar (1987) examined the rhetorical move structure of RA introduction sections from Educational Psychology and Physics.They identified several ifferences between these disciplines, which they interpreted as resulting from the varying communicative purposes and traditions of argument development guiding their scholarly activity. Applying and adapting Swales' (1990, 2004) Introduction-Method-Results-Discussion (IMRD) modelfor empirical RAs and Creating a Research Space (CARS) model or rhetorical move-step analysis, many studies have explored disciplinary variation in the rhetorical structure of RAs, revealing systematic differences in how academic writers from distinct disciplinary communities organize RAs rhetoricall (e.g., Cotos, Huffman, & Link, 2015, 2017; Basturkmen, 2012; Lin & Evans, 2012; Samraj, 202). Lin and Evans (2012) analyzed the macrostructures of empirical RAs across 39 disciplines and identified six major patterns of structural organization along with abundant disciplinary variation. At the rhetorical move-step level, Cotos et al. (2017) developed a rigorous rhetorical move-step model for the methods section of published RAs, and reported that hard and soft science disciplines form clusters based on their use of the stes in the model. The distribution of rhetorical move-steps in RAs and RA part-genres has also ben found to vary even at the sub-disciplinary level. Samraj (2002) reported that RAs in two environmental science sub-disciplines (Wildife Behavior and Conservation Biology) employ varying sets of rhetorical move-steps and atributed these variations to the inherent differences between the two sub-disciplines (the former being a theoretical field and the latter applied).

Disciplinary variation in the linguistic features of academic writing has received equal attention (Cunningham, 2017; Hu & Wang, 2014; Hyland, 199, 2008; Hyland & Tse, 2007), with some studies exploring the discipline specific use f various linguistic features by L2 English writers (e.g., Gardner, Nesi, & Biber, 2019; Yoon & Romer, 2020). Hyland and Tse (2007) reported substantial disciplinary variation in the frequency, range, collocations and meaning of academic vocabulary items and attributed such variation to \*the different practices and discourses of disciplinary communities (p. 235). From a phraseological perspective, Hyland (2008) reported variations in the frequencies and preferred uses of lexical bundles in RAs and degree papers across Electrical Enginering, Bology, BusinesStudies, and Applied Linguisics, and Cunningham (2017) identified aset of key phrase-frames that uniquely capture ifferent aspects of mathematics RAs. In addition, some studies looked at disciplinary variation in the citation practices of RAs e.g., Hu & Wang, 2014; Hyland, 1999; Swales, 1990. For example, Hu and Wang (2014) found that Appied Linguistics and General Medicine RAs differed in thefrequencies of specific types of dialogic engagement: the former used more dialogically expansive citations, whil the latter more dialogicall contractive citations. Notably, while complex yntactic structures have en identified as important features of academic writing (e.g., Biber & Gray, 2010), systematic explorations of disciplinary variation in the use of such structures remains scant.

# 1.2. Connecting rhetorical and formal linguistic features of disciplinary academic writing

In line with current conceptions of genre knowledge as comprised of functionally integrated rhetorical and formal knowledge (e.g, Tardy, 209), an increasing body of EAP research has integrated rhetorical and formal inguisic perspectives to examine the inguistic features used to materialize diffrent rhetorical goals in academic writing (e.g., Casal & Kessler, 2020; Cortes, 2013; Durrant & Mathews-Aydnl, 2011; Le & Harrington, 2015; Liu & Lu, 2020; Omidian et l., 2018). The focus of such research has been primarily on connecting lexical and phraseological featres to rhetorical functions, such as lexical bunde (eg, Cortes, 2013), phrase-frames e. g, Lu, Yoon, & Kisselev, 2021), and other types of formulai or mult-word expressions (e.g., Durrant & Mathews-Aydnlh, 2011; Le & Harrington, 2015; Omidian et al., 2018). For example, Cortes (2013) identified a it of lexical bundles from a corpus of RA in. troductions and found that many bundles correlated with the realization of specific rhetorical move-steps. Extending the scope of this line of research to complex syntactic structures, Lu, Casal, and Liu (2020) showed how the use of syntactically complex sentences, defined using multiple indices reflecting different dimensions of syntactic complexity, varied significantl crossrhetorical move-steps in a corpus of social cience RA introductions. Casal (2020) integrated similar complexity indices with analysis of reporting verbs, shel nouns, and phrase-frames in examining writer's rhetorical goals in RA introductions, highlighting clear patterns between writers use of particular linguistic structures and their rhetorical aims.

Most studies adopted a form-first approach by firs extracting instances of target linguistic features and then assigning those in stances specific rhetorical move-step tags (e.g., Cortes, 2013; Omidian et al., 2018). Recognizing the potential limitation of this approach with respect to the reliability of determining rhetorical move-steps in local contexts, other researchers adopted a function-first aproach (e.g., Durrant & Mathews-Aydnl, 2011; Lu et al., 2020), which entails full anotating a corpus of academic texts with rhetorical move-stes so that instances of target linguistic features can be more reliably analyzed in terms of the rhetorical goals they are used to materialize. This line of research has contributed to our understanding of how writers use of linguistic features characteristic of disciplinary genres is function-specific as wel, and several recent studies have showcased the pedagogical usefulness of such insights in promoting novice academic writers' knowledge of uch connections (e.g., Casal & Lu, 2021; Charles, 2018; Chen & Flowerdew, 2018; Cotos, Huffman, & Link, 2020; Dong & Lu, 2020).

While disciplinary variation of academic writing is well documented in regard to rhetorical construction and linguistic features separately from each other (as discussed earlier), we know relatively littl about disciplinary variation in the connections between rhetorical functions and linguistic forms. To the best of our knowledge, Omidian et al. (2018) and Casal (2020) were the only studies that brought together the rhetorical and formal linguistic perspectives in examining disciplinary variation in academic writing. Omidian et al. (2018) mapped frequent word combinations occurring in a corpus of RA abstracts from six soft and hard science disciplines to different rhetorical moves, and found considerable variation in both the types and numbers of combinations used in different rhetorical moves betwen the hard and soft science disciplines. Based on these findings, the authors concluded that \*high. lighting the differences that emerge from the ways writers construct knowledge and communicate it with their readers in different academic domains has great potential to reinforce our understanding of disciplinary writing" (p. 12) and wil prove beneficial to academic writing learners in different disciplines.

Recognizing the theoretical value and pedagogical usefulnes of insights into disciplinary variation in function-form connections, as ilustrted by Omidian et al. (2018) and Casal (2020), the current study aims to expand the scope f inquiry of this nascent line of research by examining disciplinary variation in the syntactic complexity of sentences realizing different rhetorical move-steps in RA introductions.

# 1.3.  The current research

In light of the research background and gap discussed above, the current study examines disciplinary variation in the relationship between syntactic complexity and rhetorical move-steps in RA introductions among two social science and two engineering disciplines. Specificall, we seek to answer the following reearch question: Does the syntactic complexity of sentence relizing specific rhetorical move-steps commonly found in RA introductions vary by discipline? If yes, in what ways?

As is evident in the discussion above, previous studies of disciplinary variation in academic writing have focused on both whole RAs and different RA sections. The focus on RA introductions i the current study was motivated both by the absence of prior research on disciplinary variation in form-function connections in this RA section and by the existence of a wellestablished rhetorical move-step framework for this section (Swales, 1990, 2004). Furthermore, the focus on two core social science disciplines and two core engi. neering disciplines alows us to not only compare oft and had science disciplines but also attend todifferences within coherent sets of soft and hard science disciplines.

# 2. Material and methods

# 2.1. Corpus

Our data consisted of the introduction sections of 400 published RAs from Anthropology, Sociology, Chemical Engineering (CE) and Electrical Engineering (EE), which are considered core social science and engineering disciplines, respectively (Frodeman, 2017). The data for Anthropology and Sociology were drawn from the Corpus of Social Science Research Articl Introductions (ossRAl) (Lu et a., 2020), which contains the introduction sections of 600 published RAs from six social cience disciplines. For each discipline five high impact non-niche journals were selected based on impact factor and advice from disciplinary experts. For each journal, four articles were randomly sampled each year from 2012 to 2016, resulting in 20 RAs per journal, and 100 RAs per discipline. In. troductions were identified primaril according to section headings and secondarily based on content when the Introduction section was not clearly labelld. Each RA introduction was saved as  separate plan text file and manually cleaned of formulas, figures, tables parenthetical components of citation, and any textual oddities that resulted from the text conversion proces (eg, journal tags, running heads, page numbers etc.). The data for the two engineering disciplines were collcted following the same procedures for journal selction, RA sampling, section identification, and text cleaning to esure comparability wth the ocial science data. As shown in Table 1, the final dataset contains 291,510 words $( n = 4 0 0$ , mean $= 7 2 9$ $S D = 3 1 6 $

Table 1 Corpus descriptive statistics.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Discipline</td><td>Texts</td><td>Total Words</td><td>Mean Words</td><td>Words SD</td></tr><tr><td>Anthropology</td><td>100</td><td>76,455</td><td>765</td><td>394</td></tr><tr><td>Chemical Engineering</td><td>100</td><td>70,090</td><td>701</td><td>318</td></tr><tr><td>Electrical Engineering</td><td>100</td><td>71,269</td><td>713</td><td>233</td></tr><tr><td> Sociology</td><td>100</td><td>74,840</td><td>748</td><td>306</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>400</td><td>291,510</td><td>729</td><td>316</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 2.2. Rhetorical move-step annotation

All texts were manually anotated for rhetorical move-steps using a framework previously developed by our research team for the analysis of COssRAI (Lu, Yoon, & Kisselev, 2021). Seven researchers initially independently coded $3 0 \mathrm { R A }$ introductions using Swales' (2004) revised CARS model and then met to discuss the suitabilit f the model for the dataset, propose changes to the model, and resolve discrepancies in the annotated texs. This process resulted in the spltting of some stes into substeps and the addition of new steps to account for the range of rhetorical functions that surfaced. With the updated framework, 30 additional samples were each independently annotated by two researchers. The group then met multiple times again to resolve allinter-annotator discrepancies and make inal adjustments to the framework. The resulting framework i presented in Table2. The annotations for these samples were also used to evaluate inter-rater reliability. For moves, the average percent agreement was $9 1 . 7 \%$ and the average Kappa was .81. For steps, average percent agreement was $7 2 . 1 \%$ and Kappa was not evaluated due to the large number of steps. The remaining samples in cOSsRAI were then each annotated by one researcher and checked by another, with all dscrepancies resolved through pair and group discussion. Allsamples for the two engineering disciplines were also each annotated by one researcher and checked by another using the same framework. The two researchers reported that the framework adequately covered those samples, although not al labels were utilized. Throughout the process the rhetorical chunk was the unit of analysis (see, e.g., Moreno & Swales, 2018; Swales, 2004) However, following Cotos et al. (2017, 2020), the sentence was the unit of annotation, with rhetorical move-step tags appended to the end of each sentence.

# 2.3. Syntactic complexity measurement

Syntactic complexity is generally construed as the degree of variation, elaboration, and sophistication of the syntactic structures that surface in language production and conceptualized as a multidimensional construct encompassing global complexit, coordnation, subordination, clausal elaboration, and phrasal complexity (e.g., Norris & Ortea, 2009). Table 3 summarizes the five measures used in the current study. As Lu et al. (2020) explained, while these measures only represent a fraction of the numerous syntactic complexity measures that exist (e.g., Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999; Kyle & Crossley, 2018; Lu, 2011, 2017; McNamara, Graesser, McCarthy, & Cai, 2014), they were selected based on several important criteri. Collectively, they cover most of the key syntactic complexity dimensions in Norris and Ortega's (2009) model, including global complexity (sentence length and left-embeddedness), finite subordination (number of finite dependent clauses), clausal elaboration (number of nonfinite dependent clauses), and phrasal complexity (nominalizations; see Biber, Gray, & Staples, 2016). Additionally, these measures can be analyzed with a high degree of reliability (Biber et al., 2016; Lu, 2010; McNamara et al., 2014) and inuitively interpreted by academic writing teachers and learners.

Each sample was sentence-segmented, part-of-speech tagged and syntacticll parsed using the Stanford CoreNLP (Manning et al. 2014). All sentence sementation errors were manually corrected in the rhetorical move-step annotation proces, and the POS-tagged and parsed files containing the mis-semented sentences were corrcted accordingly. The Python script developed by Lu et al. (2020) was then used to analyze the tgged or parsed samples to compute the five measures for each sentence in each sample. Lu et al. (2020) detailed the technical procedure for identifying the tructural units involved in computig each measure. We therefore only summarize the non-technical details here. For sentence length, the script counted the number of words in each sentence. For finite dependent clauses, the script counted the number of finite nominal, adjective, or adverbial clauses in each sentence. For nominalizations, the script counted the number of nominalizations in each sentence by referring to a pre-compiled list of nominalization forms. For nonfinite dependent clauses, the script counted the number of nonfinite dependent clauses marked with gerund, infinitive, or past particles in each sentence. Finall, for left-embeddedness the script counted the number of words before the main verb of the main clause in each sentence, and a small proportion (less than $1 \%$ ) of sentences that were not captured by the script (i.e., a value of O was returned) were handled manually. The expected level of reliability for identifying the relevant structural units, measured using F-score,2 ranged from 0.925 to 1.000 (Lu et al., 2020).

# 2.4. Statistical analysis

Not all rhetorical steps occurred in all RA introductions, and the distribution of steps was uneven across individual texts. To alleviate the issues of data sparseness and skewness, we combined the 20 texts from the same journal into one sample and calculated the mean for each measure arossal sentences annotated with each step in each sample. A two-way MAnOVA with discipline and rhetorical move-step as independent variables and the five syntactic complexity measures as dependent variables was first conducted in SPss 26.0 to determin if there were significant efects of disciline, rhetorical move-step, or the interaction between the two on the syntactic complexity of the sentences in RA introductions. The existence of an interaction efect would indicate that the syntactic complexity of specific rhetorical move-steps indeed varied by discipline. The Levene test indicated that all five measures violated homogeneity of variance among the four disciplines $( p < . 0 5 )$ . We therefore report our results using Pillai's trace, which is considered to be the most robust test when the MAnOVA assumption of homogeneity of variance i violated and a good option when the cell ies are uneven (e.g., Field, 2017). To address the \*in what ways" art of our research question, we focused our analysis on two steps for each move that were present in all four disciplines and all 20 journals, given the large number of rhetorical move-steps in the framework, their uneven distribution across the four disciplines see Appendix), and space constraints. For each move, the two steps with the highest inclusion rates (i., the number or proportion of texts they occurred in) were selected, with the exception that for Move One, M1 S3 was chosen over M1 S1a because of its more even distribution among the four disciplines, despite a slightly lower inclusion rate. For each focal move-step, the Levene test was used to verify homogeneity of variance for each measure, and a one-way MANOVA was run to determine whether significant between-discipline differences existed in the five measures, again with results reported using Pilli's Trace if the assumption of homogeneity of variance was violated If the MANOVA confirmed the existence of significant differences, a series of follow-up one-way ANOVAs for the measures with homogeneity of variance and non-parametric Kruskal Wallistests for those without were then run to identify the significant betwen-discipline differences in each measure. Otherwise, no follow-up tests were run.

Table 2 Rhetorical move-step framework for research article introductions.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move/Step</td><td>Description</td><td>Tag</td><td>Inclusion rate</td></tr><tr><td>Move 1</td><td>Establishing a research territory</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Claiming centrality or value of research area</td><td>[M1_S1a]</td><td>66.25%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Real-world contextualization</td><td>[M1_S1b]</td><td>43.50%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 2</td><td>Making generalizations about research area</td><td>[M1_S2]</td><td>93.50%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 3</td><td>Reviewing items of previous research</td><td>[M1_S3]</td><td>61.25%</td></tr><tr><td>Move 2</td><td>Establishing a niche</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Counter-claiming</td><td>[M2_S1a]</td><td>21.00%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td> Indicating a gap</td><td>[M2_S1b]</td><td>55.75%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Question raising</td><td>[M2_S1c]</td><td>14.25%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Continuing a tradition</td><td>[M2_S1d]</td><td>15.75%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Pointing out limitations of previous research</td><td>[M2_S1e]</td><td>33.75%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 2</td><td> Providing justification</td><td>[M2_S2]</td><td>39.25%</td></tr><tr><td>Move 3</td><td>Presenting the present work via</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Step 1</td><td>Announcing present research</td><td>[M3_S1]</td><td>95.25%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 2</td><td>Presenting research questions or hypotheses</td><td>[M3_S2a]</td><td>20.25%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 2</td><td>Advancing new theoretical claims</td><td>[M3_S2b]</td><td>8.75%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 3</td><td>Definitional clarification</td><td>[M3_S3]</td><td>12.50%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 4</td><td> Summarizing methods</td><td>[M3_S4a]</td><td>60.25%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 4</td><td> Explaining a mathematical model</td><td>[M3_S4b]</td><td>2.00%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 4</td><td>Describing analyzed scenario</td><td>[M3_S4c]</td><td>6.75%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 5</td><td>Announcing and discussing results</td><td>[M3_S5]</td><td>37.50%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 6</td><td>Stating the value of present research.</td><td>[M3_S6]</td><td>44.00%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 7</td><td>Outlining the structure of the paper</td><td>[M3_S7]</td><td>38.75%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 8</td><td>Rationalizing research focus and design</td><td>[M3_S8]</td><td>34.25%</td></tr><tr><td>Step 9</td><td>Presenting limitations of current study</td><td>[M3_S9]</td><td>1.50%</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: Inclusion rate' represents the percentage of texts $( \mathrm { N } = 4 0 0 $ that include the move-step at least once.

Table 3 Syntactic complexity indices used.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Index name</td><td> Index description</td></tr><tr><td>Sentence length</td><td>Number of words in the sentence (Lu, 2010)</td></tr><tr><td>Nominalization</td><td>Number of words with one of the five sufixes in Biber et al. (199) or included in Nomlex (MacLeod, Grishman, Meyers, Barrett, &amp; Reeves, 2001)</td></tr><tr><td>Finite dependent clause</td><td>Number of finite dependent clauses, either nominal, adjective or adverbial (Lu, 2010)</td></tr><tr><td>Nonfinite dependent clause</td><td>Number of nonfinite dependent clauses with gerund, infinitive, or past particles (Biber, Gray, &amp; Poonpon, 2011)</td></tr><tr><td>Left-embeddedness</td><td>Number of words before the main verb of the sentence (McNamara et al., 2014)</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3. Results

The two-way MAnovA revealed significant effects for discipline (Pillai's Trace $= 0 . 4 5 7$ F $( 1 5 , 8 4 3 ) = 1 0 . 1 1 1$ $p < . 0 0 1$ 3 $\boldsymbol \eta _ { \mathsf { p } } ^ { 2 } =$ 0.152), rhetorical move-step (Pillai's Tra $\mathsf { c e } = 1 . 0 2 1 , \mathrm { F } \left( 1 0 5 , 1 4 1 5 \right) = 3 . 4 6 0 , p < . 0 0 1$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 2 0 4 )$ , and the interaction between the two (Pillai's Trace $= 1 . 3 0 4$ , F (285,1415) = 1.752, $p < . 0 0 1$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 2 6 1 $ on the five measures. According to Cohen (1988), small, medium, and large effects of $\boldsymbol \eta _ { \mathsf { p } } ^ { 2 }$ correspond to values of 0.01, 0.06, and 0.14, respectively. Based on these thresholds, the effect sizes for discipline, rhetorical move-ste, and the interaction between the two were ll large. The significant, large effct of the interaction between discipline and rhetorical move-step is of particular interest to us, as it points to strong disciplinary influences on the relationship betwee syntactic complexity and rhetorical move-steps. In what follows, we systematically examine disciplinary variation in how academic writers engage with syntactic complexity to realize the six focal rhetorical move-steps in RA introductions. Table 4 summarizes the descriptive statistics of the syntactic complexity values for each of these move-steps in each discipline.

# 3.1. M1_S2: Move One, Making Generalizations about Research Area

For M1 S2 sentences, the Levene test indicated homogeneity of variance among the four disciplines for all measures $( p > . 0 5 )$ , and a one-way MANOVA revealed significant between-discipline differences in the five measures (Wilks's $\mathrm { L } = 0 . 0 2 7$ , F $( 1 5 , 3 4 ) = 6 . 0 3 4 , p \ <$ .001, $\boldsymbol \eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 7 0 0 )$ . Follow-up one-way ANOVAs revealed significant between-group differences in four measures.

For sentence length $( \mathrm { F } \ ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 1 7 . 9 7 8$ $p \textless . 0 0 1$ $\boldsymbol \eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 7 7 1 )$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that Anthropology writers constructed text advancing thsep with significantly longer sentence than writers of Sociology and CE, whose M1 2 sentences were in turn significantly longer than those of EE Examples 1 and 2 highlight the importance of inroducing, discussing, and imposing order on diverse literature across disciplines in Introduction writing, but the Anthropology writer's sentence demonstrates markedy increased clausal complexity compared with the EE writer's sentence through the use of finite dependent clauses, as well as post prepositional modification of noun phrases (NPs), all of which contribute to sentence length.

Ex. 1. For the Nobel Prize winning chemist Crutzen and many others, meanwhile, the Industrial Revolution marks the beginning of the Anthropocene, because Watt's dramatically improved steam engine enabled an ever-accelerating use of fossl fuels, releasing carbon that had been sequestered over hundreds of millons of years and therey disrupting the energy balance of Earth. (53 words, Anthropology).

Table 4 Syntactic complexity values for the six focal rhetorical move-steps in each discipline.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move</td><td>Anthropology</td><td> Sociology</td><td>Chemical E.</td><td>Electrical E.</td><td>F/H</td><td>p</td><td>np</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">M1_S2: Move One, Making Generalizations about Research Area</td></tr><tr><td>MLS</td><td>28.62 (2.27)</td><td>26.25 (.99)</td><td>24.57 (1.74)</td><td>21.37 (1.09)</td><td>17.978</td><td>.000*</td><td>.771</td></tr><tr><td>NOM</td><td>1.15 (.14)</td><td>1.28 (.18)</td><td>1.50 (.16)</td><td>1.14 (.15)</td><td>5.557</td><td>.008*</td><td>.510</td></tr><tr><td>FDC</td><td>.79 (.12)</td><td>.76 (.06)</td><td>.38 (.09)</td><td>.37 (.07)</td><td>33.024</td><td>.000*</td><td>.861</td></tr><tr><td>NDC</td><td>.76 (.06)</td><td>.72 (.12)</td><td>.74 (.14)</td><td>.66 (.10)</td><td>.720</td><td>.554</td><td>.119</td></tr><tr><td>LEM</td><td>7.88 (1.10)</td><td>7.32 (.32)</td><td>6.59 (.43)</td><td>6.37 (.33)</td><td>5.937</td><td>.006*</td><td>.527</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">M1_S3: Move One, Reviewing Items of Previous Research</td></tr><tr><td>MLS</td><td>30.55 (3.14)</td><td>28.80 (2.44)</td><td>26.75 (1.17)</td><td>25.48 (5.16)</td><td>2.289</td><td>.117</td><td>.300</td></tr><tr><td>NOM</td><td>1.12 (.27)</td><td>1.18 (.19)</td><td>1.43 (.25)</td><td>1.34 (.12)</td><td>2.288</td><td>.118</td><td>.300</td></tr><tr><td>FDC</td><td>1.11 (.34)</td><td>1.08 (.22)</td><td>.50 (.10)</td><td>.47 (.17)</td><td>12.229</td><td>.000*</td><td>.696</td></tr><tr><td>NDC</td><td>.96 (.34)</td><td>.69 (.08)</td><td>.93 (.24)</td><td>.88 (.17)</td><td>1.443</td><td>.267</td><td>.213</td></tr><tr><td>LEM</td><td>8.05 (1.01)</td><td>6.37 (1.19)</td><td>6.71 (1.45)</td><td>6.93 (1.21)</td><td>1.752</td><td>.197</td><td>.247</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">M2_S1b: Move Two, Indicating a Gap</td></tr><tr><td>MLS</td><td>24.95 (10.74)</td><td>26.06 (2.02)</td><td>28.20 (3.76)</td><td>25.04 (3.20)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>NOM</td><td>.62 (.42)</td><td>1.24 (.34)</td><td>1.51 (.31)</td><td>1.28 (.46)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>FDC</td><td>.99 (.72)</td><td>.97 (.25)</td><td>.67 (.42)</td><td>.58 (.18)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>NDC</td><td>.77 (.34)</td><td>.56 (.10)</td><td>.78 (.20)</td><td>.77 (.19)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>LEM</td><td>8.77 (4.82)</td><td>8.53 (1.38)</td><td>9.98 (2.14)</td><td>9.78 (2.31)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">M2 S2: Move Two, Providing Justification</td></tr><tr><td>MLS</td><td>29.65 (2.35)</td><td>25.78 (2.22)</td><td>23.75 (3.48)</td><td>25.84 (3.04)</td><td>3.820</td><td>.031*</td><td>.417</td></tr><tr><td>NOM</td><td>1.49 (.31)</td><td>1.14 (.24)</td><td>2.10 (.42)</td><td>1.83 (.61)</td><td>4.955</td><td>.013*</td><td>.482</td></tr><tr><td>FDC</td><td>1.05 (.42)</td><td>.88 (.16)</td><td>.37 (.20)</td><td>.56 (.17)</td><td>6.988</td><td>.003*</td><td>.567</td></tr><tr><td>NDC</td><td>.840 (.17)</td><td>.78 (.22)</td><td>.79 (.38)</td><td>.91 (.43)</td><td>.187</td><td>.904</td><td>.034</td></tr><tr><td>LEM</td><td>9.92 (4.37)</td><td>9.00 (1.81)</td><td>8.32 (1.86)</td><td>7.54 (1.96)</td><td>.690</td><td>.571</td><td>.115</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">M3_S1: Move Three, Announcing Present Research</td></tr><tr><td>MLS</td><td>31.10 (3.42)</td><td>26.23 (2.93)</td><td>30.09 (1.34)</td><td>26.56 (2.01)</td><td>4.650</td><td>.016*</td><td>.466</td></tr><tr><td>NOM</td><td>1.31 (.30)</td><td>1.25 (.26)</td><td>1.71 (.28)</td><td>1.74 (.35)</td><td>3.715</td><td>.034*</td><td>.411</td></tr><tr><td>FDC</td><td>.70 (.19)</td><td>.69 (.14)</td><td>.30 (.05)</td><td>.40 (.12)</td><td>10.804</td><td>.000*</td><td>.670</td></tr><tr><td>NDC</td><td>1.17 (.30)</td><td>1.02 (.23)</td><td>1.07 (.23)</td><td>1.18 (.22)</td><td>.493</td><td>.692</td><td>.085</td></tr><tr><td>LEM</td><td>6.10 (1.10)</td><td>4.48 (1.11)</td><td>8.19 (.80)</td><td>6.53 (1.40)</td><td>9.158</td><td>.000*</td><td>.632</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">M3_S4a: Move Three, Summarizing Methods</td></tr><tr><td>MLS</td><td>32.44 (5.97)</td><td>31.28 (4.81)</td><td>24.33 (2.38)</td><td>24.42 (2.03)</td><td>5.503</td><td>.009*</td><td>.508</td></tr><tr><td>NOM</td><td>1.40 (.49)</td><td>1.50 (.54)</td><td>1.44 (.18)</td><td>1.43 (.37)</td><td>.0442</td><td>.987</td><td>.008</td></tr><tr><td>FDC</td><td>.76 (.10)</td><td>.59 (.17)</td><td>.24 (.07)</td><td>.46 (.24)</td><td>9.175</td><td>.000*</td><td>.632</td></tr><tr><td>NDC</td><td>1.00 (.42)</td><td>1.29 (.46)</td><td>.89 (.21)</td><td>.98 (.17)</td><td>3.023</td><td>.388</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>LEM</td><td>5.60 (2.40)</td><td>7.32 (2.57)</td><td>8.81 (.30)</td><td>6.99 (1.02)</td><td>5.057</td><td>.168</td><td>-</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: $\mathrm { E = }$ Engineering, $\mathbf { M L S } =$ mean sentence length, $\mathbf { N O M } =$ nominalizations, FDC $=$ finite dependent clauses, NDC $=$ non-finite dependent clauses, $\mathbf { L E M = }$ left-embeddedness. The two values in each cel i Columns two to five denote the mean and standard deviation (in parenthesis. A one-way MANOVA revealed no significant between-discipline difference in the five measures for M2_S1b, Indicating a Gap' (Wilks's $\mathrm { L } = 0 . 2 4 7$ $\mathrm { F } ( 1 5 , 3 4 ) =$ 1.474, $p = . 1 7 1$ $\boldsymbol \eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 3 7 3 )$ . For M3_S4a, Summarizing Methods, non-parametric Kruskal Wallis tests were run for NDC and LEM. $^ { \ast } p < . 0 5$

Ex. 2. Various approaches have been proposed based on different kinds of physical phenomena. (12 words, EE).

Regarding nominalizations $\left( \mathrm { F } \left( 3 , 1 6 \right) = 5 . 5 5 \right)$ $p = . 0 0 8$ $\mathfrak { \eta } _ { \mathtt { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 5 1 0 )$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that M1_S2 sentences in CE had significantly more nominalizations than those in Sociology, Anthropology, and E. As can be seen in the nominalization dense Example 3 the tendency to nominalize in M1 S2 statements in CE i connected both to the well-documented use of research-process oriented nominalized lexemes (e.g., adsorption, removal, operation) and the use of nominalized adjectives (e.g., simplicity), which was strongly associated with CE writing.

Ex. 3. Among them, adsorption has been found to be superior to others in terms of its simplicity, low cost, acceptable removal ef. ficiency and ease of operation. (nominalizations italicized, CE).

For finite dependent clauses ( $\mathsf { F } \left( 3 , 1 6 \right) = 3 3 . 0 2 4$ $p < . 0 0 1$ $\begin{array} { r } { \eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 8 6 1 \mathrm { , } } \end{array}$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that writers in Anthropology and Sociology introduced significantly more finite dependent clauses into their M1 S2 statements than writers in CE and EE. Examples 1 and 4 llustrat the tendency of Sociology and Anthropology writer to use multiple finite clausal elements to synthesize social/psychological conditions for claims in addition to the synthesis of scholarly perspectives which is characteristic of Introductions. In contrast, Example 5 showcases NP elaboration rather than finite clausal complexity in EE, a trend which was more or less consistent across rhetorical contexts..

Ex. 4. Existing research offers important clues about [how individuals organize their social networks into a strong group of core supporters and a weaker, more diverse set of peripheral ie] and [why they do so to facilitate acces to a wide range of resources that can fulfill different needs [as they ariselll. (finite dependent clauses bracketed, Sociology).

Ex. 5. All these studie focused on classical structures and models of one DOF systems like the pendulum and mass-spring-damper. (elaborated NP italicized, EE).

For left-embeddedness () $\vec { \cdot } \ ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 5 . 9 3 7$ $p = . 0 0 6$ $\mathfrak { \eta } _ { \mathtt { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 5 2 7 )$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that M1_S2 sentences in Anthropology were significantly more left-embedded than those of CE and EE, while M1 S2 sentences of Sociology were significantly more left-embedded than those f E. The left-embedding in Examples 6 and 7illustrates atendency in Sociology and Anthropology to introduce long NPs describing complex social relationships as the research subject. While engineering writers shared the tendency to create complex NPs, the verb trended towards the earlier portions of the sentence. However, Example 8 shows an exceptional case where the main verb is the final word of a short sentence.

Ex. 6.In contrst, the homophily between ajob seeker and the contact on occupation or other work-relevant dimensions influences Whether or not the contact is able to link the job seeker to an offer that matches her skill and aspirations. (17 words before main verb, Sociology).

Ex. 7. The development of accurate, noninvasive methods for measuring or estimating energy expenditure in free-living subjects has greatly improved our understanding of activity and energy expenditure in humans and other primates. (15 words before main verb, Anthropology).

Ex. 8. The dye transport from an aqueous donor phase through an organic membrane phase to an aqueous aceptor phase occurs. (17 words before main verb, CE).

No significant between-discipline diffrences were found for M1 S2 sentences in terms of the number of non-finite dependent clauses $( \mathrm { F } ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 0 . 7 2 0$ $ { p } = . 5 5 4$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 1 1 9 $

# 3.2. M1_S3: Move One, reviewing items of previous research

For M1 S3 sentences, the Levene test indicated homogeneity of variance among the four disciplines for all measures $( p > . 0 5 )$ . A one-way MANOVA revealed significant between-discipline differences in the five measures (Wilks's $\mathrm { L } = 0 . 1 4 3$ $\vec { \cdot } \left( 1 5 , 3 4 \right) = 2 . 2 8 3 , p =$ .023, $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 4 7 7 )$ . Follow-up one-way ANOVAs revealed significant between-group diferences in finite dependent clauses only (F $( 3 , 1 6 ) = 1 2 . 2 2 9$ $p < . 0 0 1$ $\mathfrak { \eta } _ { \mathtt { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 6 9 6 )$

LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that M1 S3 sentences in Anthropology and Sociology had a significantly greater number of finite dependent clauses than those in CE and . This rhetorical ste demonstrates the highest mean complexity value for this measure for both social science disciplines, and while the means for finte dependent clauses per M1 S3 sentence are notably higher than for M1 S2 for all isciplines, the significance patterns are identical, with Anthropology and Sociology significantly more complex in this feature for this rhetorical function than the engineering disciplines. Example 9 reinforces what a mean of 0.47 finite clausal elements per M1 S3 sentence suggests, that most such sentences in EE simply do not contain finite clausal elements. While Example 10 also introduces previous research, the finte dependent clausal elements help the Sociology writer articulate another author's arguments and views which themselves contain embedded elements. Example 11 from Anthropology reinforces this trend, highlighting the distinct nature of what tends tobe reviewed in M1 3 across disciplines: more research actions in the engineering disciplines and more arguments in the social sciences disciplines. It should be noted that al four disciplines demonstrated a tendency to report findings in M1_S3.

Ex. 9. A subsequent study by the authors with more advance algorithm, i.e, ANN, support vector machine has also been conducted vith better accuracy. (EE).

Ex. 10. More recently, Sampson argued [that the mechanism [through which these conditions become effective] is related t people's relationships in their neighborhoods]. (finite dependent clauses bracketed, Sociology).

Ex. 11. Second, Parry's exegesis of the Maussian text, [with which ery much sympathise], tell us [that Mauss rally was tlking of a context [in which the split between pure gifts and commodities had not yet taken placel].(finite dependent clauses bracketed Anthropology).

No significant between-discipline differences were found in the complexity of M1 S3 sentences for the remaining measures: Mean length of sentence $( \mathrm { F } ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 2 . 2 8 9$ $p = . 1 1 7 _ { \cdot }$ $\mathfrak { n } _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 3 0 0 )$ , nominalizations ( $\mathrm { ~ F ~ } ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 2 . 2 8 8$ $p = . 1 1 8 _ { \cdot }$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 3 0 0 )$ , non-finite dependent clauses $\operatorname { ( F } \left( 3 , 1 6 \right) = 1 . 4 4 3$ $p = . 2 6 7$ $\boldsymbol { \eta } _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 2 1 3$ , and left-embeddedness $\left( \mathrm { F } \left( 3 , 1 6 \right) = 1 . 7 5 2 \right.$ $p = . 1 9 7$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 2 4 7 \}$

# 3.3. M2_S1b: move two, Indicating a Gap

For M2 1b sentences, the Levene test indicated homogeneity of variance among the four disciplines for all measures $\left( p > . 0 5 \right)$ . A one-way MANOVA revealed no significant between-discipline differences in the five measures (Wilks's $\mathrm { L } = 0 . 2 4 7$ , F $( 1 5 , 3 4 ) = 1 . 4 7 4 , p$ $= . 1 7 1$ $\boldsymbol \eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 3 7 3 )$

# 3.4. M2 S2: move two, Providing Justification

For M2 S2 sentences, the Levene test indicated homogeneity of variance among the four disciplines for all measures $( p > . 0 5 )$ . A one-way MANOVA revealed significant between-discipline differences in the five measures (Wilks's ${ \mathrm { L } } = 0 . 0 8 7$ F $( 1 5 , 3 4 ) = 3 . 1 8 7$ $p =$ .003, $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 5 5 8 \AA$ . Follow-up one-way ANOVAs revealed significant between-group differences in three measures.

For sentence length ( $\mathrm { ~ F ~ } ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 3 . 8 2 0$ $p = . 0 3 1$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 4 1 7 )$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that M2_S2 sentences were significantly longer in Anthropology than in E, Sociology, and CE. In Example 12 below, an Anthropology writer produces a sentence which is complex in its let-embeddedness, inclusion of object-of-inquiry related complex NPs, and the overall number of content items, all contributing to a lengthy sentence which presents a single gap-justifying proposition.

Ex. 12. Rather than exploring the adequacy, structure, and presentation of dictionary information by scrutinizing specific entries from a third person's perspective, it is more effective to conduct empirical research which corroborates learners consultation outcomes by ther own rflections of their consultation proces and alation of the efetivns of dictionary inforation. (49 words 21 words before main verb, Anthropology).

For nominalizations $( \mathrm { F } ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 4 . 9 5 5 $ $p { = } . 0 1 3$ $\mathfrak { \eta } _ { \mathtt { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 4 8 2 )$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that CE writers made significantly greater use of this structure in M2 S2 sentences than Anthropology and Sociology writers, and EE writers used nominalizations significantly more than Sociology writers in this context. Example 13 demonstrates the tendency of EE writers to explain the importance of flling identified gaps through discussions of methodological proceses and their applications which involve frequent nominalizations, similar to the methodologically oriented nominalizations of M3 S1. Interestingly, EE is usually on the lower end of the complexity rankings except for this measure, where it is consistently higher in relation to social science disciplines.

Ex. 13. The irregular computation and synchronization pattens of the emering parallel pplications and the increasing variety of the modern hardware architectures pose an enormous challenge in constructing highly reusable and portable multi-processor software libraries. (nominalizations italicized, EE).

For finite dependent clauses $( \mathrm { F } ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 6 . 9 8 8$ $\begin{array} { r } { p = . 0 0 3 } \end{array}$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 5 6 7 )$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that Anthropology and Sociology had significantly higher frequency in M2 S2 sentences than EE and CE. Example 14 shows the importance of finite dependent elements for Anthropology writers in embedding 'object of inquiry' references into justification statements.

Ex. 14. Examining such emergent socialities may prompt ethnographers to reconsider [what we recognize as political], and [wha we consider depoliticized]. (finite dependent clauses bracketed, Anthropology).

No significant betwen-discipline ifferences were found in the complexity of M2 S2 sentences for non-finite dependent clause (F $( 3 , 1 6 ) = 0 . 1 8 7$ $p = . 9 0 4 $ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 3 4 )$ and left-embeddedness $\mathrm { ~ ( F ~ } ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 0 . 6 9 0$ $p = . 5 7 1$ 3 $\mathfrak { \eta } _ { \mathtt { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 1 1 5 )$

# 3.5. M3_S1: move three, Announcing Present Research

For M3_S1 sentences, the Levene test indicated homogeneity of variance among the four disciplines for all measures $( p > . 0 5 )$ . A one-way MANOVA revealed significant between-discipline differences in the five measures (Wilks's ${ \mathrm { L } } = 0 . 0 3 3$ $\vec { \cdot } \left( 1 5 , 3 4 \right) = 5 . 4 5 3 , p $ $p <$ .001, $\boldsymbol \eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 6 7 9 )$ . Follow-up one-way ANOVAs revealed significant between-group differences in four measures.

For sentence length (F $( 3 , 1 6 ) = 4 . 6 5 0$ $p = . 0 1 6$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 4 6 6 )$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that M3_S1 sentences were significantly longer in Anthropology and CE than in EE and Sociology. Acrossdisciplines the above average length of M3 S1 sentences was apparent: they demonstrated the highest length of all move-steps in CE and EE (notably so in CE), and were the second longest in Anthropology. As each text tended to include a small number of M3 S1 sentence regardlessof length (ften only one), there appeared to be a strong drive to compressa large amount of information into a single sentence, as illustrated in Example 15.

Ex. 15. In this paper, we developed two-dimensional heterogeneous model for high accuracy prediction of the amounts of PA and MA, and the hot spot temperature in an industrial multi-tubular fixed bed reactor by including the reaction pathway from OX to a major-by-product MA in the Calderbank's reaction network. (47 words, CE).

For nominalizations () $\dot { \iota } \left( 3 , 1 6 \right) = 3 . 7 1 5$ $p = . 0 3 4$ $\boldsymbol \eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 4 1 1 $ , LSD post-hoc comparisons highlight that EE and CE writers used significantly more nominalizations in their Announcing statements than Anthropology and Sociology writers. While nominalizations per sentence are higher for this step than for the overall average across disciplines due to the importance of 'research proces statements in stating aims, the engineering disciplines display a stronger reliance on nominal word forms, a illustrated in Example 16.

Ex. 16. The alteration of the transport mechanism of the selected gases as a result of the CNT growth and pore size reduction was elucidated and the separation efficiency of both membranes, with respect to $\mathrm { H } _ { 2 }$ and $\mathrm { C O } _ { 2 }$ was evaluated. (nominalizations italicized, CE).

For finite dependent clauses $\left( \mathrm { F \ ( 3 , 1 6 ) } = 1 0 . 8 0 4 \right.$ $p \ < \ . 0 0 1$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 6 7 0 )$ in Announcing statements, LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that Anthropology and Sociology had significantly higher values than EE and CE. One characteristic feature of Announcing statements with high finite dependent clause counts is the integration of questions and, as discussed earlier, object of inquiry' ref erences into such statements in Anthropology, as in Example 17.

Ex. 17. This article analyzes this uncertainty over [what historicity might mean] and examines [how it has been and can be adapted] and [what theoretical service it might perform for anthropology]. (finite dependent clauses bracketed, Anthropology).

Regarding left-embeddedness (F $( 3 , 1 6 ) = 9 . 1 5 8$ $p \ll . 0 0 1$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 6 3 2 )$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that CE texts had significantly more eft-embedded Announcing statements than EE texts, which had significantly more lft-embedded Announcing statements than Anthropology and Sociology. The lft-embeddednes of CE aim statements such as that i Example 16, and to a lesser extent the lft-embeddedness f aim statements in E as well ver thestructures in the social sciences disciplines was striking, as the use of a passive $\mathbf { \epsilon } ^ { \ast } \mathbf { X }$ was [research verb] $^ +$ ed' structure was common.

No significant between-discipline differences were found for M3 S1 sentences in terms of the number of non-finite dependent clauses $( \mathrm { F } ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 0 . 4 9 3$ $p = . 6 9 2$ $\mathfrak { \eta } _ { \mathtt { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 8 5 \mathrm { ] }$

# 3.6. M3_S4a: move three, Summarizing Methods

For M3_ S4a sentences, the Levene test indicated homogeneity of variance among the four disciplines for three measures $( p > . 0 5 )$ but not for non-finite dependent clauses $\left( { p = . 0 0 6 } \right)$ and left-embeddedness $( p = . 0 1 1 )$ . A one-way MANOvA revealed significant between-discipline differences in the five measures (Pillai's Trace $= 1 . 3 1 5$ $\vec { \mathfrak { z } } \left( 1 5 , 4 2 \right) = 2 . 1 8 4$ $p = . 0 2 4$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 4 3 8 )$ . Follow-up oneway ANOVAs for the three measures with homogeneity of variance and non-parametric Kruskal Wallistests for non-finite dependent clauses and left-embeddedness revealed significant between-group differences in two measures.

For sentence length $\left( \mathrm { F } \left( 3 , 1 6 \right) = 5 . 5 0 3 \right.$ $p = . 0 0 9$ $\eta _ { \mathrm { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 5 0 8 )$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that Anthropology and Sociology had significantly longer M3 S4a sentences than EE and CE. Example 18 demonstrates a salient increase in the global complexity of Sociology writing in methods statements in RA introductions. While Sociology was often in the middle of the complexity rankings across previous discussions, the need to integrate methodological and analytical details with real world sociological information leads to significantly longer sentences.

Ex. 18. We do so by conducting a quantitative case study of women's changing work commitment in conjunction with two distinct policy changes within Germany s statutory parental leave program, including the 1992 watershed reform that extended leave duration to 36 months following childbirth and hence created one of the most generous leave entitlements worldwide. (53 words, Sociology).

For finite dependent clauses ( $\mathrm { ~ F ~ } ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 9 . 1 7 5$ $p \ll . 0 0 1$ $\mathfrak { \eta } _ { \mathtt { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 6 3 2 )$ , LSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that writers in Anthropology, Sociology, and EE used significantly more such structures in $\mathbf { M } 3 \mathbf { \Delta S 4 a }$ sentences than CE writers, and the differences between Anthropology and EE were also significant. Building on the tendencies to integrate sociological and methodological detail in Sociology methods statements in the introduction, Example 18 shows an author both outlining a methodological approach and detailing the contents of a 1992 reform.

Nosignificant between-discipline differences were found in the complexity of M3 S4a sentences for the remaining three measures: nominalizations ( $\mathrm { ~ F ~ } ( 3 , 1 6 ) = 0 . 0 4 4 2$ $p = . 9 8 7 .$ $\mathfrak { \eta } _ { \mathtt { p } } ^ { 2 } = 0 . 0 0 8 )$ , non-finite dependent clauses $\begin{array} { r } { \left( H \ ( 3 ) \ = \ 3 . 0 2 3 \right. } \end{array}$ $p = . 3 8 8 )$ , and leftembeddedness $\left( H \left( 3 \right) = 5 . 0 5 7 \right.$ $p = . 1 6 8 )$

# 4. Discussion

Our analysis revealed significant efects of discipline, rhetorical move-step, and the interaction of the two on the syntactic complexity of sentences in the introduction sections of RAs from Anthropology, Sociology, Chemical Engineering, and Electrical Engineering. A follow-up analysis f entnces realizing two frequent stes for each rhetorical move revealed some similarities but also many significant differences in the syntactic complexity of sentences realizing the same rhetorical move-steps among the four disci plines. A close examination of the feature-annotated versions f the texts created through the automated analysis pointed to important disciplinary practices behind these differences.

Of the five syntactic complexity measures considered, only non-finite dependent clauses showed no significant between-discipline difference in al six foal hetorical move-teps. Previously, Lt al. (2020) found that clusters f non-fiite deendent clause re often used in RA introductions to elaborate theoretical (e.g., Informed by ..), methodological (e.g., by surveying), or implication-based information (e.g., to gain a beter understanding of), and are especiallyfrequent in M2 s2, Providing Justification' and M3_S1a, Announcing Present Research' statements. Our current resuls indicate that the elaborative function of non-finite dependent clauses was utilized consistently acrossall four disciplines in realizing each of the six focal steps. Taken together, this highlights the affor dances of this type of complex structure for elaborating on theoretical and methodological details acros isciplinary context, as it is widely and consistently used. While more qualitative analyses of the discursive patterns of ocal usage are needed within and across disciplinary contexts, these findings point towards the potential pedagogical benefits of training EAP writers to attend to non-finite dependent clauses in their own academic language usage.

Among the six focal rhetorical move-steps analyzed, only M2 S1b, Indicating a Gap' showed no significant between-discipline difference for l five measures, indicating that RA writer from the four disciplines employed syntactic structures of comparable complexity to relize this rhetorical goal. In reent analyses, Lu et l. 2020) and Casal (2020) reorted that ths ste is characterized y a higher levelof left-embeddednessthan many ther stes, oten including a subordinate clause acknowledging the field's eforts in the relevant domain before introducing a research gap. Our current results indicated that this step also had the highest level of left-embeddednes among the si focal stes for al four disciplines. Similar to the findings of non-finite deendent clause, we interpret the uniform tendency across isciplines to employ left-embedded and subordinate clauses to connect negatively-oriented gap-building statements to positive commentary as of potential pedagogical significance across disciplinary domains. Therefore, we suggest that notably lft-embedded sentences advancing the Gap-Building aims of rsearch article writers can be leveraged pedagogically to underscore the social nature of academic writing practices by capturing interpersonal dynamics between writers and individuals within broader research communities, as well as provide insights into one of the linguistictools that authors utilize to craft Gap-Building statements of balanced stance. Further, Casal and Lu (2021) demonstrate that precisely these types of left-embedded sentences may be usefully analyzed in pedagogical contexts to raise learners' overall awareness of the role of complexity in academic writing.

The other five focal rhetorical move-steps allexhibited significant between-discipline differences in one or more of the following four measures: sentence length, finite dependent clauses, nominalizations, and left-embeddedness indicating that RA writers from different disciplines constructed these rhetorical steps in variable ways. While some of the four measures exhibited more consistency in the patterns of disciplinary variation acros these five rhetorical move-steps than others, exceptions existed even for the measure with the highest level of consistency (i.., finite dependent clauses), confirming the value of examining disciplinary variation in syntactic complexity at the rhetorical move-step level in addition to, if not in place of, the RA introduction level or the whole RA level.

Finite dependent clauses exhibited the most consistent pattrn of disciplinary variation, with the two social science disciplines using significantly more finite subordination than the two engineering disciplines in five focal rhetorical move-steps. While finite subordination has been shown to be les characteristicof academic writing than phrasal complexit (Biber t al., 2011) and to also vary in density among rhetorical move-steps in RA introductions (Lu et l., 2020), these results suggested that social science RA writers had a consistently stronger tendency to unpack information in finite clausal elements than engineering RA writer across multiple frequent rhetorical move-steps. Meanwhile, while the two engineering disciplines did not differfrom each other in this measure for most rhetorical move-steps, EE used more finite dependent clauses than CE in M3 S4a, Summarizing Methods," indicating that disciplines within the same discipline family could vary from each other as wel in how they realize specific rhetorical goals. This has important implications for research on academic disciplinary writing practices, where scholars are increasingly aware of subdisciplinary variation (e.g., Gilmore & Millar, 2018), and it also highlights the potential importance of raiing learner awareness of the functional affordances of dependent clauses, as well as discipline specific patterns.

In addition to the findings pertaining to finite dependent clauses in M3 S4a, findings on several other focal rhetorical move-steps showed that the Social Science and Engineering groupings at times captured and at other times obscured patterns of disciplinary variation in the data. For M1 S2, Making Generalizations about Research Area", the two social science disciplines used longer and more left-embedded sentences than the two engineering disciplines, while CE used more nominalizations than the other disciplines, including EE. For M2 s2, Providing Justification', the two engineering disciplines used more nominalizations than the two social science disciplines, while Anthropology used longer sentences than al other disciplines, including Sociology. For M31, Announcing Present Research", the two engineering disciplines used more nominalizations and more heavily left-embedded sentences than the two social science disciplines, while Anthropology and CE used longer sentences than the other two disciplines.

A look at these findings from the angle of syntactic complexity features can further reveal how they pointed to some consistency between disciplines within the same discipline family but alo the blurring ofdisciplinary boundaries in the use of syntactic complexity features to achieve rhetorical goals. For lft-embeddedness, the two social science disciplines used more heavily left-embedded sen tences than the two enginering discipline for M1 S2, but the opposite was true for M3_S1. For sentence length, while Anthropology used the longest sentences for multiple steps, Sociology used longer sentences than the two engineering disciplines for M1 \$2, com parable long sentences to those two disciplines for M2 S2, and shorter sentences than CE for M3 S1. For nominalizations, which have been shown to be an important characteristic ofacademic writing (Biber et al, 2011), the two enginering disciplines both used more nominalized forms to condense information than the two social disciplines in M2 S2 and M3 S1, while CE used more nominalizations than all other disciplines in M1 \$2. Interestingly, it can also be noted that, within each field, Anthropology was more complex than Sociology on multiple measures for multiple steps, and CE was more comple than E on multiple measures for multiple steps. Gilmore and Millr (2018) recently reported on lexicall-oriented differences in the academic writing of11 ub-disciline f civil engineering, and the current analysis uncovers dfferences between engineering fields across multiple measures of syntacti complexit, both reinforcing the situated, discipline-specific nature of knowledge-making and academic writing practices.

To summarize, strong linguistic-rhetorical tendencies existed both across academic domains and within specific disciplinary contexts. Our findings highlight the importance of revealing the asociations between syntactic forms and rhetorical functions in academic witing that are highly domain specific as well as those that cut across disciplinary writing practices. These findings serve to expand the limited extant understanding of disciplinary variation in form-function associations in academic writig. At the same time, our analysis also serves to expand the scope of syntactic complexity, which has focused on variation by such writer- and task-related variables as proficiency, expertise, and genre, among others, by focusing on variation along functional lines of comparison in disciplinary contexts.

Turning to a pedagogical perspective, this research highlights the potential value in raising awarenessof the relationships between particular types of syntacticlly complex structures and rhetorical aims in disciplinary contexts. We have illstrated that some syn. tactic structures are associated with specific rhetorical functions acros iscilines, while others ae used rather variably for specific rhetorical goals among different disciplines. It is important for academic writing learners to become aware of not only the use of complex structures in genre-based writing, but also the functional affordance of these structures as well as disciplinary variation in such affordances. In other words, the benefit of including yntactic complexit in academic writing pedagogy are likely to lie as much in raising learner awarenes of how, for what purpose, and in what ways academic writing in thir discipline is complex (Casal & Lu, 2021) as they are in developing their understandings of and linguistic repertoires for accomplishing the rhetorical work involved in research writing practices. More broadly, we recommend that genre-based approaches to disciplinary academic writing target the relationship between complexity and clarity in addition to other focal points, with an aim towards encouraging the development of

agency and intentionality in writing decisions.

# 5. Conclusion

This study investigated disciplinary variation in the syntactic complexity of sentences realizing each of six rhetorical move-steps commonly found in RA introductions among two core social science disciplines and two core engineering disciplines. Our analysis revealed both similarities and, to a great extent, significant differences in how RA writers from different disciplines engage with syntactic complexity in realizing the same rhetorical move-steps in RA introductions. The analytical focus of the current study was relatively narrow. It would be useful for future research to expand the analytical scope by including a wider range of syntactic complexity measures, RA part-genres, and disciplines and to systematically explore the relationship between within-discipline variation and crossdisciplinary variation. These imitations notwithstanding, our findings support the usefulness of extending a disciplinary variation aproach to the emerging line of corpus-based genre analysis research on function-form mappings in academic writing and enrich the limited extant understanding of disciplinary variation in such mappings with insights from a syntactic complexity perspective. These insights also provide further evidence for the need to attend to discipline-specific practices in how different rhetorical goals are communicated in academic writing pedagogy.

# Author statement

Xiaofei Lu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Investigation, Formal analysis, Software, Writing - original draft Supervision J Elliot Casal: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Ivestigation, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft Yingying Liu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Ivestigation, Formal analysis, Writing  original draft. lesya Kisselev: Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Jungwan Yoon: Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft.

# Appendix

Number of texts containing each rhetorical move-step in each discipline.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Move/Step</td><td>Anthropology</td><td>Chemical Engineering</td><td>Electrical Engineering</td><td> Sociology</td><td>All</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6"> Move 1, Establishing a research territory</td></tr><tr><td>M1_S1a</td><td>43</td><td>78</td><td>76</td><td>68</td><td>265</td></tr><tr><td>M1_S1b</td><td>35</td><td>68</td><td>50</td><td>21</td><td>174</td></tr><tr><td>M1_S2</td><td>85</td><td>99</td><td>90</td><td>100</td><td>374</td></tr><tr><td>M1_S3</td><td>57</td><td>65</td><td>77</td><td>46</td><td>245</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6"> Move 2, Establishing a niche</td></tr><tr><td>M2_S1a</td><td>13</td><td>25</td><td>37</td><td>9</td><td>84</td></tr><tr><td>M2_S1b</td><td>28</td><td>69</td><td>50</td><td>76</td><td>223</td></tr><tr><td>M2_S1c</td><td>23</td><td>2.</td><td>4</td><td>28</td><td>57</td></tr><tr><td>M2_S1d</td><td>14</td><td>12</td><td>25</td><td>12</td><td>63</td></tr><tr><td>M2_S1e</td><td>6</td><td>48</td><td>53</td><td>28</td><td>135</td></tr><tr><td>M2_S2</td><td> 32</td><td>42</td><td>40</td><td>43</td><td>157</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">Move 3, Presenting the present work</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S1</td><td>89</td><td>99</td><td>98</td><td>95</td><td>381</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S2a</td><td>27</td><td>15</td><td>1</td><td>38</td><td>81</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S2b</td><td>17</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>16</td><td>35</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S3</td><td>21</td><td>10</td><td>6</td><td>13</td><td>50</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S4a</td><td>37</td><td>70</td><td>76</td><td>64</td><td>247</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S4b</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S4c</td><td>14.</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>13</td><td>27.</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S5</td><td>42</td><td>30</td><td>35</td><td>43</td><td>150</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S6</td><td>21</td><td>41</td><td>68</td><td>44</td><td>174</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S7</td><td>36</td><td>19</td><td>56</td><td>44</td><td>155</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S8</td><td>35</td><td>20</td><td>26</td><td>56</td><td>137</td></tr><tr><td>M3_S9</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>4</td><td>6</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $\Nu = 1 0 0$ for each discipline.

# References

ast Purposes, 11(2), 134-144.   
Biber, D. a  010  s at a  xt, ela xici. of is Ac e, (1) 2-20. Quarterly, 45(1), 5-35.   
iber     i  tiis, 3 (5), 639-668.   
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Lech, G., Conrad, . & Finegan, E. (199). Longman grammar of spoken and witte English. New York Longman.   
l doctoral dissertation). PA: The Pennsylvania State University, University Park.   
Casal Jer, J.200  hi ti  p  i s- a-d s e 5, tie 102370.   
Casal, .    (2021). e comicad is a er o d angish g dn  t stic omplxty n a e-aed academic writing course. International Journdl of English for Academic Purposes: Research and Practice, 1(1), 95-114.   
Charle, M. (2018). Corpus-assed editing for doctoral students: More than just concordancing. Journal of Eglish for Academic Puposes, 36, 15-25.   
Che  18i Specific Purposes, 50, 97-112.   
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Core.   i       () 33-43.   
Cotos  f   2015. g a oe/ i in t   y. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 19, 52-72.   
Cots  f ,  . 017e/t mdl r  scti tn ir at.sh o ic Pe, 6, 9006   
Cotos , Hfn, . ik . (2020 d g wiers ctith a mactft itin r dr eisi. Writing Research, 12(1), 187-232.   
1       r. 25, 71-83.   
Dng .  00 in  h s aie.gsh r   8 38-154.   
Field, A. (2017). Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics (5th ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage.   
Frodeman, R. (Ed.). (2017). The Oxford handbook of interdisciplinary (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
dr, ,    019 ,    i td Linguistics, 40(4), 646-674.   
Gimore, A,  Milla, . (2018). The agf cvil gnein  ic: cus-a arch. gish for i es, 51, 117.   
Hu, G., & Wang,G. (2014). Discilinary and tolingustic uences o cittion in rrch artice. Jonal f nglish for ic Puoes 14, 1428.   
Hyland, K. (199). Academic atribution: itation and the construction of disciplinary knowledge. Applie Linguistics, 20(3), 341-367.   
Hyland, K. (2008). As can be seen: Lexical bundles and disciplinary variation. English for Specific Purposes, 27(1), 4-21.   
Hyland, K., & Tse, P. (2007). Is there an "academic vocabulary"? Tesol Quarterly, 41(2), 235-253.   
Kyle  e, 01g ti xt   wi usin i s ie.h , 1022) 333-349.   
Le. .     i Specific Purposes, 39, 45-61.   
Lin, L, & Eans, . 2012). trl aten in mprica erh artices: crocipliy study. Egish for ic Pose, 31(3, 150-160.   
Li    2020  tio n wr r l.   sh or   7 ti 102222.   
Lu, X. (2010). utomatic aalysis of syntactic complexity in second language writing. Intnational Jounal of Corpus Lingustic, 15(4), 474496.   
Lu,  (201). cs- of tic mplxt  a nf e wiers mt. ly, 451) 36-62.   
Lu  (201) d meme f yntc complxt n ou-a wn  d licatins or ig at ge etin 34) 493-511.   
Lu Academic Purposes, 44, Article 100832.   
Lu      t Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 11(1), 59-71.   
Lu,  e     t. for i  6, 63-83.   
aced  i ,   t   00).k t. f ..   
ag    dky04   P the 52d     560is   
camara, ., Grer, ., y,  ai, 2014) d iof tx disose w o-i. rig ri nirsty Press.   
oreo,   w, J (018. hn o ai  d brig th ftioo . is or ic , 50, 4063.   
Noris   209   tt L f pt sics 304 5-578.   
mn ,  a-i  t -       . Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 36, 1-14.   
Samraj, B. (2002). Introductions in research artices: Variations across disciplines. English for Specific Purposes, 21(1), 1-17.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M., & Najjar, H. (1987). The writing of research article introductions. Writen Communication, 4(2), 175-191.   
Tardy, C. M. (2o09). Building genre knowledge. West Lafayette. In Parlor press.   
Yon, H & Rer, . 2020. Qfying siliy : An atomated arch inctin mdscre in su stnt wtig. riten Communication, 37(2), 208-244.

gyin i h.  tht of e si at Th t. h   s sics ng r  h y, . r     f       t ey   t    a San Ant. h mpld her h.2018 t The  ttsit the t of Aple stic. r  n de corpu

Jungwan Yoon s atuer in the art of Egish at e eon nirsit. Sh d her h..  Apie stic a Th sylania tate University. er rearch intersts incude academic litracy development, scond languag writig, corpus inuistic, and discourse alysis.